
CHAPTER VI
DEBTOR AND CREDITOR
Violet Polkington was married, and, as a consequence, the financial affairs of the family
     were in a state that can only be described as wonderful. They were intricately involved, of
     course, and there was no chance of their being clear again for a year at least; but, also,
     there was no chance of them being found out, appearances were better than ever.
Mr. Frazer had been given a small living, whether by the deserved kindness of fortune, or by
     reason of his own efforts, or the Polkingtons, is not known. Anyhow he had it, and he and
     Violet were married in June with all necessary éclat. Local papers described the event
     in glowing terms, appreciative friends said it was the prettiest wedding in years, and in due
     time Chèrie wrote and told Julia about it. The Captain also wrote; his point of view was rather
     different, but his letter filled up gaps in Chèrie's information, and Julia's own past
     experience filled up the remaining gaps in both.
The letters came on Tuesday, as Julia expected, a little before dinner time; she was still
     reading them when Mijnheer and his son came in from the office. Joost smiled sympathetically
     when he saw she had them, glad on her account; and she, almost unconsciously, crumpled together
     the sheets that lay on the table beside her, as if she were afraid they would betray their
     contents to him.
     
"You have good news from home?" said Mijnheer; "your parents are well?"
"Quite well, thank you," Julia answered. She had just come to the place in her father's
     letter where he regretted that such very light refreshments were the fashion at wedding
     receptions. "It is, of course, as your mother says, less expensive, but at such a time who
     would spare expense—if it were the fashion? I assure you I had literally nothing to eat at the
     time, or afterwards; your mother thinking it advisable as soon as we were alone, to put away
     the cakes for future visitors. At such a time, when a man's feelings are nearly touched, he
     needs support; I did not have it, and I cannot say that I have felt myself since."
Julia read to the end of the letter; Mijnheer had by this time taken up a paper, but Joost
     watched her as she folded the sheets. He did not speak, it seemed he would not intrude upon
     her; there was something dog-like in this sympathy with what was not understood. She felt
     vaguely uncomfortable by reason of it, and spoke to break the spell. "Everything went off very
     well," she said.
The words were for him alone, since Mijnheer was now reading, and also knew nothing of the
     subject. The smile brightened on his face. "Did it?" he answered. "I am very glad. They must
     have missed you much, and thought often of you."
Julia nodded. Chèrie had said. "I must say I think it is a pity you were not here; it is
     important to have some one with a head in the background; mother and I had to be the fore, so
     of course we could not do it; if you had been here several things would have gone better, and
     some waste have been saved."
This remark Julia did not communicate to Joost; she
      put the letter in her pocket, and went to fetch the dinner. After dinner she was
     to go on an errand for Mevrouw. It would take a long time, all the evening in fact, for it was
     to an old relative who lived in a village about three miles from the town. Walking was the only
     way of getting to the place, except twice a week when a little cargo boat went down the canal,
     and took some hours about it. This was neither the day nor the time for the boat, Julia would
     have to walk; but, as she assured Mevrouw, she much preferred it. Accordingly, as soon as
     dinner was finished, she was given a great many messages, mostly of a condoling nature, for the
     old lady was ill in bed, some strengthening soup, and a little bottle of the peach-brandy. With
     these things packed in a substantial marketing basket, she started.
Through the town she went with that easy step and indifference to the presence of other
     people that Denah so criticised, faster and faster her spirits rising. Once or twice she looked
     in at the low windows that stood open on the shady side of the street; there she saw the heads
     of families smoking their after-dinner pipes, while their wives and daughters sat crocheting
     and watching the passersby. There were chairs with crimson velvet seats in most of the rooms,
     and funny little cabinet, or side-board things of bright red mahogany, with modern Delft vases,
     very blue indeed, upon them. And always there was a certain snugness, perhaps even smugness,
     about the rooms. At least, so it seemed to her as she looked in, almost insolently pleased to
     be outside, to be free and alone.
In time she came to the outskirts of the town, the canal lay on her right, and on her left,
     flat green fields, cut up by innumerable ditches, and set with frequent windmills, all black
     and white, and mostly used for maintaining the
      water level. There were people busy in the fields, but to Julia they only gave the
     idea of ants, and did not intrude upon her mind in the least. It was all very quiet and green
     around, and quiet and blue above, except for the larks singing rapturously. Certainly it was
     very good to be away from the Van Heigens, away from the ceaseless little reiteration of
     Mevrouw's talk, from the minute, punctilious conventions, from Joost's quiet gaze, from the
     proximity of the hateful, necessary blue daffodil. With a violent rebound Julia shook off the
     feeling that had been growing on her of late, and was once more possibly reckless, but
     certainly free, and no longer under the spell of her surroundings. Her young blood coursed
     quickly, her eyes shone, the basket she carried grew light; she might have sung as she went had
     not Nature, in withholding the ability, also kindly withheld the inclination.
Soon after leaving the town, a side road cut into the main one; a waggon was lumbering down
     it at no great pace, but just before the branch road joined the main one the driver cracked his
     whip loudly, so that his team of young horses started forward suddenly. Too suddenly for the
     comprehension of some children who were playing in the road; for a second or more they looked
     at the approaching waggon, then, when the necessity dawned upon them, they ran for safety, one
     one way, one another, and the third, a baby boy, like a chicken, half across the way to the
     right, then, after a scurry in the middle, back again to the left, under the horses' feet.
Julia shouted to him, but in the excitement of the moment she spoke English, and not Dutch,
     though it hardly mattered, for the little boy was far too frightened to understand anything. It
     certainly would have fared badly with him had she not followed up her cry by darting into the
     road, seizing him by the shoulder, and flinging
      him with considerable force against the green wayside bank. She was only just in
     time; as it was, the foremost horse struck her shoulder and sent her rolling into the dust.
For an instant she lay there, perilously near the big grinding wheels; an almost
     imperceptible space, yet somehow long enough for her to decide quite calmly that it was
     impossible to scramble to her feet in time, so she had better draw her legs up and trust to the
     wheels missing her. Then suddenly the wheels stopped, and some one who had seized the horses'
     heads addressed the waggoner with the English idiom that is perhaps most widely known.
Julia heard "damned fool" in quite unemotional English, and almost simultaneously the
     guttural shrieks of two peasant women who approached. She picked herself up, then moving two
     paces to the side, stopped to put her hat straight with a calmness she did not quite feel.
     There was a volley of exclamations from the peasant women, and "Are you hurt?" the man who had
     stopped the horses asked her, speaking now in Dutch, though with an English accent.
"No," she answered, winking back the water which had come into her eyes with the force of the
     blow, and she turned her back on him so that he should not see her do it.
"My good women," she said shortly to the peasants who, with upraised hands and many gestures,
     stared at her, "there is nothing the matter, there is no reason why you should stand there and
     look at me; I assure you no one has been hurt, and no one is going to be; you had much better
     go on your way, as I shall do. Good-afternoon."
She walked a few paces down the road, not in the
      direction she intended to go certainly, but she was too shaken for the moment to
     notice which way she took, and was only actuated by a desire to get away and put an end to a
     scene. The movement and the words were not without effect; the two women, a good deal
     astonished, obeyed automatically, and, picking up the burdens they had set down, trudged on
     their way, not realising for some time how much offended they were at the curt behaviour of the
     "mad English." The children by this time had ceased staring and returned to their play; the
     waggoner, muttering some surly words, drove on. Julia sat on the bank by the roadside, and
     tried to brush the dust from her dress. The Englishman, after making some parting remarks to
     the waggoner, this time in Dutch, though still in the quiet, drawling voice which was much at
     variance with the language, had gone to pick up the basket. She wished she had thanked him for
     his timely assistance when she first scrambled to her feet, and gone on at once, then she could
     have done this necessary sitting down when he was out of sight, and come back for the stupid
     basket when she remembered it. But now she would have to thank him formally, and perhaps
     explain things, and say expressly that she was not hurt, and this while she was shaken and
     dusty. Mercifully he was English, and so would not expect much; she looked at his back with
     satisfaction. He was scarcely as tall as many Hollanders, but very differently built. To Julia,
     looking at him rather stupidly, his proportions, like his clothes, appeared very nearly perfect
     after those she had been used to seeing lately. When he turned and she saw for the first time
     his face, she was not very much surprised, though really it was surprising that Rawson-Clew
     should still be hereabouts.
Their eyes met in mutual recognition. Afterwards she
      wondered why she did not pretend to be Dutch, it ought to have been possible; he
     had only seen her once before, and her knowledge of the language was much better than his. And
     even if he had not been deceived, he would have been bound to acquiesce to her pretence, had
     she persisted in it. But she did not think of it before their mutual recognition had made it
     too late.
"I hope you are not hurt," he said, as he crossed the road with the basket.
"No," she answered, "thanks to you—"
But he, evidently sharing her dislike for a fuss, was even more anxious than she not to dwell
     on that, and dismissed the subject quickly. He began to wipe the bottom of the basket, from
     which soup was dripping, talking the while of the carelessness of continental drivers and the
     silliness of children of all nations, perhaps to give her time to recover.
She agreed with him, and then repeated her thanks.
He again set them aside. "It's nothing," he said; "I am glad to have had the opportunity,
     especially since it also gives me the opportunity of offering you some apology for an
     unfortunate misunderstanding which arose when last I saw you. You must feel that it needs an
     apology."
For a moment Julia's eyes showed her surprise; an apology was not what she expected, and, to
     tell the truth, it did not altogether please her. She knew that she and her father had no right
     to it while the money was unpaid.
"Please do not apologise," she said; "there is no need, I quite understand."
"I was labouring under a false impression," Rawson-Clew explained.
She nodded. "I know," she said, "but it is cleared up
      now; no one who spoke with my father could possibly imagine he lived by his
     wits."
Which ambiguous remark may have been meant to apply to the Captain's mental outfit more than
     his moral one. When Rawson-Clew knew Julia better he came to the conclusion it probably did, at
     the time he thought it wise not to answer it.
"Here is your basket," he said; "I think it is clean now."
She made a movement to take it, but her arm was numb and powerless from the blow she had
     received; it was the right shoulder which had been struck, and that hand was clearly useless
     for the time being; with a wince of pain, she stretched out the left.
But he drew the basket back. "You are hurt," he said.
"No, I'm not, nothing to speak of; it only hurts me when I move that arm; I will carry the
     basket with the other hand."
"How far have you to go?"
She told him to the village and back.
"You had better go straight home at once," he said.
"I can't do that," she answered. She did not explain that she did not want to, the pain in
     her shoulder not being bad enough to make her want to give up this first hour of freedom. "My
     shoulder does not hurt if I do not move it," she said; "I can carry the basket with the other
     hand."
"Perhaps you will allow me to carry it for you?" he suggested; "I am going the same way."
"No, thank you," she returned. "Thanks very much for the offer, but there isn't any need; I
     can manage quite well. I expect you will want to go faster than I do." She spoke decidedly, and
     turned about quickly; as she did
      so, she caught sight of the bottle of peach-brandy in the grass.
"Oh, there's the brandy," she exclaimed; "I mustn't go without that."
He fetched the fortunately unbroken bottle and put it in the basket, but he did not give it
     to her.
"I will carry this," he said; "if our pace does not agree, if you would prefer to walk more
     slowly, I will wait for you at the beginning of the village."
Julia rose to her feet, there was no choice left to her but to acquiesce; from her heart she
     wished he would leave the basket and go alone; she wished even that he would be rude to her,
     she felt that then he would have been nearer her level and her father's. She resented alike his
     presence and his courtesy, and she could not show either feeling, only accept what he offered
     and walk by his side, just as if no money was owed, and no letter, condescendingly cancelling
     the debt, had been written. She grew hot as she thought of that carefully worded letter, and
     hot when she thought of her father's relief thereat. And here, here was the man who must have
     dictated the letter, and probably paid the debt, behaving just as if such things never existed.
     He was walking with her—she could not give him ten yards start and follow him into the
     village—and making polite conversations about the weather, and the road, and the quantity of
     soup that had been spilled.
She pulled herself together, and, feeling the situation to be beyond remedy, determined to
     bear herself bravely, and carry it off with what credit she could. She glanced at the more than
     half-empty soup can. "I am afraid you are right," she said; "there is a great deal of it gone;
     still, that is not without advantage—I shall be sent to take some more in a day or two."
     
"You wish that?" he inquired.
"Yes," she answered, "I find the exercise beneficial; I have had too much pudding
     lately."
He looked politely surprised, and she went on to explain.
"It is very wholesome," she said, "but a bit stodgy; I think it is too really good to be
     taken in such large quantities by any one like me. It is unbelievably good, it makes one
     perfectly ashamed of oneself; and unbelievably narrow, it makes one long for bed-time."
She broke off to smile at his more genuine surprise, and her smile, like that of some other
     people of little real beauty, was one of singular charm.
"Did you think I meant actual pudding?" she asked. "I didn't; I meant just the whole life
     here; if you knew the people well, the real middle class ones, you would understand."
"I think I can understand without knowing them well," he said; "I fancy there is a good deal
     of pudding about; in fact, I myself am feeling its rather oppressive influence."
"The town is paved with it," Julia declared. "I thought so this afternoon. I also thought,
     though it is Tuesday, it was just like a spring Sunday; every day is like that."
Rawson-Clew suggested that many people appreciated spring Sundays.
"So do I," Julia agreed, "but in moderation; you can't do your washing on Sunday, nor your
     harvesting in spring. An endless succession of spring Sundays is very awkward when you have
     got—well, week-day work to do, don't you think so?"
He wondered a little what week-day work she had in her mind, but he did not ask.
"Are you living with a Dutch family?" he inquired.
     
She nodded. "As companion," she said; "sort of superior general servant."
"Indeed? Then it must have been you I saw yesterday; I thought so at the time; you were
     driving with some Dutch ladies."
Julia was surprised that he had seen and recognised her. "We went for an excursion
     yesterday," she said; "they called it a picnic."
She told him about it, not omitting any of the points which had amused her. Could Joost have
     heard her, he would have felt that his suspicion that she sometimes laughed at them more than
     justified; but she did not give a thought to Joost, and probably would not have paused if she
     had. She wanted to pass the present time, and she was rather reckless how, so long as
     Rawson-Clew either talked himself, or seemed interested in what she said; also, it must be
     admitted, though it was to this man, it was something of a treat to talk freely again. So she
     gave him the best account she could, not only of the excursion, but of other things too. And if
     it was his attention she wanted, she should have been satisfied, for she apparently had it, at
     first only the interest of courtesy, afterwards something more; it even seemed, before the end,
     as if she puzzled him a little, in spite of his years and experience.
He found himself mentally contrasting the life at the Van Heigens', as she described it, with
     that which he had imagined her to have led at Marbridge, and, now that he talked to her, he
     could not find her exact place in either.
"You must find Dutch conventionality rather trying," he said at last.
"I am not used to it yet," she answered; "when I am it will be no worse than the
     conventionality at home."
He felt he was wrong in one of his surmises; clearly
      she was not really Bohemian. "Surely," he said, "you have not found these absurd
     rules and restrictions in England?"
"Not the same ones; we study appearances one way, and they do another; but it comes to the
     same thing, so far as I am concerned. One day I hope to be able to give it up and retire; when
     I do I shall wear corduroy breeches and if I happen to be in the kitchen eating onions when
     people come to see me, I shall call them in and offer them a share."
"Rather an uncomfortable ambition, isn't that?" he inquired. "I am afraid you will have to
     wait some time for its fulfilment, especially the corduroy. I doubt if you will achieve that
     this side the grave, though you might perhaps make a provision in your will to be buried in
     it."
Julia laughed a little. "You think my family would object? They would; but, you see, I should
     be retiring from them as well as from the world, the corduroy might be part of my
     bulwarks."
"I don't think you could afford it even for that; do you think women ever can afford that
     kind of disregard for appearances?"
"Plain ones can," she said; "it is the only compensation they have for being plain; not much,
     certainly, seeing what they lose, but they have it. When you can never look more than
     indifferent, it does not matter how much less you look."
"That is a rather unusual idea," he remarked; "it appears sound in theory, but in
     practice—"
"Sounder still," she answered him.
He laughed. "I'm afraid you won't make many converts here," he said, "where nearly every
     woman is plain, and according to your experience, every one, men and
      women too, think a great deal of looks; at all events, correct ones."
"They do do that," she admitted; "they just worship propriety and the correct, and have the
     greatest notion of the importance of their neighbours' eyes. It is a perfect treat to be out
     alone, and not have to regard them—this is the first time I have been out alone since I have
     been here."
"Rather hard; I thought every one had—er—time off."
"An evening out?" she suggested. "I believe the number of evenings out is regulated by the
     number of applications for the post when vacant; cooks could get more evenings than housemaids,
     and nursery governesses might naturally expect a minus number, if that were possible. There
     would be lots of applications for my post, so I can't expect many evenings; however, I have
     thought of a plan by which I can get out again and again!"
"What will you do?" he inquired.
"I shall get Denah—she is one of the girls who went for the excursion—to come and teach
     Mevrouw a new crochet pattern after dinner of a day. It will take ages, Mevrouw learns very
     slowly, and Denah will know better than to hurry matters; she admires Mijnheer Joost, the Van
     Heigens' son, and she will be only too delighted to have an excuse to come to the house."
"And if she is there you will have a little leisure? Some one always has to be on duty? Is
     that it?"
Julia laughed softly. "If she is there," she said, "she will want me out of the way, and I am
     not satisfactorily out of the way when I am anywhere on the premises. Not that Mijnheer Joost
     talks to me when I am there, or would talk to her if I were not; she just mistrusts every
     unmarried female by instinct."
     
"A girl's instinct in such matters is not always wrong," Rawson-Clew observed.
But if he thought Julia had any mischievous propensities of that sort he was mistaken. "I
     should not think of interfering in such an affair," she said; "why, it would be the most
     suitable thing in the world, as suitable as it is for my handsome and able sister to marry the
     ambitious and able nephew of a bishop; they are the two halves that make one whole. Denah and
     Joost would live a perfectly ideal pudding life; he with his flowers—that is his work, you
     know; he cares for nothing besides, really—and she with her housekeeping. He with a little
     music for relaxation, she with her neighbours and accomplishments; it would be as neat and
     complete and suitable as anything could be."
"And that commends it to you? I should have imagined that what was incongruous and odd
     pleased you better."
"I like that too," she was obliged to admit, "though best when the people concerned don't see
     the incongruity; but I don't really care either way, whether things are incongruous or
     suitable, I enjoy both, and should never interfere so long as they don't upset my concerns and
     the end in view."
He looked at her curiously; again it seemed he was at fault; she was not merely a wayward
     girl in revolt against convention, saying what she deemed daring for the sake of saying it, and
     in the effort to be original. She was not posing as a Bohemian any more than she was truly
     one.
"Have you usually an end in view?" he asked.
"Have not you?" she answered, turning on him for a moment eyes that Joost had described as
     "eating up what they looked at." "Of course," she said, looking away
      again, "it is quite natural, and very possible, that you are here for no purpose,
     and I am here for no purpose too; you might quite well have come to this little town for
     amusement, and I have come for the money I might earn as a companion. Or you might have drifted
     here by accident, as I might, without any special reason—" She stopped as she spoke; they were
     fast approaching the first house of the village now, and she held out her hand for the basket.
     "I will take it," she said; "I have a very short distance to go; thank you so much."
"Let me carry it the rest of the way," he insisted; "I am going through the village; we may
     as well go the rest of the way together, I want you to tell me—"
But Julia did not tell him anything, except that her way was by the footpath which turned off
     to the right. "I could not think of troubling you further," she said. "Thank you."
She put her hand on the basket, so that he was obliged to yield it; then, with another word
     of thanks, she said "good-evening," and started by the path.
For a moment he looked after her, annoyed and interested against his will; of course, she
     meant nothing by her words about his purpose and her own, still it gave him food for reflection
     about her, and the apparent incongruity of her present surroundings. On the whole, he was glad
     he had met her, partly for the entertainment she had given, and partly for the opportunity he
     had had to apologise.
An apology was due to her for the affair of last winter, he felt it; though, at the same
     time, he could not hold himself much to blame in the matter. He had gone to Marbridge to see
     into his young cousin's affairs at the request of the boy's widowed mother. The affairs, as
     might have been expected, were in muddle enough, and
      the boy himself was incorrigibly silly and extravagant. The whole business needed
     tact and patience, and in the end had not been very satisfactorily arranged; during the process
     Captain Polkington's name had been mentioned more than once; he figured, among other ways, of
     spending much and getting little in return. Somehow or other Rawson-Clew had got the impression
     that the Captain was—well, perhaps pretty much what he really had come to be; and if that was
     not quite what his wife had persuaded herself and half Marbridge to think him, surely no one
     was to blame. The mistake made was about the Captain's wife and daughters and position in the
     town; Rawson-Clew, in the first instance, never gave them a thought; the Captain was a detached
     person in his mind, and, as such, a possible danger to his cousin's loose cash. He went to No.
     27 to talk plainly to the man, not to tell him he was a shark and an adventurer; it was the
     Captain himself who translated and exaggerated thus; not even to tell him what he thought, that
     he was a worthless old sponge, but to make it plain that things would not go on as they had
     been doing. The girl's interruption had been annoying, so ill-timed and out of place; she ought
     to have gone at once when he suggested it; she had placed him and herself, too, in an
     embarrassing position; yet, at the same time—he saw it now, though he did not earlier—there was
     something quaint in the way she had both metaphorically and actually stood between him and her
     miserable old father. He had dictated the subsequent letter to the Captain more on her account
     than anything else. He considered that by it he was making her the amend honourable for the
     unfortunate interview of the afternoon, as well as closing the incident. Of course, nothing
     real was forfeited by the letter, for under no circumstances would the money have been repaid; he
      never had any delusion about that. From which it appears that his opinion of the
     Captain had not changed.
As for his opinion of Julia, he had not one when he first saw her, except that she had no
     business to be there; now, however, he felt some little interest in her. There was very little
     that was interesting in this small Dutch town; it was a refreshing change, he admitted it to
     himself, to see a girl here who put her clothes on properly; something of a change to meet one
     anywhere who did not at once fall into one of the well-defined categories.
Much in this world has to be lain at the door of opportunity, and idleness in youth, and
      ennui and boredom in middle ages. Rawson-Clew was in the borderland between the two,
     and did not consider himself open to the temptations of either. He was not idle, he had things
     to do; and he was not bored, he had things to think about; but not enough of either to prevent
     him from having a wide margin.
When he met Julia again there was no reason for dropping the acquaintance renewed through
     necessity. But also there was no opportunity, on that occasion, for pushing it further, even if
     there had been inclination, for she was not alone.
It was on Saturday evening; she was walking down the same road, much about the same time, but
     there was with her a tall, fair young man, with a long face and loose limbs. He carried, of
     course, an umbrella—that was part of his full dress—and the basket—he walked between her and
     the cart track. She bowed sedately to Rawson-Clew, and the young man, becoming tardily aware of
     it, took off his hat, rather late, and with a sweeping foreign flourish. She wore a pair of
     cotton gloves, and lifted her dress a few inches, and glanced shyly up at her escort now and
     then as he talked. They were speaking Dutch, and
      she was behaving Dutch, as plain and demure a person as it was possible to
     imagine, until she looked back, then Rawson-Clew saw a very devil of mockery and mischief flash
     up in her eyes. Only for a second; the expression was gone before her head was turned again,
     and that was decorously soon. But it had been there; it was like the momentary parting of the
     clouds on a grey day; it illumined her whole face—her mind, too, perhaps—as the eerie, tricky
     gleam, which is gone before a man knows it, lights up the level landscape, and transforms it to
     something new and strange.
Rawson-Clew walked on ahead of the pair; he had to outpace them, since he was bound the same
     way, and could not walk with them. He was not sure that he was not rather sorry for Denah, the
     Dutch girl; one who can laugh at herself as well as another, and all alone, too, is he thought,
     rather apt to enjoy the incongruous more than the suitable.


