
CHAPTER IV
THE OWNER OF THE BLUE DAFFODIL
Vrouw Snieder, the notary's wife, sat by her window at work on a long strip of red crochet
     lace. From her place she could see all who came up the street, and, there being a piece of
     looking-glass set outside, at right angles to the pane, also most who came down it. This,
     though doubtless very informing, did not help the progress of the lace; but that was of no
     consequence, Mevrouw always had some red lace in making, and it might as well be one piece as
     another. With her, were her two daughters, Denah and Anna, though Anna had no business there,
     being supposed just then to be preparing vegetables for dinner. She had only come into the room
     to fetch keys, but a remark from her mother brought her to the window.
"There goes Vrouw Van Heigen's English miss," the old lady said, and both her daughters
     looked at once.
"She has been marketing, I see; she seems a good housewife."
"She walks in the road," Denah observed critically; "It is so conspicuous, I could not do it;
     besides, one might be run over."
"The English always walk in the road," her sister answered; "they think everything will get
     out of their way, and they do not at all mind being conspicuous."
"The English miss should mind," Denah said, "for she is not pretty; no one looks at her to
     admire; besides she is poor and has to work hard."
     
"Yes, yes," her mother agreed placidly; "she is a fine worker. Vrouw Van Heigen is full of
     her praises; such a cook—she has twenty new dishes, and everything is done quickly, one cannot
     tell how; it is like having a magician in the house, so she says. Ah, there is Herr Van de
     Greutz's Marthe going into the apothecary's. I wonder now—"
But her daughters were not interested in Marthe; the English girl at the Van Heigens'
     interested them a great deal more. They continued to talk about her a great deal afterwards,
     Denah going back with her sister to the kitchen and the vegetables, so as to be able to do so
     undisturbed.
"I will help you with these," she said; "then we can go out."
She sat down and took up a knife. "It is strange how much Vrouw Van Heigen thinks of that
     girl," she said. "She has been there but one month and already there is no one like her. She
     does not keep her in her place very well; were she a daughter more could not be said. I wonder
     how Mijnheer likes it."
"It was Mijnheer who engaged her," Anna said. "It is not likely that he regrets. I hear that
     she has written some English letters for him since one of the clerks has been ill. My father
     says she can cook like a Frenchwoman, and that is something. As for Joost, it is surely of
     little importance to him, he is too quiet to say anything to her; she talks little; she must be
     shy."
Denah had nothing to say to this, although, seeing in which person her own interest in the
     Van Heigens lay, she possibly found some comfort in the assurance. After a little she remarked,
     "That girl has no accomplishments; she is as old-fashioned as our Aunt Barje, a
      huisvrouw,
     no more. It is strange, for the English women make fun of us for this, and pretend
     that they are educated and advanced above us; she is not, she can do nothing but speak a few
     languages; she cannot sing nor play, she has read no science, she cannot draw, nor model in
     wax, nor make paper flowers, nor do bead work; she could not even crochet till I showed her
     how. I wonder if she has made any progress with the pattern I gave her. Shall we go and see by
     and by? I might set her right if she is in a difficulty, and we could at the same time inquire
     after Mevrouw's throat; she had a weakness, I noticed, on Tuesday."
Anna agreed; she was a most obliging sister, and a while later they set out together for the
     Van Heigens' house. They did not walk in the wide, clean road, but were careful to keep to the
     path, pausing a moment to consult before starting for the other side when it was necessary to
     cross over.
The Van Heigens' house stood on the outskirts of the town, a long way back from the road. The
     bulb garden lay all round it, though immediately in front was a lawn so soft and green that no
     one ever walked on it. The house was of wood, painted white, and had a high-pitched roof of
     strange, dark-coloured tiles; a canal lay on two sides, which ought to have made it damp, but
     did not.
Vrouw Van Heigen was pleased to see the girls, and received them with an effusiveness which
     might have suggested that a longer time than four days had elapsed since they last met. She
     kissed them on both cheeks, and led them in by the hand; she asked particularly how they were,
     and how their mother was, and how their father was, and if they were not very tired with their
     walk, and would they not have lemonade—yes, they must have lemonade. "Julia, Julia," she
     called, "bring lemonade, bring glasses and the lemonade."
     
Julia came from a little room which led off the sitting-room, carrying the things required on
     a papier-maché tray. She wore a large, blue-print apron, for she had been shelling shrimps when
     she was called, and though she stayed to wash her hands, she did not think it necessary to
     remove her apron. She had observed it to be the custom hereabouts to wear an apron of some sort
     all day long, and she did not differentiate between the grades of aprons as Denah and Anna did.
     She set down the tray and shook hands ceremoniously with the sisters and made all the proper
     inquiries in the properest way; she had also observed that to be the custom of the place. Then
     she poured out the lemonade and handed it round, and was afterwards sent to fetch a glass for
     herself and a little round tray to set it on—every one had a little tray for fear of spoiling
     the crimson plush table-cover. Julia cannot be said to have been anxious for lemonade; Vrouw
     Van Heigen's growing affection for her often found expression in drinks at odd times, a good
     deal more often than she appreciated. On this occasion, since she was doing the pouring out
     herself, she was able to get off with half a glass.
They all sat round the table and talked; Julia talked a great deal the least, but that did
     not matter, the others had so much to say. She listened, admiring the way in which one little
     incident—a dog running on the tram line and being called off just in time by its owner—served
     them for a quarter of an hour. What economy of ideas it was, and how little strain to make
     conversation! Then came Mevrouw's throat, the little hoarseness Denah had noticed on Tuesday.
     It was nothing, the good lady declared, she had not felt it. Oh, if they insisted on noticing
     it, she would own to a weakness but no more than was usual to her when the dust was about, and
     truly the dust was
      terrible now, she could not remember when it had been so bad so early in June. And
     so on, and so on, until they somehow came round to crochet lace, when Julia was obliged to
     confess that she had not made much progress with the pattern. She exhibited a very small piece
     with several mistakes in it.
"Why," cried Denah, "I have done already almost half a metre of the piece I began at the same
     time. Is it difficult for you?"
Julia said it was, and Vrouw Van Heigen added by way of apology for her, that she had been
     busy making a cool morning dress.
"For yourself?" Anna asked. "Do you make your dresses?"
"This is for Mevrouw," Julia answered; "but I can make my own."
The Polkingtons had had to, and also to put an immense amount of thought and work into it,
     because they were bound to get a fine effect for a small expense, and that is not possible
     without a large outlay of time and consideration. Julia did not explain this to the present
     company, it would have been rather incomprehensible to them.
Anna was at once fired with a desire to make herself a cool morning dress, and asked a dozen
     questions as to how, while Denah's busy fingers undid the faulty crochet work, and her tongue
     explained the mistakes. Mevrouw did not listen much to either, but noticing the glasses were
     empty, pressed the visitors in vain to have more lemonade. They refused, and finding them quite
     obdurate she toddled into the little room where Julia had been doing the shrimps, to come back
     again, bearing a large bladder-covered bottle of peach-brandy. The girls declined this very
     firmly, but Julia was sent for more glasses, and soon
      they were all sipping the rich flavoured liqueur without protestation.
It was over this that they planned an expedition to the wood. No one knew quite who suggested
     it; when people all talk at once it is not easy to say who originates an idea; anyhow, it was
     agreed that the weather was so dry and the trees so lovely and Mevrouw so seldom went out. She
     really felt—did she not?—that she would enjoy making a small excursion, she was so wonderfully
     well—for her. What did Anna think her mother would say? Perhaps they might join together for a
     drive?
Anna thought her mother would be delighted; indeed, she often spoke of the charms of a
     country excursion; Denah was called upon to corroborate, and did so volubly. Where should they
     go? Half-a-dozen different places were suggested; why not go here, or there, or to the wood?
     Yes, the wood, that would be lovely. They could take their tea out; if they were well wrapped
     up, of course, protected from the damp and the wind, might it not be possible?
So by degrees the plan was brought to the first stage. Denah and Anna were to talk it over
     with their mother, and if she thought favourably of it, then "we must see." By that time Denah
     had set the crochet work quite straight, and with kisses and hand-shakings the visitors
     departed. Julia went back to the little room where first she washed the glasses that had been
     used, afterwards she finished the shrimps and washed them and put them ready for supper in a
     china dish like a large soap dish on three feet. When that was done, it was necessary to lay
     the table for dinner and superintend the getting of that meal.
The Van Heigens dined at four. It had taken Julia all the month she had been with them to in
     any way get used to that time. Mijnheer and the only son, Joost, came in
      from the office for two hours then. The office joined the house and the great dim
     orderly bulb barns joined the office, so the father and son had not far to come in whichever
     place they might be. Julia and Mevrouw fetched the food from the kitchen and cleared the table,
     as well as getting their own meal; but that was nothing when you were used to it, any more than
     was the curious butter and nutmeg sauce that always seemed to play a part at dinner.
Mijnheer had a good deal to say to Julia, principally about his business. The letters she had
     written for him during the illness of the clerk who usually did his English correspondence, had
     given her some little insight into it. This she had profited by, being in the first instance
     really interested, and, in the second, not slow to see that the old man, far from resenting it,
     had been pleased. He talked a good deal about his affairs now, giving her little bits of
     information and explaining rather proudly his method of doing business, and his father's and
     his grandfather's before him. Joost, as usual, said little or nothing; he must have been five
     or six and twenty, but he had hardly ever left the parental roof, and was usually so hard at
     work that he had little time or inclination for frivolity. He had earnest child-like blue eyes
     that Julia did not care to look at, any more than she did the round yellow face of Mr. Gillat's
     watch. This was rather a pity as she could not always avoid it, and certainly he looked at her
     a good deal, in fact whenever he thought he was not observed. Of course he always was observed,
     by her at least; that was a foregone conclusion; the observation gave her some uneasiness.
After dinner the father and son went to sit on the veranda, and Mevrouw helped Julia take the
     dishes into the white marble kitchen and the glasses into the little
     off-room. Later, Julia came to sit on the veranda, too—it was somewhat stuffy being
     all closed in with glass windows. There they drank pale tea, the pot kept simmering on a
     spirit-stove, and read the foreign papers which had just come. Mevrouw did not read, she made
     tea and did crochet work, a strip like Vrouw Snieder's, only yellow instead of red. Julia, it
     is to be feared, did not try to master the pattern so kindly set right by Denah; she could not
     resist the breath from the outside world which the papers brought.
At six o'clock Mijnheer and his son went back to the office, and Julia, having washed the
     tea-cups, joined Mevrouw in the sitting-room. It was never very light in that room, for the
     walls were covered with a crimson flock paper and the woodwork was black; while the windows,
     which looked on the canal, were always shaded till dark. They sat here at work on the morning
     gown, till supper time. Mijnheer sometimes came in an hour before supper, as early as half-past
     eight; Joost had usually too much to do to come in before half-past nine. After supper, when
     the things were cleared away, they had prayers; Mijnheer read a chapter from the Bible, and
     they sat round the table and listened, and afterwards he said, "Now we will pray," and they sat
     a while in silence. Julia sat, too, her keen, observing eyes cast down and a curious stillness
     about her. After that every one went to bed; Julia and the maidservant had two little rooms
     right up in the eaves of the house; the family slept on the floor below. Julia was glad of
     this, though it was possible to imagine her room would be very hot in summer and very cold in
     winter. But she was glad to be well above the sleeping house, and to be able to look from her
     window across the wide country, over the dark bulb gardens—laid out like a Chinese puzzle with
     their eight-foot hedges—to the lights of the town on the one hand, and, better
      still, to the dim curve of the Dunes on the other. It is to be feared she
     sometimes spent a longer time at her window than was wise, seeing the early hour at which she
     had to rise; but no one was troubled by it, for she was careful to take off her shoes first
     thing; the rooms were unceiled, and it was necessary to tread lightly if one would not disturb
     people below.
On the day after that of Anna and Denah's visit, Herr Van Heigen offered to show Julia the
     bulb barns. It was a Saturday, and so after dinner, the workmen having all gone home, there was
     no one about and she could ascend the steep barn ladders without any suffering in her modesty.
     At least that was what Mijnheer thought; Julia, her modesty being of a very serviceable order,
     may have given the matter less consideration, but she accepted the offer.
The barns were very large and high, many of them three storeys and each storey lofty. The
     light inside was dim, a sort of dun colour, and the air very dry and full of a strange, not
     unpleasant smell. Everything was as clean as clean could be; no litter, no dirt, the floor
     nicely swept, the shelves that ran all round and rose, tier upon tier, in an enormous stand
     that occupied the whole centre of the place, all perfectly orderly. On the shelves the bulbs
     lay, every one smooth and clean and dry, sorted according to kind and quality; Mijnheer knew
     them all; he could, like a book-lover with his books, put his hand upon any that he wished in
     the dark. It seemed to Julia that there were hundreds upon hundreds of different sorts. Not
     only hyacinths and tulips and such well-known ones in endless sizes and varieties, but little
     roots with six and seven syllable names she had never heard before, and big roots, too, and
     strange cornery roots, a never-ending quantity.
     
Mijnheer told her they were not yet all in; many were in the ground and had still to be
     lifted. This she knew, for she had seen the dead tops of some in the little enclosed squares
     where they grew; from her bedroom window, too, she saw others still in bloom—a patch, the size
     of a tennis-lawn squared, of scarlet ranunculous, little blood-red rosettes, sheltered by a
     high close-clipped hedge. And another patch of iris hispanica, fairy flowers of palest gold and
     lavender, quivering at the top of their grey-green stalks like tropical dragon-flies hovering
     over a field of growing oats. These it seemed, and many others, would be brought in by and by,
     then the great barns would be really full. Mijnheer took up a root here and there, telling her
     something of the history of each; explaining how the narcissus increased and the tulips grew;
     showing her hyacinth bulbs cut in half-breadthways with all the separate severed layers
     distended by reason of the growing and swelling of the seeds between.
"Each little seed will be a bulb by and by," he said, "but not yet. When we cut the root
     first, we set it in the ground and these begin to grow and become in time as you see them now.
     Afterwards they grow bigger and bigger till their parent can no longer contain them."
"Does it take long for them to grow full size?" Julia asked.
"It takes five years to grow the finest hyacinth bulbs," Mijnheer answered, "but inferior
     ones are more quick. And when the bulb is grown, there is one bloom—fine, magnificent, a truss
     of flowers—after that it deteriorates, it is, one may say, over. Ah, but it is magnificent
     while it is there! There is no flower like the hyacinth; had I my way, I would grow nothing
     else, but people will not have them now. They must have novelties. 'Give us narcissus,' they
     say; 'they are so graceful'—I do not see
      the grace—'Or iris'—well, some are fine, I allow, but they do not last in bloom as
     do hyacinths. The mourn iris of Persia is very beautiful; we have not one flowering yet, but we
     shall have by and by. I will show you then; you will think it very handsome. When it blooms I
     go to it in the morning and dust the sand from the petals. I feel that I can reverence that
     flower; it is most beautiful."
"Is it very scarce?" Julia asked.
"Somewhat," Mijnheer answered; "but we have things that are more so, we have many novelties
     so called. Ah, but we have one novelty that is a true one, it is a wonder, it has no price, it
     is priceless!" He drew a deep breath of almost awed pride. "It is the greatest rarity that has
     ever been reared in Holland, a miracle, in fact—a blue daffodil!"
Julia refrained from mentioning that she had heard of the rarity before; she leaned against
     the centre stand and listened while the old man grew eloquent, with the eloquence of the
     connoisseur, not the tradesman, over his treasure. There was no need for her to say much, only
     to put a question here and there, or make a sympathetic comment; with little or no effort she
     learned a good deal about the wonderful bulb. It seemed that it really had been grown in the
     Van Heigens' gardens, and not imported from Asia, as Mr. Cross thought. There were six roots by
     this time; not so many as had been hoped and expected, it did not increase well, and was
     evidently going to be difficult to grow.
"Would you like to know the name which it will immortalise?" the old man asked at last. "It
     is called Narcissus Triandrus Azurem Vrouw Van Heigen."
"You named it in honour of Mevrouw, I suppose?" Julia said.
"I did not; Joost did."
     
"Mijnheer Joost?" she repeated.
"Yes," the father answered. "It is his, not mine; to him belongs the honour. It is he who has
     produced this marvel. How? That is a secret; perhaps even I could not tell you if I would;
     Nature is wonderful in her ways; we can only help her, we cannot create. Yes, yes, it is Joost
     who has done this. He seemed to you a retiring youth? Yet he is the most envied and most
     honoured man of our profession. I would sooner—there are many men in Holland who would
     sooner—have produced this flower than have a thousand pounds. And he is my son—you may well
     believe that I am proud."
And Mijnheer beamed with satisfaction in his son and his blue daffodil. But Julia leaned
     against the stand in the dry twilight, saying nothing. Money, it appeared, was not then the
     measure of all things; neither intrinsically, as with Mr. Alexander Cross, nor for what it
     represented in comfort and position, as with her own family, did it rank with these bulb
     growers. They, these people whom her mother would have called market gardeners, tradespeople,
     it seemed, loved and reverenced their work; they thought about it and for it, were proud of it
     and valued distinction in it, and nothing else. The blue daffodil was no valuable commercial
     asset, it was an honour and glory, an unparalleled floral distinction—no wonder Cross could not
     buy or exploit it. In a jump Julia comprehended the situation more fully than that astute
     business man ever could; but at the same time she felt a little bitter amusement—it was this,
     this treasured wonder, that she thought to obtain.
The next day, Sunday, Julia went to church with Mijnheer and Joost; Mevrouw did not find
     herself well enough for church, but she insisted that Julia should not stay at home on her
     account. Accordingly the girl accompanied
      father and son to the Groote Kerk and listened to the rather dull service there.
     For the most part she sat with her eyes demurely cast down, though once or twice she looked
     round the old barn-like place, and wondered if there were any frescoes under the whitewash of
     the walls and whence came the faint, all pervading smell, like a phantom of incense long
     forgotten. When service was over and they came out into the sunny street, Mijnheer announced
     that he was going to see a friend. Julia, of course, must hurry home to set the table for the
     mid-day coffee drinking, and afterwards prepare for dinner. Joost was going back, likewise, and
     to her it was so natural a thing they should go together that she never thought about it. It
     did not, however, seem so to him, and after walking a few paces in embarrassment, he said—
"You would perhaps prefer I did not walk with you?"
"Oh, no," she answered, in some surprise; "I shall be pleased, if you are going the same way,
     that is."
He fidgeted, becoming more embarrassed. "You are sure you do not mind?" he said. "It is a
     little conspicuous for you."
Then she understood, and looked up with twinkling eyes. "I am afraid I am conspicuous,
     anyhow," she said.
This was true enough, for her clothes, fitting like an Englishwoman's, and put on like a
     Frenchwoman's (the Polkingtons all knew how to dress), were unlike any others in sight. Her
     face, too, dark and thin and keenly alert, was unlike, and her light, easy walk; and if this
     was not enough it must be added that she was now walking in the road because the pavement was
     so crowded.
Joost stepped off the path to make room for her and she saw by his face that his mind was not
     at ease.
"Pray, Mijnheer," she said, in her softest tones, and
      her voice had many tones as her companion had not failed to notice, though he was
     not aware that the softest was also usually the most mischievous, "will you not walk the other
     side of the way? Then you will not be conspicuous at all."
"I do not mind it," he said, blushing, and Julia decided that his father's description of him
     as a retiring youth was really short of the mark. They walked along together down the quiet,
     bright streets; there were many people about, but nobody in a hurry, and all in Sunday clothes,
     bent on visiting or decorous pleasure-making. Everywhere was sunny and everything looked as if
     it had had its face washed; week days in the town always looked to Julia like Sundays, and
     Sundays, this Sunday in particular, looked like Easter.
In time they came to the trees that bordered the canal; there were old Spanish houses here, a
     beautiful purplish red in colour, and with carving above the doors. Julia looked up at her
     favourite doorpiece—a galleon in full sail, a veritable picture in relief, unspoiled by three
     hundred years of wind and weather.
"I think this is the most beautiful town I was ever in," she said. Her companion looked
     surprised.
"Do you like it?" he asked. "It must be quite unlike what you are used to, all of it must
     be."
"It is," she answered, "all of it, as you say—the place, the ways, the people."
"And you like it? You do not think it—you do not think us what you call slow, stupid?"
She was a little surprised, it had never occurred to her that he, any more than the others,
     would think about her point of view. "No," she answered, "I admire it all very much, it is
     sincere, no one appears other than he is, or aims at being or seeming more. Your house is the same
      back and front, and you, none of you have a wrong side, the whole life is solid
     right through."
Joost did not quite understand; had she not guessed that to be likely she would hardly have
     spoken so frankly. "I fear I do not understand you," he said; "it is difficult when we do not
     know each other's language perfectly."
"We know it very well," Julia answered; "as well as possible. If we were born in the same
     place, in the same house, we should not understand it better."
He still looked puzzled; he was half afraid she was laughing at him. "You think I am stupid?"
     he said, gravely.
She denied it, and they walked on a little in silence. They were in the quieter part of the
     town now and could talk undisturbed; after a little he spoke again, musingly.
"Often I wonder what you think of, you have such great, shining eyes, they eat up everything;
     they see everything and through everything, I think. They sweep round the room, or the persons
     or the place, and gather all—may I say it?—like some fine net—to me it seems they draw all
     things into your brain, and there you weave them and weave them into thoughts."
Julia swallowed a little exclamation, and by an effort contrived not to appear as surprised
     as she was by this too discerning remark. She was so young that she did not before know that
     children and child-like folk sometimes divine by instinct the same conclusions that very clever
     people arrive at by much reasoning and observation. She felt decidedly uncomfortable at this
     explanation of Joost's frequent contemplations of herself.
"You seem to think me very clever," she said.
"Of course," he answered simply, "you are clever."
"No, I am not," she returned; "ask your mother; ask Denah Snieder; they do not think me
     clever. What can
      I do, except cook? Oh, yes, and speak a few foreign language as you can yourself?
     I cannot paint, or draw, or sing; I do not understand music; why, when you play Bach, I wish to
     go out of the room."
"That is true," he admitted; "I have felt it."
Julia bit her lip; she had never before expressed her opinion of Bach, and she did not feel
     in the least gratified that he had found it out for himself.
"It is absurd to call me clever," she said. "I have little learning and no accomplishments. I
     cannot even get on with the crochet work Denah showed me, and I do not know how to make flowers
     of paper."
"But why should one make flowers of paper?" he asked, in his serious way. "They are not at
     all beautiful."
"Denah makes them beautifully," she answered.
The argument did not seem to carry weight, but Julia advanced no other; she thought silence
     the wisest course. They had almost reached home now; a little before they came to the gate,
     Joost opened the subject of herself again. "I think sometimes you must make fun of us; do you
     not sometimes in your heart laugh just a little bit?"
"I laugh at everything sometimes," she said; "myself most of all. Do you never laugh at
     yourself? I expect not; you are very serious. I will tell you what it is like: a little goblin
     comes out of your head and stands in front of you; the goblin is you, a sort of you; the other
     part, the part people know, sits opposite, and the goblin laughs at it because it sees how
     ridiculous the other is, how grotesque and how futile. My goblin came out into my room last
     night and laughed and laughed; you would almost have heard him if you had been there."
They had reached the gate now, and as Joost held it open for her to pass through, she saw
     that he had blushed to the ears at the lightly spoken words—if he had been
      in her room last night; the impropriety of them to him was evident. For a moment
     she blushed, too, then she recovered herself and grew impatient with one so artificial—and yet
     so simple, so self-conscious—and yet so unconscious, so desperately stupid—and yet so
     uncomfortably clear-sighted.


