
CHAPTER XVII EAVESDROPPING
Three months passed quickly by, the happiest in Rupert's life. Winter by the
      Western Sea is often wild and stormy; the days have little light in them, and the moist vapour
      filling the air seems to cling heavily about one, while hour after hour the rain-clouds creep
      along the sides of the valleys or hang on the wooded ridges above them. It is a monotonous,
      dull-eyed season, the least favourable that can be imagined to inspiration; and only a brave
      spirit will bear up against it or keep alert under its stupefying influence. But the brave
      spirit was there. If light grew scant outside, and work went on slowly in the Great Hall, a
      radiance was kindling within the artist's fancy which became larger every day, adding an
      energy to his step, a charm to his voice and expression, and for the while utterly doing away
      with the melancholy that used to haunt him. When he was called to his London studio, as
      happened
       more than once, he went regretfully, stayed the shortest possible time, and ran
      back again like a boy escaping from school over the palings. He came to be looked upon almost
      as a member of the Trelingham household; and, in turn, he seemed to love everything in and
      about it. His unequal humour gave place to a cheerfulness which was willing to amuse and to be
      amused. Nothing could ruffle him; and Lady May, in spite of herself, caught the infection of
      his high spirits, while Tom Davenant declared that if all artists resembled Glanville they
      were not half-bad fellows. The Earl, though no judge of character, became ever more thankful
      that Providence, through his daughter's suggestion, had put him in the way of a great painter
      and most agreeable companion, who knew how to observe the delicate line of conduct traced out
      for him by circumstances. Rupert's behaviour was, I must say, perfect; he kept his distance,
      did not ask or encourage sentimental conversations on the part of Lady May, and displayed
      towards her and the Countess a courtesy in which it would have been impossible to strike a
      shade of difference. If he had in any way presumed, here to a reasonable mind was
      satisfaction.
The secret of his content lay near at hand. For the first time in his life he was in love.
      He saw Hippolyta when she visited Trelingham; he met her by chance as she rode out, and
      watched her foot-steps along the sands where, on bright afternoons, she sometimes walked. He
      professed an ardent desire
       to know the tracks over the moor which lay on the other side of Yale; and his
      explorations naturally took him up the course of the stream, if only to admire in its winter
      glory the cascade from which Falside derived its name. At this time of the year he found it
      more romantic, and the flood of waters more plenteous, than he had expected. It was, indeed,
      not the season for out-door sketching; yet an hour of fine weather would come occasionally,
      and he transferred to his portfolio a number of rapid and, it must be allowed, masterly views
      in which the water-fall dashed and foamed over its moss-grown rocks, and the bare trees
      bending over it added grandeur to the scene. Hippolyta's garden, lying on the hillside and
      green as an Alpine meadow, could not well be omitted; nor a gable of the cottage, although it
      stood back from the cascade, and was visible only at one point of sight. The young lady was
      not always at home when these sketches were taken; but Rupert, who, like all artists, had
      something of the gipsy in him, would go up at the back of the cottage and humbly demand from
      old Dolores, the nurse or housekeeper, a glass of milk to quench his thirst. Dolores saw him
      about the place, and did not mind; while his petition, delivered in a matter-of-fact tone and
      without hesitating, seemed to imply that it was customary. She gave the milk and said nothing
      about it to her mistress. But as he happened once to be standing at the door in his vagrant
      attitude, taking slow draughts of that beverage, Hippolyta came
       running out in quest of Dolores, and on seeing him changed colour and looked
      confused. She drew back, and tried to cover her confusion with a laugh; but it did not serve,
      and she had to look another way while she begged him to come into the house and rest for a few
      moments. No, he would not do that; but would she deign to criticise the sketch he was making
      of the waterfall in this rainy light? He could not satisfy himself that it looked natural, and
      the opinion of one who had seen the cascade at all hours would be of service to him. Hippolyta
      was always ready to be of service to anybody; she threw on a shawl, and went down the steep
      pathway which led to the water's edge. Rupert, all thanks and eagerness, made her observe the
      clear yellow light that was filling the sunset heavens, how it spread above the waterfall and
      irradiated the high branches and slender tracery over their heads, throwing a tawny reflection
      from the opening to their left upon the pure white foam which crowned the falling torrent.
      Then he showed her what he had made of it; and she, who could find nothing to criticise,—for
      it was an admirable sketch, —praised it and him, of course in his artistic capacity, which
      resulted on his part in a momentary fit of intoxication. She knew the waterfall in all its
      aspects, and was beguiled into talking about them, even leading him to an upper walk where he
      might see how the Yale formed its tiny rapids ere it plunged down the rocks. Glanville
      hearkened respectfully, took out his pencil and dashed down a line or two, declared that
       she was endowed with the eye of an artist and ought to take lessons in painting,
      and would have lingered till nightfall had not Hippolyta quietly observed that she must go
      back to her bread-baking or the batch would spoil, and sped away like a roe-deer, leaving him
      the helpless victim of her charms. He could not but come again and complete the sketch.
      Hippolyta saw him from her window as he sat in front of the waterfall. She hesitated a while,
      and then went down through the garden, and gave him a commission for Lady May. This little
      action took no time to speak of, and Hippolyta returning to the house was seen no more by
      Rupert. Yet he walked to the village where he had left his horse, and rode on to Trelingham in
      a state of singular happiness. He rehearsed his commission openly and unabashed; if Lady May
      had an answer to send he could take it, for he was going the same way to-morrow. And it became
      an understood thing that Glanville intended to exhibit a landscape, in which the cascades of
      the Yale would be introduced, during the course of that year.
At Trelingham, in spite of her untutored ways, Hippolyta was everybody's favourite, unless I
      am to except Lady May. She came often, as the Earl desired; and her bearing was so frank and
      gentle that even the censorious neighbours, who were shocked when they heard that she had been
      'taken up' by Lady Alice's brother, began to admit that Miss Valence, though a perfect savage
      in her habits, was
       interesting. Not, indeed, that many of them came across her. She begged hard to
      be introduced as little as possible, and saw only those chance visitors from whom she could
      not get away in time. When she was thus held captive she spoke hardly at all, but her silence
      showed that she was attending, and more than one imposing and frivolous matron found in
      Hippolyta's dumbness a check upon the 'pribble prabble,' to use Fluellen's excellent phrase,
      which passes current as 'society talk,' and is thought the proper subject-matter of a morning
      call. Poor Hippolyta, she was much to be pitied! She did not mean to be silent; she was
      overwhelmed at the kind of conversation on which people fed their minds. Was the great world,
      which gave laws to the rest of mankind, and boasted of its blood, and wealth, and intellect,
      so like that deafening house which she had once entered in the Zoological Gardens where
      parrots and cockatoos scream all day long, and each bird sharpens its beak on iron wire? Most
      of the ladies, she thought, and Tom Davenant would have agreed with her, had very hard mouths.
      For want of practice she could not vie with them, and she sat and listened in blank
      amazement.
But she had been taught to observe, and she perceived that the inmates of Trelingham Court
      were unlike their visitors. She said to Glanville, whom she often found at her elbow when she
      turned round to make a remark, 'It is curious what an unworldly air comes over this place when
      callers are shut out,—
       I mean the other callers besides myself. I suppose you, Mr. Glanville, are the
      nearest approach to a man of the world under this roof, and you would not take a prize,' she
      concluded, smiling at him in a way he did not think of resenting.
'You are quite right,' he said; 'I hope I shall never win much in that competition. Neither
      is the Earl an example of what you mean, nor Mr. Davenant. But women of the world now, do you
      discover none? Lady May, for instance.'
'No; Lady May's position requires her to seem like the rest; but it is all surface. She
      plays her part because it has been given her, but she is too noble, her gifts are too splendid
      for it. Like you, she has the genius of an artist, and should be a musician, or write poetry,
      or do something extraordinary.'
'And the Countess?'
'Oh, the Countess!' said Hippolyta, laughing; 'the Countess is not so much a woman of the
      world as I am. She is an amusing, a captivating child. There is not malice enough in her
      composition to make a woman of the world.'
'Not malice, certainly,' thought Glanville, 'but mischief. I am not always pleased with her
      affection for Hippolyta. However enthusiastic, I doubt that it is quite so simple as it
      appears.' In which philosophic inference, not communicated to Miss Valence, but the fruit of
      observation, we shall perhaps see that Rupert was justified.
The only drawback to his contentment was that
       Ivor did not write; while if Hippolyta was not always happy, she ascribed it, in
      Lord Trelingham's hearing, to the fact that her father had sent only a laconic message when
      she told him of her new friends, to the effect that she might please herself in the matter. He
      subjoined, it is true, a hasty postscript, but it contained merely these words, 'You know that
      I bear no resentment towards Lord Trelingham.' This was not all she wanted by any means;
      although the Earl, resolved upon looking at things in a Christian light, took it as a
      concession and bade her not lose heart. He did not inquire where Colonel Valence was; and
      though she wrote frequently, she neither spoke of his doings nor expressed anxiety for his
      return. No one could suppose that she did not love her father; but, though impressionable, her
      nerves had been schooled from the first, and the Colonel's uncertain and wandering life was
      too familiar an experience to make her uneasy. Still, she was alone in the world,—a perilous
      situation for a maiden of nineteen. Adviser she had none; her Spanish relatives, if such
      existed, did not come within reach of her; nor were the Trelingham family, however amiable, of
      the kind to influence one who had been educated on principles which the Earl abhorred, and
      which Lady May, in spite of her varied accomplishments and real intellect, could not have
      understood. It can hardly be questioned, indeed, that if Lord Trelingham had realised how far
      they were from being abstract theories, and what a bearing they had on life, his
       compassion for Hippolyta would have been vanquished by his dread of their
      contagion. Rupert was destined to know a little more of them.
It was that difficult time of day, for an artist in a country-house, which begins somewhere
      about four o'clock in winter and lasts till the dinner-bell puts an end to it, when Glanville,
      who had been at work in the Great Hall since morning, and felt so tired that he did not know
      what to do with himself, entered the many-windowed drawing-room which was then empty, and
      walking across its wide expanse, threw himself into one of the cushioned embrasures where he
      could lie at ease and look out at the sea beyond. An immense wood-fire was burning on the
      hearth, and Rupert, to get away from the blaze, had chosen a window as far from it as
      possible, drawing the heavy velvet curtains about him so as to be screened and comfortable. He
      soon grew tired of watching the misty waters; his eyes closed, and the young man fell into an
      innocent and refreshing sleep. How long his slumber continued is immaterial to the story; but
      it was broken in upon by the sound of voices at no great distance, and as he slowly came back
      to himself he heard an animated conversation sustained by the three ladies, who, though not
      resembling the withered hags of fable, were weaving his destiny among them. It was dark on the
      terrace; but through the aperture of the curtains he could observe the flickering light of the
      wood-fire and the figures seated near it,—Lady May with a cup in her hand, sitting upright and
      addressing
       Karina, who was in the act of laying a book on the sofa where she half reclined.
      Hippolyta, buried in the depths of a huge arm-chair, was looking straight into the flames,
      but, as her expression showed, had an ear for the discussion that was going on. Animated it
      certainly was; with less refinement of manner it would have appeared a downright quarrel. Lady
      May was speaking.
'You said the other day, Karina, that I was severe upon your reading. That would be absurd
      in me. But I do think your uncle would be scandalised if he saw this kind of literature in the
      hands of any woman.'
'Oh, Uncle William is so precise,' cried the Countess, 'he would not read such a book
      himself, of course; but he belongs to a past generation when English people read nothing but
      the Prayer-Book and the Quarterly Review . Why shouldn't I read anything that is
      clever? Besides, this is not one of the new romances. It is an old favourite of mine.
      Everybody in France knows Rousseau's Confessions , or knows about them. What do you
      say, Miss Valence? You, of course, read everything.' She looked at Hippolyta, who did not
      stir, but replied:
'What does your cousin say? That is of more consequence than my opinion.'
'I say,' answered Lady May very decidedly, 'that no woman can read the French literature of
      the last century and not be degraded.'
'Then you have not read it yourself?' said the Countess, in a tone of mocking inquiry.

'Not much; but I know many, both men and women, that have, and whether they admire it or no,
      they are agreed as to its character. What good can it do you, Karina?'
'What good? it amuses me. It tells me all kinds of things I want to know,—how people
      dressed, and talked, and ate, and travelled, and made love, and ran away from one another, a
      hundred years ago, and ever so much more. It must have been a very pleasant world, not like
      these horrid days when if you do anything it is put in the papers. And I adore sentiment, and
      virtue, and humanity, and all those things. I wish we could have a Petit Trianon and
      they would let me keep cows, as Marie Antoinette did.'
'What tinsel and paste!' said Lady May indignantly. 'Yes, sentiment and virtue in the mouth
      of Rousseau were indeed exquisite. But how can you talk in that idle way about their
      love-making! There was no such thing as love in the eighteenth century.'
'Paul and Virginia?' objected Hippolyta, still keeping her eyes on the fire.
'Yes, in romance I grant. And Lotte also was a reality when she cut bread and butter for the
      children; but Werther was not when he wept and raved about her—he was only Goethe the
      sentimental, describing his fancies, which were the one kind of love he had experienced or
      knew anything about.'
'I agree with you there,' said Hippolyta; 'all Goethe's love-making was sentimental egoism;
      like the Spectre of the Brocken it reflected himself.'

'And Jean Jacques, what do you think of him?' inquired the Countess.
'I have read him too little to form a judgment. That book on the sofa I began one day, but I
      could not go on with it. I felt—it is hard to give another the exact impression—as if, then, I
      had been imprisoned in a hot-house, with strange flowers all round, the odour of which was
      sickening and a deadly poison. I should not like to breathe such a moral atmosphere long.'
'How very astonishing!' exclaimed Karina; 'you talk like one of the good people, like my
      uncle, almost. I thought you did not mind such things.'
Hippolyta looked round now. She was very much hurt. 'I mind them a great deal,' she said;
      'why do you think I do not mind them? I have never given you reason.' She spoke very
      sorrowfully, not as if she were angry or insulted.
'My dear child,' the Countess cried, 'I am so sorry to have hurt your feelings. I don't mind
      things when I read them. But as you were brought up without religion, I fancied you would not
      be prejudiced against Jean Jacques, like my cousin.'
'Prejudiced! no,' said Hippolyta, 'that I am not. Personally, I have an affection for him,
      his life was so miserable and he seemed made for better things. Jean Jacques was not
      irreligious, even in your sense. But, as for my education, I see you do not understand what it
      has been. Shall I tell you?'
'Do,' said the Countess; and 'only as much as
       you choose,' said Lady May. They were both interested; but Lady May was somewhat
      doubtful as to the propriety of revelations which, innocent enough on the lips of Miss
      Valence, might confirm the Countess in her evil ways.
'It will not be so dreadful, I hope,' said Hippolyta with a smile at Lady May. 'I have been
      taught on principles unlike your own, perhaps, but I have never done anything that I knew to
      be wrong. My days have gone by harmlessly. So now I may begin "The Story of Hippolyta Valence,
      told by herself." There is no need of an introduction.'
Thus far the listener behind the curtain had felt assured that he should only terrify a
      peaceful company of ladies by appearing in their midst from his place of concealment. But now
      he was in a frightful dilemma. To escape unobserved was impossible, to stay where he found
      himself was still more impossible. He looked across at the doors. They might as well have been
      a thousand miles off; neither to the one nor the other could he get without passing the ladies
      who occupied that side of the room in force. He thought, as desperate men will, of impossible
      alternatives —of opening the heavy window, and getting out on the terrace; but that, too,
      meant noise and discovery. If only it had been the French window lower down! There is a fate
      in these things. Instant decision alone could save him, and to decide instantly was out of the
      question. Hippolyta had begun; he did not know what to do; he must remain
       there imprisoned and trust to a kindly Providence to interpose in his favour.
      Some one might come in, or the ladies might depart without knowing they had had an auditor. He
      closed his eyes, but sleep would not come, even if, which I take leave to doubt, it had been
      seriously invoked. After all, Rupert was human; he had resolved that Hippolyta should be his,
      and nothing he might hear would shake his resolution. These confidences must have come after
      marriage; there was no great harm in hearing them before. Thus he argued, listening the while
      to Hippolyta's voice, which sounded in his ears like an evening bell in the distance, full of
      dreaming melody. For even now he was not thoroughly roused, though sleep had fled from
      him.
'I was born,' said Hippolyta, 'in Spain, not far from Barcelona, where, as I mentioned to
      Lord Trelingham, my father and mother lived for some time after their marriage. They were
      devoted to one another and to me. My mother had little or nothing, however, to do with my
      education. She was not strong, and her friend or servant—but we do not call any one a servant
      in our way of speaking,—her friend, therefore, Dolores, took charge of me and taught me all
      she knew as soon as I was capable of learning. She had never been out of her native country,
      and her ways were primitive enough, as I saw by comparison with those of English people when I
      came across them. But this advantage they had, I could have lived among the peasantry in whose
      neighbourhood
       I spent my earliest years with no less comfort and happiness than any of their
      daughters. I know the use of right hand and left; I can take care of myself and am not afraid
      to live alone or to go anywhere I wish. It was, indeed, the main principle of my father's
      teaching that a woman who needed service or attendance was no better than a child. He thought
      Nature had made us free by giving us eyes and brains and a pair of hands; that it is an evil
      custom which, by degrading women to be mere play-things and ornaments, has enslaved men. He
      was an ardent admirer of Shelley, and like him he preached the emancipation of the whole human
      race.'
'An admirable thing,' said Lady May; 'but how did he propose to accomplish it?'
Hippolyta answered immediately, 'By making the two sexes equal and free.'
'I should like that, indeed,' exclaimed Karina; 'but the men are too strong for us, and not
      easily persuaded. They like their wives to be dependent on them for everything.'
'The new creed finds a short way out of that difficulty, at any rate,' said Hippolyta with
      kindling cheeks. 'If marriage is slavery, if it cannot be reformed, it must be abolished.' The
      Countess looked horrified.
Lady May beckoned to her cousin to keep still. 'Karina is interrupting you with her
      questions,' she said, 'but we can ask questions afterwards. Your own story is what we should
      be most interested in hearing now.'

'I will go on with it,' said Hippolyta. 'As I was remarking, my father held by the equality
      of the sexes, and would have their education assimilated in most things. The boys should be
      taught not to live like barbarians; the girls to use their limbs and their understandings. He
      would have them frequent the same schools and rival one another in study. I daresay you know
      that he was a Greek scholar at the University of Cambridge. He loved to throw his principles
      into the shape of the antique stories; and thus he often warned me that he meant to give me
      the training of those heroic women, the Amazons, who called themselves "equal to men." That is
      how I came by my name Hippolyta. My mother said I should never be tall enough to suit such a
      splendid appellation, and wished me to be called Titania, which is perhaps the prettier of the
      two.'
'And did you go to school abroad?' asked Lady May; 'you must have gone to America for the
      mixed education Colonel Valence wanted.'
'No, we lived such an unsettled life. Besides, my father would not have sent me to a
      boarding-school. I learned all that was necessary at home. My father instructed me in books of
      every kind; he taught me history, and gave me an enthusiasm for the great movement in which he
      was playing so many parts. And my mother, lying on her couch, could show me how to make my own
      dresses, which I have always done since.'
'You wonderful being!' said the Countess. 'I
       thought you must have gone to a very good couturière ; but it was your
      mother, I suppose.'
'I do not think she could ever have had the money,' replied Hippolyta; 'she was a poor girl
      of Barcelona, whose father was shot by my father's side on the barricades; and that was how he
      came to know her first, having to inform her as gently as he could that she was an orphan. I
      liked to hear my mother tell the story over again, and often asked her for it. Poor dear
      mother, I miss her every day I live!'
Glanville did not scruple about listening now. He felt touched to the heart. Hippolyta was
      not crying, but her subdued tones were full of pathos; and as if the last words had stirred
      recollections which she could not trust herself to utter, she became silent for two or three
      minutes, while the Countess and Lady May exchanged glances of surprise. Here was a revelation.
      Miss Valence was a gentlewoman, then, only by courtesy; for her father had renounced his
      station and her mother had none to renounce.
'Yes,' she resumed, 'I am of the people, and am proud to inherit from my mother an affection
      for them, which has been my chief happiness. She could not read or write; she had never gone
      to school and did not know what was meant by the word history. But she could sing the ancient
      ballads and songs of the peasants which are all the history Spain possesses, and I learnt to
      sing them from her. She had only one religion—my father; he was to her all that the world
      could bestow of brave or admirable; and that
       idolatry came natural, as you may suppose, to me. He was often serious, never
      harsh. He showed me the meaning of poetry, gave me large freedom, and brought into play as
      early as possible the powers of reason and conscience, not of fear, servility, or custom. The
      time must arrive, he said, when I should have only myself to depend on. He would not leave me
      the property which had been his; it was to be thrown into the common stock of the brotherhood.
      So that unless hand or brain could support me I should fare ill.'
'But that is monstrous!' exclaimed Lady May; 'what, to leave his only child a beggar! Excuse
      my vehemence,' she added, 'I see you do not agree with me.'
'I partly understand you, but how could I agree with you, my dear Lady May? I shall
      not be a beggar whilst I have myself. Were I helpless in mind or body, the question would be
      different. For such cases provision is to be made in the new order of things.'
'But, positively, you are living in Utopia,' said the Earl's daughter; 'cannot you see that
      these are the idlest dreams? Does Colonel Valence hope to pull the world together at its four
      corners?'
'I suppose you would describe it so,' answered Hippolyta. 'My father believes in a moral
      dynamite which will leave only such things standing as reason cannot overthrow. Whatever ought
      to succumb will succumb. Else we should be governed by dead men
       who have lain in their graves for thousands of years. Regeneration springs out of
      the depths; it will be the people's doing.'
'But, anyhow, it will not come yet,' persisted Lady May, in whose eyes the frantic delusion
      of the whole business was heightened by Hippolyta's composure. 'Come it will not in our time,
      and how are you, and such as you, to live?'
'As for me, I am better able to make my way without assistance than nine girls out of ten. I
      can scrub the floor, and blacklead stoves. I can set type. I can speak and write a certain
      number of languages, and make my own dresses. Can you do as much, Countess?' she asked with a
      pleasant glance towards the reclining beauty.
'Heaven forbid!' said the Countess. 'I can speak like a parrot any language I hear spoken
      about me. But I have not a housemaid's gifts nor a printer's.'
'More is the pity,' replied Hippolyta. 'However, since I can do these things, I do not mind
      facing the world. Moreover, I have the comfort of thinking that I eat no morsel which I have
      not earned.'
'Well,' said Karina, 'I never earned anything, and I never shall. But that does not signify.
      You would not condemn me to starve like Ugolino, would you, if the Revolution came?'
'No; I should keep you in a golden cage, as a beautiful curiosity of the past,' said
      Hippolyta, 'and you should subsist on the money taken at the doors.' They both laughed at this
      sudden fancy, which was as
       novel to the speaker as to the person that figured in it. 'But what did you mean
      by saying it does not signify?'
'Oh, this,' said the other lady: 'I wanted to ask you whether there would be marrying and
      giving in marriage when your father had his way. You said not, at the beginning.'
'I said, or at least I had it in mind to say, that there should be no marriages of interest,
      or convenance , or without affection on both sides. There should be no slavery in
      marriage, no women shut up in a moral seraglio with the bolts and bars of the law keeping them
      in durance while their husbands were free. They should cease to be chattels. Where there was
      love there should be marriage; and when love ended marriage should end too. I would burn the
      body when the spirit was fled; the coffin you call marriage with the corpse of a dead
      affection.'
Lady May had become very thoughtful. She raised her eyes and looked steadily at Hippolyta
      till she had done speaking, and then said, with remarkable earnestness, 'Is not that the
      doctrine of Free Love?'
'If you like,' replied the young enthusiast, 'but I call it Free Marriage.'
'Where is the difference? I can see none,' said Lady May.
'That would be a long story. Love ought to be free, or it is worthless. But you understand
      by free love yielding to every impulse of the passions, and I
       mean obeying the true woman's heart and despising tyrannical laws and usages. My
      father's motto has ever been, to distrust impulse and to despise custom. They are his very
      words.'
'But a woman has nothing to go upon except impulse and custom,' said Lady May. 'It is
      exactly how I should describe her life. Men, of course, have something else; they are strong,
      and can override custom and put down their impulses.'
'And why should a woman not do the same? She is strong in her affections, and she might be
      as strong in her reason if she were shown how. At any rate, when I learnt from my father that
      we women have a task and a duty in the world of to-morrow, I did not understand him to be
      encouraging caprice, or unbridled desires, or wandering fancies. I have seen many households
      in travelling over Europe with him; and when they were unhappy, the reason, as he pointed out,
      was that women are only half-women, not so just or truthful as men because their foreheads
      have been flattened and their minds kept childish. The balance will never hang equal between
      the sexes till their union is free and rational.'
'How come you to have thought so much at nineteen on a matter like this?' inquired Lady
      May.
'Because my father believes that knowledge is better than ignorance. He pointed out the
      books I was to read; and my mother, who understood him and was of a singularly apt mind,
      instructed me according to his wishes.'

'Then you do not approve of marriage, after all?' said the Countess. 'You think it is a
      wicked custom. I see that you do agree with the French romances, although you have not read
      much of Jean Jacques. How my uncle would open his eyes if he heard you!'
'I did not say all marriages were wicked,' answered Hippolyta; 'only that the true marriage
      is the union of heart with heart, of human beings who are free to give themselves and worthy
      of one another. Custom is nothing, pledging the hand is nothing; and passion, they say in the
      stories, will not last. In my father's creed marriage is the ideal of human life. It will be
      realised as it ought to be with other good things that are waiting.'
'But oh, my dear,' sighed the Countess, 'we cannot wait. We get old so soon—ten years sooner
      than the men, for they have the best of everything. Look at my Cousin Tom, for example. He is
      just about my own age; and if we were equal, as you said in your very pretty sketch—and I am
      sure I wish we were—but he looks ever so much younger than I do.'
Hippolyta was inwardly amused. The Countess's tender idyll was no secret to her; but whether
      she thought it should be realised in the golden age she would not say. A long pause followed.
      Glanville, his mind filled with conflicting thoughts, irritated, yet more in love than ever,
      was hardly conscious that he might be discovered at any moment, and that the consequences
      would be dreadful. During the conversation, which had absorbed all their attention, the
       ladies had neglected to tend the fire, and it was dying down into dull white
      ashes, with a spark here and there glowing out of them. The sensitive Karina, usually wrapt in
      furs, began to shiver and look round for the explanation. 'Why, May,' she cried, 'the fire is
      gone out; we have forgotten to drink our tea, and it is quite dark and dismal. I am half-dead
      with cold. Do ring for lights.'
'We had better adjourn altogether,' replied her cousin, to which Rupert mentally added an
      amen. 'I dont't know what has come over us to be sitting here like the witches in Macbeth.
      Now, my dear,' she continued, taking Hippolyta by the hand, 'since it is the first time you
      are dining here, you had better come to my room and put yourself in the hands of my maid. You
      would only get nervous if I were not there to see after you.'
Rupert strained his eyes through the curtains, and held his breath while the ladies were
      moving towards the door. They were very slow, for they had shawls and wrappers to collect in
      the semi-darkness; and it was not until the open door allowed a gleam of light to come in from
      the hall that they could see what they were doing. At last, at long last, they went. Glanville
      gave a sigh of relief; he waited a moment till the coast was clear, and then pulling the
      curtains aside, rose and stretched himself. He felt extremely tired and not a little excited.
      It was about time he said, that this strange conversation had ended, for he could not have
      endured either his cramped position
       or the thought of eavesdropping much longer. And with these words he grasped the
      handle of the door. At the same moment he felt some one turning it from the outside.
Aghast, he staggered back, the door opened, and Hippolyta came running in. As the light fell
      full upon Rupert, standing like a lost man in front of her, she stopped and put her hands to
      her breast. A nervous woman would have screamed, a silly one would have fainted; but
      Hippolyta, possessed of the rare courage which answers at call, did neither. Her eyes met
      those of the artist, steadily, inquiringly. He was dead silent. 'You did not come in just
      now?' she said. He replied in a faint voice, 'No; it was —I don't remember how long ago.' She
      blenched, but kept looking at him still. 'And you heard what I have been saying?'—'I heard
      all,' was the low answer.
'Then,' she said, with the greatest agitation in voice and manner, 'oh, then, you despise
      me;' and as she spoke she turned from him. He caught her by the sleeve.
'Despise you!' he cried in a tone of the deepest love; 'Hippolyta, I adore you.'
She plucked her sleeve from him and was gone. He heard her step on the stairs, but he dared
      not follow. He was so overcome that he leaned against the wall to recover himself. Was he
      ashamed or exultant, struck with remorse or full of hope and courage? He was all these at
      once. For the
       notions that Hippolyta had learned from her father he cared not a jot. Hers was a
      soul that turned them all to favour and to prettiness; she believed them because they seemed
      noble in her eyes and came with authority from the being she most revered. That she had laid
      bare her very innermost heart in speaking with Lady May and the Countess he was certain. She
      could never have been so frank with him, even though he stood in the place of a declared
      lover. He despise Hippolyta! Good heavens, why could he not this instant follow her and fall
      at her feet? But the die was cast. She had no choice now but to understand. He would speak
      that evening, if it were possible; to-morrow, at any rate. He had meant to wait a little for
      fear of alarming the bird ere it was caught in the snare; but events had proved too much for
      him. He must venture all, and, if necessary, venture again and again. While he stood absorbed
      in meditation the first dinner-bell sounded, and awoke him to the things of earth. He ran
      upstairs with a quicker step than usual, wishing that for the next four and twenty hours
      society and all that it inherit could be dissolved, leaving him and Hippolyta to be their own
      universe. At the bottom of his heart he doubted her love as little as he doubted his own.
      'Free love, free marriage,' he repeated mechanically; 'yes, Hippolyta, it is love that makes
      us free.'
He hardly knew what he was doing, and made sad havoc among his dressing things during the
      next
       half-hour. The fingers were hot and trembling with which he fumbled at his
      neckcloth; he took up this and that which were nothing to his purpose, looked about the room
      for what he held in his hand, had just sense enough not to attempt shaving—which, had he
      begun, this chronicle might speedily have been ended—and was not in any way ready when the
      second bell resounded in his ears. He came in as the rest were seated round the dinner-table,
      and took his place, which the fates had willed should be next to Hippolyta. He seemed
      distraught, but I regret to say that his distraction did not originate in a feeling of shame
      for what had happened. This honourable man, who for a long hour had listened behind a curtain
      to conversation which was not intended for any man's ears, could be scarcely said to remember
      where he had passed the afternoon. Some remnant of grace hindered him from directing his eyes
      towards Hippolyta. He knew very well, notwithstanding, both how she looked and what flowers
      she wore in her beautiful golden hair. He knew that she felt as uncomfortable and as happy as
      he did; that the slight quiver in her voice when she spoke—and she said but little—had
      infinite meanings; that her shyness equalled his, although it was better concealed; and when
      dinner was drawing to an end he absolutely looked up and met the tremulous smile on her lips
      with the shadow of an answering smile upon his own.
The Earl, unconsciously, was very good to them.
       Knowing Hippolyta's unwillingness to say much in the presence of strangers, he
      had invited her on a day when the family were alone; and as she appeared to be still in terror
      he acted like a considerate host, and spoke of things indifferent which required no answering,
      or narrated incidents out of his own past, and had the gratification of seeing the young
      lady's eyes bent on him while he discoursed. For no reward in the world would she have
      ventured to address Rupert except in monosyllables. Once, I say, she met his gaze, and her
      lips fashioned themselves unwillingly into a smile. But that over, she was glad to escape; and
      when the gentlemen entered the drawing-room Glanville learned that Miss Valence had been too
      much fatigued to stay up, and was departed to her slumbers. His apology, his declaration of
      love or war, must wait until the moon came out of the clouds again.
But Hippolyta had not gone home; that was his comfort. He should see her in the morning. She
      appeared at breakfast; was tongue-tied as on the previous evening, and exceedingly careful not
      to address the young man, whose courage, dashed for a moment by her silence, revived when he
      looked upon her calm and beautiful face. She was agitated by no inward trouble, only absorbed
      and mastered. Could it be that she thought he would not speak? He waited to hear of the
      arrangements for the day. Hippolyta, still pleading fatigue, asked that the expedition they
      had planned might be put off till
       the afternoon, or till her next visit. Rupert was exultant. If she stayed in the
      house or in the Park he would find his opportunity. And so it came to pass. The other ladies
      went out riding. Miss Valence sat in the morning-room, where the lights were pleasant until
      mid-day, and a cheerful fire was burning. She had drawn her chair to the window, and was
      writing at a small desk, bending over which her figure was visible to any one that came that
      way along the terrace. Glanville walked about in the air, trying to collect his thoughts and
      cool the fever which ran in his veins; but, crisp as was the morning, and cold and clear in
      the stinted sunshine the aspect of the distant waters, he could not bring down his
      high-beating pulse. And when he had passed by the window where Hippolyta sat more times than
      he could reckon, he summoned up heart of grace, and walked boldly into the hall. In another
      moment he was by her side. Hippolyta, in her extreme agitation on seeing him there, stood up
      and had not a word to say. They both coloured violently.
'Miss Valence,' he began; he could get no further. She did not know how to rebuke or to
      encourage him, or which of the two she meant. He waited until she resumed her seat, then began
      once more. 'May I speak to you?' he said, in the lowest tones of a passion-stirred voice. 'I
      have an apology to make which ought not to be delayed. I have a mind to unburden of its load.
      It seems as though I were always doomed to offend you, and yet,—oh Hippolyta,'
       he said, bursting out, 'you must, you do understand that since I saw you at the
      Hermitage I have had no other thought, day or night—'
'Than to offend me?' she asked, with her quick sense of the entanglement into which this
      eloquent lover had got himself. 'I am sure I ought to be very much obliged.' But the taunt
      would not serve. Rupert was in too serious a mood to be laughed out of his passion.
'Don't,' he cried; 'you are cruel. I hardly know what I am saying; but I do know, and I must
      try to make you know, what I mean. Hippolyta, if you can return the love I have felt ever
      since that day you will make me the happiest man alive. Can you, Hippolyta?'
Her face was burning. She grasped the edge of the writing-table to steady herself. Which way
      to turn she did not know, but it seemed to her that unless she made a resolute effort she
      should fall off the chair fainting. Rupert stood looking down on the ground, motionless and
      silent. The murmur of the waves came, like the sound of bells in the air, faint and musical,
      athwart the stillness; and neither of them spoke. Slowly, however, Hippolyta gathered up her
      strength as if for a supreme effort. She said to Rupert in a steady voice where no vibration
      betrayed her feeling, 'Mr. Glanville, let me ask you one thing.' He raised his eyes. She
      seemed perfectly mistress of herself as she went on, 'Do you mean that you respect or despise
      me?'

'Oh heavens,' he exclaimed, 'is it possible you can doubt? Hippolyta, I worship the ground
      you walk on. I never saw any one to compare with you.'
'And yet you listened yesterday afternoon to a conversation in which, if aught was said that
      as a matter of principle could shock you,—and I suppose many things shocked you,—I was the
      offender. I am well aware of the views men commonly take, what they expect of a woman, and
      what virtues they prize.'
'But I am not such a man,' returned Glanville with eagerness. 'Why do you not blame me
      rather for hearkening where I had no right, than yourself for uttering sentiments which you
      learned in infancy?'
'Blame you?' she answered, as if the notion had not occurred to her, 'because I did not
      think of it. I supposed you an honourable man. If you overheard me and made no sign, I daresay
      there was some explanation. Oh no, I did not blame you.'
'God bless you, Hippolyta,' he cried; 'you are the most admirable woman in the world. Was I
      to blame? I should have been perhaps, I confess, but for the feeling of intense and ardent
      love which made it impossible I should hear and not love you still more. It was that, and only
      that, which hindered me from at once coming forward when you began the story of your life.'
      And then, in few words, he told her how he had fallen asleep and what happened afterwards. She
      listened to him gravely, and as though
       waiting for the conclusion he would draw from her yesterday's avowal. It was not
      long in coming.
'I am not given to philosophy or revolution myself,' were his words, 'nor can I pretend to
      feel enthusiasm about anything except art. But what does it matter? If you will stoop to love
      me, Hippolyta, I shall be happy. And if you will not? Oh, I cannot bear to think it. You see
      how impossible it is that I should live without you.'
He drew nearer as he spoke, and the great flame of his affection seemed to be rushing about
      her and hiding the whole world in its divine radiance. In her own mind she had surrendered
      already; what was there to oppose to Rupert's vehemence and sincerity? But still, she would
      have a clear understanding.
'You know how I have been brought up, you have heard what I think, and in spite of all that
      you profess to care for me?'
'Profess to care? Are you not the very breath of my existence? I am talking, perhaps, like a
      fool, like a boy. But, Hippolyta, lay upon me any task, put my sincerity to the test, do as
      you please with me now and henceforth, and you will see whether my love is honest and true.'
      His vehemence made him gasp for breath.
Hippolyta rose and put her hand in his. The maiden's eyes were glowing with soft light; the
      flush on her countenance was beautiful to see. 'Rupert,' she said. Then she too paused an
      instant. How he waited for the next word! 'Rupert, I believe in
       you. Such as I am, since you—why should I not say it?—since you think of me in
      this way I will be yours.' He took her other hand in his with a convulsive grasp. But she drew
      herself away, and continued, 'Only you must not come between my father and me. I have promised
      to do his bidding in many ways that for the present I cannot explain. Free I am not. And,
      therefore, if you will not consent to wait until these things are over and done with, say the
      word. Let all this be as though it had never been. You could not guess what a strange and
      difficult course is mine.'
'Ah no,' said Glanville, 'it shall never be spoken, the word that would separate us. I am
      willing to wait. How long, Hippolyta? I can be patient if you love me.'
'It may not be long,' was her answer: 'a few months; at the outside a year or two. My father
      has lately shown more reserve in speaking to me than he was wont. But I know the time is
      running out, and that a crisis is approaching. Can you trust me to do you no injustice, to do
      myself none?'
'I trust you altogether, my darling,' he said; and there his great joy overcame him. The
      strong man broke down. Hippolyta was much affected. With a charming mixture of affection and
      timidity she laid her hand on his arm and said bashfully, 'Why do you cry? Are you displeased
      at anything I have said? No, I see you are not. I thought Englishmen never showed their
      feelings.' She
       laughed very softly, with the tenderest playfulness in her accents. Rupert caught
      her in his arms and for a single moment held her there. But she slipped away from him, and,
      leaving her unfinished letter on the desk, fled out of the room.
Such was Rupert Glanville's engagement with Hippolyta Valence. When they met again in
      private, which by favour of the gods happened that very afternoon, it was decided that they
      should keep their promises secret until Hippolyta gave permission to make them known. This was
      not Rupert's proposal, or entirely his wish; for he felt, with reason, that he could not have
      a better defence against Lady May, nor put forward a more intelligible excuse for his change
      of conduct towards her, than to announce the engagement. But Hippolyta, to whom he did not
      speak of the Earl's daughter, was apprehensive that a premature disclosure of what had taken
      place would thwart her efforts to bring about a reconciliation between the families. She knew
      how great was Lady May's influence over Lord Trelingham; neither had she waited until now to
      discover that something in the nature of an enthusiastic friendship, perhaps of love, existed
      on her side which had not been returned by Rupert. She would be a rival, sooner or later,
      —unsuccessfully, no doubt, but a rival still,—for the hand of the artist. That need not
      signify once Hippolyta had brought the Earl and her father into some sort of agreement. But
      meanwhile, secrecy
       appeared to her an absolute part of discretion. She was not afraid of losing
      Rupert, his love would protect him, and she had been too well used to deny herself pleasant
      things, and therefore knew how to be patient. The gentleman, in that submissive state which
      lasts till he reaches the altar, and ceases as if by magic when he is returning down the
      church after certain words have been spoken, yielded uncomplainingly. He was glad enough to
      have an assurance of possessing Hippolyta at whatever time and under such circumstances as
      she, in her wisdom, might determine. You never saw a mountain-pard so tamed by kindness, so
      subdued and willing to follow the hand that led him along, as this fiery, clear-eyed,
      tender-hearted Rupert. His best friends, always excepting Ivor Mardol, would not have known
      him as he stood humbly attendant on the behest of his newly-found mistress. Might he tell
      Ivor? he inquired. Hippolyta reflected for a while, and answered between a smile and a sigh
      that she did not doubt his friend, but it would be as well to let nobody hear of it besides
      her father. To him she was writing by the next post.

