<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>New Grub Street: A Novel</title><author>Gissing, George (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1891</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER XV THE LAST RESOURCE
The past twelve months had added several years to Edwin Reardon's seeming age; at
      thirty-three he would generally have been taken for forty. His bearing, his personal habits,
      were no longer those of a young man; he walked with a stoop and pressed noticeably on the
      stick he carried; it was rare for him to show the countenance which tells of present
      cheerfulness or glad onward-looking; there was no spring in his step; his voice had fallen to
      a lower key, and often he spoke with that hesitation in choice of words which may be noticed
      in persons whom defeat has made self-distrustful. Ceaseless perplexity and dread gave a
      wandering, sometimes a wild, expression to his eyes.
He seldom slept, in the proper sense of the word; as a rule, he was conscious all through
      the night of 'a kind of fighting' between physical weariness and wakeful toil of the mind. It
       often happened that some wholly imaginary obstacle in the story he was writing
      kept him under a sense of effort throughout the dark hours; now and again he woke, reasoned
      with himself, and remembered clearly that the torment was without cause, but the short relief
      thus afforded soon passed in the recollection of real distress. In his unsoothing slumber he
      talked aloud, frequently wakening Amy; generally he seemed to be holding a dialogue with
      someone who had imposed an intolerable task upon him; he protested passionately, appealed,
      argued in the strangest way about the injustice of what was demanded. Once Amy heard him
      begging for money — positively begging, like some poor wretch in the street; it was horrible,
      and made her shed tears; when he asked what he had been saying, she could not bring herself to
      tell him.
When the striking clocks summoned him remorselessly to rise and work he often reeled with
      dizziness. It seemed to him that the greatest happiness attainable would be to creep into some
      dark, warm corner, out of the sight and memory of men, and lie there torpid, with a blessed
      half-consciousness that death was slowly overcoming him. Of all the sufferings collected
       into each four-and-twenty hours this of rising to a new day was the worst.
The one-volume story which he had calculated would take him four or five weeks was with
      difficulty finished in two months. March winds made an invalid of him; at one time he was
      threatened with bronchitis, and for several days had to abandon even the effort to work. In
      previous winters he had been wont to undergo a good deal of martyrdom from the London climate,
      but never in such a degree as now; mental illness seemed to have enfeebled his body.
It was strange that he succeeded in doing work of any kind, for he had no hope from the
      result. This one last effort he would make, just to complete the undeniableness of his
      failure, and then literature should be thrown behind him; what other pursuit was possible to
      him he knew not, but perhaps he might discover some mode of earning a livelihood. Had it been
      a question of gaining a pound a week, as in the old days, he might have hoped to obtain some
      clerkship like that at the hospital, where no commercial experience or aptitude was demanded;
      but in his present position such an income would be useless. Could he take Amy
       and the child to live in a garret? On less than a hundred a year it was scarcely
      possible to maintain outward decency. Already his own clothing began to declare him
      poverty-stricken, and but for gifts from her mother Amy would have reached the like pass. They
      lived in dread of the pettiest casual expense, for the day of pennilessness was again
      approaching.
Amy was oftener from home than had been her custom. Occasionally she went away soon after
      breakfast, and spent the whole day at her mother's house. 'It saves food,' she said with a
      bitter laugh, when Reardon once expressed surprise that she should be going again so soon.
'And gives you an opportunity of bewailing your hard fate,' he returned coldly.
The reproach was ignoble, and he could not be surprised that Amy left the house without
      another word to him. Yet he resented that, as he had resented her sorrowful jest. The feeling
      of unmanliness in his own position tortured him into a mood of perversity. Through the day he
      wrote only a few lines, and on Amy's return he resolved not to speak to her. There was a sense
      of repose in this change of attitude; he encouraged himself in the view that Amy was treating
      him with cruel neglect. She, surprised
       that her friendly questions elicited no answer, looked into his face and saw a
      sullen anger of which hitherto Reardon had never seemed capable. Her indignation took fire,
      and she left him to himself.
For a day or two he persevered in his muteness, uttering a word only when it could not be
      avoided. Amy was at first so resentful that she contemplated leaving him to his ill-temper and
      dwelling at her mother's house until he chose to recall her. But his face grew so haggard in
      fixed misery that compassion at length prevailed over her injured pride. Late in the evening
      she went to the study, and found him sitting unoccupied.
'Edwin — '
'What do you want?' he asked indifferently.
'Why are you behaving to me like this?'
'Surely it makes no difference to you how I behave? You can easily forget that I exist, and
      live your own life.'
'What have I done to make this change in you?'
'Is it a change?'
'You know it is.'
'How did I behave before?' he asked, glancing at her.

'Like yourself — kindly and gently.'
'If I always did so, in spite of things that might have embittered another man's temper, I
      think it deserved some return of kindness from you.'
'What "things" do you mean?'
'Circumstances for which neither of us is to blame.'
'I am not conscious of having failed in kindness,' said Amy, distantly.
'Then that only shows that you have forgotten your old self, and utterly changed in your
      feeling to me. When we first came to live here could you have imagined yourself leaving me
      alone for long, miserable days, just because I was suffering under misfortunes? You have shown
      too plainly that you don't care to give me the help even of a kind word. You get away from me
      as often as you can, as if to remind me that we have no longer any interests in common. Other
      people are your confidants; you speak of me to them as if I were purposely dragging you down
      into a mean condition.'
'How can you know what I say about you?'
'Isn't it true?' he asked, flashing an angry glance at her.
'It is not true. Of course I have talked to
       mother about our difficulties; how could I help it?'
'And to other people.'
'Not in a way that you could find fault with.'
'In a way that makes me seem contemptible to them. You show them that I have made you poor
      and unhappy, and you are glad to have their sympathy.'
'What you mean is, that I oughtn't to see anyone. There's no other way of avoiding such a
      reproach as this. So long as I don't laugh and sing before people, and assure them that things
      couldn't be more hopeful, I shall be asking for their sympathy, and against you. I can't
      understand your unreasonableness.'
'Im afraid there is very little in me that you can understand. So long as my prospects
      seemed bright, you could sympathise readily enough; as soon as ever they darkened, something
      came between us. Amy, you haven't done your duty. Your love hasn't stood the test as it should
      have done. You have given me no help; besides the burden of cheerless work I have had to bear
      that of your growing coldness. I can't remember one instance when you have spoken to me as a
      wife might — a wife who was something more than a man's housekeeper.'

The passion in his voice and the harshness of the accusation made her unable to reply.
'You said rightly,' he went on, 'that I have always been kind and gentle. I never thought I
      could speak to you, or feel to you, in any other way. But I have undergone too much, and you
      have deserted me. Surely it was too soon to do that. So long as I endeavoured my utmost, and
      loved you the same as ever, you might have remembered all you once said to me. You might have
      given me help, but you haven't cared to.'
The impulses which had part in this outbreak were numerous and complex. He felt all that he
      expressed, but at the same time it seemed to him that he had the choice between two ways of
      uttering his emotion, the tenderly appealing and the sternly reproachful; he took the latter
      course because it was less natural to him than the former. His desire was to impress Amy with
      the bitter intensity of his sufferings; pathos and loving words seemed to have lost their
      power upon her, but perhaps if he yielded to that other form of passion she would be shaken
      out of her coldness. The stress of injured love is always tempted to speech which seems its
      contradiction. Reardon had the strangest mixture of pain and pleasure in flinging out these
      first words of wrath
       that he had ever addressed to Amy; they consoled him under the humiliating sense
      of his weakness, and yet he watched with dread his wife's countenance as she listened to him.
      He hoped to cause her pain equal to his own, for then it would be in his power at once to
      throw off this disguise, and soothe her with every softest word his heart could suggest. That
      she had really ceased to love him he could not, durst not, believe; but his nature demanded
      frequent assurance of affection. Amy had abandoned too soon the caresses of their ardent time;
      she was absorbed in her maternity, and thought it enough to be her husband's friend. Ashamed
      to make appeal directly for the tenderness she no longer offered, he accused her of utter
      indifference, of abandoning him and all but betraying him, that in self-defence she might show
      what really was in her heart.
But Amy made no movement towards him.
'How can you say that I have deserted you?' she returned, with cold indignation. 'When did I
      refuse to share your poverty? When did I grumble at what we have had to go through?'
'Ever since the troubles really began you have let me know what your thoughts were, even if
      you didn't speak them. You have never
       shared my lot willingly. I can't recall one word of encouragement from you, but
      many, many which made the struggle harder for me.'
'Then it would be better for you if I went away altogether, and left you free to do the best
      for yourself. If that is what you mean by all this, why not say it plainly? I won't be a
      burden to you. Someone will give me a home.'
'And you would leave me without regret? Your only care would be that you were still bound to
      me?'
'you must think of me what you like. I don't care to defend myself.'
'You won't admit, then, that I have anything to complain of? I seem to you simply in a bad
      temper without a cause?'
'To tell you the truth, that's just what I do think. I came here to ask what I had done that
      you were angry with me, and you break out furiously with all sorts of vague reproaches. You
      have much to endure, I know that, but it's no reason why you should turn against me. I have
      never neglected my duty. Is the duty all on my side? I believe there are very few wives who
      would be as patient as I have been.'
Reardon gazed at her for a moment, then turned away. The distance between them was
       greater than he had thought, and now he repented of having given way to an
      impulse so alien to his true feelings; anger only estranged her, whereas by speech of a
      different kind he might have won the caress for which he hungered.
Amy, seeing that he would say nothing more, left him to himself.
It grew late in the night. The fire had gone out, but Reardon still sat in the cold room.
      Thoughts of self-destruction were again haunting him, as they had done during the black months
      of last year. If he had lost Amy's love, and all through the mental impotence which would make
      it hard for him even to earn bread, why should he still live? Affection for his child had no
      weight with him; it was Amy's child rather than his, and he had more fear than pleasure in the
      prospect of Willie's growing to manhood.
He had just heard the workhouse clock strike two when, without the warning of a footstep,
      the door opened. Amy came in; she wore her dressing-gown, and her hair was arranged for the
      night.
'Why do you stay here?' she asked.
It was not the same voice as before. He saw that her eyes were red and swollen.
'Have you been crying, Amy?'

'Never mind. Do you know what time it is?'
He went towards her.
'Why have you been crying?'
'There are many things to cry for.'
'Amy, have you any love for me still, or has poverty robbed me of it all?'
'I have never said that I didn't love you. Why do you accuse me of such things?'
He took her in his arms and held her passionately and kissed her face again and again. Amy's
      tears broke forth anew.
'Why should we come to such utter ruin?' she sobbed. 'Oh, try, try if you can't save us even
      yet! You know without my saying it that I do love you; it's dreadful to me to think all our
      happy life should be at an end, when we thought of such a future together. Is it impossible?
      Can't you work as you used to and succeed as we felt confident you would? Don't despair yet,
      Edwin; do, do try, whilst there's still time!'
'Darling, darling — if only I could! '
'I have thought of something, dearest. Do as you proposed last year; find a tenant for the
      flat whilst we still have a little money, and then go away into some quiet country place,
      where you can get back your health and live for very
       little, and write another book — a good book, that'll bring you reputation again.
      I and Willie can go and live at mother's for the summer months. Do this! It would cost you so
      little, living alone, wouldn't it? You would know that I was well cared for; mother would be
      willing to have me for a few months, and it's easy to explain that your health has failed,
      that you're obliged to go away for a time.'
'But why shouldn't you go with me, if we are to let this place?'
'We shouldn't have enough money. I want to free your mind from the burden whilst you are
      writing. And what is before us if we go on in this way? You don't think you will get much for
      what you're writing now, do you?'
Reardon shook his head.
'Then how can we live even to the end of the year? Something must be done, you
      know. If we go into poor lodgings, what hope is there that you'll be able to write anything
      good?'
'But, Amy, I have no faith in my power of — '
'Oh, it would be different! A few days — a week or a fortnight of real holiday in this
      spring weather. Go to some seaside place. How is it possible that all your talents should have
      left
       you? It's only that you have been so anxious and in such poor health. You say I
      don't love you, but I have thought and thought what would be best for you to do, how you could
      save yourself. How can you sink down to the position of a poor clerk in some office? That
       can't be your fate, Edwin; it's incredible. Oh, after such bright hopes, make one
      more effort! Have you forgotten that we were to go to the South together — you were to take me
      to Italy and Greece? How can that ever be if you fail utterly in literature? How can you ever
      hope to earn more than bare sustenance at any other kind of work?'
He all but lost consciousness of her words in gazing at the face she held up to his.
'You love me? Say again that you love me!'
'Dear, I love you with all my heart. But I am so afraid of the future. I can't bear poverty;
      I have found that I can't bear it. And I dread to think of your becoming only an ordinary man
      — '
Reardon laughed.
'But I am not "only an ordinary man," Amy! If I never write another line, that
      won't undo what I have done. It's little enough, to be sure; but you know what I am .
      Do you
       only love the author in me? Don't you think of me apart from all that I may do or
      not do? If I had to earn my living as a clerk, would that make me a clerk in soul?'
'You shall not fall to that! It would be too bitter a shame to lose all you have gained in
      these long years of work. Let me plan for you; do as I wish. You are to be what we hoped from
      the first. Take all the summer months. How long will it be before you can finish this short
      book?'
'A week or two.'
'Then finish it, and see what you can get for it. And try at once to find a tenant to take
      this place off our hands; that would be twenty-five pounds saved for the rest of the year. You
      could live on so little by yourself, couldn't you?'
'Oh, on ten shillings a week, if need be.'
'But not to starve yourself, you know. Don't you feel that my plan is a good one? When I
      came to you to-night I meant to speak of this, but you were so cruel — '
'Forgive me, dearest love! I was half a madman. You have been so cold to me for a long
      time.'
'I have been distracted. It was as if we
       were drawing nearer and nearer to the edge of a cataract.'
'Have you spoken to your mother about this?' he asked uneasily.
'No — not exactly this. But I know she will help us in this way.'
He had seated himself, and was holding her in his arms, his face laid against hers.
'I shall dread to part from you, Amy. That's such a dangerous thing to do. It may mean that
      we are never to live as husband and wife again.'
'But how could it? It's just to prevent that danger. If we go on here till we have no money
      — what's before us then? Wretched lodgings at the best. And I am afraid to think of that. I
      can't trust myself if that should come to pass.'
'What do you mean?' he asked anxiously.
'I hate poverty so. It brings out all the worst things in me; you know I have told you that
      before, Edwin?'
'But you would never forget that you are my wife?'
'I hope not. But — I can't think of it; I can't face it! That would be the very worst that
      can befall us, and we are going to try our
       utmost to escape from it. Was there ever a man who did as much as you have done
      in literature and then sank into hopeless poverty?'
'Oh, many!'
'But at your age, I mean. Surely not at your age?'
'I'm afraid there have been such poor fellows. Think how often one hears of hopeful
      beginnings, new reputations, and then — you hear no more. Of course it generally means that
      the man has gone into a different career; but sometimes, sometimes — '
'What?'
'The abyss.' He pointed downward. 'Penury and despair and a miserable death.'
'Oh, but those men haven't a wife and child! They would struggle — '
'Darling, they do struggle. But it's as if an ever increasing weight were round their necks;
      it drags them lower and lower. The world has no pity on a man who can't do or produce
      something it thinks worth money. You may be a divine poet, and if some good fellow doesn't
      take pity on you you will starve by the roadside. Society is as blind and brutal as fate. I
      have no right to complain of my own ill-fortune; it's my own fault (in a sense) that I can't
      continue as
       well as I began; if I could write books as good as the early ones I should earn
      money. For all that, it's hard that I must be kicked aside as worthless just because I don't
      know a trade.'
'It shan't be! I have only to look into your face to know that you will succeed after all.
      Yours is the kind of face that people come to know in portraits.'
He kissed her hair, and her eyes, and her mouth.
'How well I remember your saying that before! Why have you grown so good to me all at once,
      my Amy? Hearing you speak like that I feel there's nothing beyond my reach. But I dread to go
      away from you. If I find that it is hopeless; if I am alone somewhere, and know that the
      effort is all vain — '
'Then?'
'Well, I can leave you free. If I can't support you, it will be only just that I should give
      you back your freedom.'
'I don't understand — '
She raised herself, and looked into his eyes.
'We won't talk of that. If you bid me go on with the struggle, I shall do so.'
Amy had hidden her face, and lay silently in
       his arms for a minute or two. Then she murmured: 'It is so cold here, and so
      late. Come!' 'So early. There goes three o'clock.' 
The next day they talked much of this new project. As there was sunshine Amy accompanied her
      husband for his walk in the afternoon; it was long since they had been out together. An open
      carriage that passed, followed by two young girls on horseback, gave a familiar direction to
      Reardon's thoughts.
'If one were as rich as those people! They pass so close to us; they see us, and we see
      them; but the distance between is infinity. They don't belong to the same world as we poor
      wretches. They see everything in a different light; they have powers which would seem
      supernatural if we were suddenly endowed with them.'
'Of course,' assented his companion with a sigh.
'Just fancy, if one got up in the morning with the thought that no reasonable desire that
      occurred to one throughout the day need remain ungratified! And that it would be the same, any
      day and every day, to the end of
       one's life! Look at those houses; every detail, within and without, luxurious. To
      have such a home as that!'
'And they are empty creatures who live there.'
'They do live , Amy, at all events. Whatever may be their faculties, they all have
      free scope. I have often stood staring at houses like these until I couldn't believe that the
      people owning them were mere human beings like myself. The power of money is so hard to
      realise; one who has never had it marvels at the completeness with which it transforms every
      detail of life. Compare what we call our home with that of rich people; it moves one to
      scornful laughter. I have no sympathy with the stoical point of view; between wealth and
      poverty is just the difference between the whole man and the maimed. If my lower limbs are
      paralysed I may still be able to think, but then there is such a thing in life as walking. As
      a poor devil I may live nobly; but one happens to be made with faculties of enjoyment, and
      those have to fall into atrophy. To be sure, most rich people don't understand their
      happiness; if they did, they would move and talk like gods — which indeed they are.'
Amy's brow was shadowed. A wise man,
       in Reardon's position, would not have chosen this subject to dilate upon.
'The difference,' he went on, 'between the man with money and the man without is simply
      this: the one thinks, "How shall I use my life?" and the other, "How shall I keep myself
      alive?" A physiologist ought to be able to discover some curious distinction between the brain
      of a person who has never given a thought to the means of subsistence, and that of one who has
      never known a day free from such cares. There must be some special cerebral development
      representing the mental anguish kept up by poverty.'
'I should say,' put in Amy, 'that it affects every function of the brain. It isn't a special
      point of suffering, but a misery that colours every thought.'
'True. Can I think of a single subject in all the sphere of my experience without the
      consciousness that I see it through the medium of poverty? I have no enjoyment which isn't
      tainted by that thought, and I can suffer no pain which it doesn't increase. The curse of
      poverty is to the modern world just what that of slavery was to the ancient. Rich and
      destitute stand to each other as free man and bond. You remember the line of Homer I have
      often
       quoted about the demoralising effect of enslavement; poverty degrades in the same
      way.'
'It has had its effect upon me — I know that too well,' said Amy, with bitter frankness.
Reardon glanced at her, and wished to make some reply, but he could not say what was in his
      thoughts.
He worked on at his story. Before he had reached the end of it, 'Margaret Home' was
      published, and one day arrived a parcel containing the six copies to which an author is
      traditionally entitled. Reardon was not so old in authorship that he could open the packet
      without a slight flutter of his pulse. The book was tastefully got up; Amy exclaimed with
      pleasure as she caught sight of the cover and lettering.
'It may succeed, Edwin. It doesn't look like a book that fails, does it?'
She laughed at her own childishness. But Reardon had opened one of the volumes, and was
      glancing over the beginning of a chapter.
'Good God!' he cried. 'What hellish torment it was to write that page! I did it one morning
      when the fog was so thick that I had to light the lamp. It brings cold sweat to my forehead to
      read the words. And to think that people will skim over it without a suspicion of
       what it cost the writer! — What execrable style! A potboy could write better
      narrative.'
'Who are to have copies?'
'No one, if I could help it. But I suppose your mother will expect one?'
'And — Milvain?'
'I suppose so,' he replied, indifferently. 'But not unless he asks for it. Poor old Biffen,
      of course; though it'll make him despise me. Then one for ourselves. That leaves two — to
      light the fire with. We have been rather short of firepaper since we couldn't afford our daily
      newspaper.'
'Will you let me give one to Mrs. Carter?'
'As you please.'
He took one set and added it to the row of his productions which stood on a topmost shelf.
      Amy laid her hand upon his shoulder, and contemplated the effect of this addition.
'The works of Edwin Reardon,' she said, with a smile.
'The work, at all events — rather a different thing, unfortunately. Amy, if only I were back
      at the time when I wrote "On Neutral Ground," and yet had you with me! How full my mind was in
      those days! Then I had only to look, and I saw something; now I strain my eyes, but
       can make out nothing more than nebulous grotesques. I used to sit down knowing so
      well what I had to say; now I strive to invent, and never come at anything. Suppose you pick
      up a needle with warm, supple fingers; try to do it when your hand is stiff and numb with
      cold; there's the difference between my manner of work in those days and what it is now.'
'But you are going to get back your health. You will write better than ever.'
'We shall see. Of course there was a great deal of miserable struggle even then, but I
      remember it as insignificant compared with the hours of contented work. I seldom did anything
      in the mornings except think and prepare; towards evening I felt myself getting ready, and at
      last I sat down with the first lines buzzing in my head. And I used to read a great deal at
      the same time. Whilst I was writing "On Neutral Ground" I went solidly through the "Divina
      Commedia," a canto each day. Very often I wrote till after midnight, but occasionally I got my
      quantum finished much earlier, and then I used to treat myself to a ramble about the streets.
      I can recall exactly the places where some of my best ideas came to me. You remember the scene
      in Prendergast's lodgings?
       That flashed on me late one night as I was turning out of Leicester Square into
      the slum that leads to Clare Market; ah, how well I remember! And I went home to my garret in
      a state of delightful fever, and scribbled notes furiously before going to bed.'
'Don't trouble; it'll all come back to you.'
'But in those days I hadn't to think of money. I could look forward and see provision for my
      needs. I never asked myself what I should get for the book; I assure you, that never came into
      my head — never. The work was done for its own sake. No hurry to finish it; if I felt that I
      wasn't up to the mark, I just waited till the better mood returned. "On Neutral Ground" took
      me seven months; now I have to write three volumes in nine weeks, with the lash stinging on my
      back if I miss a day.'
He brooded for a little.
'I suppose there must be some rich man somewhere who has read one or two of my books with a
      certain interest. If only I could encounter him and tell him plainly what a cursed state I am
      in, perhaps he would help me to some means of earning a couple of pounds a week. One has heard
      of such things.'
'In the old days.'

'Yes. I doubt if it ever happens now. Coleridge wouldn't so easily meet with his Gillman
      nowadays. Well, I am not a Coleridge, and I don't ask to be lodged under any man's roof; but
      if I could earn money enough to leave me good long evenings unspoilt by fear of the workhouse
      — '
Amy turned away, and presently went to look after her little boy.
A few days after this they had a visit from Milvain. He came about ten o'clock in the
      evening.
'I'm not going to stay,' he announced. 'But where's my copy of "Margaret Home"? I am to have
      one, I suppose?'
'I have no particular desire that you should read it,' returned Reardon.
'But I have read it, my dear fellow. Got it from the library on the day of
      publication; I had a suspicion that you wouldn't send me a copy. But I must possess your
       opera omnia .'
'Here it is. Hide it away somewhere. — You may as well sit down for a few minutes.'
'I confess I should like to talk about the book, if you don't mind. It isn't so utterly and
      damnably bad as you make out, you know. The misfortune was that you had to make three
       volumes of it. If I had leave to cut it down to one, it would do you credit. The
      motive is good enough.'
'Yes. Just good enough to show how badly it's managed.'
Milvain began to expatiate on that well-worn topic, the evils of the three-volume
      system.
'A triple-headed monster, sucking the blood of English novelists. One might design an
      allegorical cartoon for a comic literary paper. By-the-by, why doesn't such a thing exist? — a
      weekly paper treating of things and people literary in a facetious spirit. It would be caviare
      to the general, but might be supported, I should think. The editor would probably be
      assassinated, though.'
'For anyone in my position,' said Reardon, 'how is it possible to abandon the three volumes?
      It is a question of payment. An author of moderate repute may live on a yearly three-volume
      novel — I mean the man who is obliged to sell his book out and out, and who gets from one to
      two hundred pounds for it. But he would have to produce four one-volume novels to obtain the
      same income; and I doubt whether he could get so many published within the twelve months. And
      here comes in the benefit
       of the libraries; from the commercial point of view the libraries are
      indispensable. Do you suppose the public would support the present number of novelists if each
      book had to be purchased? A sudden change to that system would throw three-fourths of the
      novelists out of work.'
'But there's no reason why the libraries shouldn't circulate novels in one volume.'
'Profits would be less, I suppose. People would take the minimum subscription.'
'Well, to go to the concrete, what about your own one-volume?'
'All but done.'
'And you'll offer it to Jedwood? Go and see him personally. He's a very decent fellow, I
      believe.'
Milvain stayed only half an hour. The days when he was wont to sit and talk at large through
      a whole evening were no more; partly because of his diminished leisure, but also for a less
      simple reason — the growth of something like estrangement between him and Reardon.
'You didn't mention your plans,' said Amy, when the visitor had been gone some time.
'No.'
Reardon was content with the negative, and his wife made no further remark.

The result of advertising the flat was that two or three persons called to make inspection.
      One of them, a man of military appearance, showed himself anxious to come to terms; he was
      willing to take the tenement from next quarter-day (June), but wished, if possible, to enter
      upon possession sooner than that.
'Nothing could be better,' said Amy in colloquy with her husband. 'If he will pay for the
      extra time, we shall be only too glad.'
Reardon mused and looked gloomy. He could not bring himself to regard the experiment before
      him with hopefulness, and his heart sank at the thought of parting from Amy.
'You are very anxious to get rid of me,' he answered, trying to smile.
'Yes, I am,' she exclaimed; 'but simply for your own good, as you know very well.'
'Suppose I can't sell this book?'
'You will have a few pounds. Send your "Pliny" article to The Wayside . If you come
      to an end of all your money, mother shall lend you some.'
'I am not very likely to do much work in that case.'
'Oh, but you will sell the book. You'll get twenty pounds for it, and that alone would keep
       you for three months. Think — three months of the best part of the year at the
      seaside! Oh, you will do wonders!'
The furniture was to be housed at Mrs. Yule's. Neither of them durst speak of selling it;
      that would have sounded too ominous. As for the locality of Reardon's retreat, Amy herself had
      suggested Worthing, which she knew from a visit a few years ago; the advantages were its
      proximity to London, and the likelihood that very cheap lodgings could be found either in the
      town or near it. One room would suffice for the hapless author, and his expenses, beyond a
      trifling rent, would be confined to mere food. Oh yes, he might manage on considerably less
      than a pound a week.
Amy was in much better spirits than for a long time; she appeared to have convinced herself
      that there was no doubt of the issue of this perilous scheme; that her husband would write a
      notable book, receive a satisfactory price for it, and so re-establish their home. Yet her
      moods varied greatly. After all, there was delay in the letting of the flat, and this caused
      her annoyance. It was whilst the negotiations were still pending that she made her call upon
      Maud and Dora Milvain; Reardon did not know
       of her intention to visit them until it had been carried out. She mentioned what
      she had done in almost a casual manner.
'I had to get it over,' she said, when Reardon exhibited surprise, 'and I don't think I made
      a very favourable impression.'
'You told them, I suppose, what we are going to do?'
'No; I didn't say a word of it.'
'But why not? It can't be kept a secret. Milvain will have heard of it already, I should
      think, from your mother.'
'From mother? But it's the rarest thing for him to go there. Do you imagine he is a constant
      visitor? I thought it better to say nothing until the thing is actually done. Who knows what
      may happen?'
She was in a strange, nervous state, and Reardon regarded her uneasily. He talked very
      little in these days, and passed hours in dark reverie. His book was finished, and he awaited
      the publisher's decision.

</div></body></text></TEI>