<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>New Grub Street: A Novel</title><author>Gissing, George (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1891</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
CHAPTER VI THE PRACTICAL FRIEND
When her husband had set forth, Amy seated herself in the study and took up a new
      library volume, as if to read. But she had no real intention of doing so; it was always
      disagreeable to her to sit in the manner of one totally unoccupied, with hands on lap, and
      even when she consciously gave herself up to musing an open book was generally before her. She
      did not, in truth, read much nowadays; since the birth of her child she had seemed to care
      less than before for disinterested study. If a new novel that had succeeded came into her
      hands she perused it in a very practical spirit, commenting to Reardon on the features of the
      work which had made it popular; formerly, she would have thought much more of its purely
      literary merits, for which her eye was very keen. How often she had given her husband a thrill
      of exquisite pleasure by pointing to some merit or defect of
       which the common reader would be totally insensible! Now she spoke less
      frequently on such subjects. Her interests were becoming more personal; she liked to hear
      details of the success of popular authors — about their wives or husbands, as the case might
      be, their arrangements with publishers, their methods of work. The gossip columns of literary
      papers — and of some that were not literary — had an attraction for her. She talked of
      questions such as international copyright, was anxious to get an insight into the practical
      conduct of journals and magazines, liked to know who 'read' for the publishing-houses. To an
      impartial observer it might have appeared that her intellect was growing more active and
      mature.
More than half an hour passed. It was not a pleasant train of thought that now occupied her.
      Her lips were drawn together, her brows were slightly wrinkled; the self-control which at
      other times was agreeably expressed upon her features had become rather too cold and decided.
      At one moment it seemed to her that she heard a sound in the bedroom — the doors were
      purposely left ajar — and her head turned quickly to listen, the look in her eyes
      instantaneously softening; but all remained quiet.
       The street would have been silent but for a cab that now and then passed — the
      swing of a hansom or the roll of a four-wheeler — and within the buildings nothing whatever
      was audible.
Yes, a footstep, briskly mounting the stone stairs. Not like that of the postman. A visitor,
      perhaps, to the other flat on the topmost landing. But the final pause was in this direction,
      and then came a sharp rat-tat at the door. Amy rose immediately and went to open.
Jasper Milvain raised his urban silk hat, then held out his hand with the greeting of frank
      friendship. His inquiries were in so loud a voice that Amy checked him with a forbidding
      gesture.
'You'll wake Willie!'
'By Jove! I always forget,' he exclaimed in subdued tones. 'Does the infant flourish?'
'Oh, yes!'
'Reardon out? I got back on Saturday evening, but couldn't come round before this.' It was
      Monday. 'How close it is in here! I suppose the roof gets so heated during the day. Glorious
      weather in the country! And I've no end of things to tell you. He won't be long, I
      suppose?'
'I think not.'

He left his hat and stick in the passage, came into the study, and glanced about as if he
      expected to see some change since he was last here, three weeks ago.
'So you have been enjoying yourself?' said Amy as, after listening for a moment at the door,
      she took a seat.
'Oh, a little freshening of the faculties. But whose acquaintance do you think I have
      made?'
'Down there?'
'Yes. Your uncle Alfred and his daughter were staying at John Yule's, and I saw something of
      them. I was invited to the house.'
'Did you speak of us?'
'To Miss Yule only. I happened to meet her on a walk, and in a blundering way I mentioned
      Reardon's name. But of course it didn't matter in the least. She inquired about you with a
      good deal of interest — asked if you were as beautiful as you promised to be years ago.'
Amy laughed.
'Doesn't that proceed from your fertile invention, Mr. Milvain?'
'Not a bit of it! By-the-by, what would be your natural question concerning her? Do
      you think she gave promise of good looks?'

'I'm afraid I can't say that she did. She had a good face, but — rather plain.'
'I see.' Jasper threw back his head and seemed to contemplate an object in memory. 'Well, I
      shouldn't wonder if most people called her a trifle plain even now; and yet — no, that's
      hardly possible, after all. She has no colour. Wears her hair short.'
'Short?'
'Oh, I don't mean the smooth, boyish hair with a parting — not the kind of hair that would
      be lank if it grew long. Curly all over. Looks uncommonly well, I assure you. She has a
      capital head. Odd girl; very odd girl! Quiet, thoughtful — not very happy, I'm afraid. Seems
      to think with dread of a return to books.'
'Indeed! But I had understood that she was a reader.'
'Reading enough for six people, probably. Perhaps her health is not very robust. Oh, I knew
      her by sight quite well — had seen her at the Reading-room. She's the kind of girl that gets
      into one's head, you know — suggestive; much more in her than comes out until one knows her
      very well.'

'Well, I should hope so,' remarked Amy, with a peculiar smile.
'But that's by no means a matter of course. They didn't invite me to come and see them in
      London.'
'I suppose Marian mentioned your acquaintance with this branch of the family?'
'I think not. At all events, she promised me she wouldn't.'
Amy looked at him inquiringly, in a puzzled way.
'She promised you?'
'Voluntarily. We got rather sympathetic. Your uncle — Alfred, I mean — is a remarkable man;
      but I think he regarded me as a youth of no particular importance. Well, how do things
      go?'
Amy shook her head.
'No progress?'
'None whatever. He can't work; I begin to be afraid that he is really ill. He must
      go away before the fine weather is over. Do persuade him to-night! I wish you could have had a
      holiday with him.'
'Out of the question now, I'm sorry to say. I must work savagely. But can't you all
       manage a fortnight somewhere — Hastings, East-bourne?'
'It would be simply rash. One goes on saying, "What does a pound or two matter?' — but it
      begins at length to matter a great deal.'
'I know, confound it all! Think how it would amuse some rich grocer's son who pitches his
      half-sovereign to the waiter when he has dined himself into good humour! But I tell you what
      it is: you must really try to influence him towards practicality. Don't you think — ?'
He paused, and Amy sat looking at her hands
'I have made an attempt,' she said at length, in a distant undertone.
'You really have?'
Jasper leaned forward, his clasped hands hanging between his knees. He was scrutinising her
      face, and Amy, conscious of the too fixed regard, at length moved her head uneasily.
'It seems very clear to me,' she said, 'that a long book is out of the question for him at
      present. He writes so slowly, and is so fastidious. It would be a fatal thing
       to hurry through something weaker even than the last.'
'You think "The Optimist" weak?' Jasper asked, half absently.
'I don't think it worthy of Edwin; I don't see how anyone can.'
'I have wondered what your opinion was. Yes, he ought to try a new tack, I think.'
Just then there came the sound of a latchkey opening the outer door. Jasper lay back in his
      chair and waited with a smile for his expected friend's appearance; Amy made no movement.
'Oh, there you are!' said Reardon, presenting himself with the dazzled eyes of one who has
      been in darkness; he spoke in a voice of genial welcome, though it still had the note of
      depression. 'When did you get back?'
Milvain began to recount what he had told in the first part of his conversation with Amy. As
      he did so, the latter withdrew, and was absent for five minutes; on reappearing she said:
'You'll have some supper with us, Mr. Milvain?'
'I think I will, please.'
Shortly after, all repaired to the eating-room,
       where conversation had to be carried on in a low tone because of the proximity
      of the bedchamber in which lay the sleeping child. Jasper began to tell of certain things that
      had happened to him since his arrival in town.
'It was a curious coincidence — but, by-the- by, have you heard of what The Study
      has been doing?'
'I should rather think so,' replied Reardon, his face lighting up. 'With no small
      satisfaction.'
'Delicious, isn't it?' exclaimed his wife. 'I thought it too good to be true when Edwin
      heard of it from Mr. Biffen.'
All three laughed in subdued chorus. For the moment, Reardon became a new man in his
      exultation over the contradictory reviewers.
'Oh, Biffen told you, did he? Well,' continued Jasper, 'it was an odd thing, but when I
      reached my lodgings on Saturday evening there lay a note from Horace Barlow, inviting me to go
      and see him on Sunday afternoon out at Wimbledon, the special reason being that the editor of
       The Study would be there, and Barlow thought I might like to meet him. Now this
      letter gave me a fit of laughter; not only because of those precious reviews, but because
       Alfred Yule had been telling me all about this same editor, who rejoices in the
      name of Fadge. Your uncle, Mrs. Reardon, declares that Fadge is the most malicious man in the
      literary profession; though that's saying such a very great deal — well, never mind! Of course
      I was delighted to go and meet Fadge. At Barlow's I found the queerest collection of people,
      most of them women of the inkiest description. The great Fadge himself surprised me; I
      expected to see a gaunt, bilious man, and he was the rosiest and dumpiest little dandy you can
      imagine; a fellow of forty-five, I dare say, with thin yellow hair and blue eyes and a manner
      of extreme innocence. Fadge flattered me with confidential chat, and I discovered at length
      why Barlow had asked me to meet him; it's Fadge that is going to edit Culpepper's new monthly
      — you've heard about it? — and he had actually thought it worth while to enlist me among
      contributors! Now, how's that for a piece of news?'
The speaker looked from Reardon to Amy with a smile of vast significance.
'I rejoice to hear it!' said Reardon, fervently.
'You see! you see!' cried Jasper, forgetting all about the infant in the next room, 'all
       things come to the man who knows how to wait. But I'm hanged if I expected a
      thing of this kind to come so soon! Why, I'm a man of distinction! My doings have been noted;
      the admirable qualities of my style have drawn attention; I'm looked upon as one of the coming
      men! Thanks, I confess, in some measure, to old Barlow; he seems to have amused himself with
      cracking me up to all and sundry. That last thing of mine in The West End has done me
      a vast amount of good, it seems. And Alfred Yule himself had noticed that paper in The
       Wayside . That's how things work, you know; reputation comes with a burst, just when
      you're not looking for anything of the kind.'
'What's the new magazine to be called?' asked Amy.
'Why, they propose The Current . Not bad, in a way; though you imagine a fellow
      saying "Have you seen the current Current? " At all events, the tone is to be up to
      date, and the articles are to be short; no padding, merum sal from cover to cover.
      What do you think I have undertaken to do, for a start? A paper consisting of sketches of
      typical readers of each of the principal daily and weekly papers.
       A deuced good idea, you know — my own, of course — but deucedly hard to carry
      out. I shall rise to the occasion, see if I don't. I'll rival Fadge himself in maliciousness —
      though I must confess I discovered no particular malice in the fellow's way of talking. The
      article shall make a sensation. I'll spend a whole month on it, and make it a perfect piece of
      satire.'
'Now that's the kind of thing that inspires me with awe and envy,' said Reardon. 'I could no
      more write such a paper than an article on Fluxions.'
''Tis my vocation, Hal! You might think I hadn't experience enough, to begin with. But my
      intuition is so strong that I can make a little experience go an immense way. Most people
      would imagine I had been wasting my time these last few years, just sauntering about, reading
      nothing but periodicals, making acquaintance with loafers of every description. The truth is,
      I have been collecting ideas, and ideas that are convertible into coin of the realm, my boy; I
      have the special faculty of an extempore writer. Never in my life shall I do anything of solid
      literary value; I shall always despise the people I write for. But my
       path will be that of success. I have always said it, and now I'm sure of
      it.'
'Does Fadge retire from The Study , then?' inquired Reardon, when he had received
      this tirade with a friendly laugh.
'Yes, he does. Was going to, it seems, in any case. Of course I heard nothing about the two
      reviews, and I was almost afraid to smile whilst Fadge was talking with me, lest I should
      betray my thought. Did you know anything about the fellow before?'
'Not I. Didn't know who edited The Study .'
'Nor I either. Remarkable what a number of illustrious obscure are going about. But I have
      still something else to tell you. I'm going to set my sisters afloat in literature.'
'How?'
'Well, I don't see why they shouldn't try their hands at a little writing, instead of giving
      lessons, which doesn't suit them a bit. Last night, when I got back from Wimbledon, I went to
      look up Davies. Perhaps you don't remember my mentioning him; a fellow who was at Jolly and
      Monk's, the publishers, up to a year ago. He edits a trade journal now, and I see very little
      of him. However, I found him at
       home, and had a long practical talk with him. I wanted to find out the state of
      the market as to such wares as Jolly and Monk dispose of. He gave me some very useful hints,
      and the result was that I went off this morning and saw Monk himself — no Jolly exists at
      present. "Mr. Monk," I began, in my blandest tone — you know it — "I am requested to call upon
      you by a lady who thinks of preparing a little volume to be called 'A Child's History of the
      English Parliament.' Her idea is, that" — and so on. Well, I got on admirably with Monk,
      especially when he learnt that I was to be connected with Culpepper's new venture; he smiled
      upon the project, and said he should be very glad to see a specimen chapter; if that pleased
      him, we could then discuss terms.'
'But has one of your sisters really begun such a book?' inquired Amy.
'Neither of them knows anything of the matter, but they are certainly capable of doing the
      kind of thing I have in mind, which will consist largely of anecdotes of prominent statesmen.
      I myself shall write the specimen chapter, and send it to the girls to show them what I
      propose. I shouldn't wonder if they make some
       fifty pounds out of it. The few books that will be necessary they can either get
      at a Wattleborough library, or I can send them.'
'Your energy is remarkable, all of a sudden,' said Reardon.
'Yes. The hour has come, I find. "There is a tide" — to quote something that has the charm
      of freshness.'
The supper — which consisted of bread and butter, cheese, sardines, cocoa — was now over,
      and Jasper, still enlarging on his recent experiences and future prospects, led the way back
      to the sitting-room. Not very long after this, Amy left the two friends to their pipes; she
      was anxious that her husband should discuss his affairs privately with Milvain, and give ear
      to the practical advice which she knew would be tendered him.
'I hear that you are still stuck fast,' began Jasper, when they had smoked awhile in
      silence.
'Yes.'
'Getting rather serious, I should fear, isn't it?'
'Yes,' repeated Reardon, in a low voice.
'Come, come, old man, you can't go on in this way. Would it, or wouldn't it, be any use if
      you took a seaside holiday?'
'Not the least. I am incapable of holiday,
       if the opportunity were offered. Do something I must, or I shall fret myself
      into imbecility.'
'Very well. What is it to be?'
'I shall try to manufacture two volumes. They needn't run to more than about two hundred and
      seventy pages, and those well spaced out.'
'This is refreshing. This is practical. But look now: let it be something rather
      sensational. Couldn't we invent a good title — something to catch eye and ear? The title would
      suggest the story, you know.'
Reardon laughed contemptuously, but the scorn was directed rather against himself than
      Milvain.
'Let's try,' he muttered.
Both appeared to exercise their minds on the problem for a few minutes. Then Jasper slapped
      his knee.
'How would this do: "The Weird Sisters"? Devilish good, eh? Suggests all sorts of things,
      both to the vulgar and the educated. Nothing brutally clap-trap about it, you know.'
'But — what does it suggest to you? '
'Oh, witch-like, mysterious girls or women. Think it over.'

There was another long silence. Reardon's face was that of a man in blank misery.
'I have been trying,' he said at length, after an attempt to speak which was checked by a
      huskiness in his throat, 'to explain to myself how this state of things has come about. I
      almost think I can do so.'
'How?'
'That half-year abroad, and the extraordinary shock of happiness which followed at once upon
      it, have disturbed the balance of my nature. It was adjusted to circumstances of hardship,
      privation, struggle. A temperament like mine can't pass through such a violent change of
      conditions without being greatly affected; I have never since been the man I was before I left
      England. The stage I had then reached was the result of a slow and elaborate building up; I
      could look back and see the processes by which I had grown from the boy who was a mere
      book-worm to the man who had all but succeeded as a novelist. It was a perfectly natural,
      sober development. But in the last two years and a half I can distinguish no order. In living
      through it, I have imagined from time to time that my powers were coming to their ripest; but
      that
       was mere delusion. Intellectually, I have fallen back. The probability is that
      this wouldn't matter, if only I could live on in peace of mind; I should recover my
      equilibrium, and perhaps once more understand myself. But the due course of things is troubled
      by my poverty.'
He spoke in a slow, meditative way, in a monotonous voice, and without raising his eyes from
      the ground.
'I can understand,' put in Jasper, 'that there may be philosophical truth in all this. All
      the same, it's a great pity that you should occupy your mind with such thoughts.'
'A pity — no! I must remain a reasoning creature. Disaster may end by driving me out of my
      wits, but till then I won't abandon my heritage of thought.'
'Let us have it out, then. You think it was a mistake to spend those months abroad?'
'A mistake from the practical point of view. That vast broadening of my horizon lost me the
      command of my literary resources. I lived in Italy and Greece as a student, concerned
      especially with the old civilisations; I read little but Greek and Latin. That brought me out
      of the track I had laboriously made for myself; I often thought with disgust of the kind of
      work I had
       been doing; my novels seemed vapid stuff, so wretchedly and shallowly modern. If
      I had had the means, I should have devoted myself to the life of a scholar. That, I quite
      believe, is my natural life; it's only the influence of recent circumstances that has made me
      a writer of novels. A man who can't journalise, yet must earn his bread by literature,
      nowadays inevitably turns to fiction, as the Elizabethan men turned to the drama. Well, but I
      should have got back, I think, into the old line of work. It was my marriage that completed
      what the time abroad had begun.'
He looked up suddenly, and added:
'I am speaking as if to myself. You, of course, don't misunderstand me, and think I am
      accusing my wife.'
'No, I don't take you to mean that, by any means.'
'No, no; of course not All that's wrong is my accursed want of money. But that threatens to
      be such a fearful wrong, that I begin to wish I had died before my marriage day. Then Amy
      would have been saved. The Philistines are right: a man has no business to marry unless he has
      a secured income equal to all natural demands. I behaved with the grossest selfishness.
       I might have known that such happiness was never meant for me.'
'Do you mean by all this that you seriously doubt whether you will ever be able to write
      again?'
'In awful seriousness, I doubt it,' replied Reardon, with haggard face.
'It strikes me as extraordinary. In your position I should work as I never had done
      before.'
'Because you are the kind of man who is roused by necessity. I am overcome by it. My nature
      is feeble and luxurious. I never in my life encounterd and overcame a practical
      difficulty.'
'Yes; when you got the work at the hospital.'
'All I did was to write a letter, and chance made it effective.'
'My view of the case, Reardon, is that you are simply ill.'
'Certainly, I am; but the ailment is desperately complicated. Tell me: do you think I might
      possibly get any kind of stated work to do? Should I be fit for any place in a newspaper
      office, for instance?'
'I fear not. You are the last man to have anything to do with journalism.'

'If I appealed to my publishers, could they help me?'
'I don't see how. They would simply say: Write a book and we'll buy it.'
'Yes, there's no help but that.'
'If only you were able to write short stories, Fadge might be useful.'
'But what's the use? I suppose I might get ten guineas, at most, for such a story. I need a
      couple of hundred pounds at least. Even if I could finish a three-volume book, I doubt if they
      would give me a hundred again, after the failure of "The Optimist"; no, they wouldn't.'
'But to sit and look forward in this way is absolutely fatal, my dear fellow. Get to work at
      your two-volume story. Call it "The Weird Sisters," or anything better that you can devise;
      but get it done, so many pages a day. If I go ahead as I begin to think I shall, I shall soon
      be able to assure you good notices in a lot of papers. Your misfortune has been that you had
      no influential friends. By-the-by, how has The Study been in the habit of treating
      you?'
'Scrubbily.'
'I'll make an opportunity of talking about your books to Fadge. I think Fadge and I shall
      get on pretty well together. Alfred Yule
       hates the man fiercely, for some reason or other. By the way, I may as well tell
      you that I broke short off with the Yules on purpose.'
'Oh?'
'I had begun to think far too much about the girl. Wouldn't do, you know. I must marry
      someone with money, and a good deal of it. That's a settled point with me.'
'Then you are not at all likely to meet them in London?'
'Not at all. And if I get allied with Fadge, no doubt Yule will involve me in his savage
      feeling. You see how wisely I acted. I have a scent for the prudent course.'
They talked for a long time, but again chiefly of Milvain's affairs. Reardon, indeed, cared
      little to say anything more about his own. Talk was mere vanity and vexation of spirit, for
      the spring of his volition seemed to be broken, and, whatever resolve he might utter, he knew
      that everything depended on influences he could not even foresee.

</div></body></text></TEI>