<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>New Grub Street: A Novel</title><author>Gissing, George (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1891</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
CHAPTER V THE WAY HITHER
Even in mid-rapture of his marriage month he had foreseen this possibility; but
      fate had hitherto rescued him in sudden ways when he was on the brink of self abandonment, and
      it was hard to imagine that this culmination of triumphant joy could be a preface to base
      miseries.
He was the son of a man who had followed many different pursuits, and in none had done much
      more than earn a livelihood. At the age of forty — when Edwin, his only child, was ten years
      old — Mr. Reardon established himself in the town of Hereford as a photographer, and there he
      abode until his death, nine years after, occasionally risking some speculation not
      inconsistent with the photographic business, but always with the result of losing the little
      capital he ventured. Mrs. Reardon died when Edwin had reached his fifteenth year. In breeding
       and education she was superior to her husband, to whom, moreover, she had
      brought something between four and five hundred pounds; her temper was passionate in both
      senses of the word, and the marriage could hardly be called a happy one, though it was never
      disturbed by serious discord. The photographer was a man of whims and idealisms; his wife had
      a strong vein of worldly ambition. They made few friends, and it was Mrs. Reardon's frequently
      expressed desire to go and live in London, where fortune, she thought, might be kinder to
      them. Reardon had all but made up his mind to try this venture when he suddenly became a
      widower; after that he never summoned energy to embark on new enterprises.
The boy was educated at an excellent local school; at eighteen he had a far better
      acquaintance with the ancient classics than most lads who have been expressly prepared for a
      university, and, thanks to an anglicised Swiss who acted as an assistant in Mr. Reardon's
      business, he not only read French, but could talk it with a certain haphazard fluency. These
      attainments, however, were not of much practical use; the best that could be done for Edwin
      was to place him in the office of an estate agent. His health
       was indifferent, and it seemed likely that openair exercise, of which he would
      have a good deal under the particular circumstances of the case, might counteract the effects
      of study too closely pursued.
At his father's death he came into possession (practically it was put at his disposal at
      once, though he was little more than nineteen) of about two hundred pounds — a life-insurance
      for five hundred had been sacrificed to exigencies not very long before. He had no difficulty
      in deciding how to use this money. His mother's desire to live in London had in him the force
      of an inherited motive; as soon as possible he released himself from his uncongenial
      occupations, converted into money all the possessions of which he had not immediate need, and
      betook himself to the metropolis.
To become a literary man, of course.
His capital lasted him nearly four years, for, notwithstanding his age, he lived with
      painful economy. The strangest life, of almost absolute loneliness. From a certain point of
      Tottenham Court Road there is visible a certain garret window in a certain street which runs
      parallel with that thoroughfare; for the greater part of these four years the garret in
      question was
       Reardon's home. He paid only three-and-six-pence a week for the privilege of
      living there; his food cost him about a shilling a day; on clothing and other unavoidable
      expenses he laid out some five pounds yearly. Then he bought books — volumes which cost
      anything between twopence and two shillings; further than that he durst not go. A strange
      time, I assure you.
When he had completed his twenty-first year, he desired to procure a reader's ticket for the
      British Museum. Now this was not such a simple matter as you may suppose; it was necessary to
      obtain the signature of some respectable householder, and Reardon was acquainted with no such
      person. His landlady was a decent woman enough, and a payer of rates and taxes, but it would
      look odd, to say the least of it, to present oneself in Great Russell Street armed with this
      person's recommendation. There was nothing for it but to take a bold step, to force himself
      upon the attention of a stranger — the thing from which his pride had always shrunk. He wrote
      to a well-known novelist — a man with whose works he had some sympathy. 'I am trying to
      prepare myself for a literary career. I wish to study in the Reading-room of the
       British Museum, but have no acquaintance to whom I can refer in the ordinary
      way. Will you help me — I mean, in this particular only?' That was the substance of his
      letter. For reply came an invitation to a house in the West-end. With fear and trembling
      Reardon answered the summons. He was so shabbily attired; he was so diffident from the habit
      of living quite alone; he was horribly afraid lest it should be supposed that he looked for
      other assistance than he had requested. Well, the novelist was a rotund and jovial man; his
      dwelling and his person smelt of money; he was so happy himself that he could afford to be
      kind to others.
'Have you published anything?' he inquired, for the young man's letter had left this
      uncertain.
'Nothing. I have tried the magazines, but as yet without success.'
'But what do you write?'
'Chiefly essays on literary subjects.'
'I can understand that you would find a difficulty in disposing of them. That kind of thing
      is supplied either by men of established reputation, or by anonymous writers who have a
      regular engagement on papers and magazines. Give me an example of your topics.'

'I have written something lately about Tibullus.'
'Oh, dear! Oh, dear! — Forgive me, Mr. Reardon; my feelings were too much for me; those
      names have been my horror ever since I was a schoolboy. Far be it from me to discourage you,
      if your line is to be solid literary criticism; I will only mention, as a matter of fact, that
      such work is indifferently paid and in very small demand. It hasn't occurred to you to try
      your hand at fiction?'
In uttering the word he beamed; to him it meant a thousand or so a year.
'I am afraid I have no talent for that.'
The novelist could do no more than grant his genial signature for the specified purpose, and
      add good wishes in abundance. Reardon went home with his brain in a whirl. He had had his
      first glimpse of what was meant by literary success. That luxurious study, with its shelves of
      handsomely-bound books, its beautiful pictures, its warm, fragrant air — great heavens! what
      might not a man do who sat at his ease amid such surroundings!
He began to work at the Reading-room, but at the same time he thought often of the
      novelist's suggestion, and before long had written
       two or three short stories. No editor would accept them; but he continued to
      practise himself in that art, and by degrees came to fancy that, after all, perhaps he
       had some talent for fiction. It was significant, however, that no native impulse had
      directed him to novel-writing. His intellectual temper was that of the student, the scholar,
      but strongly blended with a love of independence which had always made him think with distaste
      of a teacher's life. The stories he wrote were scraps of immature psychology — the last thing
      a magazine would accept from an unknown man.
His money dwindled, and there came a winter during which he suffered much from cold and
      hunger. What a blessed refuge it was, there under the great dome, when he must else have sat
      in his windy garret with the mere pretence of a fire! The Reading-room was his true home; its
      warmth enwrapped him kindly; the peculiar odour of its atmosphere — at first a cause of
      headache — grew dear and delightful to him. But he could not sit here until his last penny
      should be spent. Something practical must be done, and practicality was not his strong
      point.
Friends in London he had none; but for an occasional conversation with his landlady he
       would scarcely have spoken a dozen words in a week. His disposition was the
      reverse of democratic, and he could not make acquaintances below his own intellectual level.
      Solitude fostered a sensitiveness which to begin with was extreme; the lack of stated
      occupation encouraged his natural tendency to dream and procrastinate and hope for the
      improbable. He was a recluse in the midst of millions, and viewed with dread the necessity of
      going forth to fight for daily food.
Little by little he had ceased to hold any correspondence with his former friends at
      Hereford. The only person to whom he still wrote and from whom he still heard was his mother's
      father — an old man who lived at Derby, retired from the business of a draper, and spending
      his last years pleasantly enough with a daughter who had remained single. Edwin had always
      been a favourite with his grandfather, though they had met only once or twice during the past
      eight years. But in writing he did not allow it to be understood that he was in actual want,
      and he felt that he must come to dire extremities before he could bring himself to beg
      assistance.
He had begun to answer advertisements, but
       the state of his wardrobe forbade his applying for any but humble positions.
      Once or twice he presented himself personally at offices, but his reception was so mortifying
      that death by hunger seemed preferable to a continuance of such experiences. The injury to his
      pride made him savagely arrogant; for days after the last rejection he hid himself in his
      garret, hating the world.
He sold his little collection of books, and of course they brought only a trifling sum. That
      exhausted, he must begin to sell his clothes. And then — ?
But help was at hand. One day he saw it advertised in a newspaper that the secretary of a
      hospital in the north of London was in need of a clerk; application was to be made by letter.
      He wrote, and two days later, to his astonishment, received a reply asking him to wait upon
      the secretary at a certain hour. In a fever of agitation he kept the appointment, and found
      that his business was with a young man in the very highest spirits, who walked up and down a
      little office (the hospital was of the 'special' order, a house of no great size), and treated
      the matter in hand as an excellent joke.
'I thought, you know, of engaging someone
       much younger — quite a lad, in fact. But look there! Those are the replies to my
      advertisement.'
He pointed to a heap of five or six hundred letters, and laughed consumedly.
'Impossible to read them all, you know. It seemed to me that the fairest thing would be to
      shake them together, stick my hand in, and take out one by chance. If it didn't seem very
      promising, I would try a second time. But the first letter was yours, and I thought the fair
      thing to do was at all events to see you, you know. The fact is, I am only able to offer a
      pound a week.'
'I shall be very glad indeed to take that,' said Reardon, who was bathed in
      perspiration.
'Then what about references, and so on?' proceeded the young man, chuckling and rubbing his
      hands together.
The applicant was engaged. He had barely strength to walk home; the sudden relief from his
      miseries made him, for the first time, sensible of the extreme physical weakness into which he
      had sunk. For the next week he was very ill, but he did not allow this to interfere with his
      new work, which was easily learnt and not burdensome.

He held this position for three years, and during that time important things happened. When
      he had recovered from his state of semistarvation, and was living in comfort (a pound a week
      is a very large sum if you have previously had to live on ten shillings), Reardon found that
      the impulse to literary production awoke in him more strongly than ever. He generally got home
      from the hospital about six o'clock, and the evening was his own. In this leisure time he
      wrote a novel in two volumes; one publisher refused it, but a second offered to bring it out
      on the terms of half profits to the author. The book appeared, and was well spoken of in one
      or two papers; but profits there were none to divide. In the third year of his clerkship he
      wrote a novel in three volumes; for this his publishers gave him twenty-five pounds, with
      again a promise of half the profits after deduction of the sum advanced. Again there was no
      pecuniary success. He had just got to work upon a third book, when his grandfather at Derby
      died and left him four hundred pounds.
He could not resist the temptation to recover his freedom. Four hundred pounds, at the rate
      of eighty pounds a year, meant five years of literary endeavour. In that period he could
       certainly determine whether or not it was his destiny to live by the pen.
In the meantime his relations with the secretary of the hospital, Carter by name, had grown
      very friendly. When Reardon began to publish books, the high-spirited Mr. Carter looked upon
      him with something of awe; and when the literary man ceased to be a clerk, there was nothing
      to prevent association on equal terms between him and his former employer. They continued to
      see a good deal of each other, and Carter made Reardon acquainted with certain of his friends,
      among whom was one John Yule, an easy-going, selfish, semi-intellectual young man who had a
      place in a Government office. The time of solitude had gone by for Reardon. He began to
      develop the power that was in him.
Those two books of his were not of a kind to win popularity. They dealt with no particular
      class of society (unless one makes a distinct class of people who have brains), and they
      lacked local colour. Their interest was almost purely psychological. It was clear that the
      author had no faculty for constructing a story, and that pictures of active life were not to
      be expected of him; he could never appeal to the multitude. But strong characterisation was
      within his scope,
       and an intellectual fervour, appetising to a small section of refined readers,
      marked all his best pages.
He was the kind of man who cannot struggle against adverse conditions, but whom prosperity
      warms to the exercise of his powers. Anything like the cares of responsibility would sooner or
      later harass him into unproductiveness. That he should produce much was in any case out of the
      question; possibly a book every two or three years might not prove too great a strain upon his
      delicate mental organism, but for him to attempt more than that would certainly be fatal to
      the peculiar merit of his work. Of this he was dimly conscious, and, on receiving his legacy,
      he put aside for nearly twelve months the new novel he had begun. To give his mind a rest he
      wrote several essays, much maturer than those which had formerly failed to find acceptance,
      and two of these appeared in magazines.
The money thus earned he spent — at a tailor's. His friend Carter ventured to suggest this
      mode of outlay.
His third book sold for fifty pounds. It was a great improvement on its predecessors, and
      the reviews were generally favourable. For the
       story which followed, 'On Neutral Ground,' he received a hundred pounds. On the
      strength of that he spent six months travelling in the south of Europe.
He returned to London at mid-June, and on the second day after his arrival befel an incident
      which was to control the rest of his life. Busy with the pictures in the Grosvenor Gallery, he
      heard himself addressed in a familiar voice, and on turning he was aware of Mr. Carter,
      resplendent in fashionable summer attire, and accompanied by a young lady of some charms.
      Reardon had formerly feared encounters of this kind, too conscious of the defects of his
      attire; but at present there was no reason why he should shirk social intercourse. He was
      passably dressed, and the half year of travel had benefited his appearance in no slight
      degree. Carter presented him to the young lady, of whom the novelist had already heard as
      affianced to his friend.
Whilst they stood conversing, there approached two ladies, evidently mother and daughter,
      whose attendant was another of Reardon's acquaintances, Mr. John Yule. This gentleman stepped
      briskly forward and welcomed the returned wanderer.

'Let me introduce you,' he said, 'to my mother and sister. Your fame has made them anxious
      to know you.'
Reardon found himself in a position of which the novelty was embarrassing, but scarcely
      disagreeable. Here were five people grouped around him, all of whom regarded him unaffectedly
      as a man of importance; for though, strictly speaking, he had no 'fame' at all, these persons
      had kept up with the progress of his small repute, and were all distinctly glad to number
      among their acquaintances an unmistakable author, one, too, who was fresh from Italy and
      Greece. Mrs. Yule, a lady rather too pretentious in her tone to be attractive to a man of
      Reardon's refinement, hastened to assure him how well his books were known in her house,
      'though for the run of ordinary novels we don't care much.' Miss Yule, not at all pretentious
      in speech, and seemingly reserved of disposition, was good enough to show frank interest in
      the author. As for the poor author himself, well, he merely fell in love with Miss Yule at
      first sight, and there was an end of the matter.
A day or two later he made a call at their house, in the region of Westbourne Park. It was a
      small house, and rather showily than
       handsomely furnished; no one after visiting it would be astonished to hear that
      Mrs. Edmund Yule had but a small income, and that she was often put to desperate expedients to
      keep up the gloss of easy circumstances. In the gauzy and fluffy and varnishy little
      drawing-room Reardon found a youngish gentleman already in conversation with the widow and her
      daughter. This proved to be one Mr. Jasper Milvain, also a man of letters. Mr. Milvain was
      glad to meet Reardon, whose books he had read with decided interest.
'Really,' exclaimed Mrs. Yule, 'I don't know how it is that we have had to wait so long for
      the pleasure of knowing you, Mr. Reardon. If John were not so selfish he would have allowed us
      a share in your acquaintance long ago.'
Ten weeks thereafter, Miss Yule became Mrs. Reardon.
It was a time of frantic exultation with the poor fellow. He had always regarded the winning
      of a beautiful and intellectual wife as the crown of a successful literary career, but he had
      not dared to hope that such a triumph would be his. Life had been too hard with him on the
      whole. He, who hungered for sympathy, who
       thought of a woman's love as the prize of mortals supremely blessed, had spent
      the fresh years of his youth in monkish solitude. Now of a sudden came friends and flattery,
      aye, and love itself. He was rapt to the seventh heaven.
Indeed, it seemed that the girl loved him. She knew that he had but a hundred pounds or so
      left over from that little inheritance, that his books sold for a trifle, that he had no
      wealthy relatives from whom he could expect anything; yet she hesitated not a moment when he
      asked her to marry him.
'I have loved you from the first.'
'How is that possible?' he urged. 'What is there lovable in me? I am afraid of waking up and
      finding myself in my old garret, cold and hungry.'
'You will be a great man.'
'I implore you not to count on that! In many ways I am wretchedly weak. I have no such
      confidence in myself.'
'Then I will have confidence for both.'
'But can you love me for my own sake — love me as a man?'
'I love you!'
And the words sang about him, filled the air with a mad pulsing of intolerable joy, made him
       desire to fling himself in passionate humility at her feet, to weep hot tears,
      to cry to her in insane worship. He thought her beautiful beyond anything his heart had
      imagined; her warm gold hair was the rapture of his eyes and of his reverent hand. Though
      slenderly fashioned, she was so gloriously strong. 'Not a day of illness in her life,' said
      Mrs. Yule, and one could readily believe it.
She spoke with such a sweet decision. Her 'I love you!' was a bond with eternity. In the
      simplest as in the greatest things she saw his wish and acted frankly upon it. No pretty
      petulance, no affectation of silly-sweet languishing, none of the weaknesses of woman. And so
      exquisitely fresh in her twenty years of maidenhood, with bright young eyes that seemed to bid
      defiance to all the years to come.
He went about like one dazzled with excessive light. He talked as he had never talked
      before, recklessly, exultantly, insolently — in the nobler sense. He made friends on every
      hand; he welcomed all the world to his bosom; he felt the benevolence of a God.
'I love you!' It breathed like music at his ears when he fell asleep in weariness of joy; it
       awakened him on the morrow as with a glorious ringing summons to renewed
      life.
Delay? Why should there be delay? Amy wished nothing but to become his wife. Idle to think
      of his doing any more work until he sat down in the home of which she was mistress. His brain
      burned with visions of the books he would henceforth write, but his hand was incapable of
      anything but a love-letter. And what letters! Reardon never published anything equal to those.
      'I have received your poem,' Amy replied to one of them. And she was right; not a letter, but
      a poem he had sent her, with every word on fire.
The hours of talk! It enraptured him to find how much she had read, and with what clearness
      of understanding. Latin and Greek, no. Ah! but she should learn them both, that there might be
      nothing wanting in the communion between his thought and hers. For he loved the old writers
      with all his heart; they had been such strength to him in his days of misery.
They would go together to the charmed lands of the South. No, not now for their marriage
      holiday — Amy said that would be an imprudent expense; but as soon as he had got a good
       price for a book. Will not the publishers be kind? If they knew what happiness
      lurked in embryo within their foolish cheque-books!
He woke of a sudden in the early hours of one morning, a week before the wedding-day. You
      know that kind of awaking, so complete in an instant, caused by the pressure of some
      troublesome thought upon the dreaming brain. 'Suppose I should not succeed henceforth? Suppose
      I could never get more than this poor hundred pounds for one of the long books which cost me
      so much labour? I shall perhaps have children to support; and Amy — how would Amy bear
      poverty?'
He knew what poverty means. The chilling of brain and heart, the unnerving of the hands, the
      slow gathering about one of fear and shame and impotent wrath, the dread feeling of
      helplessness, of the world's base indifference. Poverty! Poverty!
And for hours he could not sleep. His eyes kept filling with tears, the beating of his heart
      was low; and in his solitude he called upon Amy with pitiful entreaty: 'Do not forsake me! I
      love you! I love you!'
But that went by. Six days, five days, four days — will one's heart burst with happiness?
       The flat is taken, is furnished, up there towards the sky, eight flights of
      stone steps.
'You're a confoundedly lucky fellow, Reardon,' remarked Milvain, who had already become very
      intimate with his new friend. 'A good fellow, too, and you deserve it.'
'But at first I had a horrible suspicion.'
'I guess what you mean. No; I wasn't even in love with her, though I admired her. She would
      never have cared for me in any case; I am not sentimental enough.'
'The deuce!'
'I mean it in an inoffensive sense. She and I are rather too much alike, I fancy.'
'How do you mean?' asked Reardon, puzzled, and not very well pleased.
'There's a great deal of pure intellect about Miss Yule, you know. She was sure to choose a
      man of the passionate kind.'
'I think you are talking nonsense, my dear fellow.'
'Well, perhaps I am. To tell you the truth, I have by no means completed my study of women
      yet. It is one of the things in which I hope to be a specialist some day, though I don't think
      I shall ever make use of it in novels — rather, perhaps, in life.'

Three days — two days — one day.
Now let every joyous sound which the great globe can utter ring forth in one burst of
      harmony! Is it not well done to make the village-bells chant merrily when a marriage is over?
      Here in London we can have no such music; but for us, my dear one, all the roaring life of the
      great city is wedding-hymn. Sweet, pure face under its bridal-veil! The face which shall, if
      fate spare it, be as dear to me many a long year hence as now at the culminating moment of my
      life!
As he trudged on in the dark, his tortured memory was living through that time again. The
      images forced themselves upon him, however much he tried to think of quite other things — of
      some fictitious story on which he might set to work. In the case of his earlier books he had
      waited quietly until some suggestive 'situation,' some group of congenial characters, came
      with sudden delightfulness before his mind and urged him to write; but nothing so spontaneous
      could now be hoped for. His brain was too weary with months of fruitless, harassing endeavour;
      moreover, he was trying to devise a 'plot,' the kind of literary Jack-in-the-box
       which might excite interest in the mass of readers, and this was alien to the
      natural working of his imagination. He suffered the torments of nightmare — an oppression of
      the brain and heart which must soon be intolerable.

</div></body></text></TEI>