<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>New Grub Street: A Novel</title><author>Gissing, George (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1891</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII TO THE WINNING SIDE
Of the acquaintances Yule had retained from his earlier years several were in the
      well-defined category of men with unpresentable wives. There was Hinks, for instance, whom,
      though in anger he spoke of him as a bore, Alfred held in some genuine regard. Hinks made
      perhaps a hundred a year out of a kind of writing which only certain publishers can get rid
      of, and of this income he spent about a third on books. His wife was the daughter of a
      laundress, in whose house he had lodged thirty years ago, when new to London but already
      long-acquainted with hunger; they lived in complete harmony, but Mrs. Hinks, who was four
      years the elder, still spoke the laundress tongue, unmitigated and immitigable. Another pair
      were Mr. and Mrs. Gorbutt. In this case there were no narrow circumstances to contend with,
      for the wife, originally a nursemaid, not long after her
       marriage inherited house property from a relative. Mr. Gorbutt deemed himself a
      poet; since his accession to an income he had published, at his own expense, a yearly volume
      of verses; the only result being to keep alive rancour in his wife, who was both parsimonious
      and vain. Making no secret of it, Mrs. Gorbutt rued the day on which she had wedded a man of
      letters, when by waiting so short a time she would have been enabled to aim at a prosperous
      tradesman, who kept his gig and had everything handsome about him. Mrs. Yule suspected, not
      without reason, that this lady had an inclination to strong liquors. Thirdly came Mr. and Mrs.
      Christopherson, who were poor as church mice. Even in a friend's house they wrangled
      incessantly, and made tragi-comical revelations of their home life. The husband worked
      casually at irresponsible journalism, but his chosen study was metaphysics; for many years he
      had had a huge and profound book on hand, which he believed would bring him fame, though he
      was not so unsettled in mind as to hope for anything else. When an article or two had earned
      enough money for immediate necessities he went off to the British Museum, and then the
      difficulty was to recall him to profitable exertions. Yet husband
       and wife had an affection for each other. Mrs. Christopherson came from
      Camberwell, where her father, once upon a time, was the smallest of small butchers.
      Disagreeable stories were whispered concerning her earlier life, and probably the
      metaphysician did not care to look back in that direction. They had had three children; all
      were happily buried.
These men were capable of better things than they had done or would ever do; in each case
      their failure to fulfil youthful promise was largely explained by the unpresentable wife. They
      should have waited; they might have married a social equal at something between fifty and
      sixty.
Another old friend was Mr. Quarmby. Unwedded, he, and perpetually exultant over men who, as
      he phrased it, had noosed themselves. He made a fair living, but, like Dr. Johnson, had no
      passion for clean linen.
Yule was not disdainful of these old companions, and the fact that all had a habit of
      looking up to him increased his pleasure in their occasional society. If, as happened once or
      twice in half a year, several of them were gathered together at his house, he tasted a sham
      kind of social and intellectual authority which he could
       not help relishing. On such occasions he threw off his habitual gloom and talked
      vigorously, making natural display of his learning and critical ability. The topic, sooner or
      later, was that which is inevitable in such a circle — the demerits, the pretentiousness, the
      personal weaknesses of prominent contemporaries in the world of letters. Then did the room
      ring with scornful laughter, with boisterous satire, with shouted irony, with fierce
      invective. After an evening of that kind Yule was unwell and miserable for several days.
It was not to be expected that Mr. Quarmby, inveterate chatterbox of the Reading-room and
      other resorts, should keep silence concerning what he had heard of Mr. Rackett's intentions.
      The rumour soon spread that Alred Yule was to succeed Fadge in the direction of The
       Study , with the necessary consequence that Yule found himself an object of affectionate
      interest to a great many people of whom he knew little or nothing. At the same time the
      genuine old friends pressed warmly about him, with congratulations, with hints of their
      sincere readiness to assist in filling the columns of the paper. All this was not
      disagreeable, but in the meantime Yule had heard nothing whatever from Mr.
       Rackett himself, and his doubts did not diminish as week after week went by.
The event justified him. At the end of October appeared an authoritative announcement that
      Fadge's successor would be — not Alfred Yule, but a gentleman who till of late had been
      quietly working as a sub-editor in the provinces, and who had neither friendships nor enmities
      among the people of the London literary press. A young man, comparatively fresh from the
      university, and said to be strong in pure scholarship. The choice, as you are aware, proved a
      good one, and The Study became an organ of more repute than ever.
Yule had been secretly conscious that it was not to men such as he that positions of this
      kind are nowadays entrusted. He tried to persuade himself that he was not disappointed. But
      when Mr. Quarmby approached him with blank face, he spoke certain wrathful words which long
      rankled in that worthy's mind. At home he kept sullen silence.
No, not to such men as he — poor, and without social recommendations. Besides, he was
      growing too old. In literature, as in most other pursuits, the press of energetic young men
      was making it very hard for a veteran even to bold
       the little grazing-plot he had won by hard fighting. Still, Quarmby's story had
      not been without foundation; it was true that the proprietor of The Study had for a
      moment thought of Alfred Yule, doubtless as the natural contrast to Clement Fadge, whom he
      would have liked to mortify if the thing were possible. But counsellors had proved to Mr.
      Rackett the disadvantages of such a choice.
Mrs. Yule and her daughter foresaw but too well the results of this disappointment,
      notwithstanding that Alfred announced it to them with dry indifference. The month that
      followed was a time of misery for all in the house. Day after day Yule sat at his meals in
      sullen muteness; to his wife he scarcely spoke at all, and his conversation with Marian did
      not go beyond necessary questions and remarks on topics of business. His face became so
      strange a colour that one would have thought him suffering from an attack of jaundice; bilious
      headaches exasperated his savage mood. Mrs. Yule knew from long experience how worse than
      useless it was for her to attempt consolation; in silence was her only safety. Nor did Marian
      venture to speak directly of what had happened. But one evening, when she had been engaged in
      the
       study and was now saying 'Good-night,' she laid her cheek against her father's,
      an unwonted caress which had a strange effect upon him. The expression of sympathy caused his
      thoughts to reveal themselves as they never yet had done before his daughter.
'It might have been very different with me,' he exclaimed abruptly, as if they had already
      been conversing on the subject. 'When you think of my failures — and you must often do so now
      you are grown up and understand things — don't forget the obstacles that have been in my way.
      I don't like you to look upon your father as a thickhead who couldn't be expected to succeed.
      Look at Fadge. He married a woman of good social position; she brought him friends and
      influence. But for that, he would never have been editor of The Study , a place for
      which he wasn't in the least fit. But he was able to give dinners; he and his wife went into
      society; everybody knew him and talked of him. How has it been with me? I live here like an
      animal in its hole, and go blinking about if by chance I find myself among the people with
      whom I ought naturally to associate. If I had been able to come in direct contact with Rackett
      and other men of that kind, to dine with them, and have
       them to dine with me, to belong to a club, and so on, I shouldn't be what I am
      at my age. My one opportunity — when I edited The Balance — wasn't worth much; there
      was no money behind the paper; we couldn't hold out long enough. But even then, if I could
      have assumed my proper social standing, if I could have opened my house freely to the right
      kind of people — How was it possible?'
Marian could not raise her head. She recognised the portion of truth in what he said, but it
      shocked her that he should allow himself to speak thus. Her silence seemed to remind him how
      painful it must be to her to hear these accusations of her mother, and with a sudden
      'Good-night' he dismissed her.
She went up to her room, and wept over the wretchedness of all their lives. Her loneliness
      had seemed harder to bear than ever since that last holiday. For a moment, in the lanes about
      Finden, there had come to her a vision of joy such as fate owed her youth; but it had faded,
      and she could no longer hope for its return. She was not a woman, but a mere machine for
      reading and writing. Did her father never think of this? He was not the only one to suffer
       from the circumstances in which poverty had involved him.
She had no friends to whom she could utter her thoughts. Dora Milvain had written a second
      time, and more recently had come a letter from Maud; but in replying to them she could not
      give a true account of herself. Impossible, to them. From what she wrote they would imagine
      her contentedly busy, absorbed in the affairs of literature. To no one could she make known
      the aching sadness of her heart, the dreariness of life as it lay before her.
That beginning of half-confidence between her and her mother had led to nothing. Mrs. Yule
      found no second opportunity of speaking to her husband about Jasper Milvain, and purposely she
      refrained from any further hint or question to Marian. Everything must go on as hitherto.
The days darkened. Through November rains and fogs Marian went her usual way to the Museum,
      and toiled there among the other toilers. Perhaps once a week she allowed herself to stray
      about the alleys of the Reading- room, scanning furtively those who sat at the desks, but the
      face she might perchance have discovered was not there.

One day at the end of the month she sat with books open before her, but by no effort could
      fix her attention upon them. It was gloomy, and one could scarcely see to read; a taste of fog
      grew perceptible in the warm, headachy air. Such profound discouragement possessed her that
      she could not even maintain the pretence of study; heedless whether anyone observed her, she
      let her hands fall and her head droop. She kept asking herself what was the use and purpose of
      such a life as she was condemened to lead. When already there was more good literature in the
      world than any mortal could cope with in his lifetime, here was she exhausting herself in the
      manufacture of printed stuff which no one even pretended to be more than a commodity for the
      day's market. What unspeakable folly! To write — was not that the joy and the privilege of one
      who had an urgent message for the world? Her father, she knew well, had no such message; he
      had abandoned all thought of orignial production, and only wrote about writing. She herself
      would throw away her pen with joy but for the need of earning money. And all these people
      about her, what aim had they save to make new books out of those already existing, that yet
      newer books might in turn be made out
       of theirs? This huge library, growing into unwieldiness, threatening to become a
      trackless desert of print — how intolerably it weighed upon the spirit!
Oh, to go forth and labour with one's hands, to do any poorest, commonest work of which the
      world had truly need! It was ignoble to sit here and support the paltry pretence of
      intellectual dignity. A few days ago her startled eye had caught an advertisement in the
      newspaper, headed 'Literary Machine'; had it then been invented at last, some automaton to
      supply the place of such poor creatures as herself, to turn out books and articles? Alas! the
      machine was only one for holding volumes conveniently, that the work of literary manufacture
      might be physically lightened. But surely before long some Edison would make the true
      automaton; the problem must be comparatively such a simple one. Only to throw in a given
      number of old books, and have them reduced, blended, modernised into a single one for to-day's
      consumption.
The fog grew thicker; she looked up at the windows beneath the dome and saw that they were a
      dusky yellow. Then her eye discerned an official walking along the upper gallery, and in
       pursuance of her grotesque humour, her mocking misery, she likened him to a
      black, lost soul, doomed to wander in an eternity of vain research along endless shelves. Or
      again, the readers who sat here at these radiating lines of desks, what were they but hapless
      flies caught in a huge web, its nucleus the great circle of the Catalogue? Darker, darker.
      From the towering wall of volumes seemed to emanate visible motes, intensifying the obscurity;
      in a moment the book-lined circumsference of the room would be but a featureless
      prison-limit.
But then flashed forth the sputtering whiteness of the electric light, and its ceaseless hum
      was henceforth a new source of headache. It reminded her how little work she had done today;
      she must, she must, force herself to think of the task in hand. A machine has no business to
      refuse its duty. But the pages were blue and green and yellow before her eyes; the uncertainty
      of the light was intolerable. Right or wrong she would go home, and hide herself, and let her
      heart unburden itself of tears.
On her way to return books she encountered Jasper Milvain. Face to face; no possibility of
      his avoiding her.
And indeed he seemed to have no such
       wish. His countenance lighted up with unmistakable pleasure.
'At last we meet, as they say in the melodramas. Oh, do let me help you with those volumes,
      which won't even let you shake hands. How do you do? How do you like this weather? And how do
      you like this light?'
'It's very bad.'
'That'll do both for weather and light, but not for yourself. How glad I am to see you! Are
      you just going?'
'Yes.'
'I have scarcely been here half a dozen times since I came back to London.'
'But you are writing still?'
'Oh yes! But I draw upon my genius, and my stores of observation, and the living world.'
Marian received her vouchers for the volumes, and turned to face Jasper again. There was a
      smile on her lips.
'The fog is terrible,' Milvain went on. 'How do you get home?'
'By omnibus from Tottenham Court Road.'
'Then do let me go a part of the way with you. I live in Mornington Road — up yonder, you
      know. I have only just come in to waste half an hour, and after all I think I should be
       better at home. Your father is all right, I hope?'
'He is not quite well.'
'I'm sorry to hear that. You are not exactly up to the mark, either. What weather! What a
      place to live in, this London, in winter! It would be a little better down at Finden."
'A good deal better, I should think. If the weather were bad, it would be bad in a natural
      way; but this is artificial misery.'
'I don't let it affect me much,' said Milvain. 'Just of late I have been in remarkably good
      spirits. I'm doing a lot of work. No end of work — more than I've ever done.'
'I am very glad.'
'Where are your out-of-door things? I think there's a ladies' vestry somewhere, isn't
      there?'
'Oh yes.'
'Then will you go and get ready? I'll wait for you in the hall. But, by-the-by, I am taking
      it for granted that you were going alone.'
'I was, quite alone.'
The 'quite' seemed excessive; it made Jasper smile.
'And also,' he added, 'that I shall not annoy you by offering my company?'

'Why should it annoy me?'
'Good!'
Milvain had only to wait a minute or two. He surveyed Marian from head to foot when she
      appeared — an impertinence as unintentional as that occasionally noticeable in his speech —
      and smiled approval. They went out into the fog, which was not one of London's densest, but
      made walking disagreeable enough.
'You have heard from the girls, I think?' Jasper resumed.
'Your sisters? Yes; they have been so kind as to write to me.'
'Told you all about their great work? I hope it'll be finished by the end of the year. The
      bits they have sent me will do very well indeed. I knew they had it in them to put sentences
      together. Now I want them to think of patching up something or other for The English
       Girl ; you know the paper?'
'I have heard of it.'
'I happen to know Mrs. Boston Wright, who edits it. Met her at a house the other day, and
      told her frankly that she would have to give my sisters something to do. It's the only way to
      get on; one has to take it for granted that
       people are willing to help you. I have made a host of new acquaintances just
      lately.'
'I'm glad to hear it,' said Marian.
'Do you know — but how should you? I am going to write for the new magazine. The
       Current .'
'Indeed!'
'Edited by that man Fadge.'
'Yes.'
'Your father has no affection for him, I know.'
'He has no reason to have, Mr. Milvain.'
'No, no. Fadge is an offensive fellow, when he likes; and I fancy he very often does like.
      Well, I must make what use of him I can. You won't think worse of me because I write for
      him?'
'I know that one can't exercise choice in such things.'
'True. I shouldn't like to think that you regard me as a Fadge-like individual, a natural
      Fadgeite.'
Marian laughed.
'There's no danger of my thinking that.'
But the fog was making their eyes water and getting into their throats. By when they reached
      Tottenham Court Road they were both thoroughly uncomfortable. The 'bus had to be
       waited for, and in the meantime they talked scrappily, coughily. In the vehicle
      things were a little better, but here one could not converse with freedom.
'What pestilent conditions of life!' exclaimed Jasper, putting his face rather near to
      Marian's. 'I wish to goodness we were back in those quiet fields — you remember? — with the
      September sun warm about us. Shall you go to Finden again before long?'
'I really don't know.'
'I'm sorry to say my mother is far from well. In any case I must go at Christmas, but I'm
      afraid it won't be a cheerful visit.'
Arrived in Hampstead Road he offered his hand for good-bye.
'I wanted to talk about all sorts of things. But perhaps I shall find you again some
      day.'
He jumped out, and waved his hat in the lurid fog.
Shortly before the end of December appeared the first number of The Current . Yule
      had once or twice referred to the forthcoming magazine with acrid contempt, and of course he
      did not purchase a copy.
'So young Milvain has joined Fadge's hopeful
       standard,' he remarked, a day or two later, at breakfast. 'They say his paper is
      remarkably clever; I could wish it had appeared anywhere else. Evil communications,
      etc.'
'But I shouldn't think there's any personal connection,' said Marian.
'Very likely not. But Milvain has been invited to contribute, you see.'
'Do you think he ought to have refused?'
'Oh no. It's nothing to me; nothing whatever.'
Mrs. Yule glanced at her daughter, but Marian seemed unconcerned. The subject was dismissed.
      In introducing it Yule had had his purpose; there had always been an unnatural avoidance of
      Milvain's name in conversation, and he wished to have an end of this. Hitherto he had felt a
      troublesome uncertainty regarding his position in the matter. From what his wife had told him
      it seemed pretty certain that Marian was disappointed by the abrupt closing of her brief
      acquaintance with the young man, and Yule's affection for his daughter caused him to feel
      uneasy in the thought that perhaps he had deprived her of a chance of happiness. His
      conscience readily took hold of an excuse for justifying the course he had followed. Milvain
       had gone over to the enemy. Whether or not the young man understood how
      relentless the hostility was between Yule and Fadge mattered little; the probability was that
      he knew all about it. In any case intimate relations with him could not have survived this
      alliance with Fadge, so that, after all, there had been wisdom in letting the acquaintance
      lapse. To be sure, nothing could have come of it. Milvain was the kind of man who weighed
      opportunities; every step he took would be regulated by considerations of advantage; at all
      events that was the impression his character had made upon Yule. Any hopes that Marian might
      have been induced to form would assuredly have ended in disappointment. It was kindness to
      interpose before things had gone so far.
Henceforth, if Milvain's name was unavoidable, it should be mentioned just like that of any
      other literary man. It seemed very unlikely indeed that Marian would continue to think of him
      with any special and personal interest. The fact of her having got into correspondence with
      his sisters was unfortunate, but this kind of thing rarely went on for very long.
Yule spoke of the matter with his wife that evening.

'By-the-by, has Marian heard from those girls at Finden lately?'
'She had a letter one afternoon last week.'
'Do you see these letters?'
'No; she told me what was in them at first, but now she doesn't.'
'She hasn't spoken to you again of Milvain?'
'Not a word.'
'Well, I understood what I was about,' Yule remarked, with the confident air of one who
      doesn't wish to remember that he had ever felt doubtful. 'There was no good in having the
      fellow here. He has got in with a set that I don't at all care for. If she ever says anything
      — you understand — you can just let me know.'
Marian had already procured a copy of The Current , and read it privately. Of the
      cleverness of Milvain's contribution there could be no two opinions; it drew the attention of
      the public, and all notices of the new magazine made special reference to this article. With
      keen interest Marian sought after comments of the press; when it was possible she cut them out
      and put them carefully away.
January passed, and February. She saw nothing of Jasper. A letter from Dora in the first
       week of March made announcement that the 'Child's History of the English
      Parliament' would be published very shortly; it told her, too, that Mrs. Milvain had been very
      ill indeed, but that she seemed to recover a little strength as the weather improved. Of
      Jasper there was no mention.
A week later came the news that Mrs. Milvain had suddenly died.
This letter was received at breakfast-time. The envelope was an ordinary one, and so little
      did Marian anticipate the nature of its contents that at the first sight of the words she
      uttered an exclamation of pain. Her father, who had turned from the table to the fireside with
      his newspaper, looked round and asked what was the matter.
'Mrs. Milvain died the day before yesterday.'
'Indeed!'
He averted his face again and seemed disposed to say no more. But in a few moments he
      inquired:
'What are her daughters likely to do?'
'I have no idea.'
'Do you know anything of their circumstances?'

'I believe they will have to depend upon themselves.'
Nothing more was said. Afterwards Mrs. Yule made a few sympathetic inquiries, but Marian was
      very brief in her replies.
Ten days after that, on a Sunday afternoon when Marian and her mother were alone in the
      sitting-room, they heard the knock of a visitor at the front door. Yule was out, and there was
      no likelihood of the visitor's wishing to see any one but him. They listened; the servant went
      to the door, and, after a murmur of voices, came to speak to her mistress.
'It's a gentleman called Mr. Milvain,' the girl reported, in a way that proved how seldom
      callers presented themselves. 'He asked for Mr. Yule, and when I said he was out, then he
      asked for Miss Yule.'
Mother and daughter looked anxiously at each other. Mrs. Yule was nervous and helpless.
'Show Mr. Milvain into the study,' said Marian, with sudden decision.
'Are you going to see him there?' asked her mother in a hurried whisper.
'I thought you would prefer that to his coming in here.'

'Yes — yes. But suppose father comes back before he's gone?'
'What will it matter? You forget that he asked for father first.'
'Oh yes! Then don't wait.'
Marian, scarcely less agitated than her mother, was just leaving the room, when she turned
      back again.
'If father comes in, you will tell him before he goes into the study?'
'Yes, I will.'
The fire in the study was on the point of extinction; this was the first thing Marian's eye
      perceived on entering, and it gave her assurance that her father would not be back for some
      hours. Evidently he had intended it to go out; small economies of this kind, unintelligible to
      people who have always lived at ease, had been the life-long rule with him. With a sensation
      of gladness at having free time before her, Marian turned to where Milvain was standing, in
      front of one of the bookcases. He wore no symbol of mourning, but his countenance was far
      graver than usual, and rather paler. They shook hands in silence.
'I am so grieved — ' Marian began with broken voice.

'Thank you. I know the girls have told you all about it. We knew for the last month that it
      must come before long, though there was a deceptive improvement just before the end.'
'Please to sit down, Mr. Milvain. Father went out not long ago, and I don't think he will be
      back very soon.'
'It was not really Mr. Yule I wished to see,' said Jasper, frankly. 'If he had been at home
      I should have spoken with him about what I have in mind, but if you will kindly give me a few
      minutes it will be much better.'
Marian glanced at the expiring fire. Her curiosity as to what Milvain had to say was mingled
      with an anxious doubt whether it was not too late to put on fresh coals; already the room was
      growing very chill, and this appearance of inhospitality troubled her.
'Do you wish to save it?' Jasper asked, understanding her look and movement.
'I'm afraid it has got too low.'
'I think not. Life in lodgings has made me skilful at this kind of thing; let me try my
      hand.'
He took the tongs and carefully disposed small pieces of coal upon the glow that remained.
      Marian stood apart with a feeling of shame and annoyance. But it is so seldom that situations
       in life arrange themselves with dramatic propriety; and, after all, this vulgar
      necessity made the beginning of the conversation easier.
'That will be all right now,' said Jasper at length, as little tongues of flame began to
      shoot here and there.
Marian said nothing, but seated herself and waited.
'I came up to town yesterday,' Jasper began. 'Of course we have had a great deal to do and
      think about. Miss Harrow has been very kind indeed to the girls; so have several of our old
      friends in Wattleborough. It was necessary to decide at once what Maud and Dora are going to
      do, and it is on their account that I have come to see you.'
The listener kept silence, with a face of sympathetic attention.
'We have made up our minds that they may as well come to London. It's a bold step; I'm by no
      means sure that the result will justify it. But I think they are perhaps right in wishing to
      try it.'
'They will go on with literary work?'
'Well, it's our hope that they may be able to. Of course there's no chance of their earning
      enough to live upon for some time. But the
       matter stands like this. They have a trifling sum of money, on which, at a
      pinch, they could live in London for perhaps a year and a half. In that time they may
      find their way to a sort of income; at all events, the chances are that a year and a half
      hence I shall be able to help them to keep body and soul together.'
The money of which he spoke was the debt owed to their father by William Milvain. In
      consequence of Mrs. Milvain's pressing application half of this sum had at length been paid,
      and the remainder was promised in a year's time, greatly to Jasper's astonishment. In
      addition, there would be the trifle realised by the sale of furniture, though most of this
      might have to go in payment of rent unless the house could be relet immediately.
'They have made a good beginning,' said Marian.
She spoke mechanically, for it was impossible to keep her thoughts under control. If Maud
      and Dora came to live in London it might bring about a most important change in her life; she
      could scarcely imagine the happiness of having two such friends always near. On the other
      hand, how would it be regarded by her father? She was at a loss amid conflicting emotions.

'It's better than if they had done nothing at all,' Jasper replied to her remark. 'And the
      way they knocked that trifle together promises well. They did it very quickly, and in a far
      more workmanlike way than I should have thought possible.'
'No doubt they share your own talent.'
'Perhaps so. Of course I know that I have talent of a kind, though I don't rate it very
      high. We shall have to see whether they can do anything more than mere bookseller's work; they
      are both very young, you know. I think they may be able to write something that'll do for
       The English Girl , and no doubt I can hit upon a second idea that will appeal to
      Jolly and Monk. At all events they'll have books within reach, and better opportunities every
      way than at Finden.'
'How do their friends in the country think of it?'
'Very dubiously; but then what else was to be expected? Of course, the respectable and
      intelligible path marked out for both of them points to a lifetime of governessing. But the
      girls have no relish for that; they'd rather do almost anything. We talked over all the
       aspects of the situation seriously enough — it is desperately serious,
      no doubt of that. I told them fairly all the hardships they would have to face — described the
      typical London lodgings, and so on. Still, there's an adventurous vein in them, and they
      decided for the risk. If it came to the worst I suppose they could still find governess
      work.'
'Let us hope better things.'
'Yes. But now, I should have felt far more reluctant to let them come here in this way
      hadn't it been that they regard you as a friend. To-morrow morning you will probably hear from
      one or both of them. Perhaps it would have been better if I had left them to tell you all
      this, but I felt I should like to see you and — put it in my own way. I think you'll
      understand this feeling, Miss Yule. I wanted, in fact, to hear from yourself that you would be
      a friend to the poor girls.'
'Oh, you already know that! I shall be so very glad to see them often.'
Marian's voice lent itself very naturally and sweetly to the expression of warm feeling.
      Emphasis was not her habit; it only needed that she should put off her ordinary reserve, utter
      quietly the emotional thought which so
       seldom might declare itself, and her tones had an exquisite womanliness.
Jasper looked full into her face.
'In that case they won't miss the comfort of home so much. Of course they will have to go
      into very modest lodgings indeed. I have already been looking about. I should like to find
      rooms for them somewhere near my own place; it's a decent neighbourhood, and the park is at
      hand, and then they wouldn't be very far from you. They thought it might be possible to make a
      joint establishment with me, but I'm afraid that's out of the question. The lodgings we should
      want in that case, everything considered, would cost more than the sum of our expenses if we
      live apart. Besides, there's no harm in saying that I don't think we should get along very
      well together. We're all of us rather quarrelsome, to tell the truth, and we try each other's
      tempers.' Marian smiled and looked puzzled.
'Shouldn't you have thought that?'
'I have seen no signs of quarrelsomeness.'
'I'm not sure that the worst fault is on my side. Why should one condemn oneself against
      conscience? Maud is perhaps the hardest to get along with. She has a sort of arrogance, an
      exaggeration of something I am quite aware
       of in myself. You have noticed that trait in me?'
'Arrogance — I think not. You have self-confidence.'
'Which goes into extremes now and then. But, putting myself aside, I feel pretty sure that
      the girls won't seem quarrelsome to you ; they would have to be very fractious indeed
      before that were possible.'
'We shall continue to be friends, I am sure.'
Jasper let his eyes wander about the room.
'This is your father's study?'
'Yes.'
'Perhaps it would have seemed odd to Mr. Yule if I had come in and begun to talk to him
      about these purely private affairs. He knows me so very slightly. But, in calling here for the
      first time — '
An unusual embarrassment checked him.
'I will explain to father your very natural wish to speak of these things,' said Marian,
      with tact.
She thought uneasily of her mother in the next room. To her there appeared no reason
      whatever why Jasper should not be introduced to Mrs. Yule, yet she could not venture
       to propose it. Remembering her father's last remarks about Milvain in connection
      with Fadge's magazine, she must wait for distinct permission before offering the young man
      encouragement to repeat his visit. Perhaps there was complicated trouble in store for her;
      impossible to say how her father's deep-rooted and rankling antipathies might affect her
      intercourse even with the two girls. But she was of independent years, she must be allowed the
      choice of her own friends. The pleasure she had in seeing Jasper under this roof, in hearing
      him talk with such intimate friendliness, strengthened her to resist timid thoughts.
'When will your sisters arrive?' she asked.
'I think in a very few days. When I have fixed upon lodgings for them I must go back to
      Finden; then they will return with me as soon as we can get the house emptied. It's rather
      miserable selling things one has lived among from childhood. A friend in Wattleborough will
      house for us what we really can't bear to part with.'
'It must be very sad,' Marian murmured.
'You know,' said the other suddenly, 'that it's my fault the girls are left in such a hard
      position?'

Marian looked at him with startled eyes. His tone was quite unfamiliar to her.
'Mother had an annuity,' he continued. 'It ended with her life, but if it hadn't been for me
      she could have saved a good deal out of it. Until the last year or two I have earned nothing,
      and I have spent more than was strictly necessary. Well, I didn't live like that in mere
      recklessness; I knew I was preparing myself for remunerative work. But it seems too bad now.
      I'm sorry for it. I wish I had found some way of supporting myself. The end of mother's life
      was made far more unhappy than it need have been. I should like you to understand all
      this.'
The listener kept her eyes on the ground.
'Perhaps the girls have hinted it to you?' Jasper added.
'No.'
'Selfishness — that's one of my faults. It isn't a brutal kind of selfishness; the thought
      of it often enough troubles me. If I were rich, I should be a generous and good man; I know I
      should. So would many another poor fellow whose worst features come out under hardship. This
      isn't a heroic type; of course not. I am a civilised man, that's all.'
Marian could say nothing.

'You wonder why I am so impertinent as to talk about myself like this. I have gone through a
      good deal of mental pain these last few weeks, and somehow I can't help showing you something
      of my real thoughts. Just because you are one of the few people I regard with sincere respect.
      I don't know you very well, but quite well enough to respect you. My sisters think of you in
      the same way. I shall do many a base thing in life, just to get money and reputation; I tell
      you this that you mayn't be surprised if anything of that kind comes to your ears. I can't
      afford to live as I should like to.'
She looked up at him with a smile.
'People who are going to live unworthily don't declare it in this way.'
'I oughtn't to; a few minutes ago I had no intention of saying such things. It means I am
      rather overstrung, I suppose; but it's all true, unfortunately.'
He rose, and began to run his eye along the shelves nearest to him.
'Well, now I will go, Miss Yule.'
Marian stood up as he approached.
'It's all very well,' he said smiling, 'for me to encourage my sisters in the hope that they
      may earn a living; but suppose I can't even do
       it myself? It's by no means certain that I shall make ends meet this year.'
'You have every reason to hope, I think.'
'I like to hear people say that, but it'll mean savage work. When we were all at Finden last
      year, I told the girls that it would be another twelve months before I could support myself.
      Now I am forced to do it. And I don't like work; my nature is lazy. I shall never write for
      writing's sake, only to make money. All my plans and efforts will have money in view — all. I
      shan't allow anything to come in the way of my material advancement.'
'I wish you every success,' said Marian, without looking at him, and without a smile.
'Thank you. But that sounds too much like good-bye. I trust we are to be friends, for all
      that?'
'Indeed, I hope we may be.'
They shook hands, and he went towards the door. But before opening it, he asked:
'Did you read that thing of mine in The Current? '
'Yes, I did.'
'It wasn't bad, I think?'
'It seemed to me very clever.'
'Clever — yes, that's the word. It had a
       success, too. I have as good a thing half done for the April number, but I've
      felt too heavy-hearted to go on with it. The girls shall let you know when they are in
      town.'
Marian followed him into the passage, and watched him as he opened the front door. When it
      had closed, she went back into the study for a few moments before rejoining her mother.

</div></body></text></TEI>