<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>New Grub Street: A Novel</title><author>Gissing, George (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1891</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
CHAPTER VII MARIAN'S HOME
Three weeks after her return from the country — which took place a week later than
      that of Jasper Milvain — Marian Yule was working one afternoon at her usual place in the
      Museum Reading-room. It was three o'clock, and with the interval of half an hour at midday,
      when she went away for a cup of tea and a sandwich, she had been closely occupied since
      half-past nine. Her task at present was to collect materials for a paper on 'French
      Authoresses of the Seventeenth Century,' the kind of thing which her father supplied on
      stipulated terms for anonymous publication. Marian was by this time almost able to complete
      such a piece of manufacture herself, and her father's share in it was limited to a few hints
      and corrections. The greater part of the work by which Yule earned his moderate income was
      anonymous: volumes and articles which bore his signature
       dealt with much the same subjects as his unsigned matter, but the writing was
      laboured with a conscientiousness unusual in men of his position. The result, unhappily, was
      not correspondent with the efforts. Alfred Yule had made a recognisable name among the
      critical writers of the day; seeing him in the title-lists of a periodical, most people knew
      what to expect, but not a few forbore the cutting open of the pages he occupied. He was
      learned, copious, occasionally mordant in style; but grace had been denied to him. He had of
      late begun to perceive the fact that those passages of Marian's writing which were printed
      just as they came from her pen had merit of a kind quite distinct from anything of which he
      himself was capable, and it began to be a question with him whether it would not be
      advantageous to let the girl sign these compositions. A matter of business, to be sure — at
      all events in the first instance.
For a long time Marian had scarcely looked up from the desk, but at this moment she found it
      necessary to refer to the invaluable Larousse. As so often happened, the particular volume of
      which she had need was not upon the shelf; she turned away, and looked about her with a gaze
       of weary disappointment. At a little distance were standing two young men,
      engaged, as their faces showed, in facetious colloquy; as soon as she observed them, Marian's
      eyes fell, but the next moment she looked again in that direction. Her face had wholly
      changed; she wore a look of timid expectancy.
The men were moving towards her, still talking and laughing. She turned to the shelves, and
      affected to search for a book. The voices drew near, and one of them was well known to her;
      now she could hear every word; now the speakers were gone by. Was it possible that Mr. Milvain
      had not recognised her? She folowed him with her eyes, and saw him take a seat not far off; he
      must have passed without even being aware of her.
She went back to her place and for some minutes sat trifling with a pen. When she made a
      show of resuming work, it was evident that she could no longer apply herself as before. Every
      now and then she glanced at people who were passing; there were intervals when she wholly lost
      herself in reverie. She was tired, and had even a slight headache. When the hand of the clock
      pointed to half-past three, she closed the volume from which she had been
       copying extracts, and began to collect her papers.
A voice spoke close behind her.
'Where's your father, Miss Yule?'
The speaker was a man of sixty, short, stout, tonsured by the hand of time. He had a broad,
      flabby face, the colour of an ancient turnip, save where one of the cheeks was marked with a
      mulberry stain; his eyes, grey-orbed in a yellow setting, glared with good-humoured
      inquisitiveness, and his mouth was that of the confirmed gossip. For eyebrows he had two
      little patches of reddish stubble; for moustache, what looked like a bit of discoloured tow,
      and scraps of similar material hanging beneath his creasy chin represented a beard. His garb
      must have seen a great deal of Museum service; it consisted of a jacket, something between
      brown and blue, hanging in capacious shapelessness, a waistcoat half open for lack of buttons
      and with one of the pockets coming unsewn, a pair of bronze-hued trousers which had all run to
      knee. Necktie he had none, and his linen made distinct appeal to the laundress.
Marian shook hands with him.
'He went away at half-past two,' was her reply to his question.

'How annoying! I wanted particularly to see him. I have been running about all day, and
      couldn't get here before. Something important — most important. At all events, I can tell
       you . But I entreat that you won't breathe a word save to your father.'
Mr. Quarmby — that was his name — had taken a vacant chair and drawn it close to Marian's.
      He was in a state of joyous excitement, and talked in thick, rather pompous tones, with a pant
      at the end of a sentence. To emphasize the extremely confidential nature of his remarks, he
      brought his head almost in contact with the girl's, and one of her thin, delicate hands was
      covered with his red, podgy fingers.
'I've had a talk with Nathaniel Walker,' he continued; 'a long talk — a talk of vast
      importance. You know Walker? No, no; how should you? He's a man of business; close friend of
      Rackett's — Rackett, you know, the owner of The Study .'
Upon this he made a grave pause, and glared more excitedly than ever.
'I have heard of Mr. Rackett,' said Marian.
'Of course, of course. And you must also have heard that Fadge leaves The Study at
      the end of this year, eh?'

'Father told me it was probable.'
'Rackett and he have done nothing but quarrel for months; the paper is falling off
      seriously. Well, now, when I came across Nat Walker this afternoon, the first thing he said to
      me was, "You know Alfred Yule pretty well, I think?" "Pretty well," I answered; "why?" "I'll
      tell you," he said, "but it's between you and me, you understand. Rackett is thinking about
      him in connection with The Study ." "I'm delighted to hear it." "To tell you the
      truth," went on Nat, "I shouldn't wonder if Yule gets the editorship; but you understand that
      it would be altogether premature to talk about it." Now what do you think of this, eh?'
'It's very good news,' answered Marian.
' I should think so! Ho, ho!'
Mr. Quarmby laughed in a peculiar way, which was the result of long years of mirthsubdual in
      the Reading-room.
'But not a breath to anyone but your father. He'll be here to-morrow? Break it gently to
      him, you know; he's an excitable man; can't take things quietly, like I do. Ho, ho!'
His suppressed laugh ended in a fit of coughing — the Reading-room cough. When he had
      recovered from it, he pressed Marian's hand with
       paternal fervour, and waddled off to chatter with someone else.
Marian replaced several books on the reference shelves, returned others to the central desk,
      and was just leaving the room, when again a voice made demand upon her attention.
'Miss Yule! One moment, if you please!'
It was a tall, meagre, dry-featured man, dressed with the painful neatness of
      self-respecting poverty: the edges of his coat-sleeves were carefully darned; his black
      necktie and a skullcap which covered his baldness were evidently of home manufacture. He
      smiled softly and timidly with blue, rheumy eyes. Two or three recent cuts on his chin and
      neck were the result of conscientious shaving with an unsteady hand.
'I have been looking for your father,' he said, as Marian turned. 'Isn't he here?'
'He has gone, Mr. Hinks.'
'Ah, then would you do me the kindness to take a book for him? In fact, it's my little
      "Essay on the Historical Drama," just out.'
He spoke with nervous hesitation, and in a tone which seemed to make apology for his
      existence.
'Oh, father will be very glad to have it.'

'If you will kindly wait one minute, Miss Yule. It's at my place over there.'
He went off with long strides, and speedily came back panting, in his hand a thin new
      volume.
'My kind regards to him, Miss Yule. You are quite well, I hope? I won't detain you.'
And he backed into a man who was coming inobservantly this way.
Marian went to the ladies' cloak-room, put on her hat and jacket, and left the Museum. Some
      one passed out through the swing-door a moment before her, and as soon as she had issued
      beneath the portico, she saw that it was Jasper Milvain; she must have followed him through
      the hall, but her eyes had been cast down. The young man was now alone; as he descended the
      steps he looked to left and right, but not behind him. Marian followed at a distance of two or
      three yards. Nearing the gateway, she quickened her pace a little, so as to pass out into the
      street almost at the same moment as Milvain. But he did not turn his head.
He took to the right. Marian had fallen back again, but she still followed at a very little
      distance. His walk was slow, and she might easily have passed him in quite a natural way;
       in that case he could not help seeing her. But there was an uneasy suspicion in
      her mind that he really must have noticed her in the Reading- room. This was the first time
      she had seen him since their parting at Finden. Had he any reason for avoiding her? Did he
      take it ill that her father had shown no desire to keep up his acquaintance?
She allowed the interval between them to become greater. In a minute or two Milvain turned
      up Charlotte Street, and so she lost sight of him.
In Tottenham Court Road she waited for an omnibus that would take her to the remoter part of
      Camden Town; obtaining a corner seat, she drew as far back as possible, and paid no attention
      to her fellow-passengers. At a point in Camden Road she at length alighted, and after ten
      minutes' walk reached her destination in a quiet by-way called St. Paul's Crescent, consisting
      of small, decent houses. That at which she paused had an exterior promising comfort within;
      the windows were clean and neatly curtained, and the polishable appurtenances of the door
      gleamed to perfection. She admitted herself with a latch-key, and went straight upstairs
      without encountering anyone.

Descending again in a few moments, she entered the front room on the ground-floor. This
      served both as parlour and dining-room; it was comfortably furnished, without much attempt at
      adornment. On the walls were a few auto-types and old engravings. A recess between fireplace
      and window was fitted with shelves, which supported hundreds of volumes, the overflow of
      Yule's library. The table was laid for a meal. It best suited the convenience of the family to
      dine at five o'clock; a long evening, so necessary to most literary people, was thus assured.
      Marian, as always when she had spent a day at the Museum, was faint with weariness and hunger;
      she cut a small piece of bread from a loaf on the table, and sat down in an easy chair.
Presently appeared a short, slight woman of middle age, plainly dressed in serviceable grey.
      Her face could never have been very comely, and it expressed but moderate intelligence; its
      lines, however, were those of gentleness and good feeling. She had the look of one who is
      making a painful effort to understand something; this was fixed upon her features, and
      probably resulted from the peculiar conditions of her life.

'Rather early, aren't you, Marian?' she said, as she closed the door and came forward to
      take a seat.
'Yes; I have a little headache.'
'Oh, dear! Is that beginning again?'
Mrs. Yule's speech was seldom ungrammatical, and her intonation was not flagrantly vulgar,
      but the accent of the London poor, which brands as with hereditary baseness, still clung to
      her words, rendering futile such propriety of phrase as she owed to years of association with
      educated people. In the same degree did her bearing fall short of that which distinguishes a
      lady. The London work-girl is rarely capable of raising herself, or being raised, to a place
      in life above that to which she was born; she cannot learn how to stand and sit and move like
      a woman bred to refinement, any more than she can fashion her tongue to graceful speech. Mrs.
      Yule's behaviour to Marian was marked with a singular diffidence; she looked and spoke
      affectionately, but not with a mother's freedom; one might have taken her for a trusted
      servant waiting upon her mistress. Whenever opportunity offered, she watched the girl in a
      curiously furtive way, that puzzled look on her face becoming very noticeable. Her
      consciousness was never
       able to accept as a familiar and unimportant fact the vast difference between
      herself and her daughter. Marian's superiority in native powers, in delicacy of feeling, in
      the results of education, could never be lost sight of. Under ordinary circumstances she
      addressed the girl as if tentatively; however sure of anything from her own point of view, she
      knew that Marian, as often as not, had quite a different criterion. She understood that the
      girl frequently expressed an opinion by mere reticence, and hence the carefulness with which,
      when conversing, she tried to discover the real effect of her words in Marian's features.
'Hungry, too,' she said, seeing the crust Marian was nibbling. 'You really must have more
      lunch, dear. It isn't right to go so long; you'll make yourself ill.'
'Have you been out?' Marian asked.
'Yes; I went to Holloway.'
Mrs. Yule sighed and looked very unhappy. By 'going to Holloway' was always meant a visit to
      her own relatives — a married sister with three children, and a brother who inhabited the same
      house. To her husband she scarcely ever ventured to speak of these persons; Yule had no
      intercourse with them. But Marian was
       always willing to listen sympathetically, and her mother often exhibited a
      touching gratitude for this condescension — as she deemed it.
'Are things no better?' the girl inquired.
'Worse, as far as I can see. John has begun his drinking again, and him and Tom quarrel
      every night; there's no peace in the 'ouse.'
If ever Mrs. Yule lapsed into gross errors of pronunciation or phrase, it was when she spoke
      of her kinsfolk. The subject seemed to throw her back into a former condition.
'He ought to go and live by himself,' said Marian, referring to her mother's brother, the
      thirsty John.
'So he ought, to be sure. I'm always telling them so. But there! you don't seem to be able
      to persuade them, they're that silly and obstinate. And Susan, she only gets angry with me,
      and tells me not to talk in a stuck-up way. I'm sure I never say a word that could offend her;
      I'm too careful for that. And there's Annie; no doing anything with her! She's about the
      streets at all hours, and what'll be the end of it no one can say. They're getting that
      ragged, all of them. It isn't Susan's fault; indeed it isn't. She does all that woman can. But
      Tom hasn't brought home ten shillings the last month,
       and it seems to me as if he was getting careless. I gave her half a crown; it
      was all I could do. And the worst of it is, they think I could do so much more if I liked.
      They're always hinting that we are rich people, and it's no good my trying to persuade them.
      They think I'm telling falsehoods, and it's very hard to be looked at in that way; it is,
      indeed, Marian.'
'You can't help it, mother. I suppose their suffering makes them unkind and unjust.'
'That's just what it does, my dear; you never said anything truer. Poverty will make the
      best people bad, if it gets hard enough. Why there's so much of it in the world, I'm sure
       I can't see.'
'I suppose father will be back soon?'
'He said dinner-time.'
'Mr. Quarmby has been telling me something which is wonderfully good news if it's really
      true; but I can't help feeling doubtful. He says that father may perhaps be made editor of
       The Study at the end of this year.'
Mrs. Yule, of course, understood, in outline, these affairs of the literary world; she
      thought of them only from the pecuniary point of view, but that made no essential distinction
      between her and the mass of literary people.

'My word!' she exclaimed. 'What a thing that would be for us!'
Marian had begun to explain her reluctance to base any hopes on Mr. Quarmby's prediction,
      when the sound of a postman's knock at the house-door caused her mother to disappear for a
      moment.
'It's for you,' said Mrs. Yule, returning. 'From the country.'
Marian took the letter and examined its address with interest.
'It must be one of the Miss Milvains. Yes; Dora Milvain.'
After Jasper's departure from Finden his sisters had seen Marian several times, and the
      mutual liking between her and them had been confirmed by opportunity of conversation. The
      promise of correspondence had hitherto waited for fulfilment. It seemed natural to Marian that
      the younger of the two girls should write; Maud was attractive and agreeable, and probably
      clever, but Dora had more spontaneity in friendship.
'It will amuse you to hear,' wrote Dora, 'that the literary project our brother mentioned in
      a letter whilst you were still here is really to come to something. He has sent us a specimen
       chapter, written by himself, of the "Child's History of Parliament," and Maud
      thinks she could carry it on in that style, if there's no hurry. She and I have both set to
      work on English histories, and we shall be authorities before long. Jolly and Monk offer
      thirty pounds for the little book, if it suits them when finished, with certain possible
      profits in the future. Trust Jasper for making a bargain! So perhaps our literary career will
      be something more than a joke, after all. I hope it may; anything rather than a life of
      teaching. We shall be so glad to hear from you, if you still care to trouble about country
      girls.'
And so on. Marian read with a pleased smile, then acquainted her mother with the
      contents.
'I'm very glad,' said Mrs. Yule; 'it's so seldom you get a letter.'
'Yes.'
Marian seemed desirous of saying something more, and her mother had a thoughtful look,
      suggestive of sympathetic curiosity.
'Is their brother likely to call here?' Mrs. Yule asked, with misgiving.
'No one has invited him to,' was the girl's quiet reply.

'He wouldn't come without that?'
'It's not likely that he even knows the address.'
'Your father won't be seeing him, I suppose?'
'By chance, perhaps. I don't know.'
It was very rare indeed for these two to touch upon any subject save those of everyday
      interest. In spite of the affection between them, their exchange of confidence did not go very
      far; Mrs. Yule, who had never exercised maternal authority since Marian's earliest childhood,
      claimed no maternal privileges, and Marian's natural reserve had been strengthened by her
      mother's respectful aloofness. The English fault of domestic reticence could scarcely go
      further than it did in their case; its exaggeration is, of course, one of the characteristics
      of those unhappy families severed by differences of education between the old and young.
'I think,' said Marian, in a forced tone, 'that father hasn't much liking for Mr.
      Milvain.'
She wished to know if her mother had heard any private remarks on this subject, but she
      could not bring herself to ask directly.
'I'm sure I don't know,' replied Mrs. Yule, smoothing her dress. 'He hasn't said anything to
      me, Marian.'

An awkward silence. The mother had fixed her eyes on the mantelpiece, and was thinking
      hard.
'Otherwise,' said Marian, 'he would have said something, I should think, about meeting in
      London.'
'But is there anything in — this gentleman that he wouldn't like?'
'I don't know of anything.'
Impossible to pursue the dialogue; Marian moved uneasily, then rose, said something about
      putting the letter away, and left the room.
Shortly after, Alfred Yule entered the house. It was no uncommon thing for him to come home
      in a mood of silent moroseness, and this evening the first glimpse of his face was sufficient
      warning. He entered the dining-room and stood on the hearthrug reading an evening paper. His
      wife made a pretence of straightening things upon the table.
'Well?' he exclaimed irritably. 'It's after five; why isn't dinner served?'
'It's just coming, Alfred.'
Even the average man of a certain age is an alarming creature when dinner delays itself; the
      literary man in such a moment goes beyond all parallel. If there be added the fact that he has
       just returned from a very unsatisfactory interview with a publisher, wife and
      daughter may indeed regard the situation as appalling. Marian came in, and at once observed
      her mother's frightened face.
'Father,' she said, hoping to make a diversion, 'Mr. Hinks has sent you his new book, and
      wishes — '
'Then take Mr. Hinks's new book back to him, and tell him that I have quite enough to do
      without reading tedious trash. He needn't expect that I'm going to write a notice of it. The
      simpleton pesters me beyond endurance. I wish to know, if you please,' he added with savage
      calm, 'when dinner will be ready. If there's time to write a few letters, just tell me at
      once, that I mayn't waste half an hour.'
Marian resented this unreasonable anger, but she durst not reply. At that moment the servant
      appeared with a smoking joint, and Mrs. Yule followed carrying dishes of vegetables. The man
      of letters seated himself and carved angrily. He began his meal by drinking half a glass of
      ale; then he ate a few mouthfuls in a quick, hungry way, his head bent closely over the plate.
      It happened commonly enough that dinner passed without a word of conversation,
       and that seemed likely to be the case this evening. To his wife Yule seldom
      addressed anything but a curt inquiry or caustic comment; if he spoke humanly at table it was
      to Marian.
Ten minutes passed; then Marian resolved to try any means of clearing the atmosphere.
'Mr. Quarmby gave me a message for you,' she said. 'A friend of his, Nathaniel Walker, has
      told him that Mr. Rackett will very likely offer you the editorship of The Study
      .'
Yule stopped in the act of mastication. He fixed his eyes intently on the sirloin for half a
      minute; then, by way of the beer-jug and the salt-cellar, turned them upon Marian's face.
'Walker told him that? Pooh!'
'It was a great secret. I wasn't to breathe a word to anyone but you.'
'Walker's a fool and Quarmby's an ass,' remarked her father.
But there was a tremulousness in his bushy eyebrows; his forehead half unwreathed itself: he
      continued to eat more slowly, and as if with appreciation of the viands.
'What did he say? Repeat it to me in his words.'
Marian did so, as nearly as possible. He
       listened with a scoffing expression, but still his features relaxed.
'I don't credit Rackett with enough good sense for such a proposal,' he said deliberately.
      'And I'm not very sure that I should accept it if it were made. That fellow Fadge has all but
      ruined the paper. It will amuse me to see how long it takes him to make Culpepper's new
      magazine a distinct failure.'
A silence of five minutes ensued; then Yule said of a sudden:
'Where is Hinks's book?'
Marian reached it from a side table; under this roof, liteature was regarded almost as a
      necessary part of table garnishing.
'I thought it would be bigger than this,' Yule muttered, as he opened the volume in a way
      peculiar to bookish men.
A page was turned down, as if to draw attention to some passage. Yule put on his
      eye-glasses, and soon made a discovery which had the effect of completing the transformation
      of his visage. His eyes glinted, his chin worked in pleasurable emotion. In a moment he handed
      the book to Marian, indicating the small type of a foot-note; it embodied an effusive eulogy —
      introduced à propos of some literary discussion —
       of 'Mr. Alfred Yule's critical acumen, scholarly research, lucid style,' and
      sundry other distinguished merits.
'That is kind of him,' said Marian.
'Good old Hinks! I suppose I must try to get him half a dozen readers.'
'May I see?' asked Mrs. Yule, under her breath, bending to Marian.
Her daughter passed on the volume, and Mrs. Yule read the foot-note with that look of slow
      apprehension which is so pathetic when it signifies the heart's good-will thwarted by the
      mind's defect.
'That'll be good for you, Alfred, won't it?' she said, glancing at her husband.
'Certainly,' he replied, with a smile of contemptuous irony. 'If Hinks goes on, he'll
      establish my reputation.'
And he took a draught of ale, like one who is reinvigorated for the battle of life. Marian,
      regarding him askance, mused on what seemed to her a strange anomaly in his character; it had
      often surprised her that a man of his temperament and powers should be so dependent upon the
      praise and blame of people whom he justly deemed his inferiors.
Yule was glancing over the pages of the work.

'A pity the man can't write English. What a vocabulary! Obstruent — reliable —
       particularization — fabulosity — different to — averse to — did one ever come across
      such a mixture of antique pedantry and modern vulgarism! Surely he has his name from the
      German hinken — eh, Marian?'
With a laugh he tossed the book away again. His mood was wholly changed. He gave various
      evidences of enjoying the meal, and began to talk freely with his daughter.
'Finished the authoresses?'
'Not quite.'
'No hurry. When you have time I want you to read Ditchley's new book, and jot down a
      selection of his worst sentences. I'll use them for an article on contemporary style; it
      occurred to me this afternoon.'
He smiled grimly. Mrs. Yule's face exhibited much contentment, which became radiant joy when
      her husband remarked casually that the custard was very well made to-day. Dinner over, he rose
      without ceremony and went off to his study.
The man had suffered much and toiled stupendously. It was not inexplicable that dyspepsia,
      and many another ill that literary flesh is heir to, recked him sore.

Go back to the days when he was an assistant at a bookseller's in Holborn. Already ambition
      devoured him, and the genuine love of knowledge goaded his brain. He allowed himself but three
      or four hours of sleep; he wrought doggedly at languages, ancient and modern; he tried his
      hand at metrical translations; he planned tragedies. Practically he was living in a past age;
      his literary ideals were formed on the study of Boswell.
The head assistant in the shop went away to pursue a business which had come into his hands
      on the death of a relative; it was a small publishing concern, housed in an alley off the
      Strand, and Mr. Polo (a singular name, to become well known in the course of time) had his
      ideas about its possible extension. Among other instances of activity he started a penny
      weekly paper, called All Sorts , and in the pages of this periodical Alfred Yule
      first appeared as an author. Before long he became sub-editor of All Sorts , then
      actual director of the paper. He said good-bye to the bookseller, and his literary career
      fairly began.
Mr. Polo used to say that he never knew a man who could work so many consecutive hours as
      Alfred Yule. A faithful account of all that
       the young man learnt and wrote from 1855 to 1860 — that is, from his
      twenty-fifth to his thirtieth year — would have the look of burlesque exaggeration. He had set
      it before him to become a celebrated man, and he was not unaware that the attainment of that
      end would cost him quite exceptional labour, seeing that nature had not favoured him with
      brilliant parts. No matter; his name should be spoken among men — unless he killed himself in
      the struggle for success.
In the meantime he married. Living in a garret, and supplying himself with the materials of
      his scanty meals, he was in the habit of making purchases at a little chandler's shop, where
      he was waited upon by a young girl of no beauty, but, as it seemed to him, of amiable
      disposition. One holiday he met this girl as she was walking with a younger sister in the
      streets; he made her nearer acquaintance, and before long she consented to be his wife and
      share his garret. His brothers, John and Edmund, cried out that he had made an unpardonable
      fool of himself in marrying so much beneath him; that he might well have waited until his
      income improved. This was all very well, but they might just as reasonably have bidden him
      reject plain food
       because a few years hence he would be able to purchase luxuries; he could not do
      without nourishment of some sort, and the time had come when he could not do without a wife.
      Many a man with brains but no money has been compelled to the same step. Educated girls have a
      pronounced distaste for London garrets; not one in fifty thousand would share poverty with the
      brightest genius ever born. Seeing that marriage is so often indispensable to that very
      success which would enable a man of parts to mate equally, there is nothing for it but to look
      below one's own level, and be grateful to the untaught woman who has pity on one's
      loneliness.
Unfortunately, Alfred Yule was not so grateful as he might have been. His marriage proved
      far from unsuccessful; he might have found himself united to a vulgar shrew, whereas the girl
      had the great virtues of humility and kindliness. She endeavoured to learn of him, but her
      dulness and his impatience made this attempt a failure; her human qualities had to suffice.
      And they did, until Yule began to lift his head above the literary mob. Previously, he often
      lost his temper with her, but never expressed or felt repentance of his marriage; now he began
      to see only the disadvantages of his position, and,
       forgetting the facts of the case, to imagine that he might well have waited for
      a wife who could share his intellectual existence. Mrs. Yule had to pass through a few years
      of much bitterness. Already a martyr to dyspepsia, and often suffering from bilious headaches
      of extreme violence, her husband now and then lost all control of his temper, all sense of
      kind feeling, even of decency, and reproached the poor woman with her ignorance, her
      stupidity, her low origin. Naturally enough she defended herself with such weapons as a sense
      of cruel injustice supplied. More than once the two all but parted. It did not come to an
      actual rupture, chiefly because Yule could not do without his wife; her tendance had become
      indispensable. And then there was the child to consider.
From the first it was Yule's dread lest Marian should be infected with her mother's faults
      of speech and behaviour. He would scarcely permit his wife to talk to the child. At the
      earliest possible moment Marian was sent to a day-school, and in her tenth year she went as
      weekly boarder to an establishment at Fulham; any sacrifice of money to insure her growing up
      with the tongue and manners of a lady. It can scarcely have been a light trial to the mother
      to
       know that contact with her was regarded as her child's greatest danger; but in
      her humility and her love for Marian she offered no resistance. And so it came to pass that
      one day the little girl, hearing her mother make some flagrant grammatical error, turned to
      the other parent and asked gravely: 'Why doesn't mother speak as properly as we do?' Well,
      that is one of the results of such marriages, one of the myriad miseries that result from
      poverty.
The end was gained at all hazards. Marian grew up everything that her father desired. Not
      only had she the bearing of refinement, but it early became obvious that nature had well
      endowed her with brains. From the nursery her talk was of books, and at the age of twelve she
      was already able to give her father some assistance as an amanuensis.
At that time Edmund Yule was still living; he had overcome his prejudices, and there was
      intercourse between his household and that of the literary man. Intimacy it could not be
      called, for Mrs. Edmund (who was the daughter of a law-stationer) had much difficulty in
      behaving to Mrs. Alfred with show of suavity. Still, the cousins Amy and Marian from time to
      time saw each other, and were not unsuitable
       companions. It was the death of Amy's father that brought these relations to an
      end; left to the control of her own affairs Mrs. Edmund was not long in giving offence to Mrs.
      Alfred, and so to Alfred himself. The man of letters might be inconsiderate enough in his
      behaviour to his wife, but as soon as anyone else treated her with disrespect that was quite
      another matter. Purely on this account he quarrelled violently with his brother's widow, and
      from that day the two families kept apart.
The chapter of quarrels was one of no small importance in Alfred's life; his difficult
      temper, and an ever increasing sense of neglected merit, frequently put him at war with
      publishers, editors, fellow authors, and he had an unhappy trick of exciting the hostility of
      men who were most likely to be useful to him. With Mr. Polo, for instance, who held him in
      esteem, and whose commercial success made him a valuable connection, Alfred ultimately broke
      on a trifling matter of personal dignity. Later came the great quarrel with Clement Fadge, an
      affair of considerable advantage in the way of advertisement to both the men concerned. It
      happened in the year 1873. At that time Yule was editor of a weekly paper called The
       Balance , a literary organ which
       aimed high, and failed to hit the circulation essential to its existence. Fadge,
      a younger man, did reviewing for The Balance ; he was in needy circumstances, and had
      wrought himself into Yule's good opinion by judicious flattery. But with a clear eye for the
      main chance Mr. Fadge soon perceived that Yule could only be of temporary use to him, and that
      the editor of a well-established weekly which lost no opportunity of throwing scorn upon Yule
      and all his works would be a much more profitable conquest. He succeeded in transferring his
      services to the more flourishing paper, and struck out a special line of work by the free
      exercise of a malicious flippancy which was then without rival in the periodical press. When
      he had thoroughly got his hand in, it fell to Mr. Fadge, in the mere way of business, to
      review a volume of his old editor's, a rather pretentious and long-winded but far from
      worthless essay 'On Imagination as a National Characteristic.' The notice was a masterpiece;
      its exquisite virulence set the literary circles chuckling. Concerning the authorship there
      was no mystery, and Alfred Yule had the indiscretion to make a violent reply, a savage assault
      upon Fadge, in the columns of The Balance . Fadge desired nothing better; the uproar
      which arose —
       chaff, fury, grave comments, sneering spite — could only result in drawing
      universal attention to his anonymous cleverness, and throwing ridicule upon the heavy,
      conscientious man. Well, you probably remember all about it. It ended in the disappearance of
      Yule's struggling paper, and the establishment on a firm basis of Fadge's reputation.
It would be difficult to mention any department of literary endeavour in which Yule did not,
      at one time or another, try his fortune. Turn to his name in the Museum Catalogue; the list of
      works appended to it will amuse you. In his thirtieth year he published a novel; it failed
      completely, and the same result awaited a similar experiment five years later. He wrote a
      drama of modern life, and for some years strove to get it acted, but in vain; finally it
      appeared 'for the closet' — giving Clement Fadge such an opportunity as he seldom enjoyed. The
      one noteworthy thing about these productions, and about others of equally mistaken direction,
      was the sincerity of their workmanship. Had Yule been content to manufacture a novel or a play
      with due disregard for literary honour, he might perchance have made a mercantile success; but
      the poor fellow had not pliancy enough for this.
       He took his efforts au grand sérieux ; thought he was producing works
      of art; pursued his ambition in a spirit of fierce conscientiousness. In spite of all, he
      remained only a journeyman. The kind of work he did best was poorly paid, and could bring no
      fame. At the age of fifty he was still living in a poor house, in an obscure quarter. He
      earned enough for his actual needs, and was under no pressing fear for the morrow, so long as
      his faculties remained unimpaired; but there was no disguising from himself that his life had
      been a failure. And the thought tormented him.
Now there had come unexpectedly a gleam of hope. If, indeed, the man Rackett thought of
      offering him the editorship of The Study he might even yet taste the triumphs for
      which he had so vehemently longed. The Study was a weekly paper of fair repute. Fadge
      had harmed it, no doubt of that, by giving it a tone which did not suit the majority of its
      readers — serious people, who thought that the criticism of contemporary writing offered an
      opportunity for something better than a display of malevolent wit. But a return to the old
      earnestness would doubtless set all right again. And the joy of sitting in that dictatorial
      chair! The delight of
       having his own organ once more, of making himself a power in the world of
      letters, of emphasising to a large audience his developed methods of criticism!
An embittered man is a man beset by evil temptations. The Study contained each week
      certain columns of flying gossip, and when he thought of this, Yule also thought of Clement
      Fadge and sundry other of his worst enemies. How the gossip column can be used for hostile
      purposes, yet without the least overt offence, he had learnt only too well. Sometimes the mere
      omission of a man's name from a list of authors can mortify and injure. In our day the
      manipulation of such paragraphs has become a fine art; but you recall numerous illustrations.
      Alfred knew well enough how incessantly the tempter would be at his ear; he said to himself
      that in certain instances yielding would be no dishonour. He himself had many a time been
      mercilessly treated; in the very interest of the public it was good that certain men should
      suffer a snubbing, and his fingers itched to have hold of the editorial pen. Ha, ha! Like the
      war-horse he snuffed the battle afar off.
No work this evening, though there were
       tasks which pressed for completion. His study — the only room on the ground
      level except the dining-room — was small, and even a good deal of the floor was encumbered
      with books, but he found space for walking nervously hither and thither. He was doing this
      when, about half-past nine, his wife appeared at the door, bringing him a cup of coffee and
      some biscuits, his wonted supper. Marian generally waited upon him at this time, and he asked
      why she had not come.
'She has one of her headaches again, I'm sorry to say,' Mrs. Yule replied. 'I persuaded her
      to go to bed early.'
Having placed the tray upon the table — books had to be pushed aside — she did not seem
      disposed to withdraw.
'Are you busy, Alfred?'
'Why?'
'I thought I should like just to speak of something.'
She was using the opportunity of his good humour. Yule spoke to her with the usual
      carelessness, but not forbiddingly.
'What is it? Those Holloway people, I'll warrant.'
'No, no! It's about Marian. She had a
       letter from one of those young ladies this afternoon.'
'What young ladies?' asked Yule, with impatience of this circuitous approach.
'The Miss Milvains.'
'Well, there's no harm that I know of. They're decent people.'
'Yes; so you told me. But she began to speak about their brother, and — '
'What about him? Do say what you want to say, and have done with it!'
'I can't help thinking, Alfred, that she's disappointed you didn't ask him to come
      here.'
Yule stared at her in slight surprise. He was still not angry, and seemed quite willing to
      consider this matter suggested to him so timorously.
'Oh, you think so? Well, I don't know. Why should I have asked him? It was only because Miss
      Harrow seemed to wish it that I saw him down there. I have no particular interest in him. And
      as for — '
He broke off and seated himself. Mrs. Yule stood at a distance.
'We must remember her age,' she said.
'Why yes, of course.'
He mused, and began to nibble a biscuit.

'And you know, Alfred, she never does meet any young men. I've often thought it wasn't right
      to her.'
'H'm! But this lad Milvain is a very doubtful sort of customer. To begin with, he has
      nothing, and they tell me his mother for the most part supports him. I don't quite approve of
      that. She isn't well off, and he ought to have been making a living by now. He has a kind of
      cleverness, may do something; but there's no being sure of that.'
These thoughts were not coming into his mind for the first time. On the occasion when he met
      Milvain and Marian together in the country road he had necessarily reflected upon the
      possibilities of such intercourse, and with the issue that he did not care to give any
      particular encouragement to its continuance. He of course heard of Milvain's leave-taking
      call, and he purposely refrained from seeing the young man after that. The matter took no very
      clear shape in his meditations; he saw no likelihood that either of the young people would
      think much of the other after their parting, and time enough to trouble one's head with such
      subjects when they could no longer be postponed. It would not have been pleasant to him to
       foresee a life of spinsterhood for his daughter; but she was young, and — she
      was a valuable assistant.
How far did that latter consideration weigh with him? He put the question pretty distinctly
      to himself now that his wife had broached the matter thus unexpectedly. Was he prepared to
      behave with deliberate selfishness? Never yet had any conflict been manifested between his
      interests and Marian's; practically he was in the habit of counting upon her aid for an
      indefinite period.
If indeed he became editor of The Study , why, in that case her assistance would be
      less needful. And indeed it seemed probable that young Milvain had a future before him.
'But, in any case,' he said aloud, partly continuing his thoughts, partly replying to a look
      of disappointment on his wife's face, 'how do you know that he has any wish to come and see
      Marian?'
'I don't know anything about it, of course.'
'And you may have made a mistake about her. What made you think she — had him in mind?'
'Well, it was her way of speaking, you know.
       And then, she asked if you had got a dislike to him.'
'She did? H'm! Well, I don't think Milvain is any good to Marian. He's just the kind of man
      to make himself agreeable to a girl for the fun of the thing.'
Mrs. Yule looked alarmed.
'Oh, if you really think that, don't let him come. I wouldn't for anything.'
'I don't say it for certain.' He took a sip of his coffee. 'I have had no opportunity of
      observing him with much attention. But he's not the kind of man I care for.'
'Then no doubt it's better as it is.'
'Yes. I don't see that anything could be done now. We shall see whether he gets on. I advise
      you not to mention him to her.'
'Oh no, I won't.'
She moved as if to go away, but her heart had been made uneasy by that short conversation
      which followed on Marian's reading the letter, and there were still things she wished to put
      into words.
'If those young ladies go on writing to her, I dare say they'll often speak about their
      brother.'
'Yes, it's rather unfortunate.'

'And you know, Alfred, he may have asked them to do it.'
'I suppose there's one subject on which all women can be subtle,' muttered Yule, smiling.
      The remark was not a kind one, but he did not make it worse by his tone.
The listener failed to understand him, and looked with her familiar expression of mental
      effort.
'We can't help that,' he added, with reference to her suggestion. 'If he has any serious
      thoughts, well, let him go on and wait for opportunities.'
'It's a great pity, isn't it, that she can't see more people — of the right kind?'
'No use talking about it. Things are as they are. I can't see that her life is unhappy.'
'It isn't very happy.'
'You think not?'
'I'm sure it isn't.'
'If I get The Study things may be different. Though — But it's no use talking about
      what can't be helped. Now don't you go encouraging her to think herself lonely, and so on.
      It's best for her to keep close to work, I'm sure of that.'
'Perhaps it is.'
'I'll think it over.'

Mrs. Yule silently left the room, and went back to her sewing.
She had understood that 'Though — ' and the 'what can't be helped.' Such allusions reminded
      her of a time unhappier than the present, when she had been wont to hear plainer language. She
      knew too well that, had she been a woman of education, her daughter would not now be suffering
      from loneliness.
It was her own choice that she did not go with her husband and Marian to John Yule's. She
      made an excuse that the house could not be left to one servant; but in any case she would have
      remained at home, for her presence must needs be an embarrassment both to father and daughter.
      Alfred was always ashamed of her before strangers; he could not conceal his feeling, either
      from her or from other people who had reason for observing him. Marian was not perhaps
      ashamed, but such companionship put restraint upon her freedom. And would it not always be the
      same? Supposing Mr. Milvain were to come to this house, would it not repel him when he found
      what sort of person Marian's mother was?
She shed a few tears over her needlework.
At midnight the study door opened. Yule
       came to the dining-room to see that all was right, and it surprised him to find
      his wife still sitting there.
'Why are you so late?'
'I've forgot the time.'
'Forgotten, forgotten. Don't go back to that kind of language again. Come, put the light
      out.'

</div></body></text></TEI>