<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>New Grub Street: A Novel</title><author>Gissing, George (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1891</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="36">
CHAPTER XXXVI JASPER'S DELICATE CASE
Only when he received Miss Rupert's amiably-worded refusal to become his wife was
      Jasper aware how firmly he had counted on her accepting him. He told Dora with sincerity that
      his proposal was a piece of foolishness; so far from having any regard for Miss Rupert, he
      felt towards her with something of antipathy, and at the same time he was conscious of ardent
      emotions, if not love, for another woman who would be no bad match even from the commercial
      point of view. Yet so strong was the effect upon him of contemplating a large fortune, that,
      in despite of reason and desire, he lived in eager expectation of the word which should make
      him rich. And for several hours after his disappointment he could not overcome the impression
      of calamity.
A part of that impression was due to the engagement which he must now fulfil. He had
       pledged his word to ask Marian to marry him without further delay. To shuffle
      out of this duty would make him too ignoble even in his own eyes. Its discharge meant, as he
      had expressed it, that he was 'doomed'; he would deliberately be committing the very error
      always so flagrant to him in the case of other men who had crippled themselves by early
      marriage with a penniless woman. But events had enmeshed him; circumstances had proved fatal.
      Because, in his salad days, he dallied with a girl who had indeed many charms, step by step he
      had come to the necessity of sacrificing his prospects to that raw attachment. And, to make it
      more irritating, this happened just when the way began to be much clearer before him.
Unable to think of work, he left the house and wandered gloomily about Regent's Park. For
      the first time in his recollection the confidence which was wont to inspirit him gave way to
      an attack of sullen discontent. He felt himself ill-used by destiny, and therefore by Marian,
      who was fate's instrument. It was not in his nature that this mood should last long, but it
      revealed to him those darker possibilities which his egoism would develop if it came seriously
      into conflict with overmastering misfortune. A
       hope, a craven hope, insinuated itself into the cracks of his infirm resolve. He
      would not examine it, but conscious of its existence he was able to go home in somewhat better
      spirits.
He wrote to Marian. If possible she was to meet him at half-past nine next morning at
      Gloucester Gate. He had reasons for wishing this interview to take place on neutral
      ground.
Early in the afternoon, when he was trying to do some work, there arrived a letter which he
      opened with impatient hand; the writing was Mrs. Reardon's, and he could not guess what she
      had to communicate.
' Dear Mr. Milvain , — I am distressed beyond measure to read in this morning's
      newspaper that poor Mr. Biffen has put an end to his life. Doubtless you can obtain more
      details than are given in this bare report of the discovery of his body. Will you let me hear,
      or come and see me?'
He read and was astonished. Absorbed in his own affairs, he had not opened the newspaper
      to-day; it lay folded on a chair. Hastily he ran his eye over the columns, and found at length
      a short paragraph which stated that the body of a man who had evidently committed suicide by
      taking poison had been found on
       Putney Heath; that papers in his pockets identified him as one Harold Biffen,
      lately resident in Goodge Street, Tottenham Court Road; and that an inquest would be held,
      etc. He went to Dora's room, and told her of the event, but without mentioning the letter
      which had brought it under his notice.
'I suppose there was no alternative between that and starvation. I scarcely thought of
      Biffen as likely to kill himself. If Reardon had done it, I shouldn't have felt the least
      surprise.'
'Mr. Whelpdale will be bringing us information, no doubt,' said Dora, who, as she spoke,
      thought more of that gentleman's visit than of the event that was to occasion it.
'Really, one can't grieve. There seemed no possibility of his ever earning enough to live
      decently upon. But why the deuce did he go all the way out there? Consideration for the people
      in whose house he lived, I dare say; Biffen had a good deal of native delicacy.'
Dora felt a secret wish that someone else possessed more of that desirable quality.
Leaving her, Jasper made a rapid, though careful, toilet, and was presently on his way to
      Westbourne Park. It was his hope that he should reach Mrs. Yule's house before any ordinary
       afternoon caller could arrive; and so he did. He had not been here since that
      evening when he encountered Reardon on the road and heard his reproaches. To his great
      satisfaction, Amy was alone in the drawing-room; he held her hand a trifle longer than was
      necessary, and returned more earnestly the look of interest with which she regarded him.
'I was ignorant of this affair when your letter came,' he began, 'and I set out immediately
      to see you.'
'I hoped you would bring me some news. What can have driven the poor man to such
      extremity?'
'Poverty, I can only suppose. But I will see Whelpdale. I hadn't come across Biffen for a
      long time.'
'Was he still so very poor?' asked Amy, compassionately.
'I'm afraid so. His book failed utterly.'
'Oh, if I had imagined him still in such distress, surely I might have done something to
      help him!' — So often the regretful remark of one's friends, when one has been permitted to
      perish.
With Amy's sorrow was mingled a suggestion of tenderness which came of her knowledge that
       the dead man had worshipped her. Perchance his death was in part attributable to
      that hopeless love.
'He sent me a copy of his novel,' she said, 'and I saw him once or twice after that. But he
      was much better dressed than in former days, and I thought — '
Having this subject to converse upon put the two more quickly at ease than could otherwise
      have been the case. Jasper was closely observant of the young widow; her finished graces made
      a strong appeal to his admiration, and even in some degree awed him. He saw that her beauty
      had matured, and it was more distinctly than ever of the type to which he paid reverence. Amy
      might take a foremost place among brilliant women. At a dinner-table, in grand toilet, she
      would be superb; at polite receptions people would whisper: 'Who is that?'
Biffen fell out of the dialogue.
'It grieved me very much,' said Amy, 'to hear of the misfortune that befell my cousin.'
'The legacy affair? Why, yes, it was a pity, Especially now that her father is threatened
      with blindeness.'
'Is it so serious? I heard indirectly that he
       had something the matter with his eyes, but I didn't know — '
'They may be able to operate before long, and perhaps it will be successful. But in the
      meantime Marian has to do his work.'
'This explains the — the delay?' fell from Amy's lips, as she smiled.
Jasper moved uncomfortably. It was a voluntary gesture.
'The whole situation explains it,' he replied, with some show of impulsiveness. 'I am very
      much afraid Marian is tied during her father's life.'
'Indeed? But there is her mother.'
'No companion for her father, as I think you know. Even if Mr. Yule recovers his sight, it
      is not at all likely that he will be able to work as before. Our difficulties are so grave
      that — '
He paused, and let his hand fall despondently.
'I hope it isn't affecting your work — your progress?'
'To some extent, necessarily. I have a good deal of will, you remember, and what I have set
      my mind upon, no doubt, I shall some day achieve. But — one makes mistakes.'
There was silence.

'The last three years,' he continued, 'have made no slight difference in my position. Recall
      where I stood when you first knew me. I have done something since then, I think, and by my own
      steady effort.'
'Indeed, you have.'
'Just now I am in need of a little encouragement. You don't notice any falling off in my
      work recently?'
'No, indeed.'
'Do you see my things in The Current and so on, generally?'
'I don't think I miss many of your articles. Sometimes I believe I have detected you when
      there was no signature.'
'And Dora has been doing well. Her story in that girls' paper has attracted attention. It's
      a great deal to have my mind at rest about both the girls. But I can't pretend to be in very
      good spirits.' He rose. 'Well, I must try to find out something more about poor Biffen.'
'Oh, you are not going yet, Mr. Milvain?'
'Not, assuredly, because I wish to. But I have work to do.' He stepped aside, but came back
      as if on an impulse. 'May I ask you for your advice in a very delicate matter?'
Amy was a little disturbed, but she collected
       herself and smiled in a way that reminded Jasper of his walk with her along
      Gower Street.
'Let me hear what it is.'
He sat down again, and bent forward.
'If Marian insists that it is her duty to remain with her father, am I justified or not in
      freely consenting to that?'
'I scarcely understand. Has Marian expressed a wish to devote herself in that way?'
'Not distinctly. But I suspect that her conscience points to it. I am in serious doubt. On
      the one hand,' he explained in a tone of candour, 'who will not blame me if our engagement
      terminates in circumstances such as these? On the other — you are aware, by-the-by, that her
      father objects in the strongest way to this marriage?'
'No, I didn't know that.' 'He will neither see me nor hear of me. Merely because of my
      connection with Fadge. Think of that poor girl thus situated. And I could so easily put her at
      rest by renouncing all claim upon her.'
'I surmise that — that you yourself would also be put at rest by such a decision?'
'Don't look at me with that ironical smile,' he pleaded. 'What you have said is true. And
       really, why should I not be glad of it? I couldn't go about declaring that I was
      heart-broken, in any event; I must be content for people to judge me according to their
      disposition, and judgments are pretty sure to be unfavourable. What can I do? In either case I
      must to a certain extent be in the wrong. To tell the truth, I was wrong from the first.'
There was a slight movement about Amy's lips as these words were uttered: she kept her eyes
      down, and waited before replying.
'The case is too delicate, I fear, for my advice.'
'Yes, I feel it; and perhaps I oughtn't to have spoken of it at all. Well, I'll go back to
      my scribbling. I am so very glad to have seen you again.'
'It was good of you to take the trouble to come — whilst you have so much on your mind.'
Again Jasper held the white, soft hand for a superfluous moment.
The next morning it was he who had to wait at the rendezvous; he was pacing the pathway at
      least ten minutes before the appointed time. When Marian joined him, she was panting from a
      hurried walk, and this affected Jasper disagreeably; he thought of Amy Reardon's air of
      repose,
       and how impossible it would be for that refined person to fall into such
      disorder. He observed, too, with more disgust than usual, the signs in Marian's attire of
      encroaching poverty — her unsatisfactory gloves, her mantle out of fashion. Yet for such
      feelings he reproached himself, and the reproach made him angry.
They walked together in the same direction as when they met here before. Marian could not
      mistake the air of restless trouble on her companion's smooth countenance. She had divined
      that there was some grave reason for this summons, and the panting with which she had
      approached was half caused by the anxious beats of her heart. Jasper's long silence again was
      ominous. He began abruptly:
'You've heard that Harold Biffen has committed suicide?'
'No!' she replied, looking shocked.
'Poisoned himself. You'll find something about it in to-day's Telegraph .'
He gave her such details as he had obtained, then added:
'There are two of my companions fallen in the battle. I ought to think myself a lucky
      fellow, Marian. What?'

'You are better fitted to fight your way, Jasper.'
'More of a brute, you mean.'
'You know very well I don't. You have more energy and more intellect.'
'Well, it remains to be seen how I shall come out when I am weighted with graver cares than
      I have yet known.'
She looked at him inquiringly, but said nothing.
'I have made up my mind about our affairs,' he went on presently. 'Marian, if ever we are to
      be married, it must be now.'
The words were so unexpected that they brought a flush to her cheeks and neck.
'Now?'
'Yes. Will you marry me, and let us take our chance?'
Her heart throbbed violently.
'You don't mean at once, Jasper? You would wait until I know what father's fate is to
      be?'
'Well, now, there's the point. You feel yourself indispensable to your father at
      present?'
'Not indispensable, but — wouldn't it seem very unkind? I should be so afraid of the
       effect upon his health, Jasper. So much depends, we are told, upon his general
      state of mind and body. It would be dreadful if I were the cause of — '
She paused, and looked up at him touchingly.
'I understand that. But let us face our position. Suppose the operation is successful; your
      father will certainly not be able to use his eyes much for a long time, if ever; and perhaps
      he would miss you as much then as now. Suppose he does not regain his sight; could
      you then leave him?'
'Dear, I can't feel it would be my duty to renounce you because my father had become blind.
      And if he can see pretty well, I don't think I need remain with him.'
'Has one thing occurred to you? Will he consent to receive an allowance from a person whose
      name is Mrs. Milvain?'
'I can't be sure,' she replied, much troubled.
'And if he obstinately refuses — what then? What is before him?'
Marian's head sank, and she stood still.
'Why have you changed your mind so, Jasper?' she inquired at length.
'Because I have decided that the indefinitely
       long engagement would be unjust to you — and to myself. Such engagements are
      always dangerous; sometimes they deprave the character of the man or woman.'
She listened anxiously and reflected.
'Everything,' he went on, 'would be simple enough but for your domestic difficulties. As I
      have said, there is the very serious doubt whether your father would accept money from you
      when you are my wife. Then again, shall we be able to afford such an allowance?'
'I thought you felt sure of that?'
'I'm not very sure of anything, to tell the truth. I am harassed. I can't get on with my
      work.'
'I am very, very sorry.'
'It isn't your fault, Marian, and — Well, then, there's only one thing to do. Let us wait,
      at all events, till your father has undergone the operation. Whichever the result, you say
      your own position will be the same.'
'Except, Jasper, that if father is helpless, I must find means of assuring his
      support.'
'In other words, if you can't do that as my wife, you must remain Marian Yule.'
After a silence, Marian regarded him steadily.

'You see only the difficulties in our way,' she said, in a colder voice. 'They are many, I
      know. Do you think them insurmountable?'
'Upon my word, they almost seem so,' Jasper exclaimed, distractedly.
'They were not so great when we spoke of marriage a few years hence.'
'A few years!' he echoed, in a cheerless voice. 'That is just what I have decided is
      impossible. Marian, you shall have the plain truth. I can trust your faith, but I can't trust
      my own. I will marry you now, but — years hence — how can I tell what may happen? I don't
      trust myself.'
'You say you "will" marry me now; that sounds as if you had made up your mind to a
      sacrifice.'
'I didn't mean that. To face difficulties, yes.'
Whilst they spoke, the sky had grown dark with a heavy cloud, and now spots of rain began to
      fall. Jasper looked about him in annoyance as he felt the moisture, but Marian did not seem
      aware of it.
'But shall you face them willingly?'
'I am not a man to repine and grumble. Put up your umbrella, Marian.'

'What do I care for a drop of rain,' she exclaimed with passionate sadness, 'when all my
      life is at stake! How am I to understand you? Every word you speak seems intended to
      dishearten me. Do you no longer love me? Why need you conceal it, if that is the truth? Is
      that what you mean by saying you distrust yourself? If you do so, there must be reason for it
      in the present. Could I distrust myself ? Can I force myself in any manner to believe
      that I shall ever cease to love you?'
Jasper opened his umbrella.
'We must see each other again, Marian. We can't stand and talk in the rain — confound it!
      Cursed climate, where you can never be sure of a clear sky for five minutes!'
'I can't go till you have spoken more plainly, Jasper! How am I to live an hour in
      such uncertainty as this? Do you love me or not? Do you wish me to be your wife, or are you
      sacrificing yourself?'
'I do wish it!' Her emotion had an effect upon him, and his voice trembled. 'But I can't
      answer for myself — no, not for a year. And how are we to marry now, in face of all these —
      '
'What can I do? What can I do?' she
       sobbed. 'Oh, if I were but heartless to everyone but to you! If I could give you
      my money, and leave my father and mother to their fate! Perhaps some could do that. There is
      no natural law that a child should surrender everything for her parents. You know so much more
      of the world than I do; can't you advise me? Is there no way of providing for my father?'
'Good God! This is frightful, Marian. I can't stand it. Live as you are doing. Let us wait
      and see.'
'At the cost of losing you?'
'I will be faithful to you!'
'And your voice says you promise it out of pity.'
He had made a pretence of holding his umbrella over her, but Marian turned away and walked
      to a little distance, and stood beneath the shelter of a great tree, her face averted from
      him. Moving to follow, he saw that her frame was shaken with soundless sobbing. When his
      footsteps came close to her, she again looked at him.
'I know now,' she said, 'how foolish it is when they talk of love being unselfish. In what
      can there be more selfishness? I feel as
       if I could hold you to your promise at any cost, though you have made me
      understand that you regard our engagement as your great misfortune. I have felt it for weeks —
      oh, for months! But I couldn't say a word that would seem to invite such misery as this. You
      don't love me, Jasper, and that's an end of everything. I should be shamed if I married
      you.'
'Whether I love you or not, I feel as if no sacrifice would be too great that would bring
      you the happiness you deserve.'
'Deserve!' she repeated bitterly. 'Why do I deserve it? Because I long for it with all my
      heart and soul? There's no such thing as deserving. Happiness or misery come to us by
      fate.'
'Is it in my power to make you happy?'
'No; because it isn't in your power to call dead love to life again. I think perhaps you
      never loved me. Jasper, I could give my right hand if you had said you loved me before — I
      can't put it into words; it sounds too base, and I don't wish to imply that you behaved
      basely. But if you had said you loved me before that, I should have it always to
      remember.'
'You will do me no wrong if you charge me with baseness,' he replied gloomily. 'If I believe
       anything, I believe that I did love you. But I knew myself, and I should never
      have betrayed what I felt, if for once in my life I could have been honourable.'
The rain pattered on the leaves and the grass, and still the sky darkened.
'This is wretchedness to both of us,' Jasper added. 'Let us part now, Marian. Let me see you
      again.'
'I can't see you again. What can you say to me more than you have said now? I should feel
      like a beggar coming to you. I must try and keep some little self-respect, if I am to live at
      all.'
'Then let me help you to think of me with indifference. Remember me as a man who disregarded
      priceless love such as yours to go and make himself a proud position among fools and knaves —
      indeed that's what it comes to. It is you who reject me, and rightly. One who is so much at
      the mercy of a vulgar ambition as I am, is no fit husband for you. Soon enough you would
      thoroughly despise me, and though I should know it was merited, my perverse pride
      would revolt against it. Many a time I have tried to regard life practically as I am able to
      do theoretically, but it always ends in
       hypocrisy. It is men of my kind who succeed; the conscientious, and those who
      really have a high ideal, either perish or struggle on in neglect.'
Marian had overcome her excess of emotion.
'There is no need to disparage yourself,' she said. 'What can be simpler than the truth? You
      loved me, or thought you did, and now you love me no longer. It is a thing that happens every
      day, either in man or woman, and all that honour demands is the courage to confess the truth.
      Why didn't you tell me as soon as you knew that I was burdensome to you?'
'Marian, will you do this? — will you let our engagement last for another six months, but
      without our meeting during that time?'
'But to what purpose?'
'Then we would see each other again, and both would be able to speak calmly, and we should
      both know with certainty what course we ought to pursue.'
'That seems to me childish. It is easy for you to contemplate months of postponement. There
      must be an end now; I can bear it no longer.'
The rain fell unceasingly, and with it
       began to mingle an autumnal mist. Jasper delayed a moment, then asked
      calmly:
'Are you going to the Museum?'
'Yes.'
'Go home again for this morning, Marian. You can't work — '
'I must; and I have no time to lose. Good-bye!'
She gave him her hand. They looked at each other for an instant, then Marian left the
      shelter of the tree, opened her umbrella, and walked quickly away. Jasper did not watch her;
      he had the face of a man who is suffering a severe humiliation.
A few hours later he told Dora what had come to pass, and without extenuation of his own
      conduct. His sister said very little, for she recognised genuine suffering in his tones and
      aspect. But when it was over, she sat down and wrote to Marian.
'I feel far more disposed to congratulate you than to regret what has happened. Now that
      there is no necessity for silence, I will tell you something which will help you to see Jasper
      in his true light. A few weeks ago he actually proposed to a woman for whom he does not
      pretend to have the slightest affection, but who
       is very rich, and who seemed likely to be foolish enough to marry him. Yesterday
      morning he received her final answer — a refusal. I am not sure that I was right in keeping
      this a secret from you, but I might have done harm by interfering. You will
      understand (though surely you need no fresh proof) how utterly unworthy he is of you. You
      cannot, I am sure you cannot, regard it as a misfortune that all is over between you. Dearest
      Marian, do not cease to think of me as your friend because my brother has disgraced himself.
      If you can't see me, at least let us write to each other. You are the only friend I have of my
      own sex, and I could not bear to lose you.'
And much more of the same tenor.
Several days passed before there came a reply. It was written with undisturbed kindness of
      feeling, but in few words.
'For the present we cannot see each other, but I am very far from wishing that our
      friendship should come to an end. I must only ask that you will write to me without the least
      reference to these troubles; tell me always about yourself, and be sure that you cannot tell
      me too much. I hope you may soon be able to send me the news which was foreshadowed in
       our last talk — though "foreshadowed" is a wrong word to use of coming
      happiness, isn't it? That paper I sent to Mr. Trenchard is accepted, and I shall be glad to
      have your criticism when it comes out; don't spare my style, which needs a great deal of
      chastening. I have been thinking: couldn't you use your holiday in Sark for a story? To judge
      from your letters, you could make an excellent background of word-painting.'
Dora sighed, and shook her little head, and thought of her brother with unspeakable
      disdain.

</div></body></text></TEI>