<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Daphne, or Marriage a la Mode : VWWP
      edition</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1909</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">

CHAPTER XI
DAPHNE'S purpose in quitting the hotel had been to find her way up the river by the
      road which runs along the gorge on the Canadian side, from the hotel to the Canadian Fall.
      Thick as the fog still was in the gorge she hoped to find some clearer air beyond it. She felt
      oppressed and stifled; and though she had told Madeleine that she was going out in search of
      effects and spectacle, it was in truth the neighbourhood of Alfred Boyson which had made her
      restless.
The road was lit at intervals by electric lamps, but after a time she found the passage of
      it not particularly easy. Some repairs to the tramway lines were going on higher up, and she
      narrowly escaped various pitfalls in the shape of trenches and holes in the roadway, very
      insufficiently marked by feeble lamps. But the stir in her blood drove her on; so did the
      strangeness of this white darkness, suffused with moonlight, yet, in this immediate
      neighbourhood of the Falls, impenetrable. She was impatient to get through it; to breathe an
      unembarrassed air.

The roar at her left hand grew wilder. She had reached a point some distance from the hotel,
      close to the jutting corner, once open, now walled and protected, where the traveller
      approaches nearest to the edge of the Canadian Fall. She knew the spot well, and groping for
      the wall, she stood breathless and spray-beaten beside the gulf.
Only a few yards from her the vast sheet of water descended. She could see nothing of it,
      but the wind of its mighty plunge blew back her hair, and her mackintosh cloak was soon
      dripping with the spray. Once, far away, above the Falls, she seemed to perceive a few dim
      lights along the bend of the river; perhaps from one of the great power-houses that tame to
      man's service the spirits of the water. Otherwise—nothing! She was alone with the perpetual
      challenge and fascination of the Falls.
As she stood there she was seized by a tragic recollection. It was from this spot, so she
      believed, that Leopold Verrier had thrown himself over. The body had been carried down through
      the rapids, and recovered, terribly injured, in the deep eddying pool which the river makes
      below them. He had left no letter or message of any sort behind him. But the reasons for his
      suicide were clearly understood by a large public, whose main verdict
       upon it was the quiet “What else could he do?”
Here, then, on this very spot, he had stood before his leap. Daphne had heard him described
      by various spectators of the marriage. He had been, it seemed, a man of sensitive temperament,
      who should have been an artist and was a man of business; a considerable musician, and
      something of a poet; proud of his race and faith and himself irreproachable, yet perpetually
      wounded through his family, which bore a name of ill-repute in the New York business world;
      passionately grateful to his wife for having married him, delighting in her beauty and charm,
      and foolishly, abjectly eager to heap upon her and their child everything that wealth could
      buy.
“It was Madeleine's mother who made it hopeless,” thought Daphne. “But for Mrs. Fanshaw—it
      might have lasted.”
And memory called up Mrs. Fanshaw, the beautifully dressed woman of fifty, with her pride of
      wealth and family, belonging to the strictest sect of New York's social élite, with her hard, fastidious face, her formidable elegance and
      self-possession. How she had loathed the marriage! And with what a harpy-like eagerness had
      she seized on the first signs of Madeleine's discontent and ennui; persuaded her to come home; prepared the divorce; poisoned public
       opinion. It was from a last interview with Mrs. Fanshaw
      that Leopold Verrier had gone straight to his death. What was it that she had said to him?
Daphne lingered on the question; haunted, too, by other stray recollections of the dismal
      story—the doctor driving by in the early morning who had seen the fall; the discovery of the
      poor broken body; Madeleine's blanched stoicism, under the fierce coercion of her mother; and
      that strong, silent, slow-setting tide of public condemnation, which in this instance, at
      least, had avenged a cruel act.
But at this point Daphne ceased to think about her friend. She found herself suddenly
      engaged in a heated self-defence. What comparison could there be between her case and
      Madeleine's?
Fiercely she found herself going through the list of Roger's crimes; his idleness, treachery
      and deceit; his lack of any high ideals; his bad influence on the child; his luxurious
      self-indulgent habits, the lies he had told, the insults he had offered her. By now the story
      had grown to a lurid whole in her imagination, based on a few distorted facts, yet radically
      and monstrously untrue. Generally, however, when she dwelt upon it, it had power to soothe any
      smart of conscience, to harden any yearning of the heart, supposing
       she felt any. And by now she had almost ceased to feel
      any.
But to-night she was mysteriously shaken and agitated. As she clung to the wall, which alone
      separated her from the echoing gulf beyond, she could not prevent herself from thinking of
      Roger, Roger as he was when Alfred Boyson introduced him to her, when they first married, and
      she had been blissfully happy; happy in the possession of such a god-like creature, in the
      envy of other women, in the belief that he was growing more and more truly attached to
      her.
Her thoughts broke abruptly. “He married me for money!” cried the inward voice. Then she
      felt her cheeks tingling as she remembered her conversation with Madeleine on that very
      subject—how she had justified what she was now judging—how plainly she had understood and
      condoned it.
“That was my inexperience! Besides, I knew nothing then of Chloe Fairmile. If I had—I should
      never have done it.”
She turned, startled. Steps seemed to be approaching her, of someone as yet invisible. Her
      nerves were all on edge, and she felt suddenly frightened. Strangers of all kinds visit and
      hang about Niagara; she was quite alone, known to be the rich Mrs. Floyd; if she were
      attacked—set upon—
The outline of a man's form emerged; she
       heard her name, or rather the name she had renounced.
“I saw you come in this direction, Mrs. Barnes. I knew the road was up in some places, and I
      thought in this fog you would allow me to warn you that walking was not very safe.”
The voice was Captain Boyson's; and they were now plain to each other as they stood a couple
      of yards apart. The fog, however, was at last slightly breaking. There was a gleam over the
      nearer water; not merely the lights, but the span of the bridge had begun to appear.
Daphne composed herself with an effort.
“I am greatly obliged to you,” she said in her most freezing manner. “But I found no
      difficulty at all in getting through, and the fog is lifting.”
With a stiff inclination she turned in the direction of the hotel, but Captain Boyson stood
      in her way. She saw a face embarrassed yet resolved.
“Mrs. Barnes, may I speak to you a few minutes?”
Daphne gave a slight laugh.
“I don't see how I can prevent it. So you didn't follow me, Captain Boyson, out of mere
      regard for my personal safety?”
“If I hadn't come myself I should have
       sent someone,” he replied quietly. “The hotel people were
      anxious. But I wished to come myself. I confess I had a very strong desire to speak to
      you.”
“There seems to be nothing and no one to interfere with it,” said Daphne, in a tone of
      sarcasm. “I should be glad, however, with your permission, to turn homeward. I see Mrs. Boyson
      is here. You are, I suppose, on your wedding journey?”
He moved out of her path, said a few conventional words, and they walked on. A light wind
      had risen and the fog was now breaking rapidly. As it gave way, the moonlight poured into the
      breaches that the wind made; the vast black-and-silver spectacle, the Falls, the gorge, the
      town opposite, the bridge, the clouds, began to appear in fragments, grandiose and
      fantastical.
Daphne, presently, seeing that Boyson was slow to speak, raised her eyebrows and attempted a
      remark on the scene. Boyson interrupted her hurriedly.
“I imagine, Mrs. Barnes, that what I wish to say will seem to you a piece of insolence. All
      the same, for the sake of our former friendship, I would ask you to bear with me.”
“By all means!”
“I had no idea that you were in the hotel. About half an hour ago, on the verandah, I
       opened an English letter which arrived this evening. The
      news in it gave me great concern. Then I saw you appear, to my astonishment, in the distance.
      I asked the hotel manager if it were really you. He was about to send someone after you. An
      idea occurred to me. I saw my opportunity—and I pursued you.”
“And here I am, at your mercy!” said Daphne, with sudden sharpness. “You have left me no
      choice. However, I am quite willing.”
The voice was familiar yet strange. There was in it the indefinable hardening and ageing
      which seemed to Boyson to have affected the whole personality. What had happened to her? As he
      looked at her in the dim light there rushed upon them both the memory of those three weeks by
      the sea-side years before, when he had fallen in love with her, and she had first trifled
      with, and then repulsed him.
“I wished to ask you a question, in the name of our old friendship; and because I have also
      become a friend—as you know—of your husband.”
He felt, rather than saw, the start of anger in the woman beside him.
“Captain Boyson! I cannot defend myself, but I would ask you to recognise ordinary
      courtesies. I have now no husband.”

“Of your husband,” he repeated, without hesitation, yet gently. “By the law of England at
      least, which you accepted, and under which you became a British subject, you are still the
      wife of Roger Barnes, and he has done nothing whatever to forfeit his right to your wifely
      care. It is indeed of him and of his present state that I beg to be allowed to speak to
      you.”
He heard a little laugh beside him—unsteady and hysterical.
“You beg for what you have already taken. I repeat, I am at your mercy. An American subject,
      Captain Boyson, knows nothing of the law of England. I have recovered my American citizenship,
      and the law of my country has freed me from a degrading and disastrous marriage!”
“While Roger remains bound? Incapable, at the age of thirty, of marrying again, unless he
      renounces his country—permanently debarred from home and children!”
His pulse ran quick. It was a strange adventure, this, to which he had committed
      himself!
“I have nothing to do with English law, nothing whatever! It is unjust, monstrous. But that
      was no reason why I, too, should suffer!”
“No reason for patience? No reason for pity?” said the man's voice, betraying emotion
       at last. “Mrs. Barnes, what do you know of Roger's present
      state?”
“I have no need to know anything.”
“It matters nothing to you? Nothing to you that he has lost health, and character, and
      happiness, his child, his home, everything, owing to your action?”
“Captain Boyson!” she cried, her composure giving way, “this is intolerable, outrageous! It
      is humiliating that you should even expect me to argue with you. Yet,” she bit her lip, angry
      with the agitation that would assail her, “for the sake of our friendship to which you appeal,
      I would rather not be angry. What you say is monstrous!” her voice shook. “In the first place,
      I freed myself from a man who married me for money.”
“One moment! Do you forget that from the day you left him Roger has never touched a farthing
      of your money? That he returned everything to you?”
“I had nothing to do with that; it was his own folly.”
“Yes, but it throws light upon his character. Would a mere fortune-hunter have done it? No,
      Mrs. Barnes!—that view of Roger does not really convince you, you do not really believe
      it.”
She smiled bitterly.
“As it happens, in his letters to me after I left him, he amply confessed it.”

“Because his wish was to make peace, to throw himself at your feet. He accused himself, more
      than was just. But you do not really think him mercenary and greedy, you know
      that he was neither! Mrs. Barnes, Roger is ill and lonely.”
“His mode of life accounts for it.”
“You mean that he has begun to drink, has fallen into bad company. That may be true. I
      cannot deny it. But consider. A man from whom everything is torn at one blow; a man of not
      very strong character, not accustomed to endure hardness.—Does it never occur to you that you
      took a frightful responsibility?”
“I protected myself—and my child.”
He breathed deep.
“Or rather—did you murder a life—that God had given you in trust?”
He paused, and she paused also, as though held by the power of his will. They were passing
      along the public garden that borders the road; scents of lilac and fresh leaf floated over the
      damp grass; the moonlight was growing in strength, and the majesty of the gorge, the roar of
      the leaping water, all seemed to enter into the moral and human scene, to accent and deepen
      it.
Daphne suddenly clung to a seat beside the path, dropped into it.

“Captain Boyson! I—I cannot bear this any longer.”
“I will not reproach you any more,” he said, quietly. “I beg your pardon. The past is
      irrevocable, but the present is here. The man who loved you, the father of your child, is
      alone, ill, poor, in danger of moral ruin, because of what you have done. I ask you to go to
      his aid. But first let me tell you exactly what I have just heard from England.” He repeated
      the greater part of French's letter, so far as it concerned Roger.
“He has his mother,” said Daphne, when he paused, speaking with evident physical
      difficulty.
“Lady Barnes I hear had a paralytic stroke two months ago. She is incapable of giving advice
      or help.”
“Of course, I am sorry. But Herbert French—”
“No one but a wife could save him—no one!” he repeated with emphasis.
“I am not his wife!” she insisted faintly. “I released myself by American law.
      He is nothing to me.” As she spoke she leant back against the seat and closed her eyes. Boyson
      saw clearly that excitement and anger had struck down her nervous power, that she might faint
      or go into hysterics. Yet a man of remarkable courtesy and pitifulness towards
       women was not thereby moved from his purpose. He had his
      chance; he could not relinquish it. Only there was something now in her attitude which
      recalled the young Daphne of years ago; which touched his heart.
He sat down beside her.
“Bear with me, Mrs. Barnes, for a few moments, while I put it as it appears to another mind.
      You became first jealous of Roger, for very small reason, then tired of him. Your marriage no
      longer satisfied you—you resolved to be quit of it; so you appealed to laws of which, as a
      nation, we are ashamed, which all that is best among us will, before long, rebel against and
      change. Our State system permits them—America suffers. In this case—forgive me if I put it
      once more as it appears to me—they have been used to strike at an Englishman who had
      absolutely no defence, no redress. And now you are free; he remains bound—so long, at least,
      as you form no other tie. Again I ask you, have you ever let yourself face what it means to a
      man of thirty to be cut off from lawful marriage and legitimate children?—Mrs. Barnes! you
      know what a man is, his strength and his weakness. Are you really willing that Roger should
      sink into degradation in order that you may punish him for some offence to your pride or your
      feeling? It may be too late! He may, as French fears, have fallen into
       some fatal entanglement; it may not be possible to restore
      his health. He may not be able”—he hesitated, then brought the words out firmly—“to forgive
      you. Or again, French's anxieties about him may be unfounded. But for God's sake go to him!
      Once on English ground you are his wife again as though nothing had happened. For God's sake
      put everything aside but the thought of the vow you once made to him! Go back! I implore you,
      go back! I promise you that no happiness you have ever felt will be equal to the happiness
      that step would bring you, if only you are permitted to save him.”
Daphne was by now shaking from head to foot. The force of feeling which impelled him so
      mastered her that when he gravely took her hand she did not withdraw it. She had a strange
      sense of having at last discovered the true self of the quiet, efficient, unpretending man she
      had known for so long and cast so easily aside. There was shock and excitement in it, as there
      is in all trials of strength between a man and a woman. She tried to hate and despise him, but
      she could not achieve it. She longed to answer and crush him, but her mind was a blank, her
      tongue refused its office. Surprise, resentment, wounded feeling made a tumult and darkness
      through which she could not find her way.

She rose at last painfully from her seat.
“This conversation must end,” she said brokenly. “Captain Boyson, I appeal to you as a
      gentleman, let me go on alone.”
He looked at her sadly and stood aside. But as he saw her move uncertainly towards a portion
      of the road where various trenches and pits made walking difficult, he darted after her.
“Please!” he said peremptorily; “this bit is unsafe.”
He drew her hand within his arm and guided her. As he did so he saw that she was crying; no
      doubt, as he rightly guessed, from shaken nerves and wounded pride; for it did not seem to him
      that she had yielded at all. But this time he felt distress and compunction.
“Forgive me!” he said, bending over her. “But think of what I have said—I beg of you! Be
      kind, be merciful!”
She made various attempts to speak, and at last she said, “I bear you no malice. But you
      don't understand me, you never have.”
He offered no reply. They had reached the courtyard of the hotel. Daphne withdrew her hand.
      When she reached the steps she preceded him without looking back, and was soon lost to
      sight.
Boyson shook his head, lit a cigar, and spent some time longer pacing up and down the
       verandah. When he went to his wife's room he found her
      asleep, a vision of soft youth and charm. He stood a few moments looking down upon her,
      wondering in himself at what he had done. Yet he knew very well that it was the stirring and
      deepening of his whole being produced by love that had impelled him to do it.
Next morning he told his wife.
“Do you suppose I produced any effect?” he asked her anxiously. “If she really
      thinks over what I said, she must be touched! unless she's made of flint. I said
      all the wrong things—but I did rub it in.”
“I'm sure you did,” said his wife, smiling. Then she looked at him with a critical
      tenderness.
“You dear optimist!” she cried, and slipped her hand into his.
“That means you think I behaved like a fool, and that my appeal won't move her in the
      least?”
The face beside him saddened.
“Dear, dear optimist!” she repeated, and pressed his hand. He urged an explanation of her
      epithet. But she only said, thoughtfully:
“You took a great responsibility!”
“Towards her?”
She shook her head.
“No—towards him!”

Meanwhile Daphne was watching beside a death-bed. On her return from her walk she had been
      met by the news of fresh and grave symptoms in Mrs. Verrier's case. A Boston doctor arrived
      the following morning. The mortal disease which had attacked her about a year before this date
      had entered, so he reported, on its last phase. He talked of a few days—possibly hours.
The Boysons departed, having left cards of inquiry and sympathy, of which Mrs. Floyd took no
      notice. Then for Daphne there followed a nightmare of waiting and pain. She loved Madeleine
      Verrier, as far as she was capable of love, and she jealously wished to be all in all to her
      in these last hours. She would have liked to feel that it was she who had carried her friend
      through them; who had nobly sustained her in the dolorous pass. To have been able to feel this
      would have been as balm moreover to a piteously wounded self-love, to a smarting and bitter
      recollection, which would not let her rest.
But in these last days Madeleine escaped her altogether. A thin-faced priest arrived, the
      same who had been visiting the invalid at intervals for a month or two. Mrs. Verrier was
      received into the Roman Catholic Church; she made her first confession and communion; she saw
      her mother for a short, final interview,
       and her little girl; and the physical energy required for
      these acts exhausted her small store. Whenever Daphne entered her room Madeleine received her
      tenderly; but she could speak but little, and Daphne felt herself shut out and ignored. What
      she said or thought was no longer, it seemed, of any account. She resented and despised
      Madeleine's surrender to what she held to be a decaying superstition; and her haughty manner
      towards the mild Oratorian whom she met occasionally on the stairs, or in the corridor,
      expressed her disapproval. But it was impossible to argue with a dying woman. She suffered in
      silence.
As she sat beside the patient, in the hours of narcotic sleep when she relieved one of the
      nurses, she went often through times of great bitterness. She could not forgive the attack
      Captain Boyson had made upon her; yet she could not forget it. It had so far roused her moral
      sense that it led her to a perpetual brooding over the past, a perpetual re-statement of her
      own position. She was most troubled, often, by certain episodes in the past, of which, she
      supposed, Alfred Boyson knew least; the corrupt use she had made of her money; the false
      witnesses she had paid for; the bribes she had given. At the time it had seemed to her all
      part of the campaign, in the day's work. She had found herself in a milieu that demoralised
       ised her; her mind had become like “the dyer's hand,
      subdued to what it worked in.” Now, she found herself thinking in a sudden terror, “If Alfred
      Boyson knew so and so!” or, as she looked down on Madeleine's dying face, “Could I even tell
      Madeleine that?” And then would come the dreary thought, “I shall never tell her anything any
      more. She is lost to me—even before death.”
She tried to avoid thinking of Roger; but the memory of the scene with Alfred Boyson did, in
      truth, bring him constantly before her. An inner debate began, from which she could not
      escape. She grew white and ill with it. If she could have rushed away from it into the full
      stream of life, have thrown herself into meetings and discussion, have resumed her place as
      the admired and flattered head of a particular society, she could easily have crushed and
      silenced the thoughts which tormented her.
But she was held fast. She could not desert Madeleine Verrier in death; she could not wrench
      her own hand from this frail hand which clung to it; even though Madeleine had betrayed the
      common cause, had yielded at last to that moral and spiritual cowardice which—as all
      freethinkers know—has spoiled and clouded so many death-beds. Daphne—the skimmer of many
      books—remembered how Renan—sain et sauf—had sent a challenge to
       his own end, and, defying the possible weakness of age and
      sickness, had demanded to be judged by the convictions of life, and not by the terrors of
      death. She tried to fortify her own mind by the recollection.
The first days of June broke radiantly over the great gorge and the woods which surround it.
      One morning, early, between four and five o'clock, Daphne came in, to find Madeleine awake and
      comparatively at ease. Yet the preceding twenty-four hours had been terrible, and her nurses
      knew that the end could not be far off.
The invalid had just asked that her couch might be drawn as near to the window as possible,
      and she lay looking towards the dawn, which rose in fresh and windless beauty over the town
      opposite and the white splendour of the Falls. The American Fall was still largely in shadow;
      but the light struck on the fresh green of Goat Island and leapt in tongues of fire along the
      edge of the Horseshoe, turning the rapids above it to flame and sending shafts into the vast
      tower of spray that holds the centre of the curve. Nature was all youth, glitter and delight;
      summer was rushing on the gorge; the mingling of wood and water was at its richest and
      noblest.
Madeleine turned her face towards the gorge,
       her wasted hands clasped on her breast. She beckoned Daphne
      with a smile, and Daphne knelt down beside her.
“The water!” said the whispering voice; “it was once so terrible. I am not afraid—now.”
“No, darling. Why should you be?”
“I know now, I shall see him again.”
Daphne was silent.
“I hoped it, but I couldn't be certain. That was so awful. Now—I am certain.”
“Since you became a Catholic?”
She made a sign of assent.
“I couldn't be uncertain—I couldn't!” she added with fervour, looking strangely
      at Daphne. And Daphne understood that no voice less positive or self-confident than that of
      Catholicism, no religion less well provided with tangible rites and practices, could have
      lifted from the spirit the burden of that remorse which had yet killed the body.
A little later Madeleine drew her down again.
“I couldn't talk, Daphne—I was afraid; but I've written to you, just bit by bit, as I had
      strength. Oh, Daphne—!”
Then voice and strength failed her. Her eyes piteously followed her friend for a little, and
      then closed.
She lingered through the day; and at
       night, when the June starlight was on the gorge, she passed
      away, with the voice of the Falls in her dying ears. A tragic beauty—“beauty born of murmuring
      sound”—had passed into her face; and that great plunge of many waters, which had been to her
      in life the symbol of anguish and guilt, had become in some mysterious way the comforter of
      her pain, the friend of her last sleep.
A letter was found for Daphne in the little box beside her bed.
It ran thus:
“DAPHNE, DARLING,—It was I who first taught you that we may follow our own lawless wills,
      and that marriage is something we may bend or break as we will. But, oh! it is not so.
      Marriage is mysterious and wonderful; it is the supreme test of men and women. If we wrong it,
      and despise it, we mutilate the divine in ourselves.
“Oh, Daphne! it is a small thing to say, ‘Forgive!’ Yet it means the whole world.
“And you can still say it to the living. It has been my anguish that I could only say it to
      the dead. Daphne, good-bye! I have fought a long, long fight, but God is Master—I bless—I
      adore—”
Daphne sat staring at the letter through a
       mist of unwilling tears. All its phrases, ideas,
      preconceptions, were unwelcome, unreal to her, though she knew they had been real to
      Madeleine.
Yet the compulsion of the dead was upon her, and of her scene with Boyson. What they asked
      of her—Madeleine and Alfred Boyson—was of course out of the question; the mere thought of that
      humiliating word “forgiveness” sent a tingle of passion through her. But was there no third
      course?—something which might prove to all the world how full of resource and generosity a
      woman may be?
She pondered through some sleepless hours; and at last she saw her way plain.
Within a week she had left New York for Europe.
</div></body></text></TEI>