
CHAPTER IV.
THESE events had taken place so rapidly and unexpectedly, that Richard
                    and Agnes had scarce time to speculate on the cause of Elizabeth’s illness,
                    before they became altogether absorbed in their overpowering anxiety for her
                    life. Her state became appalling in the extreme; it seemed as though she could
                    neither live nor die; for she lingered many days after the physicians thought it
                    impossible she could survive. Some thought for this world, some earthly passion
                    or feeling, seemed to hold her back when already in the grasp of death; and
                    whatever that thought might be, it filled her immortal soul, thus standing on
                    the threshold of eternity, so exclusively, that it swallowed up all anxiety or
                    fear for the tremendous judgment close at hand. They could not tell what was the
                    one idea which had power thus to absorb a spirit already summoned into the awful
                    Presence, for Elizabeth was reduced to a state of weakness which deprived her
                    altogether of speech. She could not raise herself or move without assistance,
                    and she would scarce have  seemed alive at all
                    but for the wild restless gaze of her sleepless eyes. There was in them a
                    terrible expression of anxiety and misery, which told but too eloquently of the
                    fierce human anguish with which that silent sufferer was wrestling.
It was a horrible thing to see one about to enter into those habitations which
                    are everlasting, whether for good or ill, thus concentrating all her expiring
                    faculties, not on earnest repentance, but on the perishing remnant of the mortal
                    life that now might be reckoned by days and hours. She seemed ever struggling
                    madly to express some one last wish, as though her soul could not go forth till
                    it had uttered certain words; but they could comprehend nothing from her
                    inarticulate efforts;—it was to Agnes that she strove to address herself
                    principally, though also to Richard, and they very naturally concluded that, her
                    whole anxiety was for her children only—that all her endeavours were to make her
                    sister understand that she committed them to her care. Impressed with this idea,
                    Agnes tried to soothe and comfort her, by repeating again and again to her that
                    she understood her wishes, and that she would never leave her children, but that
                    she would make it the business of her life to watch over them and devote herself
                    entirely to them.

Richard also, in the same belief, assured her repeatedly that she might be at
                    peace with regard to the poor little infants whom she must leave behind in this
                    chill world. He would never allow Agnes to leave him—she should stay with him to
                    tend and care for them—they should be consigned completely to her charge.
Those promises which, but for the one horrible idea that now possessed the mind
                    of Elizabeth, would have been to her so inexpressibly soothing and consolatory,
                    served only to madden and torture her as she lay there in her helpless weakness,
                    unable to tell them that they offered for her comfort the very assurance she
                    most dreaded.
Though not without hope, it was yet a death‐bed most unquiet and unblest. Could
                    the dying woman have been altogether disengaged from the engrossing thoughts of
                    this world, it would doubtless have been a season of inestimable profit to her
                    departing soul, for Mr. Lambert attended her assiduously, labouring with
                    unwearied efforts to draw the poor straying sheep in safety to the heavenly
                    fold. But he saw almost with terror that she let the redeemless hours pass
                    recklessly away, with scarce a feeling but for the inward conflict of the heart,
                    whose beating was so soon to cease for ever.
Her father‐in‐law, Mr. Clayton, had been so 
                    painfully affected by the state in which he found her, that he had been obliged
                    to relinquish the task of ministering to her in her last hours to his curate;
                    and Mr. Lambert, well accustomed as he was to scenes of a similar nature, found
                    it a most difficult duty. There was something in her mind which he could not
                    fathom, whether anxiety for her children, or, as he was inclined to believe,
                    some deeper and more envenomed cause. But he saw that it rendered nearly
                    powerless all his efforts to awaken her to a more earnest consideration of the
                    awful realities to which she was hurrying so swiftly. His voice, even when
                    hallowed by the Name in which alone is Life Eternal, fell unheeded
                    on the ears that were ever straining to catch the import of the words that
                    passed between Richard and Agnes. It was well nigh in vain that he held up the
                    Majesty of Justice as developed in the Mercy of the Cross, before the soul that
                    vibrated between those feelings ever contending fearfully—the bitter jealousy
                    against the once loved sister, for the sake of the yet dearer husband; or, when
                    some kind act of the childhood’s companion recalled the old affection, the
                    horror akin to hate of the husband, who might destroy the bright prospects of
                    that tender friend’s young life.
But the first feeling predominated; and often 
                    when Mr. Lambert would have joined her feeble hands in the attitude of
                    supplication, she strove rather to use their failing strength in driving from
                    her bed of death the sister whom she had caressed so often; or, when he
                    endeavoured to pray with her, if he saw that she was really moved by the awful
                    truths he brought before her, a spasm of horror would pass over her face at
                    sight of these two, who were kneeling there side by side.
                    Ultimately Mr. Lambert thought he had reason to hope that this poor sufferer, so
                    bitterly tried in her dying hours, had yet been mercifully dealt with. There was
                    often a look of most earnest pleading and of deepest penitence in her upraised
                    eyes, which led him to trust that this tempest‐driven soul had in truth flown to
                    the One True Refuge, although its earthly anguish and anxiety had so sadly
                    interfered with its last solemn duties.
It was a lovely June morning,—the sky was bright, as though it never had a cloud,
                    and the earth radiant, as though it knew no sin. It was just such a day, when it
                    would have been a glorious thing to have seen a ransomed spirit burst the bonds
                    of its clay, and fly from this land of perishing beauty and fading sunbeams up
                    to the fields of light above, where the Sun of Righteousness for ever
                    shines.
All those who had any claim on the affection  of
                    Elizabeth Clayton were gathered round her, for her last hour was come. They had
                    placed her little children in her arms, and a few bitter tears, the first she
                    had shed, wet her cold cheek when she felt the little caressing hands passed
                    round her neck. Yet she looked on them with a strange unnatural longing, as
                    though she desired to convey them with her to the grave. Soon the one thought,
                    which had obscured for her the glory of eternity, deadened the mother’s heart
                    within her. She signed to them to take away the smiling infants, for they
                    intercepted her gaze upon those two standing as chief mourners side
                    by side, whom to the last she must watch in her impotent jealousy. Her eyes were
                    glazing fast—the chill of death was creeping through her stiffening members to
                    her pallid breast; but she only felt that the struggle was at its climax—that in
                    a few minutes more she would be powerless to say the words with which she sought
                    to separate them, to interdict their unhallowed union, that now came choking to
                    the lips too palsied to articulate.
She struggled fearfully for utterance; it was so terrible to see her efforts that
                    Agnes sank upon her knees beside her, and clasping her cold hands,
                    exclaimed—“Dear, dear Elizabeth, I know what you would say, it is for your
                    children; fear nothing, they shall be safe and 
                    happy in my keeping; I will be as a mother to them.”
“Yes,” said Richard, bending over her; “my poor wife, be at rest; do not doubt
                    our love and care; together we will live only to watch over those dear
                    children.”
Some dreadful emotion seemed to shake the whole frame of Elizabeth; with a
                    convulsive effort she half raised herself from her pillow; her eyes glanced with
                    the wildest eagerness from the one to the other; her pale lips moved, and they
                    could distinguish the faltering words, “Agnes—not—marry;” it was all they could
                    hear, but Richard anxiously exclaimed, imagining he had understood at last the
                    meaning of her efforts: —“Agnes, she fears you will marry and leave the poor
                    children, but you will not—you will stay with them.”
“Yes, yes!” exclaimed Agnes, sobbing; “I will, indeed; I will never leave this
                    house; I promise it to you, my dearest sister.” The gleam faded from the
                    despairing eyes of the dying woman—an expression of utter hopelessness settled
                    on her features—they had misunderstood her to the last! It was all over now: it
                    was too late—she could do no more; life was ebbing; all things had grown
                    indistinct around her; she must resign herself to the grave, and them to their
                    unblest union. She sank back; the thought was
                    not in her soul, that He would remember her when He came to His kingdom; or,
                    that He would be merciful to her a sinner; but only the horror of the compact
                    which it seemed to her they had sealed at her very bed of death.
                    She made one feeble effort to turn away her face from both when they stooped to
                    kiss her, and so expired.
