
CHAPTER IX.
MR. CLAYTON left B— the following week, and Mr. Lambert duly
                    communicated to all the parishioners the reasons which had induced him so to do.
                    The event made a most powerful impression on them all. Their Vicar could not
                    have taken any step which could have brought more strongly before them his
                    uncompromising submission to the call of duty whenever it demanded the surrender
                    of his own will, and also his deep disapprobation of that act of his son’s which
                    he was compelled thus openly to reprobate—but he was greatly beloved. His
                    departure was bitterly lamented, and a strong feeling against Richard and Agnes
                    soon pervaded the village. What Mr. Clayton condemned, his people felt must be
                    very wrong, and the marriage was loudly spoken against by all.
Never had Mr. Sharp enjoyed a season of such exquisite repose as that which
                    followed the departure of the Vicar from B—. This event would alone, at any
                    time, have been sufficient to have engrossed the mind of his energetic wife, and
                    provided her with a fund of matter whereon to 
                    exercise her conversational powers; but the circumstances attending it, the
                    unlawful marriage, and the indignation which was felt against Richard and Agnes,
                    were indeed to her sources of absorbing delight and occupation, such as she had
                    seldom known. With ineffable satisfaction her husband saw her sally forth every
                    morning, without having even remembered to take that peculiar cognizance of his
                    own proceedings for the day, which often inspired him with a wild and frantic
                    desire to embark forthwith for New Zealand, or to fly and endeavour to make a
                    fortune in Kamtschatka. Mr. Sharp might do as he pleased now; he might have
                    written a letter every day to his client without her looking over his shoulder,
                    and he might have drawn up ever so many marriage contracts without her even
                    asking who the parties were. Mrs. Sharp was far too busy to think of him at all;
                    and not only she ceased for the time to watch over his affairs, but she resigned
                    all thought of attending to his comforts. This was, however, one of the
                    conditions of his unwonted peace to which that greatly persecuted gentleman was
                    too happy to agree, and no one interfered with the excited lady in the pursuit
                    of her present delightful occupation.
What in truth could be more charming than to go from house to house, informing
                    every one  that, after the most reprehensible
                    conduct of Agnes, it would be impossible to visit her, or to acknowledge her
                    acquaintance? Agnes! the haughty and exclusive person, who had refused to call
                    upon her! Mrs. Sharp had such really substantial grounds for all
                    she said, that she was listened to with more attention than she usually met
                    with.
There was one painful idea, which had long been floating in the minds of those
                    acquainted with the circumstances, which Mrs. Sharp now assisted in ripening
                    into certainty—it was the belief that Elizabeth’s melancholy death had been
                    occasioned by her jealousy of her husband and sister. Such being the case,
                    nothing certainly could seem more revolting than the whole conduct of Agnes and
                    Richard; and even the most charitable of their neighhours could not but think
                    that they were not only devoid of all principle, but heartless and indelicate to
                    the last degree, in thus speedily reaping the fruits of her death in their
                    unblest union, and returning, without remorse or fear, to the very home where
                    she had dwelt whom they had sent to her grave by so cruel a means. Mrs. Sharp
                    loved to expatiate on these points with a warm enthusiasm, but she found that
                    her eloquence was scarcely required to heighten the universal indignation. And
                    then she would  rush out to waylay Mr. Lambert
                    at every corner, and detain him for a whole half hour, while she condoled with
                    him on having so much to do since Mr. Clayton’s departure, or comforted him by
                    assuring him that he might do what he would, but that he never could make up to
                    the people for their good old Vicar. He was far too young, so it was no fault of
                    his; but she had no doubt he would kill himself in trying, for he looked very
                    ill, and she did not think he had long to live; but if he did die, they would at
                    least know at whose door to lay his death. It was Richard Clayton who would be
                    guilty of it, as he had sent away his father, besides all the other mischief he
                    had done.
At first Richard and Agnes were scarcely aware of the universal condemnation of
                    their union. They had become more cheerful, in the hope that their father had
                    exaggerated the extent to which they would be lowered in the opinion of the
                    world; but they soon found that he had spoken but too truly; his own proceedings
                    with regard to them had rendered it necessary for all persons of any weight in
                    the society of the neighhourhood to adopt a marked line of conduct in the
                    matter; and their decision was soon made. They were by birth and education
                    entitled to delicacy of feeling; and Mr. Clayton had not been for  so many years their pastor without instilling into
                    their minds somewhat of his purity and strictness of principle. They determined
                    that the brother and sister‐in‐law, now man and wife, were not to be visited or
                    received; and the few influenced the many: it became the fashion to slight them
                    as it had been the fashion to court them, and they were cut off from all
                    society, except of such persons as they did not care to associate with. This
                    trial, which to some minds would have been a light evil, was to them a most
                    serious and grievous distress; it galled the proud spirit of Richard; it wounded
                    the morbid sensibility of Agnes; it deprived them both of the excitement and
                    amusement, without which they felt as though they could not exist. Richard
                    became irritable and fretful; his wife was weighed down by a heavy despondency
                    which she sought to hide under a forced unnatural gaiety.
After a time Agnes determined to enliven her dreary hours at least by resuming
                    her visits in the village. Her mind had been so much preoccupied for some time
                    past that she had neglected her poorer friends completely; but she had always
                    been beloved and respected amongst them. She felt that now, humble as they were,
                    even their homage and attention would be soothing to her.

On a beautiful mourning in the early spring, she went out into the village,
                    nothing doubting that she would be received as she had always been; for she and
                    her husband had never thought of inquiring into the opinion of their humbler
                    neighbours respecting their conduct. The first person she went to visit, was old
                    Martha Hyans, who, with her husband, were parishioners of long standing in the
                    village of B—. This good old couple exhibited in their lives a practical
                    refutation of the saying, that love cannot exist in a cottage, more especially
                    if it be allied to poverty. The little hut where they dwelt had been decked,
                    fifty years before, for their wedding‐day; and the love that bound them, now
                    wrinkled and decrepit as they were, was fresh and pure as in their prime of
                    youth and joy. They had gone through many trials together in that narrow space,
                    but never had an unkind word passed the lips of either. Poor Elizabeth had often
                    felt that she might have learnt a valuable lesson from old Martha’s patient and
                    tried affection; and now, of this good old woman’s many trials, it seemed to her
                    that one of the greatest was Mr. Clayton’s departure. He had baptized her
                    children, and laid more than one of them in their graves. She had verily trusted
                    that he should have closed her eyes also. But he was gone; and  she knew perfectly well that he had good reasons for
                    going. She never doubted that everything he did was right at all times; but in
                    this instance, simple and humble as she was, her own opinion and feelings
                    perfectly coincided with his. Her childlike, unbiassed mind revolted against the
                    union of Richard and his wife’s sister.
Agnes perceived the change in the old woman’s feelings towards her, the moment
                    she entered the house. Martha was civil; but she manifested not the slightest
                    pleasure on seeing her. She did not ask her advice, or detail her grievances,
                    and positively declined accepting various little comforts which Agnes proposed
                    to send her. The only words she spoke were, to inquire after the children, in a
                    tone dearly full of profound commiseration for the little ones. She shook her
                    head when Agnes volunteered the information that Richard was well, as though she
                    thought he had no right to be so; and then sat sighing and lifting up her eyes
                    in the most eloquent manner. Agnes made one last attempt to induce her to speak,
                    by quoting the Litany, which Martha was in the habit of repeating from beginning
                    to end, for the edification of her visitors; but even this tempting bait had no
                    allurements to‐day. She remained unmoved; and Agnes angrily left the house,  with the determination never to enter it
                    again. She could not, however, yet believe it possible that she was exiled from
                    the society of the village, as well as that of the higher classes. She
                    attributed Martha’s conduct merely to her peculiar attachment for Mr. Clayton,
                    and trusted to find matters very different in the other cottages where she was
                    going.
Her next visit was to Mrs. Savage, the hard‐featured, large‐handed Mrs. Savage,
                    who was singularly unfortunate in appearance (to the annoyance of all lovers of
                    the picturesque, as her little dwelling was beyond measure charming and
                    romantic), and who appeared for the last twenty years to have been engaged in
                    the care of a huge baby, who never grew, and never became a day older,—a
                    phenomenon which was to be accounted for by the fact that she was constantly
                    supplied with a succession of grandchildren, who, after a certain troublesome
                    age, were removed, to be replaced with another just entering on it.
In the house of this good woman poor Agnes fared much worse than with Martha.
                    Mrs. Savage did not scruple to tell her openly all she thought and felt, and all
                    that was thought and felt by her neighbours, on the subject of Richard’s second
                    marriage; and Agnes brought the visit speedily to a conclusion, by hurrying  out to hide the indignant tears that rose to
                    her eyes as she listened.
She walked along the road towards The Mount, her heart swelling within her, and
                    as she passed on she perceived Thomas, the clerk and schoolmaster, the most
                    respectful and estimable of men, coming towards her. Instead of approaching to
                    give her all the details of the progress of her class or of the choir, he passed
                    on the other side with merely a grave salutation, which sufficiently proved to
                    her that henceforward the doors of the school were closed against her.
She had to pass yet another cottage before reaching home; it was one of the
                    humblest in B—, and was the abode of a poor imbecile creature, known in the
                    village by the name of Jack, who lived in it with his old mother. He was
                    perfectly harmless in his idiotcy, and was allowed to wander about at will, even
                    within the grounds of The Mount. It was in fact his favourite resort, as Agnes
                    took a particular interest in him, and always treated him with the utmost
                    kindness. She used to bring him his food herself, that she might teach him to
                    recognise her; and now when he saw her, he never failed to greet her with his
                    wild laugh of discordant glee. Jack was seated at the door of his house as she
                    approached, and starting  up, he ran to meet
                    her with a shout of delight. She stopped to speak to him, and he stood joyfully
                    before her, clapping his hands, and muttering in his own senseless language his
                    unintelligible expressions of pleasure.
Poor Jack was little aware of the pang which he caused to Agnes at that moment,
                    for there was in truth a most bitter sting in the thought that his was the first
                    smile of kindness and the first words of welcome which had been bestowed upon
                        her that day, who formerly had been so warmly received by all.
                    No sterner lesson could have been given to her than this one fact, that she had
                    been shunned and scorned as one who had done an unholy deed, by all save this
                    poor idiot, to whom it had pleased Heaven to deny the knowledge of right and
                    wrong!
The bitter experience of this day was quite enough. Agnes now understood what was
                    in fact the truth, that the poor people of the village had lost all respect for
                    her, and that consequently her influence amongst them was gone for ever. The
                    casualties of birth and education are by no means sufficient to command the
                    esteem of the lower orders. They are keen and penetrating judges as to what is
                    really estimable in the character of their superiors, and thoroughly alive to
                    any inconsistency in their precepts and practice. The villagers of B—  thought that Agnes had greatly erred, and
                    therefore it would have been in vain for her to have talked to them of the
                    errors of their own ways; whilst some of the younger girls possibly found no
                    small excuse for levity in their conduct from the fact, that even the lady at
                    The Mount had thought the Vicar’s notions on the subject of marriage so very
                    strict, that she had distinctly acted against them. Agnes felt all this, and
                    though perhaps in her secret heart she acknowledged its justice, it was yet with
                    a proud indignation that she determined never again to visit a single person in
                    the village.
The annoyance which all these circumstances caused to Richard and his wife is not
                    to be told. On the fiery temper and undisciplined mind of the former especially,
                    the effect was most grievous. He now found himself deprived of all the amusement
                    which hunting and similar occupations had afforded him, for he was far too proud
                    ever to place himself voluntarily in the society of those who would no longer
                    admit him to their houses. Wounded to the uttermost by the treatment he had met
                    with, he shut himself up entirely in his own house, and gave way to a sullen,
                    discontented state of mind, which was most distressing to all around him. A man
                    without employment is always a miserable individual, and he had no intellectual
                        resources. He betook himself to amusements
                    which were frivolous and useless, if not pernicious; and much of his time, which
                    now hung so heavily on his hands, was spent in exercising a most harassing
                    control over his household. He occupied himself with all the little petty
                    arrangements and minor details on which it was painful to see the strong mind of
                    a man engaged; and it almost seemed as though he sought to compensate himself
                    for the humiliations he met with in the world, by his overbearing treatment of
                    his wife and servants.
In the midst of all this misery, for it was misery both to Agnes and Richard,
                    though no positive misfortune had as yet befallen them, a gleam of sunshine came
                    to revive their hearts in the birth of a son,—an event which soon banished all
                    their regrets for the absence of Mary, who had long since been removed from her
                    father’s house, to enter it no more for years.
On the other poor infant, the son of Elizabeth, Agnes had in truth bestowed the
                    utmost care and attention ever since her marriage. It had been chiefly on his
                    account that they had taken this step, which in all other respects had proved so
                    unfortunate; and it seemed to her an imperative duty to render it productive of
                    good results to this child at least. With unremitting tenderness she had
                    therefore watched  over him; all the careful
                    affection which Richard had trusted she would bestow upon his son, and which he
                    had married her partly to ensure, she did, indeed, give to the infant, whose
                    health had greatly improved; and now, as though to show how very vainly (as well
                    as sinfully) we would seek to interfere with the Providence of God, by doing
                    evil that good may come, and what madness it is to follow any other course save
                    that of rigid duty, (leaving the result submissively in His hands,) the little
                    child was suddenly taken from them. There had been no neglect, no illness even
                    to cause them any apprehension; but unexpectedly one night he was seized with
                    convulsions, and died whilst they stood helpless beside him. With a brief
                    struggle his brief life closed. Pure and innocent he went with his baptismal
                    cross yet shining on his brow, to join his brethren who had borne theirs through
                    the burden and heat of the day.
It was impossible for Richard and Agnes, as they stood looking down upon that
                    infant face—sublime now, because of the holy peace that was stamped upon it—not
                    to perceive how clearly the sin and folly of their deed was pointed out to them
                    in this bereavement. They had acted against the laws of God and man for the sake
                    of these children; the one they had 
                    themselves delivered up to their father’s charge, and the other had now been
                    taken to a Care more tender still. No good could now result from their union to
                    these or to any other; but themselves must reap its bitter fruits. And from that
                    hour Richard and his wife repented them of the deed which they had
                    done, because the world had visited them heavily for it; but they repented not
                    yet of the crime, for the judgment of God was still to come.
