
CHAPTER X THE FRIENDS OF THE FAMILY
It was natural that Amy should hint dissatisfaction with the loneliness in which
      her days were mostly spent. She had never lived in a large circle of acquaintances; the
      narrowness of her mother's means restricted the family to intercourse with a few old friends
      and such new ones as were content with tea-cup entertainment; but her tastes were social, and
      the maturing process which followed upon her marriage made her more conscious of this than she
      had been before. Already she had allowed her husband to understand that one of her strongest
      motives in marrying him was the belief that he would achieve distinction. At the time she
      doubtless thought of his coming fame only — or principally — as it concerned their relations
      to each other; her pride in him was to be one phase of her love. Now she was well aware that
      no degree of distinction in her
       husband would be of much value to her unless she had the pleasure of witnessing
      its effect upon others; she must shine with reflected light before an admiring assembly.
The more conscious she became of this requirement of her nature, the more clearly did she
      perceive that her hopes had been founded on an error. Reardon would never be a great man; he
      would never even occupy a prominent place in the estimation of the public. The two things, Amy
      knew, might be as different as light and darkness; but in the grief of her disappointment she
      would rather have had him flare into a worthless popularity than flicker down into total
      extinction, which it almost seemed was to be his fate. She knew so well how 'people' were
      talking of him and her. Even her unliterary acquaintances understood that Reardon's last novel
      had been anything but successful, and they must of course ask each other how the Reardons were
      going to live if the business of novel-writing proved unremunerative. Her pride took offence
      at the mere thought of such conversations. Presently she would become an object of pity; there
      would be talk of 'poor Mrs. Reardon.' It was intolerable.

So during the last half year she had withheld as much as possible from the intercourse which
      might have been one of her chief pleasures. And to disguise the true cause she made pretences
      which were a satire upon her state of mind — alleging that she had devoted herself to a
      serious course of studies, that the care of house and child occupied all the time she could
      spare from her intellectual pursuits. The worst of it was, she had little faith in the
      efficacy of these fictions; in uttering them she felt an unpleasant warmth upon her cheeks,
      and it was not difficult to detect a look of doubt in the eyes of the listener. She grew angry
      with herself for being dishonest, and with her husband for making such dishonesty needful.
The female friend with whom she had most trouble was Mrs. Carter. You remember that on the
      occasion of Reardon's first meeting with his future wife, at the Grosvenor Gallery, there were
      present his friend Carter and a young lady who was shortly to bear the name of that spirited
      young man. The Carters had now been married about a year; they lived in Bayswater, and saw
      much of a certain world which imitates on a lower plane the amusements and affectations of
      society proper. Mr. Carter was still secretary
       to the hospital where Reardon had once earned his twenty shillings a week, but
      by voyaging in the seas of charitable enterprise he had come upon supplementary sources of
      income; for instance, he held the post of secretary to the Barclay Trust, a charity whose
      moderate funds were largely devoted to the support of gentlemen engaged in administering it.
      This young man, with his air of pleasing vivacity, had early ingratiated himself with the kind
      of people who were likely to be of use to him; he had his reward in the shape of offices which
      are only procured through private influence. His wife was a good-natured, lively, and rather
      clever girl; she had a genuine regard for Amy, and much respect for Reardon. Her ambition was
      to form a circle of distinctly intellectual acquaintances, and she was constantly inviting the
      Reardons to her house; a real live novelist is not easily drawn into the world where Mrs.
      Carter had her being, and it annoyed her that all attempts to secure Amy and her husband for
      five o'clock teas and small parties had of late failed.
On the afternoon when Reardon had visited a second-hand bookseller with a view of raising
      money — he was again shut up in his study,
       dolorously at work — Amy was disturbed by the sound of a visitor's rat-tat; the
      little servant went to the door, and returned followed by Mrs. Carter.
Under the best of circumstances it was awkward to receive any but intimate friends during
      the hours when Reardon sat at his desk. The little dining-room (with its screen to conceal the
      kitchen range) offered nothing more than homely comfort; and then the servant had to be
      disposed of by sending her into the bedroom to take care of Willie. Privacy, in the strict
      sense, was impossible, for the servant might listen at the door (one room led out of the
      other) to all the conversation that went on; yet Amy could not request her visitors to speak
      in a low tone. For the first year these difficulties had not been felt; Reardon made a point
      of leaving the front room at his wife's disposal from three to six; it was only when dread of
      the future began to press upon him that he sat in the study all day long. You see how
      complicated were the miseries of the situation; one torment involved another, and in every
      quarter subjects of discontent were multiplied.
Mrs. Carter would have taken it ill had she known that Amy did not regard her as strictly
       an intimate. They addressed each other by their Christian names, and conversed
      without ceremony; but Amy was always dissatisfied when the well-dressed young woman burst with
      laughter and animated talk into this abode of concealed poverty. Edith was not the kind of
      person with whom one can quarrel; she had a kind heart, and was never disagreeably
      pretentious. Had circumstances allowed it, Amy would have given frank welcome to such
      friendship; she would have been glad to accept as many invitations as Edith chose to offer.
      But at present it did her harm to come in contact with Mrs. Carter; it made her envious, cold
      to her husband, resentful against fate.
'Why can't she leave me alone?' was the thought that rose in her mind as Edith entered. 'I
      shall let her see that I don't want her here.'
'Your husband at work?' Edith asked, with a glance in the direction of the study, as soon as
      they had exchanged kisses and greetings.
'Yes, he is busy.'
'And you are sitting alone, as usual. I feared you might be out; an afternoon of sunshine
      isn't to be neglected at this time of year.'

'Is there sunshine?' Amy inquired coldly.
'Why, look! Do you mean to say you haven't noticed it? What a comical person you are
      sometimes! I suppose you have been over head and ears in books all day. How is Willie?'
'Very well, thank you.'
'Mayn't I see him?'
'If you like.'
Amy stepped to the bedroom door and bade the servant bring Willie for exhibition. Edith, who
      as yet had no child of her own, always showed the most flattering admiration of this infant;
      it was so manifestly sincere that the mother could not but be moved to a grateful friendliness
      whenever she listened to its expression. Even this afternoon the usual effect followed when
      Edith had made a pretty and tender fool of herself for several minutes. Amy bade the servant
      make tea.
At this moment the door from the passage opened, and Reardon looked in.
'Well, if this isn't marvellous!' cried Edith. 'I should as soon have expected the heavens
      to fall!'
'As what?' asked Reardon, with a pale smile.

'As you to show yourself when I am here.'
'I should like to say that I came on purpose to see you, Mrs. Carter, but it wouldn't be
      true. I'm going out for an hour, so that you can take possession of the other room if you
      like, Amy.'
'Going out?' said Amy, with a look of surprise.
'Nothing — nothing. I mustn't stay.'
He just inquired of Mrs. Carter how her husband was, and withdrew. The door of the flat was
      heard to close after him.
'Let us go into the study, then,' said Amy, again in rather a cold voice.
On Reardon's desk were lying slips of blank paper. Edith, approaching on tiptoe with what
      was partly make-believe, partly genuine, awe, looked at the literary apparatus, then turned
      with a laugh to her friend.
'How delightful it must be to sit down and write about people one has invented! Ever since I
      have known you and Mr. Reardon I have been tempted to try if I couldn't write a story.'
'Have you?'
'And I'm sure I don't know how you can resist the temptation. I feel sure you could
       write books almost as clever as your husband's.'
'I have no intention of trying.'
'You don't seem very well to-day, Amy.'
'Oh, I think I am as well as usual.'
She guessed that her husband was once more brought to a stand-still, and this darkened her
      humour again.
'One of my reasons for coming,' said Edith, 'was to beg and entreat and implore you and Mr.
      Reardon to dine with us next Wednesday. Now don't put on such a severe face! Are you engaged
      that evening?'
'Yes; in the ordinary way. Edwin can't possibly leave his work.'
'But for one poor evening! It's such ages since we saw you.'
'I'm very sorry. I don't think we shall ever be able to accept invitations in future.'
Amy spoke thus at the prompting of a sudden impulse. A minute ago, no such definite
      declaration was in her mind.
'Never?' exclaimed Edith. 'But why? Whatever do you mean?'
'We find that social engagements consume too much time,' Amy replied, her explanation just
      as much of an impromptu as the announcement
       had been. 'You see, one must either belong to society or not. Married people
      can't accept an occasional invitation from friends and never do their social duty in return.
      We have decided to withdraw altogether — at all events for the present. I shall see no one
      except my relatives.'
Edith listened with a face of astonishment.
'You won't even see me? ' she exclaimed.
'Indeed I have no wish to lose your friendship. Yet I am ashamed to ask you to come here
      when I can never return your visits.'
'Oh, please don't put it in that way! But it seems so very strange.'
Edith could not help conjecturing the true significance of this resolve. But, as is commonly
      the case with people in easy circumstances, she found it hard to believe that her friends were
      so straitened as to have a difficulty in supporting the ordinary obligations of a civilised
      state.
'I know how precious your husband's time is,' she added, as if to remove the effect of her
      last remark. 'Surely there's no harm in my saying — we know each other well enough — you
      wouldn't think it necessary to devote an evening to entertaining us just because you had
       given us the pleasure of your company. I put it very stupidly, but I'm sure you
      understand me, Amy. Don't refuse just to come to our house now and then.'
'I'm afraid we shall have to be consistent, Edith.'
'But do you think this is a wise thing to do?'
'Wise?'
'You know what you once told me, about how necessary it was for a novelist to study all
      sorts of people. How can Mr. Reardon do this if he shuts himself up in the house? I should
      have thought he would find it necessary to make new acquaintances.'
'As I said,' returned Amy, 'it won't be always like this. For the present, Edwin has quite
      enough "material."'
She spoke distantly; it irritated her to have to invent excuses for the sacrifice she had
      just imposed on herself. Edith sipped the tea which had been offered her, and for a minute
      kept silence.
'When will Mr. Reardon's next book be published?' she asked at length.
'I'm sure I don't know. Not before the spring.'

'I shall look so anxiously for it. Whenever I meet new people I always turn the conversation
      to novels, just for the sake of asking them if they know your husband's books.'
She laughed merrily.
'Which is seldom the case, I should think,' said Amy with a smile of indifference.
'Well, my dear, you don't expect ordinary novel-readers to know about Mr. Reardon. I wish my
      acquaintances were a better kind of people; then, of course, I should hear of his books more
      often. But one has to make the best of such society as offers. If you and your husband forsake
      me, I shall feel it a sad loss; I shall indeed.'
Amy gave a quick glance at the speaker's face.
'Oh, we must be friends just the same,' she said, more naturally than she had spoken
      hitherto. 'But don't ask us to come and dine just now. All through this winter we shall be
      very busy, both of us. Indeed, we have decided not to accept any invitations at all.'
'Then, so long as you let me come here now and then, I must give in. I promise not to
      trouble you with any more complaining. But how you can live such a life I don't
       know. I consider myself more of a reader than women generally are, and I should
      be mortally offended if anyone called me frivolous; but I must have a good deal of society.
      Really and truly, I can't live without it.'
'No?' said Amy, with a smile which meant more than Edith could interpret. It seemed slightly
      condescending.
'There's no knowing; perhaps if I had married a literary man — ' She paused, smiling and
      musing. 'But then I haven't, you see.' She laughed. 'Albert is anything but a bookworm, as you
      know.'
'You wouldn't wish him to be.'
'Oh no! Not a bookworm. To be sure, we suit each other very well indeed. He likes society
      just as much as I do. It would be the death of him if he didn't spend three-quarters of every
      day with lively people.'
'That's rather a large portion. But then you count yourself among the lively ones.'
They exchanged looks, and laughed together.
'Of course you think me rather silly to want to talk so much with silly people,' Edith went
      on. 'But then there's generally some amusement to be got, you know. I don't take
       life quite so seriously as you do. People are people after all; it's good fun to
      see how they live and hear how they talk.'
Amy felt that she was playing a sorry part. She thought of sour grapes, and of the fox who
      had lost his tail. Worst of all, perhaps Edith suspected the truth. She began to make
      inquiries about common acquaintances, and fell into an easier current of gossip.
A quarter of an hour after the visitor's departure Reardon came back. Amy had guessed
      aright; the necessity of selling his books weighed upon him so that for the present he could
      do nothing. The evening was spent gloomily, with very little conversation.
Next day came the bookseller to make his inspection. Reardon had chosen out and ranged upon
      a table nearly a hundred volumes. With a few exceptions they had been purchased second-hand.
      The tradesman examined them rapidly.
'What do you ask?' he inquired, putting his head aside.
'I prefer that you should make an offer,' Reardon replied, with the helplessness of one who
      lives remote from traffic.
'I can't say more than two pounds ten.'

'That is at the rate of sixpence a volume — ?'
'To me that's about the average value of books like these.'
Perhaps the offer was a fair one; perhaps it was not. Reardon had neither time nor spirit to
      test the possibilities of the market; he was ashamed to betray his need by higgling.
'I'll take it,' he said, in a matter-of-fact voice.
A messenger was sent for the books that afternoon. He stowed them skilfully in two bags, and
      carried them downstairs to a cart that was waiting.
Reardon looked at the gaps left on his shelves. Many of those vanished volumes were dear old
      friends to him; he could have told you where he had picked them up and when; to open them
      recalled a past moment of intellectual growth, a mood of hope or despondency, a stage of
      struggle. In most of them his name was written, and there were often pencilled notes in the
      margin. Of course he had chosen from among the most valuable he possessed; such a multitude
      must else have been sold to make this sum of two pounds ten. Books are cheap, you know. At
      need, one can
       buy a Homer for fourpence, a Sophocles for sixpence. It was not rubbish that he
      had accumulated at so small expenditure, but the library of a poor student — battered
      bindings, stained pages, supplanted editions. He loved his books, but there was something he
      loved more, and when Amy glanced at him with eyes of sympathy he broke into a cheerful
      laugh.
'I'm only sorry they have gone for so little. Tell me when the money is nearly at an end
      again, and you shall have more. It's all right; the novel will be done soon.'
And that night be worked until twelve o'clock, doggedly, fiercely.
The next day was Sunday. As a rule he made it a day of rest, and almost perforce, for the
      depressing influence of Sunday in London made work too difficult. Then, it was the day on
      which he either went to see his own particular friends or wa visited by them.
'Do you expect anyone this evening?' Amy inquired.
'Biffen will look in, I dare say. Perhaps Milvain.'
'I think I shall take Willie to mother's. I shall be back before eight.'
'Amy, don't say anything about the books.'

'No, no.'
'I suppose they always ask you when we think of removing over the way?'
He pointed in a direction that suggested Marylebone Workhouse. Amy tried to laugh, but a
      woman with a child in her arms has no keen relish for such jokes.
'I don't talk to them about our affairs,' she said.
'That's best.'
She left home about three o'clock, the servant going with her to carry the child.
At five a familiar knock sounded through the flat; it was a heavy rap followed by half a
      dozen light ones, like a reverberating echo, the last stroke scarcely audible. Reardon laid
      down his book, but kept his pipe in his mouth, and went to the door. A tall, thin man stood
      there, with a slouch hat and long grey overcoat. He shook hands silently, hung his hat in the
      passage, and came forward into the study.
His name was Harold Biffen, and, to judge from his appearance, he did not belong to the race
      of common mertals. His excessive meagreness would all but have qualified him to enter an
      exhibition in the capacity of living
       skeleton, and the garments which hung upon this framework would perhaps have
      sold for three and sixpence at an old-clothes dealer's. But the man was superior to these
      accidents of flesh and raiment. He had a fine face: large, gentle eyes, nose slightly
      aquiline, small and delicate mouth. Thick black hair fell to his coat-collar; he wore a heavy
      moustache and a full beard. In his gait there was a singular dignity; only a man of cultivated
      mind and graceful character could move and stand as he did.
His first act on entering the room was to take from his pocket a pipe, a pouch, a little
      tobacco-stopper, and a box of matches, all of which he arranged carefully on a corner of the
      central table. Then he drew forward a chair and seated himself.
'Take your top-coat off,' said Reardon.
'Thanks, not this evening.'
'Why the deuce not?'
'Not this evening, thanks.'
The reason, as soon as Reardon sought for it, was obvious. Biffen had no ordinary coat
      beneath the other. To have referred to this fact would have been indelicate; the novelist of
      course understood it, and smiled, but with no mirth.

'Let me have your Sophocles,' were the visitor's next words.
Reardon offered him a volume of the Oxford Pocket Classics.
'I prefer the Wunder, please.'
'It's gone, my boy.'
'Gone?'
'Wanted a little cash.'
Biffen uttered a sound in which remonstrance and sympathy were blended.
'I'm sorry to hear that; very sorry. Well, this must do. Now, I want to know how you scan
      this chorus in the "Oedipus Rex."'
Reardon took the volume, considered, and began to read aloud with metric emphasis.
'Choriambics, eh?' cried the other. 'Possible, of course; but treat them as Ionics a minore
      with an anacrusis, and see if they don't go better.'
He involved himself in terms of pedantry, and with such delight that his eyes gleamed.
      Having delivered a technical lecture, he began to read in illustration, producing quite a
      different effect from that of the rhythm as given by his friend. And the reading was by no
      means that of a pedant, rather of a poet.

For half an hour the two men talked Greek metres as if they lived in a world where the only
      hunger known could be satisfied by grand or sweet cadences.
They had first met in an amusing way. Not long after the publication of his book 'On Neutral
      Ground' Reardon was spending a week at Hastings. A rainy day drove him to the circulating
      library, and as he was looking along the shelves for something readable a voice near at hand
      asked the attendant if he had anything 'by Edwin Reardon.' The novelist turned in
      astonishment; that any casual mortal should inquire for his books seemed incredible. Of course
      there was nothing by that author in the library, and he who had asked the question walked out
      again. On the morrow Reardon encountered this same man at a lonely part of the shore; he
      looked at him, and spoke a word or two of common civility; they got into conversation, with
      the result that Edwin told the story of yesterday. The stranger introduced himself as Harold
      Biffen, an author in a small way, and a teacher whenever he could get pupils; an abusive
      review had interested him in Reardon's novels, but as yet he knew nothing of them but the
      names.

Their tastes were found to be in many respects sympathetic, and after returning to London
      they saw each other frequently. Biffen was always in dire poverty, and lived in the oddest
      places; he had seen harder trials than even Reardon himself. The teaching by which he partly
      lived was of a kind quite unknown to the respectable tutorial world. In these days of
      examinations, numbers of men in a poor position — clerks chiefly — conceive a hope that by
      'passing' this, that, or the other formal test they may open for themselves a new career. Not
      a few such persons nourish preposterous ambitions; there are warehouse clerks privately
      preparing (without any means or prospect of them) for a call to the Bar, drapers' assistants
      who 'go in' for the preliminary examination of the College of Surgeons, and untaught men
      innumerable who desire to procure enough show of education to be eligible for a curacy.
      Candidates of this stamp frequently advertise in the newspapers for cheap tuition, or answer
      advertisements which are intended to appeal to them; they pay from sixpence to half a crown an
      hour — rarely as much as the latter sum. Occasionally it happened that Harold Biffen had three
      or four such pupils in hand, and extraordinary
       stories he could draw from his large experience in this sphere.
Then as to his authorship. — But shortly after the discussion of Greek metres he fell upon
      the subject of his literary projects, and, by no means for the first time, developed the
      theory on which he worked.
'I have thought of a new way of putting it. What I really aim at is an absolute realism in
      the sphere of the ignobly decent. The field, as I understand it, is a new one; I don't know
      any writer who has treated ordinary vulgar life with fidelity and seriousness. Zola writes
      deliberate tragedies; his vilest figures become heroic from the place they fill in a strongly
      imagined drama. I want to deal with the essentially unheroic, with the day-to-day life of that
      vast majority of people who are at the mercy of paltry circumstance. Dickens understood the
      possibility of such work, but his tendency to melodrama on the one hand, and his humour on the
      other, prevented him from thinking of it. An instance, now. As I came along by Regent's Park
      half an hour ago a man and a girl were walking close in front of me, love-making; I passed
      them slowly and heard a good deal of their talk — it was part of the situation that they
      should pay
       no heed to a stranger's proximity. Now, such a love-scene as that has absolutely
      never been written down; it was entirely decent, yet vulgar to the nth power. Dickens
      would have made it ludicrous — a gross injustice. Other men who deal with low-class life would
      perhaps have preferred idealising it — an absurdity. For my own part, I am going to reproduce
      it verbatim, without one single impertinent suggestion of any point of view save that of
      honest reporting. The result will be something unutterably tedious. Precisely. That is the
      stamp of the ignobly decent life. If it were anything but tedious it would be untrue.
      I speak, of course, of its effect upon the ordinary reader.'
'I couldn't do it,' said Reardon.
'Certainly you couldn't. You — well, you are a psychological realist in the sphere of
      culture. You are impatient of vulgar circumstances.'
'In a great measure because my life has been martyred by them.'
'And for that very same reason I delight in them,' cried Biffen. 'You are repelled
      by what has injured you; I am attracted by it. This divergence is very interesting; but for
      that, we should have resembled each other so closely.
       You know that by temper we are rabid idealists, both of us.'
'I suppose so.'
'But let me go on. I want, among other things, to insist upon the fateful power of trivial
      incidents. No one has yet dared to do this seriously. It has often been done in farce, and
      that's why farcical writing so often makes one melancholy. You know my stock instances of the
      kind of thing I mean. There was poor Allen, who lost the most valuable opportunity of his life
      because he hadn't a clean shirt to put on; and Williamson, who would probably have married
      that rich girl but for the grain of dust that got into his eye and made him unable to say or
      do anything at the critical moment.'
Reardon burst into a roar of laughter.
'There you are!' cried Biffen, with friendly annoyance. 'You take the conventional view. If
      you wrote of these things you would represent them as laughable.'
'They are laughable,' asserted the other, 'however serious to the persons
      concerned. The mere fact of grave issues in life depending on such paltry things is
      monstrously ludicrous. Life is a huge farce, and the advantage of possessing
       a sense of humour is that it enables one to defy fate with mocking
      laughter.'
'That's all very well, but it isn't an original view. I am not lacking in sense of humour,
      but I prefer to treat these aspects of life from an impartial standpoint. The man who laughs
      takes the side of a cruel omnipotence, if one can imagine such a thing. I want to take no side
      at all; simply to say, Look, this is the kind of thing that happens.'
'I admire your honesty, Biffen,' said Reardon, sighing. 'You will never sell work of this
      kind, yet you have the courage to go on with it because you believe in it.'
'I don't know; I may perhaps sell it some day.'
'In the meantime,' said Reardon, laying down his pipe, 'suppose we eat a morsel of
      something. I'm rather hungry.'
In the early days of his marriage Reardon was wont to offer the friends who looked in on
      Sunday evening a substantial supper; by degrees the meal had grown simpler, until now, in the
      depth of his poverty, he made no pretence of hospitable entertainment. It was only because he
      knew that Biffen as often as not had nothing whatever to eat that he did not hesitate
       to offer him a slice of bread and butter and a cup of tea. They went into the
      back room, and over the Spartan fare continued to discuss aspects of fiction.
'I shall never,' said Biffen, 'write anything like a dramatic scene. Such things do happen
      in life, but so very rarely that they are nothing to my purpose. Even when they happen,
      by-the-by, it is in a shape that would be useless to the ordinary novelist; he would have to
      cut away this circumstance, and add that. Why? I should like to know. Such conventionalism
      results from stage necessities. Fiction hasn't yet outgrown the influence of the stage on
      which it originated. Whatever a man writes for effect is wrong and bad.'
'Only in your view. There may surely exist such a thing as the art of fiction.'
'It is worked out. We must have a rest from it. You, now — the best things you have done are
      altogether in conflict with novelistic conventionalities. It was because that blackguard
      review of "On Neutral Ground" clumsily hinted this that I first thought of you with interest.
      No, no; let us copy life. When the man and woman are to meet for a great scene of passion, let
      it all be frustrated by one or other of them
       having a bad cold in the head, and so on. Let the pretty girl get a disfiguring
      pimple on her nose just before the ball at which she is going to shine. Show the numberless
      repulsive features of common decent life. Seriously, coldly; not a hint of facetiousness, or
      the thing becomes different.'
About eight o'clock Reardon heard his wife's knock at the door. On opening, he saw not only
      Amy and the servant, the latter holding Willie in her arms, but with them Jasper Milvain.
'I have been at Mrs. Yule's,' Jasper explained as he came in. 'Have you anyone here?'
'Biffen.'
'Ah, then we'll discuss realism.'
'That's over for the evening. Greek metres also.'
'Thank Heaven!'
The three men seated themselves with joking and laughter, and the smoke of their pipes
      gathered thickly in the little room. It was half an hour before Amy joined them. Tobacco was
      no disturbance to her, and she enjoyed the kind of talk that was held on these occasions; but
      it annoyed her that she could no longer play the hostess at a merry supper-table.

'Why ever are you sitting in your overcoat, Mr. Biffen?' were her first words when she
      entered.
'Please excuse me, Mrs. Reardon. It happens to be more convenient this evening.'
She was puzzled, but a glance from her husband warned her not to pursue the subject.
Biffen always behaved to Amy with a sincerity of respect which had made him a favourite with
      her. To him, poor fellow, Reardon seemed supremely blessed. That a struggling man of letters
      should have been able to marry, and such a wife, was miraculous in Biffen's eyes. A
      woman's love was to him the unattainable ideal; already thirty-five years old, he had no
      prospect of ever being rich enough to assure himself a daily dinner; marriage was wildly out
      of the question. Sitting here, he found it very difficult not to gaze at Amy with uncivil
      persistency. Seldom in his life had he conversed with educated women, and the sound of this
      clear voice was always more delightful to him than any music.
Amy took a place near to him, and talked in her most charming way of such things as she knew
      interested him. Biffen's deferential attitude as he listened and replied was in strong
       contrast with the careless ease which marked Jasper Milvain. The realist would
      never smoke in Amy's presence, but Jasper puffed jovial clouds even whilst she was conversing
      with him.
'Whelpdale came to see me last night,' remarked Milvain, presently. 'His novel is refused on
      all hands. He talks of earning a living as a commission agent for some sewing-machine
      people.'
'I can't understand how his book should be positively refused,' said Reardon. 'The last
      wasn't altogether a failure.'
'Very nearly. And this one consists of nothing but a series of conversations between two
      people. It is really a dialogue, not a novel at all. He read me some twenty pages, and I no
      longer wondered that he couldn't sell it.'
'Oh, but it has considerable merit,' put in Biffen. 'The talk is remarkably true.'
'But what's the good of talk that leads to nothing?' protested Jasper.
'It's a bit of real life.'
'Yes, but it has no market value. You may write what you like, so long as people are willing
      to read you. Whelpdale's a clever fellow, but he can't hit a practical line.'

'Like some other people I have heard of,' said Reardon, laughing.
'But the odd thing is, that he always strikes one as practical-minded. Don't you feel that,
      Mrs. Reardon?'
He and Amy talked for a few minutes, and Reardon, seemingly lost in meditation, now and then
      observed them from the corner of his eye.
At eleven o'clock husband and wife were alone again.
'You don't mean to say,' exclaimed Amy, 'that Biffen has sold his coat?'
'Or pawned it.'
'But why not the overcoat?'
'Partly, I should think, because it's the warmer of the two; partly, perhaps, because the
      other would fetch more.'
'That poor man will die of starvation some day, Edwin.'
'I think it not impossible.'
'I hope you gave him something to eat?'
'Oh yes. But I could see he didn't like to take as much as he wanted. I don't think of him
      with so much pity as I used to; that's a result of suffering oneself.'
Amy set her lips and sighed.

