
CHAPTER XXI MR. YULE LEAVES TOWN
Since the domestic incidents connected with that unpleasant review in The
       Current , the relations between Alfred Yule and his daughter had suffered a permanent
      change, though not in a degree noticeable by any one but the two concerned. To all
      appearances, they worked together and conversed very much as they had been wont to do; but
      Marian was made to feel in many subtle ways that her father no longer had complete confidence
      in her, no longer took the same pleasure as formerly in the skill and conscientiousness of her
      work, and Yule on his side perceived too clearly that the girl was preoccupied with something
      other than her old wish to aid and satisfy him, that she had a new life of her own alien to,
      and in some respects irreconcilable with, the existence in which he desired to confirm her.
      There was no renewal of open disagreement, but their conversations
       frequently ended, by tacit mutual consent, at a point which threatened
      divergence; and in Yule's case every such warning was a cause of intense irritation. He feared
      to provoke Marian, and this fear was again a torture to his pride.
Beyond the fact that his daughter was in constant communication with the Miss Milvains, he
      knew, and could discover, nothing of the terms on which she stood with the girls' brother, and
      this ignorance was harder to bear than full assurance of a disagreeable fact would have been.
      That a man like Jasper Milvain, whose name was every now and then forced upon his notice as a
      rising periodicalist and a faithful henchman of the unspeakable Fadge — that a young fellow of
      such excellent prospects should seriously attach himself to a girl like Marian seemed to him
      highly improbable, save, indeed, for the one consideration, that Milvain, who assuredly had a
      very keen eye to chances, might regard the girl as a niece of old John Yule, and therefore
      worth holding in view until it was decided whether or not she would benefit by her uncle's
      decease. Fixed in his antipathy to the young man, he would not allow himself to admit any but
      a base motive on Milvain's side, if, indeed, Marian and Jasper were more to each other
       than slight acquaintances; and he persuaded himself that anxiety for the girl's
      welfare was at least as strong a motive with him as mere prejudice against the ally of Fadge,
      and, it might be, the reviewer of 'English Prose.' Milvain was quite capable of playing fast
      and loose with a girl, and Marian, owing to the peculiar circumstances of her position, would
      easily be misled by the pretence of a clever speculator.
That she had never spoken again about the review in The Current might receive
      several explanations. Perhaps she had not been able to convince herself either for or against
      Milvain's authorship; perhaps she had reason to suspect that the young man was the
      author; perhaps she merely shrank from reviving a discussion in which she might betray what
      she desired to keep secret. This last was the truth. Finding that her father did not recur to
      the subject, Marian concluded that he had found himself to be misinformed. But Yule, though he
      heard the original rumour denied by people whom in other matters he would have trusted, would
      not lay aside the doubt that flattered his prejudices. If Milvain were not the writer of the
      review, he very well might have been; and
       what certainty could be arrived at in matters of literary gossip?
There was an element of jealousy in the father's feeling. If he did not love Marian with all
      the warmth of which a parent is capable, at least he had more affection for her than for any
      other person, and of this he became strongly aware now that the girl seemed to be turning from
      him. If he lost Marian, he would indeed be a lonely man, for he considered his wife of no
      account. Intellectually again, he demanded an entire allegiance from his daughter; he could
      not bear to think that her zeal on his behalf was diminishing, that perhaps she was beginning
      to regard his work as futile and antiquated in comparison with that of the new generation. Yet
      this must needs be the result of frequent intercourse with such a man as Milvain. It seemed to
      him that he remarked it in her speech and manner, and at times he with difficulty restrained
      himself from a reproach or a sarcasm which would have led to trouble.
Had he been in the habit of dealing harshly with Marian, as with her mother, of course his
      position would have been simpler. But he had always respected her, and he feared to lose that
      measure of respect with which she repaid him.
       Already he had suffered in her esteem, perhaps more than he liked to think, and
      the increasing embitterment of his temper kept him always in danger of the conflict he
      dreaded. Marian was not like her mother; she could not submit to tyrannous usage. Warned of
      that, he did his utmost to avoid an outbreak of discord, constantly hoping that he might come
      to understand his daughter's position, and perhaps discover that his greatest fear was
      unfounded.
Twice in the course of the summer he inquired of his wife whether she knew anything about
      the Milvains. But Mrs. Yule was not in Marian's confidence.
'I only know that she goes to see the young ladies, and that they do writing of some
      kind.'
'She never even mentions their brother to you?'
'Never. I haven't heard his name from her since she told me the Miss Milvains weren't coming
      here again.'
He was not sorry that Marian had taken the decision to keep her friends away from St. Paul's
      Crescent, for it saved him a recurring annoyance; but, on the other hand, if they had
      continued to come, he would not have been thus completely in the dark as to her intercourse
      with Jasper;
       scraps of information must now and then have been gathered by his wife from the
      girls' talk.
Throughout the month of July, he suffered much from his wonted bilious attacks, and Mrs.
      Yule had to endure a double share of his illtemper, that which was naturally directed against
      her, and that of which Marian was the cause. In August things were slightly better; but with
      the return to labour came a renewal of Yule's sullenness and savageness. Sundry pieces of
      illluck of a professional kind — warnings, as he too well understood, that it was growing more
      and more difficult for him to hold his own against the new writers — exasperated his quarrel
      with destiny. The gloom of a cold and stormy September was doubly wretched in that house on
      the far borders of Camden Town, but in October the sun reappeared and it seemed to mollify the
      literary man's mood. Just when Mrs. Yule and Marian began to hope that this long distemper
      must surely come to an end, there befell an incident which, at the best of times, would have
      occasioned misery, and which in the present juncture proved disastrous.
It was one morning about eleven. Yule was in his study; Marian was at the Museum; Mrs. Yule
      had gone shopping. There came a sharp
       knock at the front door, and the servant, on opening, was confronted with a
      decently-dressed woman, who asked in a peremptory voice if Mrs. Yule was at home.
'No? Then is Mr. Yule?'
'Yes, mum, but I'm afraid he's busy.'
'I don't care! I must see him. Say that Mrs. Goby wants to see him at once.'
The servant, not without apprehensions, delivered this message at the door of the study.
'Mrs. Goby? Who is Mrs. Goby?' exclaimed the man of letters, irate at the disturbance.
There sounded an answer out of the passage, for the visitor had followed close.
'I am Mrs. Goby, of the 'Olloway Road, wife of Mr. C. O. Goby, 'aberdasher. I just want to
      speak to you, Mr. Yule, if you please, seeing that Mrs. Yule isn't in.'
Yule started up in fury, and stared at the woman, to whom the servant had reluctantly given
      place.
'What business can you have with me? If you wish to see Mrs. Yule, come again when she is at
      home.'
'No, Mr. Yule, I will not come again!' cried the woman, red in the face. 'I thought
      I might have had respectable treatment here, at all
       events; but I see you're pretty much like your relations in the way of behaving
      to people, though you do wear better clothes, and — I s'pose — call yourself a
      gentleman. I won't come again, and you shall just hear what I've got to say.'
She closed the door violently, and stood in an attitude of robust defiance.
'What's all this about?' asked the enraged author, overcoming an impulse to take Mrs. Goby
      by the shoulders and throw her out — though he might have found some difficulty in achieving
      this feat. 'Who are you? And why do you come here with your brawling?'
'I'm the respectable wife of a respectable man — that's who I am, Mr. Yule, if you want to
      know. And I always thought Mrs. Yule was the same, from the dealings we've had with her at the
      shop, though not knowing any more of her, it's true, except that she lived in St. Paul's
      Crezzent. And so she may be respectable, though I can't say as her husband behaves himself
      very much like what he pretends to be. But I can't say as much for her relations in Perker
      Street, 'Olloway, which I s'pose they're your relations as well, at least by
      marriage. And if they think they're going to insult me, and use their blackguard tongues —
      '

'What are you talking about?' shouted Yule, who was driven to frenzy by the mention of his
      wife's humble family. 'What have I to do with these people?'
'What have you to do with them? I s'pose they're your relations, ain't they? And I
      s'pose the girl Annie Rudd is your niece, ain't she? At least, she's your wife's niece, and
      that comes to the same thing, I've always understood, though I dare say a gentleman as has so
      many books about him can correct me if I've made a mistake.'
She looked scornfully, though also with some surprise, round the volumed walls.
'And what of this girl? Will you have the goodness to say what your business is?'
'Yes, I will have the goodness! I s'pose you know very well that I took your niece
      Annie Rudd as a domestic servant' — she repeated thi precise definition — 'as a domestic
      servant, because Mrs. Yule 'appened to arst me if I knew of a place for a girl of that kind,
      as hadn't been out before, but could be trusted to do her bes to give satisfaction to a good
      mistress? I s'pose you know that?'
'I know nothing of the kind. What have I to do with servants?

'Well, whether you've much to do with them or little, that's how it was. And nicely she's
      paid me out, has your niece, Miss Rudd. Of all the trouble I ever had with a girl! And now
      when she's run away back 'ome, and when I take the trouble to go arfter her, I'm to be
      insulted and abused as never was! Oh, they're a nice respectable family, those Rudds! Mrs.
      Rudd — that's Mrs. Yule's sister — what a nice, polite-spoken lady she is, to be
      sure? If I was to repeat the language — but there, I wouldn't lower myself. And I've been a
      brute of a mistress; I ill-use my servants, and I don't give 'em enough to eat, and I pay 'em
      worse than any woman in London! That's what I've learnt about myself by going to Perker
      Street, 'Olloway. And when I come here to ask Mrs. Yule what she means by recommending such a
      creature, from such a 'ome, I get insulted by her gentleman husband.'
Yule was livid with rage, but the extremity of his scorn withheld him from utterance of what
      he felt.
'As I said, all this has nothing to do with me. I will let Mrs. Yule know that you have
      called. I have no more time to spare.'
Mrs. Goby repeated at still greater length
       the details of her grievance, but long before she had finished Yule was sitting
      again at his desk in ostentatious disregard of her. Finally, the exasperated woman flung open
      the door, railed in a loud voice along the passage, and left the house with an alarming
      crash.
It was not long before Mrs. Yule returned. Before taking off her things, she went down into
      the kitchen with certain purchases, and there she learnt from the servant what had happened
      during her absence. Fear and trembling possessed her — the sick, faint dread always excited by
      her husband's wrath — but she felt obliged to go at once to the study. The scene that took
      place there was one of ignoble violence on Yule's part, and, on that of his wife, of terrified
      self-accusation, changing at length to dolorous resentment of the harshness with which she was
      treated. When it was over, Yule took his hat and went out.
He did not return for the mid-day meal, and when Marian, late in the afternoon, came back
      from the Museum, he was still absent.
Not finding her mother in the parlour, Marian called at the head of the kitchen stairs. The
      servant answered, saying that Mrs. Yule was up in her bedroom, and that she didn't seem
       well. Marian at once went up and knocked at the bedroom door. In a moment or two
      her mother came out, showing a face of tearful misery.
'What is it, mother? What's the matter?'
They went into Marian's room, where Mrs. Yule gave free utterance to her lamentations.
'I can't put up with it, Marian! Your father's too hard with me. I was wrong, I dare say,
      and I might have known what would have come of it, but he couldn't speak to me worse if I did
      him all the harm I could on purpose. It's all about Annie, because I found a place for her at
      Mrs. Goby's, in the 'Olloway Road; and now Mrs. Goby's been here and seen your father, and
      told him she's been insulted by the Rudds, because Annie went off home, and she went after her
      to make inquiries. And your father's in such a passion about it as never was. That woman Mrs.
      Goby rushed into the study when he was working; it was this morning, when I happened to be
      out. And she throws all the blame on me for recommending her such a girl. And I did it for the
      best, that I did! Annie promised me faithfully she'd behave well, and never give me trouble,
      and she seemed thankful to me, because she wasn't happy at home. And now to think
       of her causing all this disturbance! I oughtn't to have done such a thing
      without speaking about it to your father; but you know how afraid I am to say a word to him
      about those people. And my sister's told me so often I ought to be ashamed of myself, never
      helping her and her children; she thinks I could do such a lot if I only liked. And now that I
      did try to do something, see what comes of it!'
Marian listened with a confusion of wretched feelings. But her sympathies were strongly with
      her mother; as well as she could understand the broken story, her father seemed to have no
      just cause for his pitiless rage, though such an occasion would be likely enough to bring out
      his worst faults.
'Is he in the study?' she asked.
'No; he went out at twelve o'clock, and he's never been back since. I feel as if I must do
      something; I can't bear with it, Marian. He tells me I'm the curse of his life — yes, he said
      that. I oughtn't to tell you, I know I oughtn't; but it's more than I can bear. I've always
      tried to do my best, but it gets harder and harder for me. But for me, he'd never be in these
      bad tempers; it's because he can't look at me without getting angry. He says I've kept him
      back
       all through his life; but for me, he might have been far better off than he is.
      It may be true; I've often enough thought it. But I can't bear to have it told me like that,
      and to see it in his face every time he looks at me. I shall have to do something. He'd be
      glad if only I was out of his way.'
'Father has no right to make you so unhappy,' said Marian. 'I can't see that you did
      anything blameworthy; it seems to me that it was your duty to try and help Annie, and if it
      turned out unfortunately, that can't be helped. You oughtn't to think so much of what father
      says in his anger; I believe he hardly knows what he does say. Don't take it so much to heart,
      mother.'
'I've tried my best, Marian,' sobbed the poor woman, who felt that even her child's sympathy
      could not be perfect, owing to the distance put between them by Marian's education and refined
      sensibilities. 'I've always thought it wasn't right to talk to you about such things, but he's
      been too hard with me to-day.'
'I think it was better you should tell me. It can't go on like this; I feel that just as you
      do. I must tell father that he is making our lives a burden to us.'

'Oh, you mustn't speak to him like that, Marian! I wouldn't for anything make unkindness
      between you and your father; that would be the worst thing I'd done yet. I'd rather go away
      and work for my own living than make trouble between you and him.'
'It isn't you who make trouble; it's father. I ought to have spoken to him before this; I
      had no right to stand by and see how much you suffered from his ill-temper.'
The longer they talked, the firmer grew Marian's resolve to front her father's tyrannous
      ill-humour, and in one way or another to change the intolerable state of things. She had been
      weak to hold her peace so long; at her age it was a simple duty to interfere when her mother
      was treated with such flagrant injustice. Her father's behaviour was unworthy of a thinking
      man, and he must be made to feel that.
Yule did not return. Dinner was delayed for half an hour, then Marian declared that they
      would wait no longer. The two made a sorry meal, and afterwards went together into the
      sitting-room. At eight o'clock they heard the front door open, and Yule's footstep in the
      passage. Marian rose.
'Don't speak till to-morrow!' whispered her
       mother, catching at the girl's arm. 'Let it be till to-morrow, Marian!'
'I must speak! We can't live in this terror.'
She reached the study just as her father was closing the door behind him. Yule, seeing her
      enter, glared with blood-shot eyes; shame and sullen anger were blended on his
      countenance.
'Will you tell me what is wrong, father?' Marian asked, in a voice which betrayed her
      nervous suffering, yet indicated the resolve with which she had come.
'I am not at all disposed to talk of the matter,' he replied, with the awkward rotundity of
      phrase which distinguished him in his worst humour. 'For information you had better go to Mrs.
      Goby — or a person of some such name — in Holloway Road. I have nothing more to do with
      it.'
'It was very unfortunate that the woman came and troubled you about such things. But I can't
      see that mother was to blame; I don't think you ought to be so angry with her.'
It cost Marian a terrible effort to address her father in these terms. When he turned
      fiercely upon her, she shrank back and felt as if strength must fail her even to stand.
'You can't see that she was to blame? Isn't
       it entirely against my wish that she keeps up any intercourse with those low
      people? Am I to be exposed to insulting disturbance in my very study, because she chooses to
      introduce girls of bad character as servants to vulgar women?'
'I don't think Annie Rudd can be called a girl of bad character, and it was very natural
      that mother should try to do something for her. You have never actually forbidden her to see
      her relatives.'
'A thousand times I have given her to understand that I utterly disapproved of such
      association. She knew perfectly well that this girl was as likely as not to discredit her. If
      she had consulted me, I should at once have forbidden anything of the kind; she was aware of
      that. She kept it secret from me, knowing that it would excite my displeasure. I will not be
      drawn into such squalid affairs; I won't have my name spoken in such connection. Your mother
      has only herself to blame if I am angry with her.'
'Your anger goes beyond all bounds. At the very worst, mother behaved imprudently, and with
      a very good motive. It is cruel that you should make her suffer as she is doing.'
Marian was being strengthened to resist.
       Her blood grew hot; the sensation which once before had brought her to the verge
      of conflict with her father possessed her heart and brain.
'You are not a suitable judge of my behaviour,' replied Yule, severely.
'I am driven to speak. We can't go on living in this way, father. For months our home has
      been almost ceaselessly wretched, because of the ill-temper you are always in. Mother and I
      must defend ourselves; we can't bear it any longer. You must surely feel how ridiculous it is
      to make such a thing as happened this morning the excuse for violent anger. How can I help
      judging your behaviour? When mother is brought to the point of saying that she would rather
      leave home and everything than endure her misery any longer, I should be wrong if I didn't
      speak to you. Why are you so unkind? What serious cause has mother ever given you?'
'I refuse to argue such questions with you.'
'Then you are very unjust. I am not a child, and there's nothing wrong in my asking you why
      home is made a place of misery, instead of being what home ought to be.'
'You prove that you are a child, in asking
       for explanations which ought to be clear enough to you.'
'You mean that mother is to blame for everything?'
'The subject is no fit one to be discussed between a father and his daughter. If you cannot
      see the impropriety of it, be so good as to go away and reflect, and leave me to my
      occupations.'
Marian came to a pause. But she knew that his rebuke was mere unworthy evasion; she saw that
      her father could not meet her look, and this perception of shame in him impelled her to finish
      what she had begun.
'I will say nothing of mother, then, but speak only for myself. I suffer too much from your
      unkindness; you ask too much endurance.'
'You mean that I exact too much work from you?' asked her father, with a look which might
      have been directed to a recalcitrant clerk.
'No. But that you make the conditions of my work too hard. I live in constant fear of your
      anger.'
'Indeed? When did I last ill-use you, or threaten you?'

'I often think that threats, or even ill-usage, would be easier to bear than an unchanging
      gloom which always seems on the point of breaking into violence.'
'I am obliged to you for your criticism of my disposition and manner but unhappily I am too
      old to reform. Life has made me what I am, and I should have thought that your knowledge of
      what my life has been would have gone far to excuse a lack of cheerfulness in me.'
The irony of this laborious period was full of self pity. His voice quavered at the close,
      and a tremor was noticeable in his stiff frame.
'It isn't lack of cheerfulness that I mean, father. That could never have brought me to
      speak like this.'
'If you wish me to admit that I am bad-tempered, surly, irritable — I make no difficulty
      about that. The charge is true enough. I can only ask you again: What are the circumstances
      that have ruined my temper? When you present yourself here with a general accusation of my
      behaviour, I am at a loss to understand what you ask of me, what you wish me to say or do. I
      must beg you to speak plainly. Are you suggesting that I should make provision
       for the support of you and your mother away from my intolerable proximity? My
      income is not large, as I think you are aware, but of course if a demand of this kind is
      seriously made, I must do my best to comply with it.'
'It hurts me very much that you can understand me no better than this.'
'I am sorry. I think we used to understand each other, but that was before you were
      subjected to the influence of strangers.'
In his perverse frame of mind he was ready to give utterance to any thought which confused
      the point at issue. This last allusion was suggested to him by a sudden pang of regret for the
      pain he was causing Marian; he defended himself against self-reproach by hinting at the true
      reason of much of his harshness.
'I am subjected to no influence that is hostile to you,' Marian replied.
'You may think that. But in such a matter it is very easy for you to deceive yourself.'
'Of course I know what you refer to, and I can assure you that I don't deceive myself.'
Yule flashed a searching glance at her.
'Can you deny that you are on terms of
       friendship with a — a person who would at any moment rejoice to injure me?'
'I am friendly with no such person. Will you say whom you are thinking of?'
'It would be useless. I have no wish to discuss a subject on which we should only disagree
      unprofitably.'
Marian kept silence for a moment, then said in a low, unsteady voice:
'It is perhaps because we never speak of that subject that we are so far from understanding
      each other. If you think that Mr. Milvain is your enemy, that he would rejoice to injure you,
      you are grievously mistaken.'
'When I see a man in close alliance with my worst enemy, and looking to that enemy for
      favour, I am justified in thinking that he would injure me if the right kind of opportunity
      offered. One need not be very deeply read in human nature to have assurance of that.'
'But I know Mr. Milvain!'
'You know him?'
'Far better than you can, I am sure. You draw conclusions from general principles; but I
      know that they don't apply in this case.'
'I have no doubt you sincerely think so.
       I repeat, that nothing can be gained by such a discussion as this.'
'One thing I must tell you. There was no truth in your suspicion that Mr. Milvain wrote that
      review in The Current . He assured me himself that he was not the writer, that he had
      nothing to do with it.'
Yule looked askance at her, and his face displayed solicitude, which soon passed, however,
      into a smile of sarcasm.
'The gentleman's word no doubt has weight with you.'
'Father, what do you mean?' broke from Marian, whose eyes of a sudden flashed stormily.
      'Would Mr. Milvain tell me a lie?'
'I shouldn't like to say that it is impossible,' replied her father in the same tone as
      before.
'But — what right have you to insult him so grossly?'
'I have every right, my dear child, to express an opinion about him or any other man,
      provided I do it honestly. I beg you not to strike attitudes and address me in the language of
      the stage. You insist on my speaking plainly, and I have spoken plainly. I warned you that we
      were not like y to agree on this topic.'
'Literary quarrels have made you incapable
       of judging honestly in things such as this. I wish I could have done for ever
      with the hateful profession that so poisons men's minds!'
'Believe me, my girl,' said her father, incisively, 'the simpler thing would be to hold
      aloof from such people as use the profession in a spirit of unalloyed selfishness, who seek
      only material advancement, and who, whatever connection they form, have nothing but
      self-interest in view.'
And he glared at her with much meaning. Marian — both had remained standing all through the
      dialogue — cast down her eyes and became lost in brooding.
'I speak with profound conviction,' pursued her father, 'and, however little you credit me
      with such a motive, out of desire to guard you against the dangers to which your inexperience
      is exposed. It is perhaps as well that you have afforded me this — '
There sounded at the house-door that duplicated double-knock which generally announces the
      bearer of a telegram. Yule interrupted himself, and stood in an attitude of waiting. The
      servant was heard to go along the passage, to open the door, and then return towards the
      study. Yes, it was a telegram. Such despatches
       rarely came to this house; Yule tore the envelope, read its contents, and stood
      with gaze fixed upon the slip of paper until the servant inquired if there was any reply for
      the boy to take with him.
'No reply.'
He slowly crumpled the envelope, and stepped aside to throw it into the paper-basket. The
      telegram he laid on his desk. Marian stood all the time with bent head; he now looked at her
      with an expression of meditative displeasure.
'I don't know that there's much good in resuming our conversation,' he said, in quite a
      changed tone, as if something of more importance had taken possession of his thoughts and had
      made him almost indifferent to the past dispute. 'But of course I am quite willing to hear
      anything you would still like to say.'
Marian had lost her vehemence. She was absent and melancholy.
'I can only ask you,' she replied, 'to try and make life less of a burden to us.'
'I shall have to leave town to-morrow for a few days; no doubt it will be some satisfaction
      to you to hear that.'
Marian's eyes turned involuntarily towards the telegram.

'As for your occupation in my absence,' he went on, in a hard tone which yet had something
      tremulous, emotional, making it quite different from the voice he had hitherto used, 'that
      will be entirely a matter for your own judgment. I have felt for some time that you assisted
      me with less good-will than formerly, and now that you have frankly admitted it, I shall of
      course have very little satisfaction in requesting your aid. I must leave it to you; consult
      your own inclination.'
It was resentful, but not savage; between the beginning and the end of his speech he
      softened to a sort of self-satisfied pathos.
'I can't pretend,' replied Marian, 'that I have as much pleasure in the work as I should
      have if your mood were gentler.'
'I am sorry. I might perhaps have made greater efforts to appear at ease when I was
      suffering.'
'Do you mean physical suffering?'
'Physical and mental. But that can't concern you. During my absence I will think of your
      reproof. I know that it is deserved, in some degree. If it is possible, you shall have less to
      complain of in future.'
He looked about the room, and at length
       seated himself; his eyes were fixed in a direction away from Marian.
'I suppose you had dinner somewhere?' Marian asked, after catching a glimpse of his worn,
      colourless face.
'Oh, I had a mouthful of something. It doesn't matter.'
It seemed as if he found some special pleasure in assuming this tone of martyrdom just now.
      At the same time he was becoming more absorbed in thought.
'Shall I have something brought up for you, father?'
'Something — ? Oh no, no; on no account.'
He rose again impatiently, then approached his desk, and laid a hand on the telegram. Marian
      observed this movement, and examined his face; it was set in an expression of eagerness.
'You have nothing more to say then?' He turned sharply upon her.
'I feel that I haven't made you understand me, but I can say nothing more.'
'I understand you very well, too well. That you should misunderstand and mistrust me, I
      suppose, is natural. You are young and I am old. You are still full of hope, and I have been
      so often deceived and defeated that I dare not
       let a ray of hope enter my mind. Judge me; judge me as hardly as you like. My
      life has been one long bitter struggle, and if now — I say,' he began a new sentence, 'that
      only the hard side of life has been shown to me; small wonder if I have become hard myself.
      Desert me; go your own way, as the young always do. But bear in mind my warning. Remember the
      caution I have given you.'
He spoke in a strangely sudden agitation. The arm with which he leaned upon the table
      trembled violently. After a moment's pause he added, in a thick voice:
'Leave me. I will speak to you again in the morning.'
Impressed in a way she did not understand Marian at once obeyed, and rejoined her mother in
      the parlour. Mrs. Yule gazed anxiously at her as she entered.
'Don't be afraid,' said Marian, with difficulty bringing herself to speak. 'I think it will
      be better.'
'Was that a telegram that came?' her mother inquired after a silence.
'Yes. I don't know where it was from. But father said he would have to leave town for a few
      days.'

They exchanged looks.
'Perhaps your uncle is very ill,' said the mother in a low voice.
'Perhaps so.'
The evening passed drearily. Fatigued with her emotions, Marian went early to bed; she even
      slept later than usual in the morning, and on descending she found her father already at the
      breakfast table. No greeting passed, and there was no conversation during the meal. Marian
      noticed that her mother kept glancing at her in a peculiarly grave way; but she felt ill and
      dejected, and could fix her thoughts on no subject. As he left the table Yule said to her:
'I want to speak to you for a moment. I shall be in the study.'
She joined him there very soon. He looked coldly at her, and said in a distant tone:
'The telegram last night was to tell me that your uncle is dead.'
'Dead!'
'He died of apoplexy, at a meeting in Wattleborough. I shall go down this morning, and of
      course remain till after the funeral. I see no necessity for your going, unless, of course, it
      is your desire to do so.'
'No; I should do as you wish.'

'I think you had better not go to the Museum whilst I am away. You will occupy yourself as
      you think fit.'
'I shall go on with the Harrington notes.'
'As you please. I don't know what mourning it would be decent for you to wear; you must
      consult with your mother about that. That is all I wished to say.'
His tone was dismissal. Marian had a struggle with herself, but she could find nothing to
      reply to his cold phrases. And an hour or two afterwards Yule left the house without
      leave-taking.
Soon after his departure there was a visitor's rat-tat at the door; it heralded Mrs. Goby.
      In the interview which then took place Marian assisted her mother to bear the vigorous
      onslaughts of the haberdasher's wife. For more than two hours Mrs. Goby related her
      grievances, against the fugitive servant, against Mrs. Yule, against Mr. Yule; meeting with no
      irritating opposition, she was able in this space of time to cool down to the temperature of
      normal intercourse, and when she went forth from the house again it was in a mood of dignified
      displeasure which she felt to be some recompense for the injuries of yesterday.

A result of this annoyance was to postpone conversation between mother and daughter on the
      subject of John Yule's death until a late hour of the afternoon. Marian was at work in the
      study, or endeavouring to work, for her thoughts would not fix themselves on the matter in
      hand for many minutes together, and Mrs. Yule came in with more than her customary
      diffidence.
'Have you nearly done for to-day, dear?'
'Enough for the present, I think.'
She laid down her pen, and leant back in the chair.
'Marian, do you think your father will be rich?'
'I have no idea, mother. I suppose we shall know very soon.'
Her tone was dreamy. She seemed to herself to be speaking of something which scarcely at all
      concerned her, of vague possibilities which did not affect her habits of thought.
'If that happens,' continued Mrs. Yule, in a low tone of distress, 'I don't know what I
      shall do.'
Marian looked at her questioningly.
'I can't wish that it mayn't happen,' her mother went on; 'I can't, for his sake and for
       yours; but I don't know what I shall do. He'd think me more in his way than
      ever. He'd wish to have a large house, and live in quite a different way; and how could I
      manage then? I couldn't show myself; he'd be too much ashamed of me. I shouldn't be in my
      place; even you'd feel ashamed of me.'
'You mustn't say that, mother. I have never given you cause to think that.'
'No, my dear, you haven't; but it would be only natural. I couldn't live the kind of life
      that you're fit for. I shall be nothing but a hindrance and a shame to both of you.'
'To me you would never be either hindrance or shame; be quite sure of that. And as for
      father, I am all but certain that, if he became rich, he would be a very much kinder man, a
      better man in every way. It is poverty that has made him worse than he naturally is; it has
      that effect on almost everybody. Money does harm, too, sometimes; but never, I think, to
      people who have a good heart and a strong mind. Father is naturally a warm-hearted man; riches
      would bring out all the best in him. He would be generous again, which he has almost forgotten
      how to be among all his disappointments
       and battlings. Don't be afraid of that change, but hope for it.'
Mrs. Yule gave a troublous sigh, and for a few minutes pondered anxiously.
'I wasn't thinking so much about myself,' she said at length. 'It's the hindrance I should
      be to father. Just because of me, he mightn't be able to use his money as he'd wish. He'd
      always be feeling that if it wasn't for me things would be so much better for him and for you
      as well.'
'You must remember,' Marian replied, 'that at father's age people don't care to make such
      great changes. His home life, I feel sure, wouldn't be so very different from what it is now;
      he would prefer to use his money in starting a paper or magazine. I know that would be his
      first thought. If more acquaintances came to his house, what would that matter? It isn't as if
      he wished for fashionable society. They would be literary people, and why ever shouldn't you
      meet with them?'
'I've always been the reason why he couldn't have many friends.'
'That's a great mistake. If father ever said that, in his bad temper, he knew it wasn't the
      truth. The chief reason has always been his
       poverty. It costs money to entertain friends; time as well. Don't think in this
      anxious way, mother. If we are to be rich, it will be better for all of us.'
Marian had every reason for seeking to persuade herself that this was true. In her own heart
      there was a fear of how wealth might affect her father, but she could not bring herself to
      face the darker prospect. For her so much depended on that hope of a revival of generous
      feeling under sunny influences.
It was only after this conversation that she began to reflect on all the possible
      consequences of her uncle's death. As yet she had been too much disturbed to grasp as a
      reality the event to which she had often looked forward, though as to something still remote
      and of quite uncertain results. Perhaps at this moment, though she could not know it, the
      course of her life had undergone the most important change. Perhaps there was no more need for
      her to labour upon this 'article' she was manufacturing.
She did not think it probable that she herself would benefit directly by John Yule's will.
      There was no certainty that even her father would, for he and his brother had never been on
      cordial terms. But on the whole it seemed
       likely that he would inherit money enough to free him from the toil of writing
      for periodicals. He himself anticipated that. What else could be the meaning of those words in
      which (and it was before the arrival of the news) he had warned her against 'people who made
      connections only with self-interest in view'? This threw a sudden light upon her father's
      attitude towards Jasper Milvain. Evidently he thought that Jasper regarded her as a possible
      heiress, sooner or later. That suspicion was rankling in his mind; doubtless it intensified
      the prejudice which originated in literary animosity.
Was there any truth in his suspicion? She did not shrink from admitting that there might be.
      Jasper had from the first been so frank with her, had so often repeated that money was at
      present his chief need. If her father inherited substantial property, would it induce Jasper
      to declare himself more than her friend? She could view the possibility of that, and yet not
      for a moment be shaken in her love. It was plain that Jasper could not think of marrying until
      his position and prospects were greatly improved; practically, his sisters depended upon him.
      What folly it would be to draw back if circumstances led him to avow what hitherto he
       had so slightly disguised! She had the conviction that he valued her for her own
      sake; if the obstacle between them could only be removed, what matter how?
Would he be willing to abandon Clement Fadge, and come over to her father's side? If Yule
      were able to found a magazine?
Had she read or heard of a girl who went so far in concessions, Marian would have turned
      away, her delicacy offended. In her own case she could indulge to the utmost that practicality
      which colours a woman's thought even in mid-passion. The cold exhibition of ignoble scheming
      will repel many a woman who, for her own heart's desire, is capable of that same compromise
      with her strict sense of honour.
Marian wrote to Dora Milvain, telling her what had happened. But she refrained from visiting
      her friends.
Each night found her more restless, each morning less able to employ herself. She shut
      herself in the study merely to be alone with her thoughts, to be able to walk backwards and
      forwards, or sit for hours in feverish reverie. From her father came no news. Her mother was
      suffering dreadfully from suspense, and
       often had eyes red with weeping. Absorbed in her own hopes and fears, whilst
      every hour harassed her more intolerably, Marian was unable to play the part of an encourager;
      she had never known such exclusiveness of self-occupation.
Yule's return was unannounced. Early in the afternoon, when he had been absent five days, he
      entered the house, deposited his travelling-bag in the passage, and went upstairs. Marian had
      come out of the study just in time to see him up on the first landing; at the same moment Mrs.
      Yule ascended from the kitchen.
'Wasn't that father?'
'Yes, he had gone up.'
'Did he say anything?'
Marian shook her head. They looked at the travelling-bag, then went into the parlour and
      waited in silence for more than a quarter of an hour. Yule's foot was heard on the stairs; he
      came down slowly, paused in the passage, entered the parlour with his usual grave, cold
      countenance.

