
CHAPTER XLII.
LIFELESS! Yes! But there are two kinds of lifelessness : one from which there is no
     back-coming—one from which there is. Esther's is the latter. Although a member of that
     fraternity whose province it is to kill and to make alive has sapiently said of her, "She will
     die!—she has not a week to live!" Mother Nature has made answer, "She shall not die; I
     will save her alive! She has yet many years." And Esther lives. For many days, it is hard to
     predicate of her whether she be dead or alive; so faintly does the wave of life heave to and
     fro in her breast—so lowly does life's candle burn. But though the candle burn low, it is not
     blown out. By-and-bye strength gathers itself again, and comes back to pulse and vein and
     limb.
At seventeen life holds us so fast in his embrace that he will hardly let us go. To the sick
     child there come sweet sleeps; there comes a desire for food—a pleasure in the dusty sunbeam
     streaming through the window—in the mote
      playing up and down on ceiling and wall. I marvel will the
     bliss of spirits at the Resurrection dawn, feeling the clothing of pure new bodies, surpass the
     delight that attends the renewal of the old body at the uprising from a great sickness? The
     blanket that hung between Esther and all objects of sensation is withdrawn: full consciousness
     returns, and remembrance; and in their company, untold shame—shame at not having died! The
     celandine's greenish buds are unclosing into little brazen wide-awake flowers in the
     hedge-banks: the crocuses in the garden-borders hold up their gold chalices to catch the gentle
     February rain and the mild February sunbeams; in the wood-hollows the mercury—spring's earliest
     herald—flourishes, thick and frequent, its stout green shoots. About the meadows, small gawky
     lambs make a feeble "ba-a-a-ing." It is drawing towards sundown. The window is open; and near
     it, on a beech bough, a thrush sits, singing a loud sweet even-song.
Esther has been fully dressed for the first time, and has been moved into an adjoining
     dressing-room. In the small change of scene, there is, to her, intense delight—delight even in
     the changed pattern on the walls, in the different shape of the chairs—even in the brass
     handles of the old oak chest of drawers. Every power seems new and fresh—every sensation
     exquisitely keen; in every exercise of sight and sound and touch there is conscious joy. She
     has been amusing herself making little tests of her strength. She lifts a book that lies on the
     table beside her; it is small and light, but to her it seems over-heavy; she has to take two
     hands to it. She makes a pilgrimage from her arm-chair to the window—she has to catch at the
     wall, at the furniture, for support; but she gets there at last, and, sitting down on the
     window-seat, looks out at the quiet sky, blackened with home-coming rooks—at the pool made
     flame-red by the westering sun—at the peeping roof of the
      distant deer-barn. That little bit of roof brings a flood of
     recollections to her, and first and foremost amongst them stands St. John and her last
     interview with him. Although she is quite alone, a torrent of red invades cheeks and throat and
     brow, even to the roots of her hair. " I sent for him," she says to herself, with a
     sort of gasp; " I asked him to kiss me, and I did not die! How horrible! I
     must never see him again." Then she falls to thinking about him: whether he is still in the
     house? whether he has made up his differences with Miss Blessington? whether he is very joyful
     at her own recovery? whether he is not penetrated with the ridiculousness of her impressive
     leave-taking, which, after all—oh bathos!—was no leave-taking at all? "He must never hear me
     mentioned again," she says, twisting her hands nervously together. "Perhaps he will forget it
     in time; perhaps he will not tell any one about it. How soon shall I be well enough to go?—in a
     week? five days? four? three?—and whither am I to go?" 
Aye, whither, Miss Craven? There are but two alternatives for her—the Union and Plas Berwyn.
     She must swallow her pride, and return to the Brandons: to the long prayers; to the half-past
     six tea and bread and scrape; to the three bits of bacon at breakfast; and to the perusal of
     the Record and the Rock: she must induce Mrs. Brandon again to advertise for
     a situation in a pious family. This morning's post has brought her four pages of doctrine,
     reproof, and instruction from Miss Bessy, and, lurking within them, has come a short, sweet,
     metrical prayer, adapted to every Christian's daily use:

"My heart is like a rusty lock,
Lord, oil it with Thy grace;
And rub, and rub, and rub it, Lord,
Till I can see Thy face."
There is no time like the present; she will write now.
      She has drawn paper and pens towards her, when the door
     opens, and her friend the housemaid enters. Doctor and nurse have fled,

"Like bats and owls,
And such melancholy fowls,
At the rising of the day."
"If you please, Miss Craven, do you feel well enough to see visitors?"
She looks up astonished. "I'm well enough for anything; but I'm sure I don't know who is
     likely to visit me."
"Mr. Gerard was asking whether he might speak to you 'm?"
"Certainly not—I mean yes—No.—Yes, I suppose—if he wishes," replies the girl, stammering
     hopelessly.
Miss Craven looks rather small, and excessively childish, sunk in her huge elbow-chair; a
     white wrapper envelopes her figure; her hair, which she has not taken the trouble to dress
     properly, is twisted up in the loosest, unfashionablest, sweetest great knot at the back of her
     neck; while a cherry-coloured ribbon coquettishly snoods her noble small head: the innocentest,
     freshest, shyest rosebud-face, and the liquidest southern eyes, complete the picture. St. John
     apparently treads hard upon the heels of the messenger, for, before permission is well accorded
     him, he is in his mistress's presence. Upon his brown face is untold gladness—in his eyes
     enormous love; and in them lurks also a look of half-malicious, half-tender mirth. She rises,
     and then sits down again, in unutterable confusion; and at length holds out her hand with
     distant diffidence to him, while as intense a blush as ever made mortal woman call upon the
     hills to cover her, bathes every inch of her that is visible. Her cheeks feel like gigantic red
     globes; over
      which her eyes have difficulty in looking. His
     eyes, laughing, pitiless, yet impassioned, refuse to leave her.
"You did not give me so cold a greeting when I last saw you, Essie?" he says, with an
     enraging smile of passionate triumph.
She turns away her head, and covers her face with both hands; but, in the interstices between
     her fingers, the lovely carnation blazes manifestly vivid.
"Oh, don't—don't be so cruel!" she murmurs, in a stifled voice.
"The truth can never be cruel!" he says quietly, smiling still; and so kneels down on the
     floor beside her.
But she only murmurs, "Go away; please go away! please let me alone!" —the words
     coming half-broken, half lost, from behind the covering of her hands.
He puts up his, and tries to draw away the screen from her shamed discomfited face, saying,
     "Look at me, Essie !" But she, with all her feeble strength, resists.
"I cannot!—I cannot!" she cries, vehemently; "don't ask me! Why didn't I die? When they saw I
     was getting well, they ought to have killed me. Oh, I wish they had!"
"I'm rather glad, on the whole, they did not," he answers, gravely; and so, with one final
     effort, he being strong, and she being weak, he obtains possession of her two hands, and her
     face lies bare, unshaded—dyed with an agony of shame—clothed with great beauty—under the hungry
     tenderness of his happy eyes.
"To think of making one's last dying speech and confession, and then not dying after all,"
     she says, in torments of confusion, yet unable to restrain an uneasy laugh. "It is too
     disgraceful! I shall never get over it! Never !—NEVER !— NEVER!!" 
"Time, which mitigates all afflictions, may mitigate
      yours," he replies, gaily, unable to resist the exquisite
     pleasure of teasing her.
She turns from him with a petulant movement of head and shoulder. "Why don't you go?" she
     cries, the angry tears flashing into her eyes; "I hate the sight of you!"
At that he grows grave. "Essie," he says, slipping his arms round her as she sits, shrinking
     away from him in the deep chintz chair, "in that awful moment, when you thought—and God knows I
     thought so too—that we were saying 'goodbye' to one another for always, the barriers
     that your wretched false pride had built up between us were knocked down; try as you may, you
     can never build them up again."
"I knocked down plenty of barriers, I'm aware," she answers, ruefully. "You need not remind
     me of that!" 
"Never to be built up again any more—never any more!" he says, his mirth swallowed up in
     great solemn joy.
She has fallen forwards into his embrace; he holds her little trembling form against his
     heart—a posture to which she submits, chiefly because it affords her an opportunity of hiding
     her face upon his shoulder.
"Never any more!" she repeats, mechanically, and then there is silence, save for the thrush,
     that trills ever his high tender lay. Presently Essie stirs, and whispers, with uneasiness,
     "St. John!" 
"Well?"
"You won't tell any one, will you?"
"Tell them what?—that you and I are going to be married? By this time to-morrow I hope to
     have told every one I meet: I am not so selfish as to wish to keep such good news to
     myself."
"No—I don't mean that; but you won't tell any one about—about—about that ?" This is
     the nearest approach she can bear to make to the abhorred theme.
"Esther!"

"And you'll promise never to joke about it?"
"Never, by the holy poker!"
"And you won't twit me with it when we quarrel?"
"What! you contemplate our having little differences of opinion?"
"Of course," she answers, laughing; "when two such ill-tempered people come together, how can
     it be otherwise?"
"Quarrel or no quarrel," he cries, passionately kissing her sweet shy lips, as one that can
     never be satiated with their tender warmth, "we are together now, for bad and good, for fair
     weather and foul, till death us do part! Say it after me, Essie; don't let ours be a one-sided
     compact."
And Essie, obedient, murmurs after him, "Till death us do part!"

And so it comes to pass that in the sweet spring weather, when the ground is a carpet of
     strewn cherry-blooms, when the cows stand knee-deep in buttercups, and the brake-fern is
     uncrumpling its tender fronds, the church-bells ring out, and they two are wed.
And the sun, that shines down on the bravery of the wedding pomp, as bride and groom pace by,
     shines also hotlier, with a more brazen sickly glare, on a soldier's grave, over which, three
     days ago, his comrades fired the parting volley on Bermuda's sultry shore.
The name of the soldier to whom Heaven has granted his discharge is Robert Brandon. Esther
     Gerard may spare her remorse now; treachery of hers can wound that loyal heart, on which the
     worm feeds sweetly, never more! Not unknowing of the good fortune of the woman he had so madly,
     miserably, nobly loved, has he passed away. In his poor schoolboy scrawl he had written her a
     little simple, badly-worded note, bidding, "God bless and speed her on her way!" The tears had
     fallen hot and thick upon the paper;
      but he had wiped them off, and she had never guessed them.
     He has hoarded his scant pay, has denied himself many of the small comforts that to his
     brother-officers are bare necessaries of life, that he may send her a wedding-gift befitting
     Gerard's bride. And he had gone about his wonted ways with no moping martyr's airs, unshaken in
     his simple creed that, since God wills it, all must be for the best. His honest laugh, if it
     come seldomer than it used, yet is none the less hearty and genial when it does come. And then,
     that pestilence which, at stated seasons, never forgetting its appointed periods, visits that
     tropic clime, comes and lays its heavy hand on the shoulder of many a fair-haired youth; and,
     among the first, upon the stalwart shoulder of Robert Brandon. And he, with no life-hating
     madness, with no quarrel against fate, yet not all unwilling, having stoutly fought life's hard
     battle:

"Surrenders his fair soul
Unto his Captain—Christ!" 
THE END.
 BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD. J. D. & Co. 
