
CHAPTER XXXIV.
No one ever accused the dinners en famille at Felton of being too lively;
     but, that evening, Gerard decides that they yield the palm, in point of perfect: stagnation, to
     Blessington. There is, indeed, none of that lynx-eyed watching of the servants, none of that
     pouncing upon their minutest derelictions, which makes dining in Sir Thomas's company so
     thoroughly uncomfortable a process : no one calls the fat red-faced butler and the two
     blue-and-yellow footmen "hounds, louts, fools."
At Blessington, indeed the servants have things pretty much their own way; and, accustomed to
     their master's total and mistress's partial deafness, have got into a habit of conversing with
     one another in a tone of voice considerably above that usually considered seemly in civilised
      ménages. With one member of the company (Miss Craven) St. John has entered into a
     pact to exchange no remarks, good or bad; a second member (Mr. Blessington) contributes nothing
     to the conversation but a series of inarticulate though loud mumblings over his food—with the
     exception of a question, addressed to the butler, as to what the viands upon the table under
     his sightless eyes consist of. "'Aricot—Volly Vong—Line of Mutton—Biled Turkey," enumerates
     that functionary, glibly, at the top of his voice.
      From a third member (Mrs. Blessington) St. John has already
     heard all that is to be said on the subject of draughts and sand-bags; and with the fourth
     member, conversation always drives as heavily as a loaded waggon dragged up a perpendicular
     hill.
The evening is but a prolongation of the dinner, with the additional disadvantage of there
     being no eating and drinking to employ the otherwise unoccupied jaws. "England expects
      every man to do his duty!" She expects every man who has the misfortune to be in the
     position of an affianced to sit, hours long, idle beside his betrothed—however ardently his
     soul may be sighing for a sheet of the Times or a whiff of Latakia: to hold converse
     with no other man, woman, or child, if she be in the room.
Since, at the entrance of the gentlemen, Constance looked up expectant, and since he has a
     vague idea that it is part of his share of their bargain to pay her all outward observance and
     attention, St. John seats himself on the sofa beside her. She sits rather forward, upright as a
     dart; he leans back, with his arms resting on the sofa behind her. It is not a caress; but,
     from a little distance, it has the air of one. The old gentleman, rendered surprisingly wakeful
     by the unwonted incident of the addition of a stranger to his little circle, insists upon
     hearing a pungent article on Gladstone and the Irish Church, over which he has fallen asleep in
     the morning, re-read to him by his little white slave.
"I am afraid I can hardly see, Mr. Blessington; there is so little light!" she has
     remonstrated, mildly.
"Light!—pooh!" repeats the old gentleman, gaily. "What do young eyes like yours want with
     light? They ought to be able to see in the dark, like cats. You'll be borrowing Mrs.
     Blessington's spectacles next—eh, Mrs. Blessington?"

"Mrs. Blessington is asleep, Mr. Blessington."
"Oh! Go on, then, my dear—go on. Let us hear what they have got to say for these rascally
     placehunters, who are trying to remove the landmarks of the Constitution for the sake of
     getting into office."
Her long damp evening rambles—rambles on which a mother would have put so decided a veto—have
     brought back Miss Craven's cold. She has been hoarse all day; and it is a well-known fact that
     hoarseness always becomes worse towards night: a tiresome little tickling cough interrupts her
     every moment. Add to which, her attention is completely distracted from the subject in hand by
     the involuntary and vain effort to catch what Mr. Gerard and his love are saying to one
     another. She would hardly have been repaid for her trouble had she succeeded.
"Had you a good run to-day?" 
"Yes, rather a quick thing."
"Which horse did you ride?"
"The grey—one you have not seen. I bought her in Ireland of Brownrigg; he required
     more of a weight- carrier."
"Does she seem likely to prove satisfactory?"
"Very: she has a good turn of speed, jumps capitally, and is very temperate."
"Was it a large field?" 
"Middling."
"Any one you knew?"
"Two or three" (with a yawn).
"You are going out to-morrow again, of course?" with a slight attempt at a pout, which is not
     even perceived by the person for whose benefit it is intended.
"No, I think not; it is five-and-twenty miles, and the trains do not fit: one gets lazy in
     one's old age. I suppose I shall agree soon with Brakespeare, of the —th, who sent
      seven horses down to Melton last year; and at the end of the
     season confessed that he hated hunting, and that he thought it a very dangerous amusement."
"Really ?" answers Constance, who always takes everything au
      sérieux, opening her great eyes.
"No, not really—most assuredly!" he answers, laughing lazily. " On the contrary, I am nearer
     coinciding with the opinion of the Jewish gentleman, who said it would be a very pleasant world
     if there were no shummers and no shabbaths."
It is hardly worth Miss Craven's while, you will perceive, to lose her place twice, and get
     rated by her old employer, for the sake of hearing brilliant questions and answers of the above
     description. Though her jealous eyes are fixed upon the Saturday's columns, they see,
     none the less clearly, those two figures reclined upon the distant sofa. Once she sees St. John
     raise himself, and, stooping forward over his companion, speak with more animation than he has
     yet used. If she break the drum of her ear in the attempt, she must catch the drift of that
     remark-some delicious tender nothing, no doubt. She succeeds:
"By-the-bye, Conny, how was the lump on your pony's leg when you left home?" 
As another and another article follow the first, Esther's cough becomes increasingly
     troublesome: her throat aches with the effort of reading: her voice at each paragraph waxes
     huskier and huskier. For several minutes past Gerard's answers to Miss Blessington's questions
     have been growing ever more wildly random; suddenly he leaves the sofa, and comes over to Mr.
     Blessington's armchair.
"Will you let me read to you a bit?" he asks, in that loud unmodulated roar that
     people unused to the deaf think the only method of making them hear.
"Eh! what does he say?" inquires the old gentleman,
      sharply, lifting his head, and peering blindly up in the
     direction whence the voice came.
"I asked whether you would let me read to you, for a change, instead of Miss
     Craven?"
"No—thanks, no," replies the old man, ungraciously. "Much obliged to you, but I cannot hear a
     word you say; you run all your words into one another."
"Do I? I daresay," rejoins Gerard, good-humouredly; "but have you ever heard me read? I think
     not."
"Begging your pardon, I have, though; I heard you read prayers here one Sunday evening."
"And I am afraid my mode of conducting divine worship has not left a pleasant impression,"
     says the young man, laughing. "Well, but I promise to read as slow as ever you choose, and to
     count four at every full-stop."
"No—no," cries the old man, obstinately. "Get away with you, my dear boy! you are
     interrupting us. No offence, but we are very happy without you—aren't we, Miss Esther ? You
     attend to your own business; we don't offer to help you in that—do we—eh, my dear?" 
Baffled and vexed, St. John stands silent; and as he so stands, the young girl lifts her
     great meek eyes, dumbly grateful, to his. He has forbidden her to speak to him, but he cannot
     lay an embargo upon the gentle messages sent from those sorrowful shining orbs. His own meet
     them for an instant; then he turns away with a half-shudder.
"What a churchyard cough that girl has!" says Miss Blessington, fanning herself gently, as he
     reseats himself beside her; "it really quite fidgets one. Of course it is very unjust of one,
     but I always feel so angry with a person who goes 'cough, cough, cough' every
     minute."
"I feel angrier with the person who is the cause of it," answers Gerard, thoroughly chafed:
     "it is positive barbarity. You see what success I met with when I tried to
      relieve guard. Suppose you offer: you can always make him
     hear!"
"I should be delighted," answers Conny, blandly; "only, unfortunately, this damp weather
     makes my throat so relaxed "(touching the firm round pillar with two white slender fingers),
     "that I really should be afraid."
"Just try—there's a good girl," urges he, coaxingly; "you can stop in a minute if you find
     that it hurts you."
A mulish expression comes into her face; small good would persuasion, cajolery, threats, or
     promises do now! 
"I am very sorry I cannot oblige you; but as I am to dine out on Thursday, and one is always
     expected to sing, I really must nurse my voice."
