
CHAPTER NINE
MEADOWSWEETS
June came. The wall-flowers were long plucked or dead, the last snows of apple-blossom had
      vanished away, and the fruit was setting well. The woodlice were already ruining the young
      nectarines. "They spiles 'em in the growth an' scores 'em wi' their wicked lil teeth, then,
      come August an' they ripens, they'll begin again. But the peaches they won't touch now, 'cause
      of the fur 'pon 'em. Awnly they'll make up for't when the things is ready for eatin'." So
      Uncle Thomas explained the position to Joan. He, good man, had fulfilled his promise to see
      Michael Tregenza. It happened that a load of oar-weed was wanted on the farm, and Mr.
      Chirgwin, instead of sending one of the hands with horse and cart to Newlyn according to his
      custom when seaweed was needed, went himself. His elder niece expostulated with him and
      explained that such a trip would be interpreted to mean straitened circumstances on the farm;
      but her uncle was not proud, and when he explained that his real object was an opportunity to
      speak with Joan's father Mary said no more.
Screwing courage to the sticking-point, therefore, the old man went down to Newlyn on a
      morning when Joan was not by to question his movements. Fortune favored him. Michael had
      landed at daylight and was not sailing again till dusk. The fisherman listened patiently, but
      Mr. Chirgwin's inconsequent and sentimental conversation sounded as tinkling brass upon his
      ear. Both argued the question upon religious grounds, but from an entirely different
      standpoint. Michael was not at the trouble to talk much, for his visitor seemed scarce worthy
      of powder and shot. He explained that he deemed it damnation to hold unnecessary converse with
      sinners; that, by her act, Joan had raised eternal barriers between herself and those of her
      own home, and, indeed, all chosen people; that he had walked in the light from the dawn of his
      days until the present time, and could not imperil the souls of his wife, his son and himself
      by any further communion with one, in his judgment, lost beyond faintest possibility of
      redemption. Uncle Chirgwin listened with open mouth to these sentiments. He longed to relate
      how Joan had repented of her offense, how she had thrown herself upon the Lord, and found
      peace and forgiveness. No such thing could be recorded, however, and he felt himself at a
      disadvantage. He prayed for mercy on her behalf, but mercy was a luxury Gray Michael deemed
      beyond the reach of man. He showed absolutely no emotion upon the subject, and his chill
      unconcern quenched the farmer's ardor. Mr. Chirgwin mourned mightily that he held not a
      stronger case. Joan had tied his hands, at any rate, for the present. If she would only come
      round, accept the truth and abandon her present attitude—then he knew that he would fight like
      a giant for her, and that, with right upon his side, he would surely prevail. His last words
      upon the subject shadowed this conviction.
"Please God time may soften 'e, Tregenza; an', maybe, soften Joan tu. Her heart's warm yet,
      an' the truth will find its plaace theer in the Lard's awn time; but you—I doubt 'tedn' in you
      to change."
"Never, till wrong be right."
"You makes me sorry for 'e, Tregenza."
"Weep for yourself, Thomas Chirgwin. You'm that contented, an' the contented sawl be allus
      farthest from God if you awnly knawed it. Wheer's your fear an' tremblin' too? I've never seed
      'e afeared or shaken 'fore the thrawn o' the Most High in your life. But I 'sure 'e, thee'll
      come to it."
"An' you say that!' You'm 'mazin' blind, Tregenza, for all you walk in the Light. The
      Light's dazed 'e, I'm thinkin', same as birds a breakin' theer wings 'gainst lighthouse
      glasses. You sez you be a worm twenty times a day, an' yet you'm proud enough for Satan
      hisself purty nigh. If you'm a worm, why doan't 'e act like a worm an' be humble-minded? 'Tis
      the lil childern gets into heaven. You'm stiff-necked, Michael Tregenza. I sez it respectful
      an' in sorrer; but 'tis true."
"I hope the Lard won't lay thy sin to thy charge, my poor sawl," answered the fisherman with
      perfect indifference. "You—you dares to speak agin me! I wish I could give 'e a hand an' drag
      'e a lil higher up the ladder o' righteousness, Chirgwin; but you'm o' them as caan't dance or
      else won't, not if God A'mighty's Self piped to 'e. Go your ways, an' knaw you'm in the
      prayers of a man whose prayers be heard."
"Then pray for Joan. If you'm so cocksure you gets a hearin' 'fore us church folks, 'tis
      your fust duty to plead for her."
"It was," he said. "Now it is too late, I've sweated for her, an' wrastled wi'
      principalities an' powers for her, an' filled the night watches by sea an' shore wi' gert
      agonies o' prayer for her. But 'tweern't to be. Her name's writ in the big Book o' Death, not
      the small Book o' Life. David prayed hard till that cheel, got wrong side the blanket, died.
      Then he washed his face an' ate his meat. 'Twas like that wi' me. Joan's dead now. Let the
      dead bury theer dead."
"'Tis awful to hear 'e, Tregenza."
"The truth's a awful thing, Chirgwin, but a lie is awfuler still. 'Tis the common fate to be
      lost. You an' sich as you caan't grasp the truth 'bout that. Heaven's no need to be a big
      plaace—theer 'edn' gwaine to be no crowdin' theer. 'Tis hell as'll fill space wi' its
      roominess."
"I be gwaine," answered Mr. Chirgwin. "Us have talked three hour by the clock, an' us ain't
      gotten wan thot in common. I trusts in Christ; you trusts in yourself. Time'll shaw which was
      right. You damn the world; I wouldn't damn a dew-snail. [Footnote: Dew-snail—A slug.]
      I awnly sez again, 'May you live to see all the pints you'm wrong.' An' if you do, 'twill be a
      tidy big prospect."
They exchanged some further remarks in a similar strain. Then Tom informed Uncle Chirgwin
      that his cart with a full load of oar-weed was waiting at the door. Whereupon the old man got
      his hat, loaded his pipe, wished Thomasin good-by, and drove sorrowfully away. Mrs. Tregenza
      had secretly inquired after Joan's health and wealth. That the first was excellent, the second
      carefully put away in the lawyer's hands, caused her satisfaction. She told Mr. Chirgwin to
      make Joan write out a will.
"You never knaws," she said. "God keep the gal, but they do die now an' agin. 'Tweer better
      she wrote about the money 'cordin' to a lawyer's way. And, say, for the Lard's love, not to
      leave it to Michael. So well light a fire wi' it as that. He bawled out as the money had lit a
      fire a'ready, when I touched 'pon it to en—a fire as was gwaine to burn through eternity; but
      Michael's not like a human. His ideas 'pon affairs is all pure Bible. You an' me caan't grasp
      hold o' all he says. An' the money's done no wrong. So you'll drop in Joan's ear as it might
      be worldly-wise to save trouble by sayin' what should be done if anything ill failed 'pon
      her—eh?"
Uncle Chirgwin promised that he would do so, and Mrs. Tregenza felt a weight off her mind
      which had distressed it for some while. She was thinking of Tom, of course. She knew that Joan
      loved him, and though the prospect of his ever coming by a penny of the money appeared
      slender, yet to think that he might be in a will, named for hundreds of pounds, was a shadowy
      sort of joy to her.
That night Joan's uncle told the girl of his afternoon's work, and she expressed some sorrow
      that he should have thus exerted himself on her behalf.
"Faither's dirt beside the likes of you," she said. "'Twas wastin' good time to talk to en,
      an' I wouldn't go back to Newlyn, you mind, if he was to ax me 'pon his knees. I'm a poor fool
      of a gal, but I knaws enough to laugh at the ignorance o' faither an' that fiddle-faaced crowd
      to the Luke Gospel Chapel."
"Doan't 'e be bitter, Joan. Us all makes mistakes an' bad's the best o' human creatures.
      Your faither will chaange, sure as I'm a livin' man, some day. God ban't gwaine to let en gaw
      down to's graave wi' sich a 'mazin' number o' wrong opinions. Else think o' the wakin' t'other
      side! Iss, it caan't be. Why, as 'tis, if he went dead sudden, he'd gaw marchin' into heaven
      as bold as brass, an' bang up to the right hand o' the thrawne! Theer's a situation for a
      body! An' the awk'ardness o' havin' to step forrard an' tell en! No, no, the man'll be humbled
      sure 'fore his journey's end. Theer's Everlasting eyes 'pon en, think as you may."
"I never think at all about him," declared Joan, "an' I ban't gwaine to. He won't chaange,
      an' I never wants en to. I've got you to love me, an' to love; an' I'm—I'm waitin' for wan as
      be gawld to faither's dross."
She sighed as she spoke.
"Waitin' for en still?"
"Ay, for Mister Jan. It caan't be no gert length o' time now. I s'pose days go quicker up
      Lunnon town than wi' us."
"Joan, my dovey, 'tis idle. Even I sees it now. I did think wi' you fust as he was a true
      man. I caan't no more. I wish I could."
A month before Joan would have flashed into anger at such a speech as this, but now she did
      not answer. Young love is fertile in imagination. She had found a thousand glories in John
      Barren, and, when he left her, had woven a thousand explanations for his delayed return. Now
      invention grew dull; enthusiasm waned; her confidence was shaken, though she denied the fact
      even to herself as a sort of treachery. But there is no standing still in time. The
      remorseless fact of his non-return extended over weeks and months.
Mr. Chirgwin saw her silence, noted the little quiver of her mouth as he declared his own
      loss of faith, stroked the hand she thrust dumbly into his and felt her silence hurt his
      heart.
Presently Joan spoke.
"I've got none to b'lieve in en no more then—not wan now, not even you. Whiles you stuck up
      for en I felt braave 'bout his comin'; now—now Mister Jan have awnly got me to say a word for
      en. An' you doan't think he'm a true man no more then, uncle?" 
"Lassie, I wish to God as I did. Time's time. Why ban't he here?"
"I doan't dare think this is the end. I'm feared to look forrard now. If it do wance come
      'pon me as he've gone 'twill drive me mad, I knaws."
"No, never, not if you'd awnly turn your faace the right way. Theer's oceans o' comfort an'
      love waitin' for 'e, gal. You did belong to a hard world, as I knaws who have just comed from
      speech wi' your faither; but 'twas a world o' clean eatin' an' dressin' an' livin'—a
      God-fearin' world leadin' up'ards on a narrer, ugly road, but a safe road, I s'pose. An' you
      left it. You'll say I be harsh, but my heart do bleed for 'e, Joan. If you'd awnly drop this
      talk 'bout Nature, as none of us understands, an' turn to the livin' Christ, as all can
      understand. That's wheer rest lies for 'e, nowheers else. You'm like Eve in the garden. She
      was kindiddled an' did eat an' lost eternal life an' had to quit Eden. An' 'tis forbidden
      fruit as you've ate, not knawin' 'twas sich. Nature doan't label her pisins, worse luck."
"Eve? No, I ban't no Eve. She had Adam."
There was a world of sorrow in the words and the hopeless ring in them startled Uncle
      Chirgwin, for it denoted greater changes in the girl's mind than he thought existed. She
      seemed nearer to the truth. It cut his heart to see her suffering, but he thanked Heaven that
      the inevitable knowledge was coming, and prayed it might be the first step toward peace. He
      was silent with his thoughts, and Joan spoke again, repeating her last words.
"Iss, Eve had Adam to put his arm around her an' kiss her wet eyes. He were more to her than
      what the garden was, I'll lay, or God either. That's the bitter black God o' my faither. What
      for did He let the snake in the garden 'tall if He really loved them fust poor fools? Why
      dedn' He put they flamin' angels theer sooner. 'Twas the snake they should have watched an'
      kep' out."
Uncle Chirgwin looked at her with round terrified eyes. She had never echoed Barron's
      sentiments to such a horrified listener.
"Doan't, for pity's sake, Joan! The wickedness of it! Him as taught you to think such
      frightful thoughts tried to ruin your sawl so well as your body. Oh, if you'd awnly up an'
      say, 'That man was wrong an' I'll forget en an' turn to the Saviour.'"
"You caan't understan'. I do put ugly bits o' thot afore 'e, but if you'd heard him as
      opened my eyes, you'd knaw 'tedn' ugly taken altogether. I knaws so much, but caan't speak it
      out. Us done no sin, an' I ban't shamed to look the sun in the faace, nor you. An' he will
      come—he will—if theer's a kind God in heaven he'll come back to me. If 'e doan't, then I'll
      say that faither's God's the right wan."
"Doan't 'e put on a bold front, Joan gal. Theer's things tu deep for the likes o' us. You
      ban't prayin' right, I reckon. Theer's a voice hid in you. Listen to that. Nature's spawk to
      'e an' now er's dumb. Listen to t'other, lassie. Nature do guide beasts an' birds an' the poor
      herbs o' the field; but you—you listen to t'other. You'll never be happy no more till you awns
      'twas a sad mistake an' do ax in the right plaace for pardon."
"I want no pardon," she said. "I have done no wrong, I tell 'e. Wheer's justice to? 'Cause
      the man do bide away, I be wicked; if he comed back to-morrer an' married me—what then? I be
      sinless in the matter of it, an' Nature do knaw it, an' God do knaw it."
But her breast heaved and her eyes were wet with unshed tears. Uncle Chirgwin, her solitary
      trust and stand-by, had drifted away too. His hope was dead and she could not revive it. He
      had never spoken so strongly before, but now he was taking up Mary's line of action and had
      ranged himself against her. It almost seemed to Joan that he reflected in a meek, diluted
      fashion, as the moon turns the sun's golden fire to silver, something of what he must have
      heard that afternoon from her father. This defection acted definitely on the girl's
      temperament. She fought fear, hardened her heart against doubt, cast suspicion far away as
      treason to "Mister Jan" and gave to hope a new lease of life. She would be patient for his
      sake, she would trust in him still.
There was something grand in the loneliness, she told herself. He would know perhaps one day
      of her great patient faith and love. And the trial would make her brain and heart bigger and
      better fit her for the position of wife to him. The struggle was fought by her with that
      courage which lies beyond man's comprehension. She looked at the world with bright eyes when
      there was necessity for facing it; she exhausted her ingenuity in schemes for communicating
      with John Barron. If he only knew! She felt that even had change darkened his affection for
      her, yet, most surely, the thought of the baby must tempt him back again. Thus, with sustained
      bravery and ignorance, she left her hand in Nature's, and her faith, rising gloriously above
      the doubt of the time, trusted that majestic heathen goddess as a little child trusts its
      mother.
Fate played another prank upon her not long afterward and thrust into her hands a possible
      means of access to John Barron. A favorite resort of Joan's was the brook which ran down the
      valley beneath Drift and Sancreed. The little stream wound through a fair coomb between
      orchards, meadows, wastes of fern and heather. At this season of the year the valley was very
      lonely, and a certain spot beside the stream often tempted Joan by reason of its comfort and
      its peace. From here, sitting on a granite bowlder clothed in soft green mosses and having a
      shape into which human limbs might fit easily, the girl could see much that was fair. The
      meadows were all sprinkled with the silver-mauve of cuckoo-flowers—Shakespeare's "lady's
      smock"; the hills sloped upward under oaken saplings as yet too young for the stripping; the
      valley stretched winding landward beneath Sancreed. Above and far away stretched the Cornish
      moors dotted with man's mining enterprises, chiefly deserted. Ding-Dong raised its gaunt
      engine stack and, distant though it was, Joan's sharp eyes could see the rusty arm of iron
      stretching forth from the brickwork, motionless, not worth the removing. Close at hand, where
      the stream wandered babbling at her feet, the whole glory of spring shone on blossoms and
      grasses where the world of the stream-side sent forth a warm, living smell. The wildness of
      the upland moors stretched down into the valley below them. There glimmered blue-green patches
      of bracken, speckled with the red and white hides of calves which fed and scampered dew-lap
      deep; and the fern was all sheened with light where the sunshine brightened its polished
      leaves. The stream wound through the midst, bedecked and adorned with purple bugle flowers,
      bridged with dog-roses and honeysuckles, in festoons, in bunches and in sprays, crowned with
      scented gorse, fringed with yellow irises which splashed flaming reflections where the brook
      widened and slowed into shallow little backwaters. Flags and cresses framed the margins;
      meadowsweets made the air fragrant above, and granite bowlders fretted the waters silver,
      their foundations hidden in dark water-weed. Sunshine danced on every tiny cascade and threw
      stars and twinkling flashes of light upward from the brown pools upon the banks. Everything
      was upon a miniature scale, even to the trout which lived in the stream, flashed their dim
      shadows under its waters, leaped into the air after the flies, set little clouds of sand
      shimmering as they darted up and down or, when surprised, wriggled away into favorite holes
      and hiding places beneath the banks and trailing weeds. Ling and wortleberry too were moorland
      visitors in the valley, and the bog heather already budded.
Here was one of the many favorite resting-places of Joan, and hither she came on a rare
      morning in mid June at the wish of another person.
Uncle Chirgwin had set his niece a task, and the object of her present visit was no mere
      dawdling and thinking while perched upon the granite throne above the meadowsweets. This fact
      a basket and a three-pronged fork indicated. Her uncle deemed himself an authority on simples
      and possessed much information, mostly erroneous, concerning the properties of wild herbs and
      flowers. A decoction of hemp agrimony he at all times considered a most valuable bitter tonic;
      and of this plant the curious flesh-colored flowers on their long green stems grew pretty
      freely by the stream-side in the valley. The time of flowering was not yet come, but Joan knew
      the dull leaf of the herb well enough and, that found, she could easily dig up the root,
      wherein its virtue dwelt. But before starting on her search, the girl rested a while where the
      serrated foliage and creamy blossom of the meadowsweets laced and fringed the granite of her
      couch; and, as she sat there, her eye taking in the happy valley, her brain reading into the
      luxuriant life of nature, some strange new thoughts hidden until lately, she became suddenly
      conscious of a phenomenon beyond her power to immediately explain or understand It drove the
      hemp agrimony quite out of her head, and, when the mystery came to be explained, filled Joan's
      mind with the memory of her own sad affairs. First and repeatedly there glimmered a gossamer
      over the stream, falling into the water and as often rising again; then above the film of
      light flashed another, rising abruptly golden into the sunshine. Not for a moment or two did
      she discover the flashing thing was a fly-rod, but presently the man who held it appeared
      below her at a bend of the streamlet. He was clad much like the artists, and it made the blood
      flush hot to her cheek as she thought he might be one. Young men sometimes fished the brook
      for the fingerling trout it contained. They were small but sweet, and the catching them with a
      fly was difficult work in a stream so overhung with tangles of vine and brier, so densely
      planted in the wider reaches with water hemlock and lesser weeds. This fisherman, at any rate,
      found successful sport beyond his power to achieve. He flogged away, but hung his fly clear of
      the stream at every second cast and deceived not the smallest troutlet of them all. The young
      man, after the manner of those anglers classified as "chuck and chance it," worked his clumsy
      way toward Joan's chair on the granite bowlder. Motionless she sat, and her drab attire and
      faded sun-bonnet harmonized so well with the tones around it—the gray of the stones, the
      lights of the river, the masses of the meadowsweet—that while noting a broad and sparkling
      stickle winding away beneath her, the angler missed the girl herself. This stickle spread,
      with an oily tremor and white undercurrent full of air pearls, from a waterfall where the foot
      of Joan's throne fretted the stream. Below it the waters slowed and ran smoothly into dark
      brown shadows, being here marked by the wrinkled lines of their currents and splashed with the
      sky's reflected blue. An ideal spot for a trout it doubtless was, and the approaching
      sportsman exercised unusual care in his approach, crouching along the bank and finally
      creeping bent double within casting distance. Then, as he freed his fly, he saw Joan, like a
      queen of the pool reigning motionless and silent. She moved and no fish was likely to rise
      after within the visual radius of her sudden action. Thereupon the angler in the man cursed;
      the artist in him drew a short, sharp breath. He scrambled to his feet and looked again upon a
      beautiful picture. The plump, baby freshness of Joan's face had vanished indeed, and there was
      that in the slightly anxious expression and questioning look of her blue eyes that had told
      any medical man he stood before a future mother; but, in her seated position, no tangible
      suggestion of a hidden life was thrust upon the spectator's view. He only saw a wondrously
      pretty woman in a charming attitude, amid objects which enhanced her beauty by their own. She
      seemed a trifle pale for a cottage girl, but her mouth was scarlet and dewy as ripe
      wood-strawberries, her eyes were just of that color where the blue sky above was reflected and
      changed to a darker shade by the pools of the brook. She sat with her hands folded in her lap
      and looked straight at the sportsman with a frank interest which surprised him. He was a
      modest lad, but the sudden presentment of an object so lovely woke his pluck and he fished
      ostentatiously to Joan's very feet, suspecting that the absurdity of the action would not be
      apparent to her. She watched the morsel of feather and fur dragged across the water after the
      fantastic fashion of the "chuck and chancer," and he, when her eyes were on the water, kept
      his own fast upon her face. Both man and woman were profoundly anxious each to hear the
      other's voice, but neither felt brave enough to speak first. Then the artist's ingenuity found
      a means, and Joan presently saw his fly stick fast upon the side of the stream where she sat.
      The thing was caught at the seed-head of a rush within reach of Joan's hand, and while this
      incident appeared absolutely accidental, yet it was not so, for the artist had long been
      endeavoring to get fast somewhere hard by Joan. Now, finding his maneuver accomplished, he
      made but the feeblest efforts to loosen the fly, then raised his hat and accosted Joan.
"Might I trouble you to set my line clear? Ashamed to ask such a thing, but it would be
      awfully kind. Oh, thank you, thank you. Take care of your fingers! The hook is very
      sharp."
Joan got the fly free in a moment, and then, to Harry Murdoch's gratification, addressed
      him. The young fellow was Edmund Murdoch's cousin, and at present dwelt in Newlyn with the
      elder artist already mentioned as John Barron's friend.
"May I make so bold as to ax if you do knaw a paintin' gen'leman by name o'—o' Mister Jan?
      Leastways, that's wan on's names, but I never can call home the other, though he tawld me
      wance. He was here last early spring-time, an' painted a gert picture of me up 'pon top the
      hill they calls Gorse Point."
"Lucky devil," thought the artist; but though he knew something of Barron and his work and
      had heard that Barron painted when at Newlyn, he did not associate these facts with the girl
      before him.
"He'm in Lunnon, so far's I knaw," she continued.
Harry Murdoch had to look hard at Joan before answering, and he delayed a while with an
      expression of deep thought upon his face. At length he spoke.
"No, I cannot say that I have heard of him or the picture. But perhaps some of the men in
      Newlyn will know. He was lucky to get you to paint. I wish you would let me try."
She shook her head impatiently.
"No, no. He done it 'cause—'cause he just wanted a livin' thing to fill up a bit o' his
      canvas. 'Tweern't for shaw or for folks to see. He done it for pleasure. An' I wants to knaw
      wheer he lives 'cause he might think I be in Newlyn still, but I ban't. I'm livin' up Drift
      along wi' Mr. Chirgwin. An' I wish he could knaw it."
"He was called 'Mister John'? Well, I'll see what I can do to find out anything about him.
      And your name?"
"Joan Tregenza. If you'll be so good as to put a question round 'mongst the painting
      gen'lemen, I'd thank 'e kindly."
"Then I certainly will. And on Saturday next I'll come here again to tell you if I have
      heard anything. Will you come?"
"Iss fay, an' thank you, sir."
So he passed slowly forward, and she sat a full hour after he had left her building new
      castles on the old crumbling foundations. It was even in her mind to pray, to pray with her
      whole heart and soul; but chaos had settled like a storm upon her beliefs. She did not know
      where to pray to now; yet to-day Hope once more glimmered like a lighthouse lamp through the
      dreary darkness. So she turned her eyes to that radiance and waited for next Saturday to
      come.
Then she set about grubbing up roots of hemp agrimony where they grew. She was almost happy
      and whistled gently to herself as she filled her little basket.
That night Edmund Murdoch heard his cousin's story and explained that "Mister Jan" was
      doubtless John Barron. 
"I'm owing the beggar a letter; I'll write tomorrow."
"Was it a good picture?"
"I should say that few better ever came out of Newlyn. Perhaps none so good. Is the model as
      pretty as ever?"
Young Harry raved of the vision that Joan had presented among the meadowsweets.
"Well, I suppose he wouldn't mind her knowing where he lives; but he's such a queer devil
      that I'll write and ask him first. We shall hear in a couple of days; I can tell him her
      address, at any rate; then he may write direct to her, if he cares to."
