
CHAPTER TEN
THE HOME-COMING OF JOE
A fortnight and four days after the funeral of Joan Tregenza there blew a southwest wind
      over Newlyn, from out a gray sky, dotted with watery blots of darker gray. No added light
      marked the western horizon at sunset, but the short, dull day simply fell headlong into night;
      and with darkness came the rain.
About five o'clock in the afternoon, when the flicker and shine of many lamps in little shop
      windows brightened the tortuous streets, a man clad in tarpaulins, and carrying a big canvas
      bag on his back, passed rapidly through the village. He had come that day from London upon the
      paying off of his vessel; and while he left his two chests at the railway station, he made
      shift to bring his sea-bag along himself; and that because he was bound for the white cottage
      on the cliff, and the bag held many precious foreign concerns for Joan Tregenza. It had been
      impossible to communicate with the sailor; and he did not write from London to tell any of his
      return, that their pleasure and surprise on his appearance might be the more complete. Now a
      greater shock than that in his power to give waited the man himself. The sailor's parents
      lived at Mousehole, but Michael's cottage lay upon the way, and there he first designed to
      appear.
Joe Noy was a very big man, loosely but strongly set together, a Celt to the backbone, hard,
      narrow of mind, but possessing rare determination. His tanned, clean-shaven face was broader
      at the jaw than the eyes, and a lowering heaviness of aspect, almost ape-like, resulted when
      his features remained in repose. The effect, however, vanished when he spoke or listened to
      the speech of another. That such a man had proved fickle in love was a thing difficult to
      credit to the mind familiar with his character. Solid, sober, simple, fearing God and lacking
      humor, the jilting of a woman was an offense of all others least likely to have been
      associated with him. Yet circumstances and some unsuspected secrets of disposition had brought
      about that event; and now, as he hastened along, the vision of the dark woman he once loved at
      Drift did not for an instant cross his thoughts, for they were full of the fair girl he meant
      to marry at Newlyn. To her, at least, he had kept faithful enough; she had been the
      guiding-star of his life for hard upon a year of absence; not one morning, not one night, in
      fair weather or foul, had he omitted to pray God's blessing upon her. A fatalism, which his
      Luke Gospel tenets did not modify, was strong in the sailor. He had seen death often enough in
      his business; and his instincts told him, apart from all religious teaching, that those who
      died ripe for salvation were but few. Every man appeared to be an instrument in God's hand,
      and human free-will represented a condition quite beyond the scope of his intelligence to
      estimate or even conceive. Had any justified in so doing asked of him his reasons for
      desertion of Mary Chirgwin, Noy would have explained that when inviting her to be his wife he
      took a wrong step in darkness; that light had since suddenly shone upon him, as upon Saul, and
      that Mary, choosing rather to remain outside the sure fold of Luke Gospeldom, by so doing made
      it impossible for him to love her longer. He would have added that the match was doubtless
      foredoomed according to the arrangements of the Almighty.
Now Joe came back to his own; and his heart beat faster by several pulses, and his steps
      quickened and lengthened, as, through darkness and rain, he sighted the lamp-lighted cottage
      window of the Tregenzas. Thereupon he stopped a moment, brought his bag to the ground, mopped
      his forehead, then, raising the latch, strode straight into the kitchen without a knock of
      warning. For a moment he imagined the room, lighted only by a dull glow of firelight, to be
      empty; but then, amid familiar objects, he noted one not familiar—a tall and roomy armchair.
      This stood beside the fireplace, and in it sat Gray Michael.
"Why, so 'tis! Mr. Tregenza sure 'nough!" the traveler exclaimed, setting down his bag and
      coming forward with hand outstretched. "Here I be at last arter nine months o' salt water! An'
      Newlyn do smell pleasant in my nose as I come back to it, I tell 'e!"
The other did not take Joe's hand; he looked up vaguely, with an open mouth and no
      recognition in his expression; but Noy as yet failed to note how insanity had robbed the great
      face of its power, had stamped out the strength of it, had left it a mindless vague of limp
      features.
"Who be you then?" asked Mr. Tregenza.
"Why, blamed if you abbun forgot me! I be Joe—Joe Noy comed back-along at last. My ivers!
      You, as doan't forget nothin', to forget me! Yet, maybe, 'tis the low light of the fire as
      hides me from 'e."
"You'm a mariner, I reckon?"
"I reckon so, if ever theer was wan. An' I'll be the richer by a mate's ticket 'fore the
      year's dead. But never mind me. How be you all—all well? I thot I'd pop in an' surprise
      'e."
"Cruel fashion weather for pilchur fishin' us have had—cruel fashion weather. I knawed
      'tweer comin', same as Noah knawed 'fore the flood, 'cause the Lard tawld me. 'Forty years
      long was I grieved wi' this generation.' But man tries the patience o' God these days. We'm
      like the Ruan Vean men: 'doan't knaw an' won't larn.'"
"Iss fay, mister, true 'nough; but tell me 'bout 'e all an'—an' my Joan. She've been the
      cherub aloft for me ever since I strained my eyes glazin' for the last peep o' Carnwall when
      us sailed. How be my lil Joan?"
The other started, sat up in his chair and gripped the left arm of it, while his right hand
      extended before him and he jolted it curiously with all the fingers pointing down.
"Joan—Joan? In hell—ragin', roastin' hell—screechin', I lay, like a cat in a bonfire. 'Tis
      lies they'll tell 'e 'bout her. She weern't drownded—never. The devil set sail 'pon auld
      Chirgwin's hayrick, so they sez, an' her sailed 'long wi' en. But 'theer rings, they was so
      high that they was dreadful, an' theer rings weer full o' eyes round about.' She'm damned, my
      son—called, not chosen. 'The crop o' the bunch' they called her—the crop o' the devil's bunch
      she was—no cheel o' my gettin'. Her'll burn for a million years or better—all along o'
      free-traadin'. Free-traadin'! curse 'em—why doan't they call it smugglin' an' have done?"
Joe Noy had fallen back. He forgot to breathe, then Nature performed the necessary act, and
      in a moment of the madman's silence his listener sucked a long loud breath.
"Oh, my gracious Powers, what's fallen 'pon en?" he groaned aloud.
"God's strong, but the devil's stronger, you mind. Us must pray to the pit now. 'Our devil
      which art in hell'—Ha! ha! ha! He hears fast enough, an' pokes up the black horns of en at the
      first smell o' prayer. Not but what my Tom's aloft, in the main-top o' paradise. I seed en
      pass 'pon a black wave wi' a gray foamin' crest. An' the white sawl o' my bwoy went mountin'
      and mountin' in shape o' a seabird. Men dies hard in salt water, you mind. It plays wi' 'em
      like a cat wi' a mouse. But 'tis all wan: 'The Lard is King an' sitteth 'tween the cherubims,'
      though the airth's twitchin', same as a crab bein' boiled alive, all the time."
Noy looked round him wildly and was about to leave the cottage. Then it struck him that the
      man's wife and daughter could not be far off. What blasting catastrophe had robbed him of his
      mind the sailor knew not; but once assured of the fact that Michael Tregenza was hopelessly
      insane, Noy lent no credit to any of his utterances, and of course failed to dimly guess at
      those facts upon which his ravings were based. Indeed he heard little after the first rambling
      outburst, for his own thoughts were busy with the problems of Tregenza's fate.
"Sit down, mariner. I shan't sail till marnin' an' you'm welcome. Theer be thots in me so
      deep as Levant mine, but I doan't speak 'em for anybody's hearin'. Joan weern't none o' mine,
      an' I knawed it, thanks be to God, 'fore ever she played loose. What do 'e think o' a thousand
      pound for a sawl? Cheap as dirt—eh? 'Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud that our prayer
      should not pass through.' Not as prayers can save what's lost for all eternity 'fore 'tis born
      into time. He ruined her; he left her wi' cheel; but ban't likely the unborn clay counts. God
      Hisself edn' gwaine to damn a thing as never drawed breath. Who'd a thot the like o' her had
      got a whore's forehead? An' tokened at that—tokened to a sailor-man by name o' Noy. Let'n come
      home, let'n come home an' call the devil as did it to his account. Let the Lard see to't so
      that man edn' 'lowed to flourish no more. I be tu auld an' broken for any sich task. 'For the
      hurt o' the darter o' my people I am hurt.'"
He spoke no more upon that head, though Noy, now awake to fear and horridly conscious that
      he stood in the shadow of some tremendous ill, reaching far beyond the madman, asked him
      frantically what he meant. But Michael's mind had wandered off the subject again.
"I seed en cast forth a net, same as us does for macker'l, but 'twas sawls, not feesh, they
      dragged in the bwoat; but braave an' few of 'em. The devil's nets was the full wans,
      'cause—"
At this moment Thomasin came in, saw a man by Mr. Tregenza, but did not realize who had
      returned until she struck a light. Then, approaching, she gasped her surprise and stood for a
      moment dumb, looking from her husband to the sailor, from the sailor back to her husband. The
      horror on Noy's face frightened her; indeed he was now strung to a pitch of frantic
      excitement. He saw that the woman was altogether clad in black, that her garments were new,
      that even her bonnet had a black flower in it; and, despite his concern, he observed an
      appearance of prosperity about her, though her face belied it, for Mrs. Tregenza was very
      thin, and far grayer and older too than when he saw her last. He took the hand she stretched
      shaking toward him; then a question burst from his lips.
"For God's sake speak an' tell me the worst on it. What terrible evil be here? He'm—he'm
      daft seemin'ly; he's spawk the awfulest mad words as ever comed from lips. An' Joan—doan't 'e
      say it—doan't 'e say 'tis true she'm dead—not my lil treasure gone dead; an' me, ever since I
      went, countin' the days an' hours 'gainst when I should come back?"
"Ay, my poor lad, 'tis true—all true. An' worse behind, Joe. Hip an' thigh us be smitten—all
      gone from us; my awnly wan drownded—my awn bwoy; an' Michael's brain brawk down along o' it.
      An' the bwoat an' nets be all sold; though, thanks to God, they fetched good money. An' poor
      Joan tu—'pon the same night as my Tom—drownded—in the gert land-flood up-long."
Gray Michael had been nodding his head and smiling as each item of the mournful category was
      named. At Thomasin's last words he interrupted angrily, and something of the old, deep tones
      of his voice echoed again.
"'Tis a lie! Dedn' I tell 'e, wummon, 'tweern't so? The devil took her—body an' bones an'
      unborn baaby. They say she was found by the meadowsweets; an' I say 'tis false. You may groan
      an' you may weep blood, but you caan't chaange the things that have happened in time past—no;
      nor more can God A'mighty."
His wife looked to see how Joe viewed this statement. A great local superstition was growing
      up round Gray Michael, and his wild utterances (sometimes profanely fearful beyond the
      possibility of setting down) were listened to greedily as inspirations and oracles. Mrs.
      Tregenza herself became presently imbued with something of this morbid and ignorant opinion.
      Her deep wounds time promised to heal at the first intention, and the significance now
      attributed to her insane husband grew to be a source of real satisfaction to her. She
      dispensed the honor of interviews with Michael as one distributes great gifts.
The force of circumstances and the futility of fighting against fate impressed Thomasin
      mightily now, as Noy's wild eyes asked the question his lips could not force themselves to
      frame. She sighed and bent her head and turned her eyes away from him, then spoke
      hurriedly:
"I doan't knaw how to tell 'e, an' us reckoned theer weern't no call to, an' us weern't
      gwaine to tell; but these things be in the Lard's hand an' theer edn' no hidin' what He means
      to let out. A sorry, cruel home-comin' for 'e, Joe. Poor lass, her's done wi' all her troubles
      now, an' the unborn cheel tu. 'Tis very hard to stand up 'gainst, but the longest life's awnly
      short, an' us ban't called 'pon to live it more'n wance, thank God."
Here she gave way to tears, and dried the same on a white pocket-handkerchief with a black
      border.
"'Tis all so true as gospel," declared Gray Michael, rolling his head round on his neck and
      laughing. "An' my auld wummon's fine an' braave, edn' her? That's cause I cleared a thousan'
      pound in wan trip. Christ was aboard, an' He bid me shoot the nets by munelight off the
      islands. He do look arter His awn somethin' butivul, as I tawld En. An' now I be a feesher o'
      men, which is better, an' high 'mong the salt o' the airth, bein' called to walk along wi'
      James an' John an' the rest."
"He sits theer chitterin', ding dong, ding dong, all the wisht day. Tom's death drove en
      cracked, but 'e ban't no trouble, 'cept at feedin' times. Besides, I keeps a paid servant girl
      now," said Mrs. Tregenza.
Joe Noy had heard neither the man nor the woman. From the moment that he knew the truth
      concerning Joan his own thoughts barred his ears to all utterances.
"Who weer it? Tell me the name. I want no more'n that," he said.
"'Tis Anne Bundle's darter," answered Mrs. Tregenza, her mind on her maid.
"The man!" thundered Noy, "the man who brot the thing about—the man what ruined—O God o'
      Hosts, be on my side now! Who weer 'e? Give me the name of en. That's all as I wants."
"Us doan't knaw. You see, Joan was away up Drift wi' the Chirgwins, an' theer she was took
      when they found her arter the drownin'. She never knawed the true name of en herself, poor
      dear. But 'twas a paintin' man—a artist. It comed out arter as he'd made a picksher of her,
      an' promised to marry her, an' stawl all she'd got to give 'pon the strength of the lie. Then
      theer was a letter—"
"From the man?"
Mrs. Tregenza grew frightened at the thought of mentioning the money, and now adroitly
      changed the first letter from Barron, which was in her mind when she spoke, to the second,
      which Joan had received from him on the night of her death.
"Iss, from him; an' Mary Chirgwin found it 'pon the dead frame o' the poor gal, but 'twas
      partly pulp, along o' the water; an' Mary burned it wi'out readin' a word—so she said, at
      least, though that's difficult to credit, human nature bein' as 'tis."
"Then my work's the harder; but I'll find en, s'elp me God, even if us be grawed gray afore
      we meet."
"Think twice, Joe; you caan't bring back your lass, nor wash her sins white. 'Tis tu
      late."
"No, not that, but I can—I'm in God's hand for this. Us be tools, an' He uses all for His
      awn ends. I sees whereto I was born now, an' the future be writ clear afore my eyes. Thicky
      madman theer said the word; an' I lay the Lard put it in en for my better light. Er said
      'Let'n come home an' call the devil as did it to account.' He was thinkin' o' me when he said
      it, though he dedn' knaw me."
"Iss fay, 'tis generally allowed he be the lips o' God A'mighty now. But you, Joe—doan't 'e
      waste life an' hard-won money huntin' down a damned man. Leave en to his deserts."
"'Tis I that be his deserts, wummon—'tis I, in the hand o' the God o' Vengeance. That's my
      duty now standin' stark ahead o' me. The Lard's pleased to pay all my prayers an' good livin'
      like this here. His will be done, an' so it shall to the dregs of it; an' if I be for the pit
      arter all, theer's wan livin' as gaws along wi' me."
"That's worse than a fool's thot. Bide till you'm grawed cool anyways. 'Tis very hard this
      fallin' 'pon a virtuous member like what you be; but 'tedn' a straange tale 'tall. The man was
      like other men, I doubt; the maid was like other maids. You thot differ'nt. You was wrong; an'
      you'll be wrong again to break your heart now. Let en go—'tis best."
"Let en go! Blast en—I'll let heaven go fust! Us'll see what a wronged sawl's patience can
      do now. Us'll see what the end of the road'll shaw! O God o' the Righteous, fester this here
      man's bones in his body, an' eat his life out of en wi' fiery worms! Tear his heartstrings,
      God o' Hosts, rob en of all he loves, stamp his foul mind wi' memories till he shrieks for
      death an' judgment; punish his seed forever; turn his prayers into swearin'; torture en, rot
      en sawl an' body till you brings me to en. Shaw no mercy, God o' Heaven, but pile agony 'pon
      agony mountains high for en; an' let mine be the hand to send his cussed sawl to hell, for
      Christ's sake, Amen!"
"Oh, my Guy Faux! theer's cussin'! An' yet 'tedn' gwaine to do a happard [Footnote:
       Happard—Halfpennyworth.] o' good; an' you wouldn' be no happier for knawin' sich a
      prayer was granted," said Thomasin; but Gray Michael applauded the outburst, and his words
      ended that strange spectacle of two men, for the time both mad.
"Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Braave prayin'! Braave savor for the Lard's nose—sweeter than the
      blood o' beasts. You'm a shinin' light, cap'n—a trumpet in the battle, like the sound o' the
      sea-wind when it begins to sting afore heavy weather, an' the waters roll to the top o' the
      bulwarks an' awver. 'The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan'—sea-horses us calls 'em
      nowadays. Mount an' ride, mount an' ride! 'Cursed be the man that trusteth in man,' saith the
      Lard; but the beasts be truer, thanks to the wickedness o' God, who's spared 'em the curse o'
      brain paarts, but stricken man wi' a mighty intelligence. 'Twas a fine an' cruel act, for the
      more mind the more misery. 'Twas a damned act sure 'nough! Doan't 'e let on 'bout it, mate,
      but theer'll be clever surprises at Judgment, an' the fust to be damned'll be the God o' the
      Hebrews Hisself for givin' o' brains to weak heads. Then the thrawn o' heaven'll stand
      empty—empty—the plaace 'tween the cherubims empty; an' they'll call 'pon me to fill it so
      like's not. Tarraway, I shall be named, same as the devil in the droll—a purty word enough
      tu."
He broke into laughter, and Joe Noy, saying a few hasty words to Thomasin, departed.
