
CHAPTER EIGHT
THE MAKING OF PROGRESS
John Barron held strong theories about the importance of the mental condition when work was
      in hand. Once fairly engaged upon a picture, he painted very fast, labored without cessation,
      and separated himself as far as might be from every outside influence. No new interests were
      suffered to intrude upon his mind; no distractions of any sort, intellectual or otherwise,
      were permitted to occupy even those leisure intervals which of necessity lay between the
      periods of his work. On the present occasion he merely fed and slept and dwelt solitary,
      shunning society of every sort and spending as little time in Newlyn as possible. Fortunately
      for his achievement the weather continued wonderfully fine and each successive day brought
      like conditions of sunshine and color, light and air. This circumstance enabled him to proceed
      rapidly, and another fact also contributed to progress; the temperature kept high and the
      cow-byre, wherein Barren stored his implements and growing picture, proved so well-built and
      so snug withal that on more than one occasion he spent the entire night there. Sweet brown
      bracken filled a manger, and of this he pulled down sufficient quantities to make, with
      railway rugs, an ample bed. The outdoor life appeared to suit his health well; some color had
      come to his pale cheeks; he felt considerably stronger in body and mentally invigorated by the
      strain of work now upon him.
But though he turned his back on his fellow-men they sought him out, and rumors at length
      grew to a certainty that Barron was busy painting somewhere on the cliffs beyond Mousehole.
      Everybody supposed he had abandoned his ambition to get a portrait of Joan Tregenza; but one
      man was in his confidence: Edmund Murdoch. The young artist had been useful to Barron. On many
      occasions he tramped out from Newlyn with additions to the scanty larder kept at the cow-byre.
      He would bring hard-boiled eggs, sandwiches, bottles of soda-water and whisky; and once he
      arrived at six o'clock in the morning with a pony cart in which was a little oil stove. Barron
      had confided in Murdoch, but begged he would let it be known that he courted no society for
      the present. As the work grew he spent more and more time upon it. He explained to his friend
      quite seriously that he was painting the gorse, but that Joan Tregenza had consented to fill a
      part of the picture—a statement which amused the younger artist not a little.
"But the gorse is extraordinary, I'll admit. You must have worked without ceasing. She will
      be exquisite. Where shall you get the blue for her eyes?"
"Out of the sky and the sea."
"Does the girl inspire you herself, John? I swear something has. This is going to be
      great."
"It's going to be true, that's all. No, Joan is a dear child, but her body's no more than a
      perfect casket to a commonplace little soul. She talks a great deal and I like nothing better
      than to listen; for although what she says is naught, yet her manner of saying it does not
      lack charm. Her voice is wonderfully sweet—it comes from her throat like a wood-pigeon's, and
      education has not ruined her diction."
"She's as shy as any wood-pigeon, too—we all know that; and you've done a clever thing to
      tame her."
"God forbid that I should tame her. We met and grew friendly as wild things both. She is a
      child of Nature, her mind is as pure as the sea. Moreover, Joan walks saint-guided. Folklore
      and local twaddle does not appeal overmuch to me, as you know, yet the stories drop prettily
      from her lips and I find pleasure in listening."
Murdoch whistled.
"By Jove! I never heard you so enthusiastic, so positive, so personally alive and awake and
      interested. Don't fall in love with the girl before you know it."
To this warning Barron made a curious reply.
"Everything depends on my picture. You know my rule of life; to sacrifice all things to
      mood. I shall do so here. The best I can do must be done whatever the cost."
A shadow almost sinister lay behind the utterance, yet young Murdoch could not fathom it.
      Barren spoke in his usual slow, unaffected tones, and painted all the time; for the
      conversation took place on Gorse Point.
"Not sure if I quite understand you, old man," said Murdoch.
"It doesn't matter in the least if you don't, my dear fellow."
His words were hardly civil, but the tone in which Barren spoke robbed the utterance of any
      offense.
"All you need do," he continued, "is to keep silent in the interests of art and of Joan. I
      don't want her precious visits to me to get back to her father's ears or they will cease, and
      I don't wish to do her a bad turn in her home, for I owe her a great debt of gratitude. If men
      ask what I'm doing, lie to them and beg them not to disturb me, for the sake of Art. What a
      glint the east wind gives to color! Yet this is hardly to be called an east wind, so soft and
      balmy does it keep."
"Well, you seem to be the better for your work, at any rate. You're getting absolutely fat.
      If Newlyn brings you health as well as fame, I hope you'll retract some of the many hard
      things you have said about it."
"It has brought me an interest, and for that at any rate I am grateful. Good-by. I shall
      probably come down to-night, despite the fact that you have replenished my stores so
      handsomely."
Murdoch started homeward and met Joan Tregenza upon the way. She had given Barron one
      further sitting after Uncle Chirgwin's call at Newlyn, but since the last occasion, and for a
      period of two days, chance prevented the girl from paying him another visit. Now she arrived,
      however, as early as half-past ten, and Murdoch, while he passed her on the hill from
      Mousehole, envied his friend the morning's work before him.
Joan was very hot and very apologetic upon her arrival.
"I began to fear you had forgotten me," the artist said, but she was loud in protestations
      to the contrary.
"No, no, Mister Jan. I've fretted 'bout not comin' up like anything; ay, an' I've cried of a
      night 'cause I thot you'd be reckoning I waddun comin' no more. But 'tweern't my doin' no
      ways."
"You hadn't forgotten me?"
"Indeed an' I hadn't. An' I'd be sorrerful if I thot you thot so."
She walked to the old position before the gorse and fell naturally into it, speaking the
      while.
"Tis this way: mother's been bad wi' faace ache arter my brother Tom went to sea wi'
      faither. An' mother grizzled an' worrited herself reg'lar ill an' stopped in bed two days an'
      kep on whinin' 'bout what I was to do if she died; cause she s'posed she was gwained to. But
      so soon as Tom comed off his first trip, mother cheered wonnerful, an' riz up to see to en,
      an' hear tell 'bout how he fared on the water."
"Your head a wee bit higher, Joan. Well, I'm thankful to see you again. I was getting very,
      very lonely, I promise you. And the more I thought about the picture the more unhappy I
      became. There's such a lot to do and only such a clumsy hand to do it. The better I know you,
      Joan, the harder become the problems you set me. How am I going to get your soul looking out
      of your eyes, d'you think? How am I to make those who may see my picture some day—years after
      you and I are both dead and gone, Joan—fall in love with you?"
"La! I dunnaw, Mister Jan."
"Nor do I. How shall I make the picture so true that generations unborn will delight in the
      portrait and deem it great and fine?"
"I dunnaw."
"And yet you deserve it, Joan, for I don't think God ever made anything prettier."
She blushed and looked softly at him, but took no alarm; for though such a compliment had
      never before been paid her, yet, as Barron spoke the words, slowly, critically, without
      enthusiasm or any expression of pleasure on his face, they had little power to alarm. He
      merely stated what he seemed to regard as a fact. There was almost a suggestion of irritation
      in his utterance, as though his model's rare beauty only increased his own artistic
      difficulties; and, perhaps fearing from her smile that she found undue pleasure in his
      statement, he added to it:
"I don't say that to natter you, Joan. I hate compliments and never pay them. I told you,
      remember, that your wrists were a thought too big."
"You needn't be sayin' it over an' over, Mister Jan," she answered, her smile changing to a
      pout.
"But you wouldn't like me any more if I stopped telling you the truth. We have agreed to
      love what is true and to worship Mother Nature because she always speaks the truth."
The girl made no answer, and he went on working for a few moments, then spoke again.
"I'm selfish, Joan, and think more of my picture than I do of my little model. Put down your
      arm and take a good rest. I tried holding my hand over my eyes yesterday to see how long I
      could do so without wearying myself. I found that three minutes was quite enough, but I have
      often kept you posed for five."
"It hurted my arm 'tween the shoulder an' elbow a lil bit at first, but I've grawed used to
      it now." 
"How ever shall I repay you, kind Joan, for all your trouble and your long walks and pretty
      stories?"
"I doan't need no pay. If 'twas a matter o' payin', 'twould be a wrong thing to do, I
      reckon. Theer's auld Bascombe up Paul—him wi' curls o' long hair an' gawld rings in's ears.
      Gents pays en to take his likeness; an' theer's gals make money so, more'n wan; but faither
      says 'tis a heathenish way of livin' an' not honest. An'—an' I'd never let nobody paint me
      else but you, Mister Jan, 'cause you'm different."
"Well, you make me a proud man, Joan. I'm afraid I must be a poor substitute for Joe."
He noticed she had never mentioned her sweetheart since their early interviews, and wanted
      to ascertain of what nature was Joan's affection for the sailor. He did not yet dream how
      faint a thing poor Joe had shrunk to be in Joan's mind, or how the present episode in her life
      was dwarfing and dominating all others, present and past.
Nor did the girl's answer to his remark enlighten him.
"In coorse you an' Joe's differ'nt as can be. You knaws everything seemin'ly an' be a
      gen'le-man; Joe's only a seafarin' man, an' 'e doan't knaw much 'cept what he's larned from
      faither. But Joe used to say a sight more'n what you do, for all that."
"I like to hear you talk, Joan; perhaps Joe liked to hear himself talk. Most men do. But,
      you see, the things you have told me are pleasant to me and they were not to Joe, because he
      didn't believe in them. Don't look at me, Joan; look right away to the edge of the sea."
"You'm surprised like as I talks to ye, Mister Jan. Doan't ladies talk so free as what I
      do?"
"Other women talk, but they are very seldom in earnest like you are, Joan. They don't
      believe half they say, they pretend and make believe; they've got to do so, poor things,
      because the world they live in is all built up on ancient foundations of great festering lies.
      The lies are carefully coated over and disinfected as much as possible and quite hidden out of
      sight, but everybody knows they are there—everybody knows the quaking foundations they tread
      upon. Civilization means universal civility, I suppose, Joan; and to be civil to everybody
      argues a great power of telling lies. People call it tact. But I don't like polite society
      myself, because my nose is sensitive and I smell the stinking basis through all the pretty
      paint. You and I, Joan, belong to Nature. She is not always civil, but you can trust her; she
      is seldom polite, but she never says what is not true."
"You talk as though 'e ded'n much like ladies an' gen'lemen, same as you be."
"I don't, and I'm not what you understand by 'a gentleman,' Joan. Gentlemen and ladies let
      me go among them and mix with them, because I happen to have a great deal of money—thousands
      and thousands of pounds. That opens the door to their drawing-rooms, if I wanted to open it,
      but I don't. I've seen them and gone about among them, and I'm sick of them. If a man wishes
      to know what polite society is let him go into it as a very wealthy bachelor. I'm not 'a
      gentleman,' you know, Joan, fortunately."
"Surely, Mister Jan!"
"No more than you're a lady. But I can try to be gentle and manly, which is better. You and
      I come from the same class, Joan; from the people. The only difference is that my father
      happened to make a huge fortune in London. Guess what he sold?"
"I dunnaw."
"Fish—just plaice and flounders and herrings and so forth. He sold them by tens of
      thousands. Your father sells them too. But what d'you think was the difference? Why, your
      father is an honest man; mine wasn't. The fishermen sold their fish, after they had had the
      trouble and danger of catching them, to my father; and then my father sold them again to the
      public; and the fishermen got too little and the public paid too much, and so—I'm a very rich
      man to-day—the son of a thief."
"Mister Jan!"
"Nobody ever called him a thief but me. He was a great star in this same polite society I
      speak of. He fed hundreds of fat people on the money that ought to have gone into the
      fishermen's pockets; and he died after eating too much salmon and cucumber at his own table.
      Poetic justice, you know. There are stained glass windows up to his memory in two churches and
      tons of good white marble were wasted when they made his grave. But he was a thief, just as
      surely as your father is an honest man; so you have the advantage of me, Joan. I really doubt
      if I'm respectable enough for you to know and trust."
"I'd trust 'e with anything, Mister Jan, 'cause you'm plain-spoken an' true."
"Don't be too sure—the son of a thief may have wrong ideas and lax principles. Many things
      not to be bought can easily be stolen."
Again he struck a sinister note, but this time on an ear wholly unable to appreciate or
      suspect it. Joan was occupied with Barron's startling scraps of biography, and, as usual, when
      he began talking in a way she could not understand, turned to her own thoughts. This sudden
      alteration of his position she took literally. It struck her in a happy light.
"If you'm not a gen'leman then you wouldn' look down 'pon me, would 'e?"
"God forbid! I look up to you, Joan."
She was silent, trying to master this remarkable assertion. The artist stood no longer upon
      that lofty pedestal where she had placed him; but the change of attitude seemed to bring him a
      little closer, and Joan forgot the fall in contemplating the nearer approach.
"That's why I asked you not to call me 'Mister Jan,"' Barron added after a pause. "We are,
      you see, only different because I'm a man and you're a woman. Money merely makes a difference
      to outside things, like houses and clothes. But you've got possessions which no money can
      bring to me: a happy home and a lover coming back to you from the sea. Think what it must be
      to have nobody in the world to care whether you live or die. Why, I haven't a relation near
      enough to be even interested in all my money—there's loneliness for you!"
Joan felt full of a great pity, but could not tell how to express it. Even her dull brains
      were not slow enough to credit his frank assertion that he and she were equals; but she
      accepted the statement in some degree, and now, with her mind wandering in his lonely
      existence, wondered if she might presume to express sympathy for him and proclaim herself his
      friend. She hesitated, for such friendship as hers, though it came hot from her little heart,
      seemed a ludicrous thing to offer this man. Every day of intercourse with him filled her more
      with wonder and with admiration; every day he occupied a wider place in her thoughts; and at
      that moment his utterances and his declaration of a want in life made him more human than ever
      to her, more easily to be comprehended, more within the reach of her understanding. And that
      was not a circumstance calculated to lessen her regard for him by any means. Until that day he
      had appeared a being far apart, whose interests and main threads of life belonged to another
      sphere; now he had deliberately come into her world and declared it his own.
The silence became painful to Joan, but she could not pluck up courage enough to tell the
      artist that she at least was a friend. Finally she spoke, feeling that he waited for her to do
      so, and her words led to the point, for she found, in his answer to them, that he took her
      goodwill for granted.
"Ain't you got no uncles nor nothin' o' that even, Mister Jan?"
He laughed and shook his head.
"Not one, Joan—not anybody in all the world to think twice about me but you."
Her heart beat hard and her breath quickened, but she did not speak. Then Barron, putting
      down his brushes and beginning to load a pipe, that his next remark might not seem too
      serious, proceeded:
"I call you 'friend,' Joan, because I know you are one. And I want you to think of me
      sometimes when I am gone, will you?"
He went on filling his pipe, and then, looking suddenly into her eyes, saw there a light
      that was strange—a light that he would have given his soul to put into paint—a light that
      Joe's name never had kindled and never could. Joan wiped her hand across her mouth uneasily;
      then she twisted her hands behind her back, like a schoolgirl standing in class, and made
      answer with her eyes on the ground.
"Iss, I will, then, Mister Jan; an' maybe I couldn't help it if I would."
He lighted his pipe carefully before answering.
"Then I shall be happy, Joan."
But while she grew rose-red at the boldness of her sudden announcement, he took care neither
      to look at her nor to let her know that he had realized the earnestness with which she spoke.
      And when, ten minutes later, she had departed, he mused speculatively on the course of their
      conversation, asking himself what whim had led him to pretend to so much human feeling and to
      lament his loneliness. This condition of his life he loved above all others. No man, woman or
      child had the right to interfere with his selfish, impersonal existence, and he gloried in the
      fact. But to the scraps of his life's history, which he had spread before Joan in their
      absolute truth, he had added this fiction of friendless loneliness, and it had worked a
      wonder. He saw that he was growing to be much to her, and the problem lying in his path rose
      again, as it had for a moment when Murdoch warned him in jest against falling in love with
      Joan Tregenza. Dim suspicions crossed his mind with greater frequency, and being now a mere
      remorseless savage, hunting to its completion a fine picture, he made no effort to shut their
      shadows from his calculation. Everything which bore even indirectly upon his work received its
      share of attention; to mood must all sacrifices be made; and now a new mood began to dawn in
      him. He knew it, he accepted it. He had not sought it, but the thing was there, and Nature had
      sent it to him. To shun it and fly from it meant a lie to his art; to open his arms to it
      promised the destruction of a human unit. Barron was not the man to hesitate between two such
      courses. If any action could heighten his inspiration, add a glimmer of glory to his picture,
      or get a shadow more soul into the painted blue eyes of the subject, he held such action
      justified. For the present his mind was chaos on the subject, and he left the future to work
      itself out as chance might determine.
His painting was all he concerned himself with, and should Nature ultimately indicate that
      greater perfection might be achieved through worship and even sacrifice at her shrine, neither
      worship nor sacrifice would be withheld.
