
CHAPTER FIVE THE TRUTH
Thomasin saw that all things about Joan's room were neat, spotless, and in order. For one
      brief moment a sense of disquiet at the action before her touched the woman's heart and head;
      but duty alike to her husband and her stepdaughter demanded the search in her opinion. Should
      there be nothing to find, so much the better; if, on the other hand, matters affecting Joan's
      temporal and eternal welfare were here hidden, then they could not be uncovered too quickly.
      She looked first through the girl's little wooden trunk, the key of which was in the lock, but
      nothing save a childish treasure or two rewarded Mrs. Tregenza here. In a broken desk, which
      had belonged to her mother, Joan kept a few Christmas cards, and two silhouettes: one of Uncle
      Thomas, of Drift, one of Mary Chirgwin. Here were also some cooking recipes copied in her
      mother's writing, an agate marble which Joan had found on Penzance beach, lavender tied up in
      a bag, and an odd toy that softened Thomasin's heart not a little as she picked it up and
      looked at it. The thing brought back to her memory a time four years earlier. It was a small,
      grotesque figure on wires, built up of chestnuts and acorns with a hazel-nut for its head and
      black pins stuck in for the eyes. She remembered Tom making it and giving it to Joan on her
      birthday. Then the memory of Joan's love for Tom from the time he was born came like a glow of
      sunshine into the mother's heart, and for a moment she was minded to relinquish her unpleasant
      task upon the spot; but she changed her intention again and proceeded. The box held little
      else save a parcel of old clothes tied up with rosemary in brown paper. These the woman
      surveyed curiously, and knew, without being told, that they had belonged to Joan's mother. For
      some reason the spectacle killed sentiment and changed her mood. She shut down the box, and
      then, going to the chest of drawers, pulled out each compartment in turn. Nothing but Joan's
      apparel and her few brooches and trinkets appeared here. The history of each and all was
      familiar to Mrs. Tregenza. But on reaching the bottom drawer of the chest, she found it locked
      and the key absent. To continue her search, however, was not difficult. Nothing separated the
      drawers, and by removing that above the last, the contents of the lowest lay at her mercy, It
      was full of linen for the most part, but hidden at the bottom, Thomasin made a discovery, and
      found certain matters which at once spoke of tremendous mystery, and, to her mind, indicated
      the nature of it. First she came upon the little picture of Joe's ship in its rough gilded
      frame. This might be an innocent gift from some of the young men who had asked in the past to
      be allowed to paint Joan and received a curt negative from Gray Michael. But the other
      discovery meant more. Pushing her hand about the drawer she found a pile of paper, felt the
      crackle of it, and pulled it eagerly to the light. Then, and before she learned the grandeur
      of the sum, she was seized with a sudden palpitation and sat down on Joan's bed. Her mouth
      grew full as a hungry man's before a feast, her lips were wet, her hand shook as she opened
      and spread the notes. Then she counted them and sat gasping like a landed fish. Thomasin had
      never seen so much money before in her life. A thousand pounds! Unlike Joan, to whom the sum
      conveyed no significance, Mrs. Tregenza could estimate it. Her mind reached that far, and the
      bank-notes, for her, lay just within the estimation of avarice. Every snowy fragment meant a
      hundred pounds—a hundred sovereigns—two hundred ten-shilling pieces. The first shock overpast,
      and long before she grew sufficiently calm to associate the treasure with its possessor, Mrs.
      Tregenza began spending in her mind's eye. The points in house and garden, outhouse and sty,
      whereon money might be advantageously expended, rose up one after the other. Then she put
      aside eight hundred and fifty out of the grand total and pictured herself taking it to the
      bank. She thought of a nest-egg that would "goody" against the time Tom should grow into a
      man; she saw herself among the neighbors, pointed at, whispered of as a woman with hundreds
      and hundreds of pounds put by; she saw the rows of men sitting basking about in Newlyn, as
      their custom is when off the sea; and she heard them drop words of admiration at the sight of
      her. Presently, however, this gilded vision vanished, and she began to connect the money with
      Joan. She solved the mystery then with a brutal directness which hit the mark in one
      direction; as to the source of the money, but went wide of it in some measure upon the subject
      of the girl. Thomasin held briefly that her stepdaughter had fallen, and now, knowing her
      condition, had informed some man of it, with the result that from him came this unutterable
      gift. That the money made an enormous difference to Mrs. Tregenza's mental attitude must be
      confessed. She found herself fashioning absolute excuses for Joan. Girls so often came to ill
      through no fault of their own. The man must at least have been a gentleman to pay for his
      pleasure in four figures. Four figures! Here she stopped thinking in order to picture the
      vision of a unit followed by three ciphers. Then she marveled as to what manner of man he was
      who could send a girl like Joan a thousand pounds. She never heard of such a price for the
      value received. Her respect for Joan began to increase when she realized that the money was
      hers. Probably there was even more where that came from. "Anyway," she reflected, "it ban't no
      use cryin' ower spilt milk. What's done's done. An' a thousand pounds'll go long ways to
      softenin' the road. She might travel up-long to Truro to my cousin an' bide quiet theer till
      arter, an' no harm done, poor lass. When all's said, us knaws the Lard Hissel weer mighty easy
      wi' the like o' she, an' worser wenches tu. But Michael—God A'mighty knaws he won't be easy.
      She'm a damned wummon, I s'pose, but she's got to live through 'er life here—damned or saved;
      an' she's got a thousand pound to do't with. A terrible braave dollop o' money, sure 'nough.
      To think 'ow 'ard a man's got to work 'fore he earns five of 'em!" But her imagination
      centered upon Gray Michael now, and she almost forgot the banknotes for a moment. She thought
      of his agony and trembled for the result. He might strike Joan down and kill her. The man's
      anger against evil-doers was always a terrific thing; and he had no idea of the value of
      money. She hazarded guesses at the course he would pursue, and each idea was blacker than the
      last. Then Thomasin fell to wondering what Michael would be likely to do with the money. She
      sighed at this thought, and then she grew pale at the imaginary spectacle of her husband
      tearing the devil-sent notes to pieces and scattering them over the cliff to the sea. This
      horrible possibility stung her to another train of ideas. Might it be within her power to win
      Joan's secret, share it, and keep it from the father? Her pluck, however, gave way when she
      looked a little deeper into the future. She would have done most things in her power for a
      thousand pounds, but she would not have dared any treachery to Michael. The woman put the
      notes together and stroked them and listened to the rustle of them and rubbed her hard cheek
      with them. Then, looking from the little window of Joan's garret, she saw the girl herself
      approaching with Mr. Tregenza. They were nearly home again, so Thomasin returned the money and
      the picture to their places in the chest of drawers, smoothed the bed, where she had been
      sitting for half an hour, and went downstairs still undetermined as to a course of action.
Before dinner was eaten, however, she had decided that her husband must know the truth. Even
      her desire toward the money cooled before the prospect of treachery to him. Fear had something
      to do with this decision, but the woman's own principles were strong. It is unlikely that in
      any case they would have broken down. She sent Joan on an errand to the village after the meal
      was ended; and upon her departure addressed her husband hurriedly.
"You said I was 'mazed to dinner, an' so I was. I've gotten bad news for 'e, Michael,
      touchin' Joan."
"No more o' that, mother," he answered, "I've talked wi' she an' said a word in season.
      She'm well in body an' be gwaine to turn a new leaf, so theer's an end o' the matter."
"'Tedn' so," she declared, "I've bin in the gal's room an' I've found—but you bide here an'
      I'll bring 'em to 'e. Hold yourself back, Michael, for us caan't say nothin' sure till us
      knaws the truth from Joan."
"She've tawld me the truth out a walkin' an' I've shawed her the narrer path. What should
      you find?"
"Money—no lil come-by-chance neither; more money than ever you or me seed in our born days
      afore or shall agin."
"You'm dreamin', wummon!" he said.
"God knaws I wishes it weer so," she answered, and went once more to Joan's room.
Gray Michael was walking up and down the kitchen when she returned, and Thomasin said
      nothing, but put money and picture upon the table. Her husband fought with himself a moment,
      as it appeared, then seemed to pray a while, standing still with his hand pressed over his
      eyes, and finally sat himself down beside the things which Thomasin had brought.
"I'd no choice but to tell 'e," she said.
Gray Michael's eyes were on the picture and utter astonishment appeared in them.
"Why! 'tis Joe Noy's ship. Us seed her off the islands, outward bound! He might 'a' gived it
      her hisself surely?"
"But t'other thing; the money. Count them notes. Noy never gived Joan them."
He spread the parcel, counted the money, and sat back thunderstruck.
"God in heaven! A thousan' pound, an' notes as never went through no dirty hands neither!
      What do it mean?"
"How should I tell what it means? I found the whole fortune hid beneath her smickets. Lard
      knaws how she comed by it. What have the likes o' she to give for money?"
"What do 'e mean by that?" he blazed out, rising to his feet and clinching his fists.
"Ax your darter. Do 'e think I'd dare to say a word onless I was sartain sure? You'd smash
      me, your own wife, if I weer wrong, like enough. I ban't wrong. Joan's wi' cheel or I never
      was. Maybe that thraws light on the money, maybe it doan't. I did pray as it might 'a' comed
      out to be her man at sea. But you'll find it weern't. God help 'e, Michael, my heart do bleed
      for 'e. Can 'e find it in 'e to be merciful same as the Lard in like case, or—?"
He raised his hand to stop her. He was sitting back in his chair with a face that had grown
      gray even to the skin, with eyes that looked out at nothing. There was a moment's silence save
      for the tall clock in the corner; then Tregenza brushed beads of water off his forehead and
      dried his hand on his trousers. He raised his eyes to the roof and gripped his hands together
      on his chest and slowly spoke a text which his wife had heard upon his lips before, but only
      at times of deep concern or emotion.
"'The Lard is king, be the people never so impatient; He sitteth between the cherubims, be
      the airth never so unquiet.'"
Few saw any particular meaning in this quotation applied in moments of stress, as Michael
      usually employed it; but to the man it was a supreme utterance, the last word to be spoken in
      the face of all the evil and wickedness of the world. Come what might, God still reigned in
      heaven.
He spoke aloud thus far, and afterward, by the movement of his beard and lip, Thomasin could
      see he was still talking or praying.
"Let the Lard lead 'e, husband, in this hard pass," she said. "'Vengeance is Mine,' the Book
      sez."
He turned his eyes upon her. His brows were dragged down upon them; he had brushed his gray
      hair like bristles upright on his head; across the mighty wall of his forehead jagged
      cross-lines were stamped, like the broken strata over a cliff-face.
"Ay, you say it. Vengeance be God's awn, an' mercy be God's awn. 'Tedn' for no man to meddle
      wi' them. Us caan't be aught but just. She'll have justice from me—no more'n that. 'Tis all
      wan now. Wanton or no wanton, she've flummoxed me this day. The giglot lied an' said the thing
      that was not. She'm not o' the Kingdom—the fust Tregenza as ever lied—the fust."
"God send it edn' as bad as it do look, master. 'Er caracter belike ban't gone. S'pose as
      she'm married?"
"Hould your clack, wummon. I be thinkin'."
He was thinking, indeed. In the face of this discovery, the ghost of an idea, which had
      haunted Gray Michael's mind more than once during the upbringing of Joan, returned a greater
      and more pronounced shadow than ever before. The conviction carried truth stamped upon it from
      the standpoint of his present horrid knowledge. To an outsider his thought had appeared
      absolutely devilish, to the man himself it was as a buoy thrown to one drowning. The belief
      flooded his mind, swept him away, convinced him. Its nature presently appeared as he answered
      Thomasin. She was still thinking of the thousand pounds.
"Theer's no word in the Book agin mercy, Michael. Joan's your awn darter—froward or not
      froward."
"You'm wrong theer," he said. He was now cool and quiet. "I did think so wance; I did tell
      her so when us walked not two hour agone. Now I sees differ'nt. She'm none o' mine. She'm no
      Tregenza. Be Nature, as made us God-fearin' to a man, to a wummon, to a cheel, gwaine to lie
      after generations 'pon generations? Look back at them as bred me, an' them as bred them—back,
      an' back, an' back. All Tregenzas was o' the Lard's harvest; an' should I, as feared God
      more'n any o' 'em, an' fought for the Lard of Hosts 'fore I was higher'n this table—should
      I—Michael Tregenza, breed a damned sawl? The thot's comed black an' terrible 'pon my mind
      'fore to-day; an' I've put en away from me, judgin' 'twas the devil. Now I knaw 'twas God
      spoke; now I knaw that her's none o' my gettin'. 'Who honoreth his faither shall 'a' joy o'
      his awn childern.' Shall I, as weer a pattern son, be cussed wi' a strumpet for a darter?"
"You'm speakin' a hard thing o' dead bones, then. The Chirgwins is upland folks o' long
      standin', knawn so far as the Land's End, an' up Drift an' down Lizard likewise."
"She've lied to me," was his answer; "she've lied oftentimes; she'm false to whatever I did
      teach her; she've sawld herself—she've—no more on it—no more on it but awnly this: I call 'pon
      God A'mighty to bear witness she'm no Tregenza—never—never."
"'Tweer her mother in the gal; but doan't 'e say more 'bout that, Michael. Poor dear sawl,
      she'm dead an' gone, an' she loved 'e wi' all her 'eart, as I, what knawed her, can testify
      to." 
"No more o' that," he said, "the gal's comin'. Thank God she ban't no cheel o' mine—thank
      God, as 'ave tawld me 'tedn' so. He whispered it, an' I put it away an' away. Now I knaws. You
      bide here, Thomasin Tregenza, and I'll speak what's fittin'."
Thus in one moment this hideous conviction was stamped upon the man's soul for life. He
      judged the dead mother by the daughter and visited the child's sin upon the parent's memory.
      Any conclusion more monstrous, more directly opposed to every natural instinct, can hardly be
      conceived, but the man had been strangling natural instincts for fifty years. Only pride of
      family remained. There were but few Tregenzas left and soon there would be none unless Tom
      carried on the name. Michael was the quintessence of the Tregenza spirit, the fruit of
      generations, the high-water mark. He stood on that giddy pinnacle which has religious mania
      for its precipice. To damn a dead woman was easier than to accept a wanton daughter. Better an
      unfaithful wife than that any soul born of Tregenza blood should be lost. So he washed his
      hands of both, thanking God, who had launched the truth into his mind at last; and then he
      rose to his feet as Joan entered the room.
She stood for a moment in the doorway with her blue eyes fixed in amazement upon the kitchen
      table. Then she grew very red to the roots of her hair and came forward. There was almost a
      joy in her mind that the long story of falsehood must end at last. She did not fear her father
      now and looked up into his face quite calmly as she approached the table.
"These be mine," she said. "Was it you, faither, as took 'em from wheer they was?"
"'Twas me, Joan," answered Mrs. Tregenza; "an' I judge the Lard led me."
The girl stood erect and scornful.
"I'm glad you found them; now I can tell the truth."
"Truth!" thundered Michael. "Truth—what do you knaw 'bout Truth, darter o' Baal? Your life's
      a lie, your tongue's rotten in your mouth wi' lyin'. Never look in no honest faace agin!" 
"You'd do best to bide still while I tell 'e what this here means," said Joan quietly. The
      man's anger alarmed her no more than the squeak of a caged rat. "I ban't no darter o' Baal,
      an' the money's come by honest. I've lied afore, but never shall again. An' I've let Joe go
      'is ways thinkin' I loved en, which I doan't. I be tokened to a furriner from London, an' he's
      took me for his awn, an' he be gwaine to come down-long mighty soon an' take me away. But I
      couldn't tell 'e nothin' of that 'cause he bid me keep my mouth shut. So theer."
"'Took 'e for 'is awn'! Wheer is he, then? Why be you here?"
"He'm comin', I tell 'e. He'm a true man, an' he shawed me what 'tis to love."
"Bought you, you damned harlot!"
She knew the word was vile, but a shred of John Barron's philosophy supported her.
"My awnly sin is I've lied to you, faither; an' you've no right to call me evil names."
"Never call me faither no more, lewd slut! I be no faither o' thine, nor never was. God
      A'mighty! a Tregenza a wanton! I'd rather cut my hand off than b'lieve it so. It's
      this—this—blood-money—the price o' a damned sawl! No more lyin'. I knaw—I knaw—an' the
      picksher—the ship of a true man. It did ought to break your heart to see it, if you had wan. A
      devil-spawned painting feller, in coorse. An' his black heart happy an' content 'cause he've
      sent this filth. You stare, wi' your mother's eyes—you stare, an' stare. Hell's yawning for
      'e, wretched wummon, an' for him as brot 'e to it!"
"He doan't believe in hell, no more doan't I," said Joan calmly; "an' it ban't a faither's
      plaace to damn's awn flaish an' blood no way."
"Never name me thy faither no more! I ban't your faither, I tell 'e, an' I do never mean to
      see thy faace agin. Go wheer you'm minded; but get 'e gone from here. Tramp the broad road
      with the crowd—the narrer path's closed agin 'e. And this—this—let it burn same as him what
      sent it will."
He picked up the note nearest to him, crumpled it into a ball and flung it upon the
      fire.
"Michael, Michael!" cried his wife, rushing forward, "for God's love, what be doin' of? The
      money ban't damned; the money's honest!"
But Joan did more than speak. As the gift flamed quickly up, then sunk to gray ash, a
      tempest of passion carried her out of herself. She trembled in her limbs, grew deadly pale,
      and flew at her father like a tigress. No evil word had ever crossed her lips till then,
      though they had echoed in her ears often enough. But now they jumped to her tongue, and she
      cursed Gray Michael and tore the rest of the money out of his hand so quickly that his
      intention of burning it was frustrated.
"It's mine, it's mine, blast you!" she screamed like a fury, "what right have you to steal
      it? It's mine—gived me by wan whose shoe you ban't worthy to latch! He's shawed me what you
      be, an' the likes o' you, wi' your hell-fire an' prayin' an' sour looks. I ban't afeared 'o
      you no more—none o' you. I be sick o' the smeech o' your God. 'Er's a poor thing alongside o'
      mine an' Mister Jan's. I'll gaw, I'll gaw so far away as ever I can; an' I'll never call 'e my
      faither agin, s'elp me God!"
Mrs. Tregenza had thanked Providence under her breath when Joan rescued the notes, but now,
      almost for the first time, she realized that her own interest in this pile of money was as
      nothing. Every penny belonged to her stepdaughter, and her stepdaughter evidently meant to
      keep it. This discovery hit her hard, and now the bitterness came forth in a flood of words
      that tumbled each over the other and stung like hornets as they settled.
Gray Michael's broadside had roared harmlessly over Joan's erect head; Thomasin's small shot
      did not miss the mark. She was furious; her husband stood dumb; her virago tongue hissed the
      truth; and Joan, listening, knew that it was the truth.
No matter what the elder woman said. She missed no vile word of them all. She called Joan
      every name that chills the ear of the fallen; and she explained the meaning of her
      expressions; she bid the girl take herself and the love-child within her from out the sight of
      honest folks; she told her the man had turned his back forever, that only the ashy road of the
      ruined remained for her to tread. And that was how the great news that Nature had looked upon
      her for a mother came to Joan Tregenza. Here was the riddle of the mysterious voice unraveled;
      here was the secret of her physical sorrows made clear. She looked wildly from one to the
      other—from the man to the woman; then she tottered a step away, clutching her money and her
      little picture to her breast; and then she rolled over, a huddled, senseless heap, upon the
      floor.
