
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
"JOE'S SHIP"
According to his custom, Noy worked through the exhibition catalogue for each room before
      entering it. The hour was an early one, and but few persons had as yet penetrated to the
      central part of the gallery. For these, however, an experience of a singular character was now
      in store. Wandering hither and thither in groups and talking in subdued voices after the
      manner of persons in such a place, all were suddenly conscious of a loud inarticulate cry. The
      sudden volume of sound denoted mixed emotions, but amazement and grief were throned upon it,
      and the exclamation came from a man standing now stiff and spellbound before "Joe's Ship," the
      famous masterpiece of John Barron. The beholders viewed an amazed figure which seemed
      petrified even to an expression on his face. There are countenances which display the ordinary
      emotions of humanity in a fashion unusual and peculiar to themselves. Thus, while the
      customary and conventional signs of sorrow are a down-drawing slant to the corners of mouth
      and eye, yet it sometimes happens that the lines more usually associated with gratification
      are donned in grief. Of this freakish character was the face of Joe Noy. His muscles seemed to
      follow the bones underneath them; and now beholding him, the surprised spectators saw a man of
      gigantic proportions gigantically moved. Yet, while sorrow was discernible in his voice, the
      corners of his mouth were dragged up till his lips resembled a half-moon on its back, and the
      lids and corners of his eyes were full of laughter wrinkles, while the eyes themselves were
      starting and agonized. The man's catalogue had fallen to the ground; his hands were clinched;
      now, as others watched him, he came step by step nearer to the picture.
To estimate the force of the thing upon Noy's hungry heart, to present the chaos of emotions
      which now gripped him at the goal of his pilgrimage, is impossible. Here, restored to him by
      art, was his dead sweetheart, the sum and total of all the beauty he had worshiped and which
      for nearly a year of absence had been his guiding star. He knew that she was in her grave, yet
      she stood before him sweet and fresh, with the moisture of life in her eyes and on her lips.
      He recognized everything, to the windy spot where the gorse flourished on the crown of the
      cliff. The clean sky told him from whence the wind blew; the gray gull above was flying with
      it upon slanting wings. And Joan stood below in a blaze of sunshine and yellow blossom. A
      reflection from the corner of her sunbonnet brightened her face, though it was shaded from
      direct sunlight by her hand; her blue eyes mirrored the sea and the sky; and they met Joe's,
      like a question. She was looking away to the edge of the world; and he knew from the name of
      the picture, which he had read before he saw it, the object regarded. He glared on, and his
      breath came quicker. The brown petticoat with the black patch was familiar to him; but he had
      never seen the gleam of her white neck below the collar where it was hidden from the sun. In
      the picture an unfastened button showed this. The rest he knew: her hair, turning at the
      flapping edge of the sunbonnet; her slight figure, round waist, and the shoes, whose strings
      he had been privileged to tie more than once. Then he remembered her last promise: to see his
      ship go down Channel from their old meeting-place upon Gorse Point; and the memory, thus
      revived by the actual spectacle of Joan Tregenza looking her last at his vanishing vessel,
      brought the wild cry to Noy's lip with the wringing of his heart. He was absolutely dead to
      his environment, and his long days of silence suddenly ended in a futile outpouring of words
      addressed to any who might care to listen. Passion surged to the top of his mind—rage for his
      loss, indignation that the unutterably fair thing before them had been blotted out of the
      world while he was far away, without power to protect her. For a few moments only was the man
      beyond his own self-control, but in that brief time he spoke; and his listeners enjoyed a
      sensation of a nature outside their widest experiences.
"Oh, Christ Jesus! 'tis Joan—my awn lil Joan, as I left her, as I seed her alive!"
He had reached the rail separating the pictures from the public. Here he stood and spoke
      again, now conscious that there were people round about him.
"She'm dead—dead an' buried—my Joan—killed by the devil as drawed her theer in that
      picksher. As large as life; an' yet she'm under ground wi' a brawken heart. An' me, new-comed
      off the sea, hears of it fust thing."
"It's 'Joe's Ship' he means," whispered somebody, and Noy heard him.
"Iss fay, so 'tis, an' I be Joe—I talkin' to 'e; an' she'm shadin' her eyes theer to see my
      vessel a-sailin' away to furrin paarts! 'Tis a story that's true, an' the God-blasted limb
      what drawed this knawed I was gone to the ends o' the airth outward bound."
A man from the turnstile came up here and inquired what was the matter. His voice and tone
      of authority brought the sailor back to the position he occupied; he restrained himself,
      therefore, and spoke no more. Already Noy feared that his passion might have raised
      suspicions, and now, turning and picking up his catalogue, he made hasty departure before
      those present had opportunity to take much further notice of him. The man hurried off into the
      rattle of the busy thoroughfare, and in a moment he and his sorrows and his deadly purpose had
      vanished away.
Meantime the curator of the gallery, a man of intelligence, improved the moment and
      addressed some apposite reflections to those spectators who still clustered around John
      Barron's picture.
"It isn't often we get such a sight as that. Many people have wondered why this great work
      was called as it is. The man who has gone explains it, and you have had a glimpse of the
      picture's history—the inner history of it. The painting has made a great sensation ever since
      it was first exhibited, but never such a sensation as it made to-day."
"The beggar looked as though he meant mischief," said somebody.
"He knows the model is dead apparently, but there's another mystery there too, for Mr.
      Barron himself isn't aware of the fact. He was here only the day before yesterday—a little
      pale shadow of a man, like a ghost in a fur coat. He came to see his picture and stopped ten
      minutes. Two gentlemen were with him, and I heard him say, in answer to one of them as he left
      the gallery, that he had quite recently endeavored to learn some particulars of Joan Tregenza,
      his model, but had failed to do so as yet."
