<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Rome Express, by Arthur
      Griffiths.</title><author>Griffiths, Major Arthur George Frederick (1838-1908).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER IV
He had other work to do, and was eager to get at it. So he left Block to show the Countess
     back to the waiting-room, and, motioning to the porter that he might also go, the Chief
     hastened to the sleeping-car, the examination of which, too long delayed, claimed his urgent
     attention.
It is the first duty of a good detective to visit the actual theatre of a crime and overhaul
     it inch by inch,—seeking, searching, investigating, looking for any, even the most
     insignificant, traces of the murderer's hands.
The sleeping-car, as I have said, had been side-tracked, its doors were sealed, and it was
     under strict watch and ward. But everything, of course, gave way before the detective, and,
     breaking through the seals, he walked in, making straight for the little room or compartment
     where the body of the victim still lay untended and absolutely untouched.
It was a ghastly sight, although not new in M. Floçon's experience. There lay the corpse in
     the narrow berth, just as it had been stricken. It was partially undressed, wearing only shirt
     and drawers. The former lay open at the chest, and showed the gaping wound that had, no doubt,
     caused death, probably instantaneous death. But other blows had been struck; there must have
     been a struggle, fierce and embittered, as for dear life. The savage truculence of the murderer
     had triumphed, but not until he had battered in the face, destroying features and rendering
     recognition almost impossible.
A knife had given the mortal wound; that was at once apparent from the shape of the wound. It
     was the knife, too, which had gashed and stabbed the face, almost wantonly; for some of these
     wounds had not bled, and the plain inference was that they had been inflicted after life had
     sped. M. Floçon examined the body closely, but without disturbing it. The police medical
     officer would wish to see it as it was found. The exact position, as well as the nature of the
     wounds, might afford evidence as to the manner of death.
But the Chief looked long, and with absorbed, concentrated interest, at the murdered man,
     noting all he actually saw, and conjecturing a good deal more.
The features of the mutilated face were all but unrecognizable, but the hair, which was
     abundant, was long, black, and inclined to curl; the black moustache was thick and drooping.
     The shirt was of fine linen, the drawers silk. On one finger were two good rings, the hands
     were clean, the nails well kept, and there was every evidence that the man did not live by
     manual labour. He was of the easy, cultured class, as distinct from the workman or
     operative.
This conclusion was borne out by his light baggage, which still lay about the berth,—hat-box,
     rugs, umbrella, brown morocco hand-bag. All were the property of some one well to do, or at
     least possessed of decent belongings. One or two pieces bore a monogram, "F.Q.," the same as on
     the shirt and under-linen; but on the bag was a luggage label, with the name, "Francis
     Quadling, passenger to Paris," in full. Its owner had apparently no reason to conceal his name.
     More strangely, those who had done him to death had been at no pains to remove all traces of
     his identity.
M. Floçon opened the hand-bag, seeking for further evidence; but found nothing of
     importance,—only loose collars, cuffs, a sponge and slippers, two Italian newspapers of an
     earlier date. No money, valuables, or papers. All these had been removed probably, and
     presumably, by the perpetrator of the crime.
Having settled the first preliminary but essential points, he next surveyed the whole
     compartment critically. Now, for the first time, he was struck with the fact that the window
     was open to its full height. Since when was this? It was a question to be put presently to the
     porter and any others who had entered the car, but the discovery drew him to examine the window
     more closely, and with good results.
At the ledge, caught on a projecting point on the far side, partly in, partly out of the car,
     was a morsel of white lace, a scrap of feminine apparel; although what part, or how it had come
     there, was not at once obvious to M. Floçon. A long and minute inspection of this bit of lace,
     which he was careful not to detach as yet from the place in which he found it, showed that it
     was ragged, and frayed, and fast caught where it hung. It could not have been blown there by
     any chance air; it must have been torn from the article to which it belonged, whatever that
     might be,—head-dress, nightcap, night-dress, or handkerchief. The lace was of a kind to serve
     any of these purposes.
Inspecting further, M. Floçon made a second discovery. On the small table under the window
     was a short length of black jet beading, part of the trimming or ornamentation of a lady's
     dress.
These two objects of feminine origin—one partly outside the car, the other near it, but quite
     inside—gave rise to many conjectures. It led, however, to the inevitable conclusion that a
     woman had been at some time or other in the berth. M. Floçon could not but connect these two
     finds with the fact of the open window. The latter might, of course, have been the work of the
     murdered man himself at an earlier hour. Yet it is unusual, as the detective imagined, for a
     passenger, and especially an Italian, to lie under an open window in a sleeping-berth when
     travelling by express train before daylight in March.
Who opened that window, then, and why? Perhaps some further facts might be found on the
     outside of the car. With this idea, M. Floçon left it, and passed on to the line or permanent
     way.
Here he found himself a good deal below the level of the car. These sleepers have no
     foot-boards like ordinary carriages; access to them is gained from a platform by the steps at
     each end. The Chief was short of stature, and he could only approach the window outside by
     calling one of the guards and ordering him to make the small ladder (faire la petite
      echelle). This meant stooping and giving a back, on which little M. Floçon climbed
     nimbly, and so was raised to the necessary height.
A close scrutiny revealed nothing unusual. The exterior of the car was encrusted with the mud
     and dust gathered in the journey, none of which appeared to have been disturbed.
M. Floçon reëntered the carriage neither disappointed nor pleased; his mind was in an open
     state, ready to receive any impressions, and as yet only one that was at all clear and distinct
     was borne in on him.
This was the presence of the lace and the jet beads in the theatre of the crime. The
     inference was fair and simple. He came logically and surely to this:
1. That some woman had entered the compartment.
2. That whether or not she had come in before the crime, she was there after the window had
     been opened, which was not done by the murdered man.
3. That she had leaned out, or partly passed out, of the window at some time or other, as the
     scrap of lace testified.
4. Why had she leaned out? To seek some means of exit or escape, of course.
But escape from whom? from what? The murderer? Then she must know him, and unless an
     accomplice (if so, why run from him?), she would give up her knowledge on compulsion, if not
     voluntarily, as seemed doubtful, seeing she (his suspicions were consolidating) had not done so
     already.
But there might be another even stronger reason to attempt escape at such imminent risk as
     leaving an express train at full speed. To escape from her own act and the consequences it must
     entail—escape from horror first, from detection next, and then from arrest and punishment.
All this would imperiously impel even a weak woman to face the worst peril, to look out, lean
     out, even try the terrible but impossible feat of climbing out of the car.
So M. Floçon, by fair process of reasoning, reached a point which incriminated one woman, the
     only woman possible, and that was the titled, high-bred lady who called herself the Contessa di
     Castagneto.
This conclusion gave a definite direction to further search. Consulting the rough plan which
     he had constructed to take the place of the missing train card, he entered the compartment
     which the Countess had occupied, and which was actually next door.
It was in the tumbled, untidy condition of a sleeping-place but just vacated. The sex and
     quality of its recent occupant were plainly apparent in the goods and chattels lying about, the
     property and possessions of a delicate, well-bred woman of the world, things still left as she
     had used them last—rugs still unrolled, a pair of easy-slippers on the floor, the sponge in its
     waterproof bag on the bed, brushes, bottles, button-hook, hand-glass, many things belonging to
     the dressing-bag, not yet returned to that receptacle. The maid was no doubt to have attended
     to all these, but as she had not come, they remained unpacked and strewn about in some
     disorder.
M. Floçon pounced down upon the contents of the berth, and commenced an immediate search for
     a lace scarf, or any wrap or cover with lace.
He found nothing, and was hardly disappointed. It told more against the Countess, who, if
     innocent, would have no reason to conceal or make away with a possibly incriminating
     possession, the need for which she could not of course understand.
Next, he handled the dressing-bag, and with deft fingers replaced everything.
Everything was forthcoming but one glass bottle, a small one, the absence of which he noted,
     but thought of little consequence, till, by and by, he came upon it under peculiar
     circumstances.
Before leaving the car, and after walking through the other compartments, M. Floçon made an
     especially strict search of the corner where the porter had his own small chair, his only
     resting-place, indeed, throughout the journey. He had not forgotten the attendant's condition
     when first examined, and he had even then been nearly satisfied that the man had been hocussed,
     narcotized, drugged.
Any doubts were entirely removed by his picking up near the porter's seat a small
     silver-topped bottle and a handkerchief, both marked with coronet and monogram, the last of
     which, although the letters were much interlaced and involved, were decipherable as
     S.L.L.C.
It was that of the Countess, and corresponded with the marks on her other belongings. He put
     it to his nostril, and recognized at once by its smell that it had contained tincture of
     laudanum, or some preparation of that drug.
</div></body></text></TEI>