<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Rome Express, by Arthur
      Griffiths.</title><author>Griffiths, Major Arthur George Frederick (1838-1908).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
CHAPTER VII
When the Judge had brought down the interrogation of the Countess to the production of the
     small glass bottle, he paused, and with a long-drawn "Ah!" of satisfaction, looked round at his
     colleagues.
Both M. Floçon and the Commissary nodded their heads approvingly, plainly sharing his
     triumph.
Then they all put their heads together in close, whispered conference.
"Admirable, M. le Juge!" said the detective. "You have been most adroit. It is a clear
     case."
"No doubt," said the Commissary, who was a blunt, rather coarse person, believing that to
     take anybody and everybody into custody is always the safest and simplest course. "It looks
     black against her. I think she ought to be arrested at once."
"We might, indeed we ought to have more evidence, more definite evidence, perhaps?" The Judge
     was musing over the facts as he knew them. "I should like, before going further, to look at the
     car," he said, suddenly coming to a conclusion.
M. Floçon readily agreed. "We will go together," he said, adding, "Madame will remain here,
     please, until we return. It may not be for long."
"And afterwards?" asked the Countess, whose nervousness had if anything increased during the
     whispered colloquy of the officials.
"Ah, afterwards! Who knows?" was the reply, with a shrug of the shoulders, all most enigmatic
     and unsatisfactory.
"What have we against her?" said the Judge, as soon as they had gained the absolute privacy
     of the sleeping-car.
"The bottle of laudanum and the porter's condition. He was undoubtedly drugged," answered the
     detective; and the discussion which followed took the form of a dialogue between them, for the
     Commissary took no part in it.
"Yes; but why by the Countess? How do we know that positively?"
"It is her bottle," said M. Floçon.
"Her story may be true—that she missed it, that the maid took it."
"We have nothing whatever against the maid. We know nothing about her."
"No. Except that she has disappeared. But that tells more against her mistress. It is all
     very vague. I do not see my way quite, as yet."
"But the fragment of lace, the broken beading? Surely, M. le Juge, they are a woman's, and
     only one woman was in the car—"
"So far as we know."
"But if these could be proved to be hers?"
"Ah! if you could prove that!"
"Easy enough. Have her searched, here at once, in the station. There is a female searcher
     attached to the detention-room."
"It is a strong measure. She is a lady."
"Ladies who commit crimes must not expect to be handled with kid gloves."
"She is an Englishwoman, or with English connections; titled, too. I hesitate, upon my word.
     Suppose we are wrong? It may lead to unpleasantness. M. le Prefet is anxious to avoid
     complications possibly international."
As he spoke, he bent over, and, taking a magnifier from his pocket, examined the lace, which
     still fluttered where it was caught.
"It is fine lace, I think. What say you, M. Floçon? You may be more experienced in such
     matters."
"The finest, or nearly so; I believe it is Valenciennes—the trimming of some underclothing, I
     should think. That surely is sufficient, M. le Juge?"
M. Beaumont le Hardi gave a reluctant consent, and the Chief went back himself to see that
     the searching was undertaken without loss of time.
The Countess protested, but vainly, against this new indignity. What could she do? A
     prisoner, practically friendless,—for the General was not within reach,—to resist was out of
     the question. Indeed, she was plainly told that force would be employed unless she submitted
     with a good grace. There was nothing for it but to obey.
Mother Tontaine, as the female searcher called herself, was an evil-visaged, corpulent old
     creature, with a sickly, soft, insinuating voice, and a greasy, familiar manner that was most
     offensive. They had given her the scrap of torn lace and the débris of the jet as a guide, with
     very particular directions to see if they corresponded with any part of the lady's apparel.
She soon showed her quality.
"Aha! oho! What is this, my pretty princess? How comes so great a lady into the hands of
     Mother Tontaine? But I will not harm you, my beauty, my pretty, my little one. Oh, no, no, I
     will not trouble you, dearie. No, trust to me;" and she held out one skinny claw, and looked
     the other way. The Countess did not or would not understand.
"Madame has money?" went on the old hag in a half-threatening, half-coaxing whisper, as she
     came up quite close, and fastened on her victim like a bird of prey.
"If you mean that I am to bribe you—"
"Fie, the nasty word! But just a small present, a pretty gift, one or two yellow bits,
     twenty, thirty, forty francs—you'd better." She shook the soft arm she held roughly, and
     anything seemed preferable than to be touched by this horrible woman.
"Wait, wait!" cried the Countess, shivering all over, and, feeling hastily for her purse, she
     took out several napoleons.
"Aha! oho! One, two, three," said the searcher in a fat, wheedling voice. "Four, yes, four,
     five;" and she clinked the coins together in her palm, while a covetous light came into her
     faded eyes at the joyous sound. "Five—make it five at once, d'ye hear me?—or I'll call them in
     and tell them. That will go against you, my princess. What, try to bribe a poor old woman,
     Mother Tontaine, honest and incorruptible Tontaine? Five, then, five!"
With trembling haste the Countess emptied the whole contents of her purse in the old hag's
     hand.
"Bon aubaine. Nice pickings. It is a misery what they pay me here. I am, oh, so
     poor, and I have children, many babies. You will not tell them—the police—you dare not. No, no,
     no."
Thus muttering to herself, she shambled across the room to a corner, where she stowed the
     money safely away. Then she came back, showed the bit of lace, and pressed it into the
     Countess's hands.
"Do you know this, little one? Where it comes from, where there is much more? I was told to
     look for it, to search for it on you;" and with a quick gesture she lifted the edge of the
     Countess's skirt, dropping it next moment with a low, chuckling laugh.
"Oho! aha! You were right, my pretty, to pay me, my pretty—right. And some day, to-day,
     to-morrow, whenever I ask you, you will remember Mother Tontaine."
The Countess listened with dismay. What had she done? Put herself into the power of this
     greedy and unscrupulous old beldame?
"And this, my princess? What have we here, aha?"
Mère Tontaine held up next the broken bit of jet ornament for inspection, and as the Countess
     leaned forward to examine it more closely, gave it into her hand.
"You recognize it, of course. But be careful, my pretty! Beware! If any one were looking, it
     would ruin you. I could not save you then. Sh! say nothing, only look, and quick, give it me
     back. I must have it to show."
All this time the Countess was turning the jet over and over in her open palm, with a
     perplexed, disturbed, but hardly a terrified air.
Yes, she knew it, or thought she knew it. It had been—But how had it come here, into the
     possession of this base myrmidon of the French police?
"Give it me, quick!" There was a loud knock at the door. "They are coming. Remember!" Mother
     Tontaine put her long finger to her lip. "Not a word! I have found nothing, of course. Nothing,
     I can swear to that, and you will not forget Mother Tontaine?"
Now M. Floçon stood at the open door awaiting the searcher's report. He looked much
     disconcerted when the old woman took him on one side and briefly explained that the search had
     been altogether fruitless.
There was nothing to justify suspicion, nothing, so far as she could find.
The detective looked from one to the other—from the hag he had employed in this unpleasant
     quest, to the lady on whom it had been tried. The Countess, to his surprise, did not complain.
     He had expected further and strong upbraidings. Strange to say, she took it very quietly. There
     was no indignation in her face. She was still pale, and her hands trembled, but she said
     nothing, made no reference, at least, to what she had just gone through.
Again he took counsel with his colleague, while the Countess was kept apart.
"What next, M. Floçon?" asked the Judge. "What shall we do with her?"
"Let her go," answered the detective, briefly.
"What! do you suggest this, sir," said the Judge, slyly. "After your strong and well-grounded
     suspicions?"
"They are as strong as ever, stronger: and I feel sure I shall yet justify them. But what I
     wish now is to let her go at large, under surveillance."
"Ah! you would shadow her?"
"Precisely. By a good agent. Galipaud, for instance. He speaks English, and he can, if
     necessary, follow her anywhere, even to England."
"She can be extradited," said the Commissary, with his one prominent idea of arrest.
"Do you agree, M. le Juge? Then, if you will permit me, I will give the necessary orders, and
     perhaps you will inform the lady that she is free to leave the station?"
The Countess now had reason to change her opinion of the French officials. Great politeness
     now replaced the first severity that had been so cruel. She was told, with many bows and
     apologies, that her regretted but unavoidable detention was at an end. Not only was she freely
     allowed to depart, but she was escorted by both M. Floçon and the Commissary outside, to where
     an omnibus was in waiting, and all her baggage piled on top, even to the dressing-bag, which
     had been neatly repacked for her.
But the little silver-topped vial had not been restored to her, nor the handkerchief.
In her joy at her deliverance, either she had not given these a second thought, or she did
     not wish to appear anxious to recover them.
Nor did she notice that, as the bus passed through the gates at the bottom of the large slope
     that leads from the Lyons Station, it was followed at a discreet distance by a modest fiacre,
     which pulled up, eventually, outside the Hôtel Madagascar. Its occupant, M. Galipaud, kept the
     Countess in sight, and, entering the hotel at her heels, waited till she had left the office,
     when he held a long conference with the proprietor.
</div></body></text></TEI>