
CHAPTER IX.

LORD X., (I may not in common honour give his name; a man however—so far I may
     say—notorious for his philanthropy of an unsteady and spasmodic kind, and for a certain
     restless curiosity to see into the inside of different social circles)—this lord, in his
     wanderings among the East-end poor, had come across Joshua in his little kingdom of endeavour
     in Church-court. And as no one could come in contact with him, without feeling that
     inexplicable charm which is inseparable from great earnestness and self-devotion, it is to be
     supposed that Lord X.
      among the rest was attracted to the man as he was. Or maybe
     it was only a poor kind of curiosity, not sympathy; as I have since believed. However that may
     be, he and Joshua met; and a friendship was struck up between them on the spot. I use the word
     advisedly; for though the one was a peer of the realm, and the other only an artisan—not
     learned in the scholarly way of a gentleman; not refined in the same way perhaps as a
     gentleman, so far as manner and little observances went; a man speaking with a provincial
     accent, and dressed in fustian and coarse clothes—yet he was fit to take his place with the
     finest gentleman in the land; and even the finest lady would have found but little in him to
     ridicule and much to respect. And I will do both Lord and Lady X. the credit of sincerity in
      the beginning, when, as I said, the friendship between him
     and them was struck up.
Then it must be remembered, that Joshua was one of the handsomest men you could see in a long
     summer's day; a real man; no sickly, effeminate, half-woman, but a tall, broad-shouldered,
     deep-chested fellow, largely framed, and with that calm self-control, that steady unfeverish
     energy, which seemed as if it could carry the world before it. And maybe his good looks
     influenced his new acquaintances in the beginning, even more than they themselves knew. However
     that might be, they made up to him, and seemed as though they would have been his best friends
     all through.
“You want a background, Mr. Davidson,” said Lord X., one day when he called on him at our
     lodgings. “All human nature
      resolves itself into a mathematical formula; a plus
      y represents a quantity unattainable by a alone.”
“But what background can I get, my lord?” returned Joshua. “It sounds a strange confession to
     make, but no one will work with me. Sects keep only to themselves or their affiliations; and I,
     who belong to no sect, am looked on as an enemy by all because I am an enemy to none.”
“Putting sectarianism aside for the moment, you can do nothing without the sanction of
     society,” said Lord X. “No movement can succeed which is not backed by men of birth and
     money.”
Joshua smiled. “This remark does not apply to the roots, my lord, I suppose?” he said; “only
     to the growth and development?”

“Oh!” said Lord X., carelessly, “a low fellow might strike out an idea, but it would want a
     man of position to develop it.”
“Well, perhaps you are right,” Joshua answered. “For, after all, Christianity owes more to
     Paul than to Jesus; and the Pauline development has struck deeper and spread wider than the
     Christ original.”
“Just so,” said Lord X.
“The one being example, both difficult to follow and subversive of the existing state of
     things; the other dogma which ranks the intellectual acceptance of a creed above the
     revolutionary ethics on which it is based,” said Joshua.
“But, Mr. Davidson!” remonstrated Lord X., “surely even you, enthusiast as you are, must
     acknowledge that it would be impossible to go back to the practices of
      early Christian times? The staff and the scrip were all very
     well in their day, but they would scarcely do now. Society has become more complex and
     intricate since then; it would be out of all question to have the common purse and live in the
     barbaric simplicity of apostolic times. Times change, and manners with them.”
“When is just my difficulty, my lord,” said Joshua. “For if modern society is right, then
     Christ was wrong; and we have to look elsewhere than to Him for a solution of our moral and
     social problems.”
“I would not pronounce so crudely as that,” said Lord X. “Say rather that a further
     development may reconcile our differences.”
“So be it, sir; yet if this is so, we are still in the same position as before, and the
      life of Christ, as related in the Bible, is not the absolute
     example for us to follow.”
“About that you must form your own opinion,” said Lord X., with a certain cynical
     indifference not pleasant to witness. What you may or may not believe of the Bible is a
     question for yourself alone to decide: it can have no interest for any one else. What has an
     interest, however, is your mode of dealing with the great social problems in which you have
     bestirred yourself; and, going back to our starting-point, I say again that you can do nothing
     if society does not assist you.”
Joshua smiled a little sadly. “And I have only the same answer to make, my lord,” be said.
     “No one will help me; and my work, such as it is, stands alone.”
“Then I think, Mr. Davidson, that it
      must be your own fault,” said Lord X. “There are liberal
     denominations to which your spirit of inquiry would not be alien; why cannot you coalesce with
     them? The Broad Church do not nail their colours to your old enemy, dogma; and the Unitarians
     are not superstitious.”
“But the Unitarians above all demand respectability of life,” said Joshua. “Having abandoned
     that wide harbour, the Atonement, they are obliged to anchor themselves on morality. My poor
     lost sheep would come off but badly before the rigid tribunal of Unitarian morality; and the
     Broad Church, though more humane perhaps, requires at the least repentance. But the men and
     women I have to do with are without a sense of sin—people who fail again and again, and whom
     nothing but the utmost
      patience can ever reclaim, if even that does.”
“Then I do not see much use in your attempts,” said Lord X. “I myself would do all I could to
     rescue the poor wretches one sees in the courts and alleys from the filth and misery in which
     they live. But when I find I am doing no real good, and that they go wrong again, I leave them
     to their fate and mark them off as hopeless. You must draw a line, Mr. Davidson! For the sake
     of society, you must show some difference in our estimate of men. To treat the deserving and
     the undeserving alike is gross injustice. Some of these wretches are more like brutes than men.
     I would clear them all but like rats; and with no more compunction than if they were rats.”
“I do not agree with you, my lord. I
      believe that more harm has been done by condemnation than
     ever would come through tolerance. By love alone can the world be saved.”
“Love? Rubbish!” said Lord X. “The laws must be obeyed, and society supported.”
“Only in so far as it is just,” put in Joshua.
“If by just you mean equality, pardon me if I say that you talk nonsense,” said Lord X. “You
     might as well say, that nature is unjust, because a grove of oaks needs more space than a row
     of turnips, as that man is to blame because he has lifted himself into classes of which the
     superiors have more than the inferiors. If it had not been for this injustice, as you call it,
     we should never have had a superior class at all, and the world would have gone on
      for ever in one dead level of mediocrity, where no one
     shone, and no one was obscured.”
“Granted,” said Joshua. “But you having developed into stars and suns, what we want is, that
     you should help the poor dark spheres on the same way.”
Lord X. laughed. “I doubt the power and I question the wisdom of that,” he said. “Help them
     to be cleanly and virtuous and content with their natural position, if you like; but I for one
     do not go further.”
“And Christ and history do, my lord,” said Joshua.
“Mr. Davidson, you are incorrigible!” said Lord X., jocularly; “but happily your opinions do
     not vitiate your good works, and I will help you in these where I can.”

“Thank you, my lord,” said Joshua simply: “I shall hold you to your promise. And yet you must
     understand that I hope far more from the union and organization of the working classes
     together, than from any extraneous aid whatever; only we take all kinds.”
“In which you are wise,” said Lord X., drily. “You would get on but poorly among yourselves I
     fancy, if it were not for Us.”
Joshua did not answer. He said afterwards that, having made his declaration honestly, he felt
     it would have been ungenerous to have carried the conversation further on that line. While
     accepting my lord's help it was scarcely the thing to depreciate it; so the talk then drifted
     or rather settled on all that he had been doing in Church-court and the neighbourhood—on his
      night-school, his charities, his hospitality to thieves and
     the like; and the results; those whom he might fairly count as his successes, with those who
     had been as yet his failures. He never allowed more than this “as yet.” “While there is a gate
     open to them, there is always the hope that they will enter in by it,” he used to say. “What
     men are taught of Christ in heaven—that no shame, no disgrace, no sin can make Him turn away
     His face from those who seek Him—so ought they to find here on earth in human pity and human
     love. If we were more patient, we should have more power over each other, and there would be
     fewer failures.”
“You mean, if we were gods we should act in a godlike manner,” said Lord X., with that
     curious mixture of cynicism and philanthropy,
      kindness and satire, earnestness and levity, that
     characterised him.
“No,” Joshua answered; “I mean only that, if we did our best possible as men, we should make
     a better job of life altogether both for ourselves individually and for the world at
     large.”
“You must come and see me, Mr. Davidson,” said Lord X., suddenly rising and drawing on his
     gloves. “Lady X. will be charmed to see you, I am sure. She is immensely interested in all
     sorts of social questions, and I shall be delighted to present you. You will be a new reading
     to her,” he added, and smiled.
“I will come and be read,” said Joshua “and I hope to a good end. If I can interest you, and
     your friends through you, my lord, I shall have done something.”

This was the first time that I had seen Joshua really elated with hope of help from the
     outside. He knew that Lord X. was a man of immense wealth, and that he could, if he would, do
     wonders for his poor friends. But he did not know how shallow his philanthropic zeal was; how
     much more a matter of mere amusement than of vital principle. His work among the poor was the
     work of a superior; and his estimate of his own class, and therefore of himself as a peer, was
     so curiously great, that he thought his very presence among them ought to prove a kind of balm
     and moral styptic to all their wounds. He was willing to give when the fit took him; but he
     would have resented the doctrine of duty, or the right to take. The poor were as curious
     specimens to him. He never regarded them as men
      and women like himself and his class. He scarcely gave them
     credit for ordinary human feeling even; for he used to say that affections and nerves were both
     matters of education and refinement, and that the uneducated and unrefined neither loved nor
     felt as the others. Perhaps he was right. I am not physiologist enough to know much about
     nerves and pain and the difference of education, so far as that goes; but I think I have seen
     as much real affection, as much passionate self-abandoning, self-sacrificing love among the
     poor as there is among the rich. It may be more uncouth, its demonstration more simple too, and
     less elegantly expressed, but it is there all the same, and maybe in fuller quantity than with
     fashionable folks who really seem too idle and dispersed to be able to love with either vigour
     or concentration.

Furthermore, philanthropy to Lord X. was an occupation and a reputation. He had no turn for
     abstract polities, no head for diplomacy, no taste for literature; he was not all artist nor a
     mechanician, but he was ambitious, and he liked distinction. So, dabbling among the poor, and
     touching the grave social problems besetting them delicately, following them to their haunts
     and relieving their immediate distress, pleased both his kind heart and his vanity; and he did
     substantial good of a fragmentary kind, if his motives would scarce bear severe scrutiny.
For myself I did not augur much from the association. Less spiritual and less single-minded
     than my friend, I could also judge better than he of his own power of fascination. Hence I
     could discern more
      clearly than he, how much of Lord X.'s offer of help was the
     genuine movement of his own soul, and how much was due to the curiosity and amusement which the
     study of a life and character at once so fresh and whole-hearted as his awakened and promised.
     But it was not for me to speak, or throw cold water on what might turn out to be such a boon to
     the cause. If Joshua had wanted my advice, he would have asked it. As he did not ask it, I
     considered him best able to judge for himself. And yet sometimes I have been sorry that I did
     not speak.
