

CHAPTER II.
JOSHUA did not leave home early. He wrought at his father's bench and was content to
     bide with his people. But his spirit was not dead if his life was uneventful. He gathered about
     him a few youths of his own age, and held with them prayer meetings and Bible readings, either
     at home in his father's house, or in the fields when the throng was too great for the cottage.
     It gave one a feeling as of old primitive times to be sitting there under the clear sky of a
     summer's evening, with the larks singing over head, and the swallows and sea birds
      flashing through the air, the voice of the waves as they beat
     up against Long Island subdued to a tender murmur that seemed to have a mystery somehow in it,
     and the young carpenter reading to us of Christ, and praying for the power to be like unto Him
     in life and heart; praying with an earnestness, a realization, a very passion of entreaty—nay,
     I have never heard or seen aught like it since, in church or chapel either!
And then he himself was so unlike other boys. He was so upright, so steadfast! No one ever
     knew Joshua tell the shadow of a lie, or go back from his word, or play at pretence. And he had
     such an odd way of coming right home to us. He seemed to have felt all that we felt, and to
     have thought all our thoughts. Young as he was, he was our leader even then. We all looked
      for great things from him. I should be laughed at if I said
     how high our expectations reached.
The youths that Joshua go together as his friends were as well-conditioned a set of lads as
     you could wish to see; sober, industrious, chaste. They were never in any trouble, and no one
     could say they had ever heard one of them give back a bad word, whatever the provocation, or
     say a loose one; but the clergy of their several parishes scouted them, and stood at no evil to
     say of them. For they were not church-goers; and that is always an offence to the clergy of
     country parishes, who treat even the best of the Dissenters as little better than rogues,
     taking it partly as a personal affront and partly as a moral sin if their parishioners find
     greater comfort for their poor souls elsewhere
      where than under them. However, for the matter of that, the
     lads were of no denomination; and though they prayed much and often, it was neither at church
     nor chapel; it was at their own houses or in the fields.
Their aim was to be thorough and like Christ. They denounced the sin of luxury among
     professing Christians, and spared no one, lay or clerical: so did Christ, they said. They set
     their faces against the priestly class altogether, and maintained that Christ as High Priest
     needed no subordinate or go-between, and that the modern parson was only the ancient Pharisee,
     whom Christ was never weary of denouncing. They were anti-Sabbatarians too, as He had been, and
     held the doctrine of freedom in Christ throughout. They believe implicitly every word of the
     Gospels, which they stood by as
      fuller of the Divine Life than the Epistles; and they thought
     that the Example left the world was the one thing to follow and the one pattern to imitate.
     Joshua's great hope and desire, confessed among us, was to bring back the world to the
     simplicity and broad humanity of Christ's acted life; and as a believer in the divinity of that
     life, he could not understand how it had been let drop. His one central point was the same now
     as that which had formerly troubled him—and Mr. Grand; namely, how, if Christ was God, and His
     life given to us as our example, do we not follow it literally, in simple exactness, and as we
     find it set before us in the Gospels? And he believed that God would strengthen his hands, not
     only to enable him to realise this in his own person, but also to evangelise society, and bring
     it over to the
      Truth along with him. He was waiting for a Sign; and he
     believed it would be given him.
He was but a young man at this time, remember; enthusiastic, with little or no scientific
     knowledge and with much of the logic of fanaticism; unable to judge between the possible and
     the impossible, and putting the direct interposition of God above the natural law. Wherefore,
     he accepted the text about faith removing mountains as literally true, and possible to be done.
     Given the faith, the mountain would move. And one evening he went down into the Rocky Valley,
     earnest to try conclusions with God's promise, and sure of proving it true. He had fasted all
     day, and he had prayed all day; not necessarily kneeling and repeating set forms, but in the
     whole attitude of his mind;
      and in the twilight when work was over he went down with
     three of us, myself and two others, a certain that the truth of the Word would be made
     manifest, and that he could remove rocks by FAITH.
He prayed to God to grant us this manifestation—to redeem His promise. He was full of faith:
     not a shadow of doubt chilled or slacked him. As he stood there in the softening twilight, with
     his arms raised above his head and his face turned up to the sky, his countenance glowed as
     Moses' of old. He seemed inspired, transported beyond himself, beyond humanity. He commanded
     the stone to move in God's name, and because Christ had promised: and we knelt beside him, not
     so much trembling as exalted, feeling in the very presence of the Divine, and that He would do
     unto us
      according to His word. But the rock stood still; and a
     stonecchat went and perched on it.
Another time he took up a viper in his hand, quoting the psalm, “They shall take up
     serpents.” But the beast stung him, and he was ill for days after. So, when he ate a handful of
     the berries of the black briony, and all but died of the poison. Yet he had handled the viper
     and eaten the berries in faith as simple and sincere as when he had commanded the stone in the
     Rocky Valley to move.
When the doctor was called in, and Joshua told him, boylike, what he had done and why and in
     what spirit, he shook his head gravely, and told his mother he was mad and had better be looked
     after.
“No, no, not mad, sir, because I believe
      the Bible, and have determined to lead a life after Christ's
     word and example,” said Joshua.
“Tut! rubbish!” said the doctor. “What you've got to do, my lad, is to plane your wood smooth
     and make your joists firm. All this religious folly of yours has no sense in it. I tell you it
     will upset your brain, and that you are mad now, and will be madder if you don't pull up in
     time.”
“So Festus said to St. Paul, sir; but he was not mad, nor am I.”
“But what do you want to do, jackass?” said the doctor with a good-humoured kind of
     impatience. “What's amiss with your poor foolish head that you can't take things easy?”
“I want to find out which is true, sir,”
      answered Joshua: “the Bible which ordains certain ways of
     life; or the Christian world which disobeys them. If Christ was God, there is but one way for
     us all. He could not have left us an imperfect example to be mended here and there as we think
     best for the convenience of society. He is God or man; for, as things are, it is not God and
     man—Christ and Christians; and I want to know which is the truth.”
“Take my advice,” said the doctor kindly; “put all these thoughts out of your head as quickly
     as you can. Get some work to do in a new part of the country, fall in love with some nice girl,
     and marry as soon as you can make a home for her. Give over reading the Bible for a time, and
     look up some pleasant stories and books of travel, and the like; and leave off
      eating poison-berries and handling vipers. That's the only
     life for you, depend upon it; and though I am no theologian, I venture to say, that working
     honestly in that state of life to which it has pleased God to call you, going to church,
     kneeling out of beershops, and living like your respectable neighbours, is a far better kind of
     thing than all this high-flown religion you are hankering after. Depend upon it, our best
     religion is to do our duty, and to leave the care of our souls to those whose business it is to
     look after them.”
“Thank you, sir; you mean kindly,” said Joshua. “But God has given me other thoughts, and I
     must obey them if I would not sin against the Holy Ghost.”
And the doctor said afterwards to Mr. Grand, that he was quite touched at the lad's
      sweetness and wrong-headedness combined, and would have given
     much to have been able to send him there and then to a lunatic asylum, where he might have been
     taken care of for a time and put to rights.
The failure of these trials of faith perplexed us all, and profoundly afflicted Joshua. Not
     many men have gone through greater spiritual anguish, I should suppose, than he did at this
     time. It was like the sudden darkening of the sun to him, and the doubt of himself which it
     brought was nearer madness than his simple faith had been. He passed through a bad time; when
     his soul went down into the Valley of the Shadow, if ever man's did! But in time he came out
     into the light again. He knew his own sincerity, and his entire acceptance
      of the Word of God and of the Divinity of Christ; and he
     could not think that God had met his prayer with a rebuff. God, who knew the heart, would he
     felt sure have accepted his endeavour, had that endeavour been within the scope of His plan for
     humanity. It was the first struggle between Faith and Law, Revelation and Nature, through which
     every inquiring mind has to pass; and it was a bitter one.
He said nothing of these thoughts for many weeks. He was not a youth who jumped to
     conclusions, but rather one who pondered well, and who let his thoughts ripen; but at last he
     spoke one evening, when we were gathered together as usual, after work.
“Friends,” he said, “it seems to me—
      indeed, I think we must all see it now—that His Word is not
     to be accepted literally, and not to be acted on in all its details. The laws of Nature are
     supreme, and even faith cannot change them. Can it be,” he then said solemnly, “that much of
     that Word is a parable?—that Christ was truly as he says of Himself, the corner stone, but not
     the whole building?—and that we have to carry on the work in His spirit, but in our own way,
     and not merely to try and repeat His acts?”
I do not think we were prepared for such a speech. We looked at one another uneasily, even
     the dimmest of us seeing something of the conclusions to which such a principle would lead us,
     and forecasting the rudderless wandering of souls that would ensue. But Joshua would say no more.
      He bade us good-night soon after, and it was long before we
     renewed the subject. We all felt that he had broken dangerous ground; for had we not set out
     with the determination to realise Christ in our lives, founded on our conviction of the
     literalness, the absolute uncompromising truth of every word in the Gospels?—a truth not to be
     explained away, or paraphrased in any manner of worldly wisdom or expediency; but to be
     accepted crude, naked, entire as it is set down? It was one thing, or the other—Christ or
     society, the Bible or the world. It could not be both; but once admit the right of choice, of
     criticism, and where was then our standard? Yet again, what could we make of that text about
     faith, when we had proved it for ourselves and found it wanting? And if wrong in
      ever so small a matter, was not our theory of absolute
     infallibility at an end? But if absolute infallibility was at an end, was not that making
     Christ a mere temporary teacher, local and for the day—not universal and for all time; and God
     a bit by bit worker? And if so, and even Gospel revelation is not final, where then exists the
     absolute necessity of acceptance? Yet, if we came to this conclusion—sorrowfullest of all!—we
     must relinquish all anchorage everywhere, and do our best to piece together a theory of life
     for ourselves, glad if any of the broken fragments of faith might still serve us.
But we were far off, as yet, from any such conclusions; and the Christ life, and the Gospel
     narrative, and the need laid on us all to follow in the Master's steps, and believe
      lieve as He taught, and do as He did, were still the cardinal
     points of Joshua's creed, and the object of his endeavour: and, with him, of ours.
