

CHAPTER I.
JOSHUA DAVIDSON was the only son of a village carpenter, born in the small hamlet of
     Trevalga on the North Cornwall coast, in the year 1835. His parents were poor but worthy
     people, who kept themselves very much together and had but little to do with the neighbours.
     Folks blamed this for pride, and said they held themselves high because they were the decayed
     branches of an ancient family—some said dating from King Arthur's self. Of course this was only
      an “Arthurian legend,” if I may call it so, that could not be
     verified; for naturally down about Tintagel everything has to do with King Arthur—even the
     choughs. Joshua sometimes spoke of it, but not from pride; there never was a man freer from
     that failing than he; rather from the belief he had in what a learned man would call hereditary
     transmission, but as we say, just “in the blood,” and a kind of idea that dawned on him, quite
     of late years, that there would be a revival of national glories, national names and leaders,
     under new aspects but from the ancient sources. And if so, might he not count for something,
     direct descendant as he believed he was of the hero whose Castle had been one of his earliest
     playgrounds, and on whose Quoit he had spent many an hour of way-side dreaming
      ing? It was a fancy; a harmless one; so let it pass for just
     as much as it was worth.
There was nothing very remarkable about Joshua's childhood. He was always a quiet, thoughtful
     boy, and from his earliest years noticeably pious. His parents came of the Friends' stock; not
     of a strict kind themselves, for they joined in the Church services; but the fact is just an
     indication of the kind of influences which helped to mould him in early youth. He had a habit
     of asking why, and of reasoning out a principle, from quite a little lad; which displeased
     people; so that he did not get all the credit from the schoolmaster and the clergyman to which
     his diligence and good conduct entitled him. They thought him troublesome, and some said he was
     self-conceited; which he never was; but
      the more he was in earnest the more he offended them.
He was never well looked on by the Vicar since a famous scene that took place in the church
     one Sunday after afternoon catechism. He was then about fourteen years of age, and I have heard
     say he was a beautiful boy, with a face almost like a young woman's for purity and
     spirituality. He was so beautiful that some ladies and gentlemen staying at the Vicarage
     noticed him during church time, and said he looked like a boy-saint. But he knew nothing about
     himself. I question if he knew whether his hair was black like mine, or, as it was, a bright
     brown like ripe nuts in the sunshine. After catechism was over he stood out before the rest,
     just in his rough country clothes as he vas, and said very respectfully to the
      Vicar, Mr. Grand:
     “If you please sir, I would like to ask you a few questions.”
“Certainly, my lad, what have you to say?” said Mr. Grand rather shortly. He did not seem
     over well pleased at the boy's addressing him; but he could not well refuse to hear him because
     of the ladies and gentlemen with him, and especially Mr. Freeman, a very good old man who
     thought well of everybody, and let everybody do pretty much as they liked.
“If we say, sir, that Jesus Christ was God,” said Joshua, “surely all that He said and did
     must be the real right? There cannot be a better way than His?”

“Surely not, my lad,” Mr. Grand made answer; “what else have you been taught all your life?
     what else have you been saying in your catechism just now?”
“And His apostles and disciples, they showed the way too?” said Joshua.
“And they showed the way too, as you say; and if you come up to half they taught you'll do
     well, Joshua.”
The Vicar laughed a little laugh as he said this; but it was a laugh, Joshua's mother said,
     that seemed to mean the same thing as a “scat”—our Cornish word for a blow—only the boy didn't
     seem to see it.
“Yes; but, sir, it is not of myself I am thinking, it is of the world,” said Joshua. “If we
     are Christians, why don't we live as Christians?”
“Ah indeed! why don't we!” said Mr.
      Grand. “Because of the wickedness of the human heart; because
     of the world, the flesh, and the devil!”
“Then, sir, if you feel this, why don't you and all the clergy live like the apostles, and
     give what you have to the poor?” cried Joshua, clasping his hands and making a step forward,
     the tears in his eyes. “Why, when you read that verse, ‘Whoso hath this world's good, and seeth
     his brother have need, and shutteth up his compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in
     him?’ do you live in a fine house, and have grand dinners, and let Peggy Bray nearly starve in
     that old mud hut of hers, and widow Tregellis there, with her six children, and no fire or
     clothing for them? I can't make it out, sir ! Christ was GOD; and we are Christians; yet we
     won't do as He ordered,
      though you tell us it is a sin that can never be forgiven if
     we dispute what the Bible says.”
“And so it is,” said Mr. Grand sternly. “Who has been putting these bad thoughts in to your
     head?”
“No one sir. I have been thinking for myself. Michael, out by Lion's Den, is called an
     infidel; he calls himself one; and you preached last Sunday that no infidel can be saved; but
     Michael helped Peggy and her base child when the Orphan Fund people took away her pension,
     because, as you yourself told her, she was a bad woman, and it was encouraging wickedness; and
     he worked early and late for widow Tregellis and her children, and shared with them all he had,
     going short for them many a time. And I can't help thinking, sir, that Christ,
      who forgave all manner of sinners, would have helped Peggy
     with her base child, and that Michael, being an infidel and such a good man, is something like
     that second son in the Parable who said he would not do his Lord's will when he was ordered,
     but who went all the same—”
“And that your Vicar is like the first?” interrupted Mr. Grand angrily.
“Well, yes, sir, if you please,” said Joshua quite modestly but very fervently.
There was a great stir among the ladies and gentlemen when Joshua said this; and some laughed
     a little, under their breath because it was in church, and others lifted up their eyebrows, and
     said, “What an extraordinary boy!” and whispered together; but Mr. Grand was very angry, and
     said in a severe tone—

“These sinners are beyond the knowledge of an ignorant lad like you, Joshua; and I advise
     you, before you turn questioner and reformer, to learn a little humility and respect for your
     betters. I consider you have done a very impertinent thing to-day, and I shall mark you for
     it!”
“I did not wish to be impertinent, sir,” said Joshua eagerly; “I want only to know the right
     of things from you, and to do as God has commanded, and Christ has shown us the way. And as you
     are our clergyman, and this is the House of God, I thought it the best plan to ask. I want only
     to know the truth; and I cannot make it out!”
“Hold your tongue, sir!” said Mr. Grand. “God has commanded you to obey your pastors and
     masters and all that are in
      authority over you; so let us have no more of this folly.
     Believe as you are taught, and do as you are told, and don't set yourself up as an independent
     thinker in matters you understand no more than the ass you drive. Go back to your place, sir,
     and another time think twice before you speak to your superiors.”
“I meant no harm. I meant only the truth and to hear the things of God,” repeated Joshua
     sadly, as he took his seat among his companions; who tittered.
When they all went out of church Mr. Grand was heard to say to Mr. Freeman: “You will see,
     Freeman, that boy will go to the bad; he will turn out a pestilent fellow, a freethinker and a
     democrat. Oh, I know the breed, with their cant about truth and the right! He richly deserved a
     flogging to-day
      if ever boy did; to dare to take me to task in my own
     church!”
But Mr. Freeman said gently; “I don't think he meant it for insolence. I think the lad was in
     earnest, though of course he should not have spoken as he did.”
“Earnest or not, he must be taught better manners for the future,” said Mr. Grand.
And so it was that Joshua was not well looked on by the clergyman, who was his enemy, as one
     may say, ever after.
All this made a great talk at the time, and there are many who remember the whole thing at
     this present day; as any one would find if they were to ask down at Trevalga; but all that
     Joshua was ever heard to say of it was: “I thought only of what was right in the sight of God;
     I never thought of man at all.”

He did not however, repeat the experiment of asking inconvenient questions of his social
     superiors in public; but it was noticed that after this he became more and more thoughtful, and
     more and more under the influence of a higher principle than lads of his age are usually
     troubled with. And though always tender to his parents and respectful to the schoolmaster and
     minister, and the like of that, yet he was less guided by what might be called expediency in
     his conduct, and more than ever a stickler for the uncompromising truth, and the life as lived
     by Jesus Christ. He was not uncomfortable to live with, his mother said; quite the contrary; no
     one ever saw him out of temper, and no one ever knew him do a bad thing; but he somehow forced
     his parents to be always up to the mark, and
      even the neighbours were ashamed to talk loosely or say what
     they shouldn't before a lad whose whole thought, whose sole endeavour was, “how to realise
     Christ.”
“Mother,” he once said, as he and Mrs. Davidson stood by the cottage door together, “I mean
     when I grow up to live as our Lord and Saviour lived when He was on the earth. For though he is
     God in Heaven he was only man here; and what He did we too can do with His help and the Holy
     Spirit's.”
“He is our example, lad,” said his mother reverently. “But I doubt lest you fall by over
     boldness.”
“Then, if imitation is over bold, His life was a delusion, and He is not our example at all,”
     said Joshua. “Which is a saying of the devil.”
