

CHAPTER VII.
JOSHUA'S life of work and endeavour brought with it no reward of praise or
     popularity. It suffered the fate of all unsectarianism, and made him to be as one man in the
     midst of foes. Had he been a converted sinner like Ned Wright, preaching the doctrine of the
     Atonement, and Purification by the blood of Jesus, he would have had all the evangelical force
     at his back, pivoted as they are on the same hub, whatever their special denomination. Had he
     been a Ritualist, working under organised authority, he would have then been a pipe, so
      to speak, through which flowed the power of the Church; and
     this much more had he been a Roman Catholic, and of any Order. Had he been a Unitarian, a
     stickler for respectability and that the poor he relieved should be deserving, like Mr. C. and
     the charity-organisation people; or a Political Economist, giving lectures on the law of supply
     and demand, and the immorality of large families; had he belonged to any body whatsoever, he
     would have been supported. But, as he was—a man working on the Christ plan, and that alone;
     dealing with Humanity by pity and love and tolerance—he was as stranger and an alien.
The whole force of home missionaries of every denomination discountenanced him as an infidel,
     unsound, irregular; and in whatsoever they disagreed among themselves,
      they all agreed in their ill estimate of him. The police
     were suspicious of him, and set him down as a doubtful character who harboured criminals; and
     the very people to whom he gave himself—accustomed as they were to be scouted by every man and
     woman pretending to clean hands and a pure life, or, at the best, to be preached at and urged
     to remorse—misdoubted him. The absence of abhorrence in his dealings with them looked to some
     like a trap, to others like encouragement. And yet they could scarcely think that!—with all his
     endeavours to put them into a better way of life, and to lift them out of the necessity of
     crime by giving them the alternative of honesty made possible, because giving them work
     sufficient for their daily wants.
But he soon began to see that the utmost
      he, or a dozen such as he, could do, was only palliative and
     temporary. He might save one out of a thousand, and he would do well if he did that; but what
     is one out of a thousand cleansed and set in a safe place, to the nine hundred and ninety-nine
     left in their filth at the bottom of the abyss? Things have gone too far in England now for
     private charities to be of much use. What is wanted is a thorough reorganisation of society, so
     that the distribution of wealth and knowledge shall not be so partial as it is. And this the
     working classes must get for themselves by combination.
So Joshua turned to class-organisation as something more hopeful than private charity. But do
     not let me be misunderstood: he gave up nothing of his own personal doings among the poor, and
     never wearied nor relaxed
      laxed. If he looked to organisation as the framework, he did
     not disdain charity as the enrichment, in the plan of social amelioration.
When the International Working Men's Association was formed, he joined it as one of its first
     members; indeed he mainly helped to establish it. It had been one of his articles of belief
     long before any one else had spoken, that the time had passed for distinct and exclusive
     nationalities; and that if working men would free themselves from the fetters in which capital
     and caste have bound them, it must be by their own class-fraternisation all over the world. If
     labour is to make its own terms with capital, it must be by the coercive strength of the
     labourer. To wait for the free gift of the capitalist, through his recognition of human
      duties, as some among the Comtists urge, would be to wait
     for the millennium. Yet the International represented no class enmity with him. He had no dream
     of barricades and high places taken by assault. It was to him, as to his other English
     brethren, an organisation to strengthen the hands of the labourer everywhere, but not to plunge
     society into a bloody war. It was a means of class-advancement by peaceable and noble efforts,
     not of universal destruction by violent or ignoble ones.
The middle classes laugh at the artisan's desire to rise in the world, and speak of his close
     combinations as traitorous and rebellious to the existing order of things. Some think it an
     irreligious contempt of a caste-Providence; forgetting that their own order was made by the
     same determination
      termination, and that the recognition of the merchant class,
     and its reception on anything like terms of equality, was forced from the nobles by men who had
     at heart the great truth of human equality and human rights; at least, down to that part of the
     social page where their own names stood. Below that paragraph where the artisan, the prolétaire, is to be found, society has as yet drawn a line not to be
     overpassed. Demand rights and recognition for working men, and even the Liberal press gives
     forth an uncertain sound, and the bugbear of “Jack Cade” scares such stout hearts as the
      Pall Mall and the Spectator. Even they, kings of liberal thought
     as they are in so many ways, will not see that the modern artisan stands in the same relation
     to capital as that in which the ancient serf stood to
      the land. The serf tilled the land, which was his master's,
     for his master. If he could get for himself a living about as good as that of the hogs he
     forested, he had all that was considered necessary for a serf. And the artisan represents the
     serf of olden days, while capital is the foretime baron. The baron gave his villein disdainful
     leave to live because his life was so far requisite to his own needs; but individually he had
     neither rights nor value. So the capitalist. He gives his workmen only enough to keep them in
     efficient working order—or not that, if the labour market is so thronged that he can replace
     without trouble those who fall out. His “hands” are the mere parts of his machinery. The sum of
     them work to a certain result; but he is indifferent whether the work is done with sorrow and insufficiency
      ciency to the individual or not. His sole business is to see
     that the sum get through their labours creditably—to the firm. It is good that the work of the
     world should be done at all costs, even by compulsory labour if need be; but it is better that
     it should be done by men regarded as men, individual, and having inalienable rights, rather
     than as so many portions of a vitalised mechanism. And a fair and proportionate share in the
     profits of the business is part of the rights of the labourer.
I am speaking now as if of myself; but I am only repeating what I have heard my friend say
     scores of times.
Of course Joshua was an earnest Republican. Who that thinks for himself can fail to be one?
     Not that he would have put aside the reigning sovereign by force,
      but he held that the times were ripening for the old
     monarchical symbol and aristocratic exclusiveness to disappear now that the reality had gone;
     and that the Republic would come about of itself, thanks, in great part, to the monarch who has
     shown the people that royalty can be dispensed with and yet things go none the worse for the
     withdrawal, and to the aristocracy which has abandoned its traditions of blood and birth, and
     has sold so many of its blue ribands to money. But he was not a Republican of the kind to rave
     and vilify, and accuse all the higher classes of wilful misdoing, of vice and selfishness, and
     what not. He never abused anybody, but judged things by their merits, and gave to the
     professors of any doctrine, no matter what, at least the credit of sincerity. By which he made
      many enemies, and was constantly accused of lukewarmness to
     the cause, and of looking two ways at once.
“You cannot beat me off my point,” he used to say, when he had put into an uproar a little
     inner and anonymous society which some few of us had formed together, by vindicating some man
     whose measures he also had attacked. “I say that we do our cause harm, and degrade ourselves,
     by all these childish personalities. What we have to do is, to defend our own principles, and
     show the fallacy or the evil of our opponents'; but we must fight fair, and give that credit
     for honesty of purpose which we demand for ourselves. If we are thieves and brigands to the
     governing classes, and they are thieves and brigands to us, what kind of understanding can we
     ever come to together?”

But L., one of those fanatical men who cannot accept the doctrine of an opponent's virtue,
     and whose zeal takes the form of the wildest abuse on all who differ from him, got up and
     denounced Joshua as an “inherent traitor,” and advised his expulsion from the society. And more
     than one of the council looked grave, and as if they were giving their minds to it, had not
     Félix Pyat risen, and given his opinion so forcibly that the malcontents were silenced. Even
     the thin-voiced little man who had denounced Joshua, and whose ambition was to be regarded as
     the Robespierre of the society—incorruptible, and not to be moved by fear or favour—even he had
     to give in. For Félix was our giant; and Félix loved Joshua.
This was at the time when he was over
      here as an exile, chiefly reading at the British Museum, and
     when he gained the love and admiration of all who knew him by the dignity, the devotion, the
     earnestness of his life. I mention this somewhat by the way, as my feeble protest against the
     terms in which it is the fashion to speak of one of the finest fellows that ever lived—as fine
     in his own way as Delescluze, our martyr,—and by those who ought to know better and who do know
     better; but who think it politic to swim with the stream, and to curse those whom fortune has
     not blessed.
From his position in the International, and in other political societies—which abound among
     the working men more than the careless upper ten have the least idea of—Joshua was thrown into
     intimate relations with a great many men, more or less notorious
      torious. He saw all sorts—the frothy ranter whose motive
     power was vanity; the reckless agitator whose conscience was obscured, and, so long as there
     was something stirring, cared nothing what stirred or who suffered; the bilious antagonist to
     all men superior to himself, and who would pull down those above to his own level but never
     raise up to it those who lay below; the honest patriot willing to sink all minor differences in
     the one great aim, and ready to sacrifice himself for the good of his cause and class, but
     blind as a beetle as to the best methods: he saw them all, and he accepted all with that broad
     human love, that large and liberal allowance of differences, which made the charm of his
     character.
“They are good elements,” he used to say, “badly mixed. Does not some one say
      that dirt is only matter in the wrong place? So these men as
     leaders would be pernicious enough, but a wise administration could utilise them. When Fourier
     could find an economic value in the diablotin, we need not
     fear for any one.”
It was on this point that Joshua and the chief man of the London branch split. He was a
     purist, and gave his mind to tares. But Joshua thought more of the wheat, and believed in the
     larger power of good than of evil. He opposed all that narrow partisanship which goes only in
     one groove, and said, as the skilled workmen have lately said, that he would work with any one,
     no matter what his rank or politics, who would aid him and his order in securing the essentials
     for knowledge and decency of living. The more rabid and ultra of the politicians
      attacked him, as he had been attacked in the other society;
     but he held on in his own broad, generous way. And though he never got the ear of the
     International, because he was so truly liberal, he had some little influence; and what
     influence he had ennobled their councils as they have never been ennobled since.
This is not speaking against the society. I belong to it myself, and I am proud to do so. But
     I have learnt from my friend to distrust one-sided partisans, and to think all questions best
     argued from their principles, and the men who either support or oppose them left out in the
     shade. Men don't wilfully uphold the thing they know to be had. Take the stiffest Conservative
     of them all—the man who believes in the divine ordination of caste, and the absolute need
      of preserving the fetichism of society as it is, even
     though, like Juggernaut, the great car of gentility crushes the whole working class beneath
     it—he may be, and is, sorry for the individuals; but he maintains the existing order
     conscientiously. And to blackguard him, and call him bloodsucker, and all the names that
     hysterical men do call him, is simply childish anger, not manly argument. So, on the other
     side, the men who would make a revolution by fire and blood, as has been said, if necessary,
     though they too would be sorry for the individuals who had to suffer, yet they would feel the
     thing to be done so much more righteous than the suffering would be unrighteous, that they
     would sacrifice the few and the present to the good of the many and the future. And
      these are no more “bloodthirsty scoundrels,” and all the
     rest of it, than their opponents. After all, it is the same battle of strength which goes on
     throughout creation—the struggle for existence in class as in individuals; and “the good old
     rule, the royal plan” has its meaning and its uses, in that it necessitates endeavour; which is
     the sole way by which things human come to perfection.
