
CHAPTER III.
AS Hamlin had fancied, while painting Anne’s portrait, so the girls at Mrs Simson’s
      used to fancy that there could not be much going on inside this taciturn and undemonstrative
      creature. But it was not so. While Anne looked so quiet, said so little (and least of all
      about herself) during those two years of school, a drama—nay, a whole life‐poem—was
      incessantly going on within her. She worked indefatigably at her lessons, read every book she
      could lay hold of, was taken to concerts, lectures, burgher tea‐parties and garrison balls,
      and on excursions up and down the Rhine and into the neighbouring hills; but all this was but
      as an exterior life surrounding an interior one, as the movement of the ship to the movement
      of the passengers on its deck.

The real life was not with these girls and these teachers, but with Hamlin; not in this
      Rhineland town, but in the distant places where he travelled. He wrote to her very often, from
      London, from Italy, from Greece and Egypt, and wherever he roamed about. At first she was
      surprised by the frequency of his letters; then she became accustomed to it as to a necessity
      of her existence, but a necessity to which she had no right. It seemed to her wonderful that
      he should write so often, and yet that the time which elapsed between his letters should be
      intolerable. In her great desire for them she used to have recourse to all manner of
      unconscious sophistications. She tried to train herself to disappointment, to chastise her own
      impatience and greediness, saying to herself, on the days when she thought that a letter might
      come, “It is impossible that there should be one to‐day,” although her heart fell when the
      prophecy sometimes came true; and she stayed up‐stairs, her eyes pinned to her book,
       when she heard the postman’s ring at the door, although
      that ring put her all into a tremble, and made her feel faint when she heard it. Thus with the
      letters from him. It was almost worse about her own answers. Often she could stand it no
      longer, and would begin a letter to Hamlin—only a few lines, which might be finished when his
      next letter should be received. The few lines turned to pages; yet the next day no letter
      would come, and she was unable to resist the temptation of writing even more; then, when the
      long‐wished letter at last came, there came with it such a number of new things to say, that
      her previous epistle must needs be torn up. Also, on re‐reading what she had written in answer
      to Hamlin, she was often filled with shame and fear. She had entertained him with such
      trifles, or been so pedantic, or put things in such a horrid way, she must needs tear it up
      and write once more. Then the length, the frequency of her letters frightened her: he would
      grow weary and impatient; she tried
       to write briefly, but failed; she tried to write rarely,
      making solemn resolutions to let two, three, or four days pass without answering him; but it
      was not of much use. She was dreadfully afraid lest Hamlin should think her a drag upon him,
      lest he should write one single letter more than he would naturally have done, from goodness
      to her. She never told him with what tremulous expectancy she waited for the post; with what
      heartburn she saw it come empty‐handed; with what avidity she read his letters, re‐read them
      furtively by snatches, carried them about in her pocket, made them last over days, till she
      knew them by heart, and, even then, how she was for ever doing up and undoing again the packet
      in which she kept them: if he knew that, he might feel obliged, being so kind, to write
      oftener; and that must not be.
Any one who had seen these letters which were her soul’s food, would have been surprised how
      they could awaken such a longing, how they could produce such emotion and
       keep alive such passion. In accordance with his whole plan
      of proceedings, Hamlin never once wrote to Anne as if there were any question of her ever
      becoming his wife. “My dear Miss Brown,” they all ceremoniously began, and ended off “Yours
      sincerely,” or “Your sincere friend, Walter Hamlin.” Affectionate they were, and even adoring,
      in the sense of looking up, or affecting to look up, at her as a sort of superhuman and
      wonderful creature, not quite conscious of its wonderfulness, perhaps, and certainly not
      responsible for it; the mental attitude of an artist before a beautiful model, of some Italian
      medieval poet before a Platonic mistress. There was not much perception of the reality of Anne
      Brown’s personality, nor indeed of her having any personality at all, being a thing with
      feelings, thoughts, hopes, interests of her own. Sometimes even poor Anne felt, on reading his
      letters, as if a lump of ice had been laid on her heart, when she came upon certain sentences;
      she could scarcely tell you why, but
       those sentences made her feel numb and alone, like a
      wrecked sailor at the north pole, for days. Then a reaction came; a burning indignation with
      herself, a burning adoration of Hamlin. She felt as if she had done him some injury; and once
      or twice, amid tears of shame, she wrote that she had become unworthy of his friendship—why,
      she could not well explain. But she tore it all up, or left only dim hints which Hamlin
      misunderstood, and became more respectful and adoring than ever, imagining that he must have
      said something to slight her. He really was adoring; it was such a lovely Madonna this, that
      it seemed to him that all the most beautiful and precious things of his mind, and other men’s
      minds, must be heaped up before her, like offerings of flowers, and rich ointments, and
      jewels, and music. He copied out pages of poetry and prose in his letters, and wrote to her
      the most lovely descriptions of things he saw or things he felt. Whenever he recollected a
      fine poem, or saw a beautiful scene,
       or was struck by a beautiful thought or a happy expression,
      he hastened to offer it to Anne, as the kings of the East offered gold and frankincense and
      embroidered raiment to the little Christ. That this was the result of his love, she never
      thought; for she never ventured to think that he condescended, or even would ever condescend,
      to love her; but it was in her eyes the result of his greatness, his generosity, the largesse, as it were, of his sublimity. About himself Hamlin would
      also write a great, great deal. Of singularly delicate mental fibre, and somewhat weak will,
      he was for ever tormented (or pretending to himself to be tormented, for to be so was pretty
      well a matter of choice) by unattainable ideals, by conflicts in his own nature: mysterious
      temptations of unspeakable things, beckoning his nobler nature into the mud, which he never at
      all specified, but which moved Anne to agonies of grief and admiration. The poor girl, not
      understanding how such things will shoot up in the poetic mind as a result of mere
       reading, and be nurtured there for a day for the sake of
      their strange colour, would screw up all her might to help him, writing to him to be patient,
      to be strong and bold, to remember the nobility of his nature,—strange passionately earnest
      entreaties written in tears, or in moods like those which send people to the stake; and which,
      in their ludicrous disproportionateness to their cause, would bring the tears to almost any
      one’s eyes who should read them.
A strange correspondence; and of which Hamlin’s half, although beautiful with all manner of
      artistic prettinesses, would have struck one as the less beautiful and interesting part: the
      suppressed passionateness, unconscious of itself, of the girl’s letters, her mixture of prim
      literary daintiness, absorbed from her reading, and of homely, tragically‐hurled‐about imagery
      (Hamlin used, without revealing the author, to read out some of these metaphors of Anne’s to
      his friends, pointing out their Elizabethan, Webster‐like character), were much
       more really striking. But Anne thought that what she wrote
      was unworthy to be seen by Hamlin; his condescension was mere goodness.
Hamlin, indeed, was very good to her—very gentle, courteous, generous, and assiduous. There
      was scarcely a book read by Anne Brown which was not of his selecting; and even in the midst
      of his journeys he used to elaborately select things for her reading, cutting out all but a
      very few pieces out of books of poetry, and copying and pasting into them all manner of
      extracts. “I should be grieved to think that anything save the very best should ever be read
      by you,” he often wrote. Thus, in the most singular way, Anne, only a nursemaid a few months
      before, became more deeply versed in poetry and poetical and picturesque history than most
      girls; Greek lyrism, Oriental mysticism, French æstheticism, but above all, things medieval
      and pseudo‐medieval; imbued with the imagery and sentiment of that strange eclectic school of
      our days which we still call pre‐Raphaelite. And
       such an education, while putting her in complete harmony
      with Hamlin’s aspirations and habits, also brought home to her the merit of Hamlin’s own work.
      Of his pictures, she had, indeed, only vague recollections, besides the little sketches,
      wonderful jewel‐coloured things, full of poetic suggestion, which he would send her at
      Christmas and on her birthday, to the amazement of the whole school. But he sent her a good
      deal of his poetry, and that only of the best. She did not always understand exactly the
      things to which he alluded, seeing only the beauty, the vague passionate wistfulness, the
      delicate sadness of what he wrote. His greatness perfectly confounded her. She found allusions
      to it in everything: in reading of dead poets, of Shelley, Keats, Goethe, a kind of passionate
      interest thrilled through her, for she seemed to be reading about Hamlin. And the same held
      good as to artists; they were all his kinsmen, of his blood—nay, they all, in a mystic manner,
      foreshadowed him.

Of these matters she never spoke to any of the girls. But often, while walking with them,
      her pride would swell with the thought that she belonged to him—that he had chosen her. And
      when the New Zealander, who was musical and had a fine voice, used sometimes to sing
      Schumann’s song, “Er der herrlichste von allen,” the words and the music sent a flood of love
      and pride to her heart; it was he, “he the most glorious of all,” who was thus gracious and
      good to her.
