
CHAPTER VI.
THE door had scarcely closed upon Edmund Lewis, when it opened again suddenly.
“Mr Perry!” cried Anne, rising and running forward as a child might run to meet a former
      kind and encouraging teacher; “Mr Perry! oh I am so glad to see you!”
It really seemed to her that this dear, good, open familiar face, with the untidy yellow
      hair and beard,—that this well‐known, boyish, slouching figure drove away like some cabalistic
      sign the loathsome creature who had been there a few minutes before,—that Melton Perry
      dispelled all the horrid vision left behind by Edmund Lewis.
“Didn’t expect me yet, eh, Annie—I mean Miss Brown?” said Melton Perry, as she
       seized his hand in both hers. “I suppose you expected me by
      the Dover train. But I came by Dieppe, six hours’ agony, but a saving of twelve‐and‐sixpence.
      I was always an economical creature, wasn’t I? Why, what’s that you have round your neck? That
      beastly little pewter and horn rosary that I got you at the Fair of the Impruneta, by George!
      Fancy your having kept such a thing!”
“It’s one of the best things I have,” said Anne, the tears coming into her eyes as this
      well‐known voice brought back the far‐distant past—“it’s the present of a friend.”
“And all this, isn’t this also the present of a friend?” said Perry, throwing himself into
      an arm‐chair, and looking round the room with much the same wonder with which Anne had looked
      at its strange furniture, its brocades and embroideries, and Japanese vases and lustre plates,
      when she first came; “but I forgot, Walter Hamlin isn’t a particular friend of yours.”
To this jest Miss Brown made no answer:
       if only Melton Perry could guess at the literal truth of
      his words!
“Lord, what a damned gorgeous place this is!” cried Perry, still looking round; and then,
      suddenly turning towards Anne, where she sat, in a wonderful trailing dress of deep crimson
      stamped velvet, a big bunch of blackish crimson roses marking off, throwing into relief, the
      strange opaque ivory of her face, “what a beautiful woman you are, Annie! Do you know, I
      usen’t to believe it, when Watty raved about you at the Villa Arnolfini. What a crusty old
      jackass I must have been! But tell, why in the wide world aren’t you married yet? What have
      you been doing all this time?”
“Mr Hamlin has not asked me to marry him yet,” answered Anne, laconically.
Melton Perry thrust his hands upon the arms of his chair, and his whole body forward. “Not
      asked you to marry him yet!” he repeated; “do you mean to say you aren’t engaged to him . .
      .?”
Anne shook her head.

“That he’s been going loafing, and spooning, and doing Vita Nuova all this
      time? I thought that he must have lost two dozen grandfathers and grandmothers in rapid
      succession, so that one mourning postponed your marriage after the other, or something
      similar.” Then a thought suddenly struck him. “Hamlin’s not ill?” he cried. “Consumption,
      madness, doctors’ consultations,—anything of that sort?”
Miss Brown could not help smiling.
“Oh no, Mr Hamlin has been quite well. He is in Paris at present; he didn’t expect you quite
      so soon, but he will be back in a day or two.”
Melton Perry rose and looked Anne very earnestly in the face—
“Miss Brown—no, I can’t call you Miss Brown—Annie, tell me the truth. Has Hamlin not kept
      his word—has he played you any dirty trick? No, no, I don’t mean anything,—but, has Hamlin
      played fast and loose with you?”

“Mr Hamlin never intended asking me to marry him at once,” answered Anne, evasively. She
      felt in Melton Perry’s suspicions that again, as with her cousin, Hamlin would be attacked,
      maligned, that she would have to defend him. “Don’t you remember, Mr Perry? We were to wait,
      to see whether we really . . . I will tell you all about it later—to‐morrow. It is a long
      story; I want to hear about you now, about Italy—about your work, the children, Mrs
      Perry.”
“Mr Hamlin,” she added, fearing lest her evasive answers, her haste to get rid of the
      subject, should prejudice Perry against his friend, “has been most generous and noble towards
      me; indeed much more than I can ever say.”
“I’m damned if I understand any of it,” said Perry to himself, as he proceeded to answer
      Anne’s rapid strings of questions about his wife, his little girls, his pictures, his
      etchings,—those etchings, never thought of before, which had revealed in this sixth‐rate
      painter
       a great artist, and had brought him, in good case to make
      money, to England. Miss Brown insisted upon showing him up to his room herself. As she was
      leaving him, he looked at her long and seriously.
“Annie,” he said, “if it’s not rude to ask, for I’ve forgotten—how old are you?”
“I was twenty‐four last month. Why do you ask? Do you think I look more?”—she added, with a
      smile whose bitterness he did not catch. She could scarcely realise it herself; she seemed to
      have lived so long, such years and years since she had seen him last—nay, since she had first
      entered this room.
“Twenty‐four,” repeated Perry, stupidly. “Well now, don’t be offended—of course you couldn’t
      be more, for you weren’t of age when you left us; but somehow—it isn’t that you don’t look
      young, you know, but all the same I should have thought . . . I’m a rude brute.”
“That I was much older,” laughed Miss Brown. “Well, I often think so myself.”

“It’s something, I don’t know what. You are far handsomer than in Italy, and you never did
      look much like a girl—you know what I mean; but now, upon my word, I don’t know how to say it,
      I never saw an unmarried woman look like you. You look as if you had seen and understood such
      a heap of things. I feel quite a fool before you. Forgive me,” he said, “I’m always a
      blundering tomfool. I had somehow thought of you as something like my own girls. Winnie’s
      sixteen, you know, and such a strapping girl. But I feel as if you might be my
      grandmother.”
Anne laughed. “I have always felt as if I were your grandmother. I was born old. Good‐bye,
      Mr Perry. Remember that dinner is at seven; and put on a dress‐coat if you want to win the
      heart of my aunt—I mean Mr Hamlin’s aunt.”
Melton Perry whistled as he stooped to unbuckle his portmanteau.
“I’m damned if I understand anything of it all, and Annie least of any of them,” he
      mused.
