
CHAPTER I.
A MONTH later, the little Perrys were being taken for their walk in the Boboli
      Gardens by a Swiss bonne in a quilted cap; and Anne Brown
      was unpacking her things in a room overlooking the yellowish‐green Rhine, with its oscillating
      bridge of boats, and facing the rocks and bastions of Ehrenbreitstein.
When Richard Brown had returned to England with the signed documents in his pocket, Hamlin
      had immediately written two letters,—one to his lawyers, instructing them to settle the
      capital of five hundred a‐year, that is to say, one quarter of his property, on Anne Brown;
      the other, narrating the history of his engagement (if engagement it might be called), to the
      widow of his former tutor, and asking
       her to admit the young lady in whom he was interested into
      her school at Coblenz. It was the Easter holidays, and Mrs Simson had taken advantage of the
      fact to come to Florence in order to take back her pupil herself.
There was still a fortnight before the school would reopen, so Hamlin suggested that they
      should slowly travel north, and it was settled that he should accompany the schoolmistress and
      his ward. The greater part of that fortnight was spent at Venice, where Anne Brown had never
      been, and Hamlin parted company from them to return to England, only at Munich.
Mrs Simson was of that particular type of Englishwoman which, however much it may marry,
      always seems to remain an old maid; but an old maid whose old‐maidishness is an incapacity of
      feeling any difference of age between herself and her youngers, of maintaining any stateliness
      of superior age and experience: a hopeful, believing, shrewd, happy‐go‐lucky, enthusiastic
      creature, invariably making
       one think of a remarkably good‐natured old grey mare. Youth
      was the greatest attraction in the world to her, and she identified herself completely with
      the young women that came under her influence. Hamlin had known her in his boyish days, and
      lately, passing along the Rhine, had stayed with her for a day or two in her old‐fashioned
      house by the confluence of the Rhine and the Mosel. The impression that this school was so
      utterly unlike any of the girls’ schools he had read of in novels; the impression that a young
      woman might develop there into whatever pleasant thing nature intended,—had been so strong,
      that from the moment of his first contemplating a possible marriage with the Perrys’ servant,
      Mrs Simson and her school at Coblenz had formed an essential part of his plans. The lady, on
      the other hand, was exactly the kind of woman to whom a situation like this would appeal:
      Hamlin, whom she had entertained on buns and ginger‐beer, and then, in later years, raved over
      after the first sonnet which he sent to
       the ‘Athenæum,’ had always been her especial object of
      adoration; and his adoption of a beautiful and strange young woman, his preparation of a bride
      for himself, was for her the finishing touch to his perfection. She would indeed have
      preferred had Anne Brown been small and fair, and garrulous and impish, and shown a love for
      mathematics and flirtation; but, nevertheless, Anne Brown, inasmuch as she was the elect of
      Walter Hamlin, and inasmuch as she was a beautiful young creature, immediately won the facile
      but not fickle heart of Mrs Simson. The whole business seemed to her as natural as possible;
      and it was she who proposed that Hamlin should accompany her and his ward part of their way
      northwards.
What was Anne’s own condition? During those hours in the train, when Hamlin was for ever
      jumping out and overwhelming them with coffee and stale cakes and newspapers at every station;
      during those days at Venice, when they stayed at the same hotel (the headwaiter quite
      spontaneously wrote “Mrs Simson
       and niece” in the strangers’ book), and spent their days in
      picture‐galleries and churches and gondolas, and their evenings at theatres,—during all that
      journey Anne was as cold, and silent, and melancholy as she had been when first they had met
      at the Villa Arnolfini; indeed any man but Hamlin, and any woman except Mrs Simson, would
      probably have been disheartened and disgusted by this apparent stolidity of behaviour. But Mrs
      Simson had already made up her character of Anne Brown, and fallen in love with it quite
      independent of realities; and Hamlin was rather pleased that the creature whom he was going to
      teach how to think and how to feel, did not manifest any particular mode of thinking and
      feeling of her own. So they were both extremely assiduous to Anne Brown, and in reality
      thought much more about what she was going to be than about what she actually was.
The fact was that the poor girl was in a dazed condition—that all this journey seemed
       to her unreal, and all the things around her unsubstantial.
      Her head felt hollow, she seemed to be informed about her feelings rather than to experience
      them, her own words sounded as if through a whispering‐gallery. A couple of weeks ago she had
      had so strong a consciousness of identity and existence, of her own desires and hopes; now she
      could not well understand how she came to be where she was. Sometimes, while mechanically
      talking with her companions or walking in their company, she used to ask herself how it had
      all come about, and then she could see no reason for it all; it seemed accidental,
      inexplicable, causeless, and almost incredible. Whenever, on the other hand, she awakened to
      the reality of things, she was depressed by a sense of transition; she was afraid of speaking,
      and almost of feeling. As long as she had been the Perrys’ servant, she had experienced no
      shyness with Hamlin; as far as her taciturn nature would allow, she had spoken out whatever
      she had thought or
       felt, without considering whether or not it might surprise,
      annoy, or amuse him. Now, on the contrary, she gradually became conscious of a fear lest
      Hamlin should have cheated himself in choosing her. Unable to tell any one of this feeling,
      she let it overshadow her. One evening at Munich, two or three days before they parted company
      with Hamlin, Mrs Simson, coming into Anne’s room, found the girl seated with her head in the
      pillows of her bed, sobbing.
The excellent and somewhat romantic heart of the schoolmistress immediately melted at this
      sight.
“My dear child,” she cried, looking more than ever like a friendly grey old mare, “what is
      the matter with you?”
But Anne merely buried her head deeper in the pillows, and sobbed harder than before.
“What is the matter?” repeated Mrs Sireson, laying her hand on Anne’s shoulder.
“Oh, leave me, leave me!” moaned the girl.
Mrs Simpson gently passed her arm under
       the prostrate girl’s breast, and lifted her up from the
      bed.
“What is the matter with you, my dear?” she asked.
“Nothing—nothing,” sobbed Anne, trying to hide her cried‐out eyes with her hands.
“Nonsense; nothing!” said Mrs Simson, briskly. “You are unhappy about something, you poor
      little thing.”
Girls, and especially girls in distress, invariably appeared little to Mrs Simson, even
      when, like Anne Brown, they overtopped her by a good head.
“Something is the matter with you,” she insisted. “Now just let us see together what it may
      be;” and she made the reluctant girl sit down by her side on the sofa. “Are you homesick?—do
      you feel very strange, poor dearie, with strange people?— are you frightened a little by the
      sudden change in your life?—it’s very natural, my dear little girl, but you’ll get over it
      soon.”
Anne shook her head. But the impossibility
       of making Mrs Simson understand what depressed her, sent
      the sobs once more into her voice.
“No, no,” she said; “oh no, no—you can’t understand. I don’t feel lonely—I don’t feel
      unhappy—but it’s only because Mr Hamlin—”
“Because Mr Hamlin is going away, my dear?” Mrs Simson smiled as she kissed Anne on the
      crisp iron‐black hair, for the girl would not loosen her hands from her face—“Because he is
      going away? That’s very natural too; but it won’t be for long, dearest.”
Anne broke loose from her embrace. “It’s not that! it’s not that!” she sobbed; “please go
      away—you can’t understand—it’s not that! Oh no, I shall be glad when he be gone away!”
Mrs Simson rose. At first she felt pained, disgusted; but her frigidness melted with the
      speedy reflection that girls don’t know what the matter is with them in such cases.
“Good‐bye, dear,” she said; “I shall send you up some tea in a few minutes; that will set
      you all right. But don’t fret because
       Mr Hamlin is going. You will see him soon again.”
“I shall be glad when he is gone!” repeated Anne, in a paroxysm of grief.
It was not a mere foolish, hysterical falsehood. It was a real relief when, one morning at
      Frankfurt, Hamlin was standing on the platform of the station, speaking to them at the door of
      their carriage. The guard came to slam the door.
“Good‐bye, Mrs Simson,” said Hamlin. “Good‐bye, Miss Brown.”
“Good‐bye, sir,” she answered, extending her hand.
He kissed it hurriedly. The door was slammed. The train moved on slowly, and Hamlin walked
      along its side. Gradually it went quicker and quicker, and Anne Brown saw Hamlin for a minute
      on the platform; he was pale, but radiant. He waved his hand.
“A rivederci !” he cried, waving his hat.
A pillar of the station hid him. Anne turned away from the window and opened a
       book which he had given her. She read so assiduously all
      that day, that poor Mrs Simson, who was a sociable woman, resorted, in sheer despair, to
      talking with the other travellers, who stared in puzzled surprise at the tall girl with the
      melancholy pale face and masses of crimp black hair who sat opposite her.
When they had got out of the train, rattled over the round stones of Coblenz, and were
      finally following the obstreperously welcoming cook and housemaid up the stairs of Mrs
      Simson’s house, Anne felt relieved. And when she had been left alone in her room, she felt a
      weight off her. When she had taken some things out of her box, she went to the window. The
      last flare of sunset was on the marblelike brownish‐green swirls of the Rhine; and filaments
      of reddish gold streaked the sky above Ehrenbreitstein, whose windows gleamed crimson. A
      steamer was puffing and whistling by the wharf; the trumpets of the rappel shrieked through the streets and were reechoed from the opposite shore.
      From inside
       the house rose the sound of a piano; some one was playing
      Bach’s “Mein gläubiges Herz.”
It was the beginning of a new life. Anne Brown left the window, hung her clothes in the
      wardrobe, folded her linen in the drawers. Then she took from her trunk a framed photograph of
      Hamlin, and stuck it on her dressing‐table; he was very handsome, with his straight,
      keen‐featured, almost beardless Norman face and waves of light hair: she looked at it long.
      Then she dived to the bottom of her trunk and brought out two little books; the “Petrarch” he
      had given her at Lucca, and the volume of his own poems. She sat down by the open window and
      began reading them, and glancing at the redness dying away from river and sky. She felt very
      solemn and happy.
“I must become worthy of him,” she thought.
