
CHAPTER IV.
THE day after this visit from Cousin Dick, came the first visit from Madame
      Elaguine. It seemed to Anne that, from the very moment of her entering the room, she could
      perceive something strange in Sacha’s manner—something brazen, flaunting, cruel. The little
      woman somehow no longer looked so small and that childish appealingness had entirely left her
      manner; she was self‐possessed, cynical, triumphant. Her very dress was different from
      anything in which Miss Brown had hitherto seen her; exotic indeed and fantastic, like
      everything that she wore, but certainly not turned out by Madame Elaguine’s maid. She kissed
      Anne familiarly on both cheeks, enveloping her in an atmosphere of heady Eastern perfumes.

“Poor Annie,” she said, “you have been very ill, and must have thought me a great brute for
      not coming to see you before. But Walter absolutely forbade my coming—stood in front of your
      door, so to speak, and shut it in my face. He pretended that I should have excited you too
      much. Perhaps I should; I am a wretched, excitable creature. Perhaps he was right; what do you
      think?” Madame Elaguine fixed her eyes on those of Anne; a long look of scrutiny and triumph,
      as if she had expected to see her wince.
“I think Mr Hamlin was quite mistaken,” answered Miss Brown quietly, understanding the
      meaning of that look. “I am much less subject to excitement than he supposes; and your
      presence would not have excited me more than any one else’s.”
“Really!” and Madame Elaguine’s mouth took a peculiar little sneering turn; “I should have
      thought that I was exciting, now. Not more exciting, for instance, than the Miss
      Leighs? or than your cousin, Mr Richard
       Brown?” and she again looked scrutinisingly at Anne, who
      merely shook her head. “By the way, your cousin has quite cut me of late, Annie—ask him why. I
      suspect that he thinks me a dangerous woman, quite without moral ballast,—what my German
      teacher used to call Sittlicher Ernst. He was such a funny
      creature that German teacher of mine; did I ever tell you about him? He taught at the school
      where I was in Petersburg: a thin lank creature, with long red wrists projecting a yard from
      his sleeves, and a waistcoat which would ride up whenever he was excited; he used to lean
      against the wall, any part of his body at random, and bend and sway the rest of him about,
      like a caterpillar. He taught us German literature, and was very shocked because I said the
      ‘Bride of Corinth’ was the only amusing thing Goethe had ever written. He believed in
      Schopenhauer—and hated women, and me in particular, because I had no Sittlicher Ernst; and one day, what do you think he did? he fell on his knees and
      tried
       to catch me round the waist. Poor devil! he was turned out
      of doors, and drowned himself later. I wonder whether it was out of despair at my want of
       Sittlicher Ernst? He was such a queer creature. I sometimes
      think, after all, he was the only man I could really have loved, if only his waistcoat had not
      ridden up, and his wrists projected so much from his cuffs.”
Sacha laughed, and bit her lower lip a little, so that it suddenly became scarlet, like the
      lips of Edmund Lewis. She threw herself back in her chair, one foot crossed over the other,
      her eyes fixed on the Venetian chandelier, which caught opalescent lights in the sunshine; she
      was smiling, perhaps in recollection of the professor with his wrists and his waistcoat.
Anne did not know what to say; the presence of this woman seemed to freeze her, like the
      contact of some clammy thing: it was as if the soul of Edmund Lewis had entered her body and
      had become more active, more
       subtle in its new habitation. Mechanically her eyes rested
      upon Madame Elaguine’s dress, a marvellous vague thing, made in some confused resemblance of
      the men’s dress of Moliére’s time,—a crimson plush coat and a big man’s cravat of Flanders
      lace, but all bursting out, by every conceivable slashing and gap, into a mass of lace, which
      hung about her like a cloud of thistle‐down, beneath which her thin and nervous little body
      seemed to twist and writhe with every word.
“It’s a pretty frock, isn’t it?” she remarked, looking down upon it with satisfaction. “Oh
      no, I didn’t make this; I am bored with always making my own frocks. It’s from Worth. I swore
      I would bring round Watty from belief in pre‐Adamitic skirts and purfled sleeves and
      eighteen‐penny medievalism to a belief in Worth; you know he used always to rant at Paris
      clothes. Well, I’ve been as good as my word; this is from Worth, and what’s more, Walter has
      paid my bill. Humiliating, rather, isn’t it? but then, you see, I’m a pauper,
       and can’t buy Worth frocks on a thousand a‐year, including
      subscription for a copy of Chough’s new translation of ‘Villon,’ with all the improprieties
      annotated, Dutch paper, morocco, rough edges, price three guineas, can I?”
Anne flushed. Hamlin had paid for Sacha’s dress! And yet, had Hamlin not paid for not merely
      one, but all Anne’s dresses these years—nay, for everything that Anne saw about her—nay, for
      everything almost that Anne knew and was? And still, how was it, there was a difference? and
      as she looked at Sacha in her fantastic Molière coat of crimson plush and watered white silk
      and lace, which Hamlin had paid for, she could not get out of her mind the image of certain
      French kept women whom she had seen, in their elaborate dresses and well‐appointed victorias,
      driving in the Park. It was very unjust and horrible, yet she could not get it out of her
      mind.
“Walter is a queer creature,” went on Madame Elaguine; “somewhat like my German
       caterpillar professor: I don’t mean in the matter of wrists
      and waistcoats, but in the matter of women. I don’t know how to say it; my ideas aren’t ever
      very clear: I suppose it’s want of Sittlicher Ernst, and
      also because I’m hysterical—at least the doctors say so; because I insist on having my own
      way. I mean that Walter, for instance, hates me in a certain sense just as that professor did.
      I’m sure he sometimes feels as if he could throttle me, because I have no Sittlicher Ernst, and because I made love to him, and offered him
      barley‐sugar and tops when I was ten. And yet! Ah, well, I suppose I am a wretch! Oh, Annie
      dear, I fear, I fear I am a wretch!” and Madame Elaguine suddenly jumped up from her chair and
      flung her arms round Miss Brown’s neck and kissed her, with such violence that Anne felt her
      lips almost like leeches and her teeth pressing into her cheeks.
“Oh Annie, I am an unworthy wretch! I am a beast towards you!” she cried.
Anne felt a horror, a kind of fear of death;
       and yet she felt sorry for this woman; was she not a wretch
      in not clearing up the position—in letting this woman continue to love in shame, when she
      might love openly and honourably? She loosened herself from Sacha’s embrace.
“Madame Elaguine” she began, feeling her face still burning from this strangling embrace,
      and mechanically smoothing her ruffled hair, “I have long wanted to tell you something with
      regard to Mr Hamlin—indeed I feel I ought to have told it you before, but . . .” At this
      moment the door opened and Hamlin entered.
Anne had missed her opportunity; it was impossible to speak before Hamlin, although she had
      once or twice contemplated clearing up matters to him and his cousin at the same time. But it
      was impossible now. Sacha had something strange, brazen, about her, which froze Anne’s soul.
      Hamlin was listless, depressed, with that hang‐dog, stupefied air that Miss Brown had noticed
      in him of late. He
       spoke little, barely answered any of Sacha’s remarks: every
      time that he raised his eyes upon his cousin, it was with an expression that amounted almost
      to disgust; and she seemed nowise hurt, but rather amused and pleased at this look, and took a
      pleasure in provoking it by a hundred absurdities, and by a sort of bullying way, as if
      expressly to show her power over this sullen creature.
They did not stay long. Madame Elaguine rose, and Hamlin mechanically followed her example:
      was it that he could not see her go away by herself, or that he was afraid of being left alone
      with Miss Brown?
“This is my first visit to you since your illness, and it will be my last for a little
      time,” said Madame Elaguine, letting Hamlin help her on with her cloak, and spinning out the
      operation, as if to show that this depressed and sullen creature, for all his sulkiness, was
      her slave.
“Are you going away?” cried Anne, a sudden fear entering her heart. Sacha noticed
       her involuntary flush, and mistook its meaning.
“Only for a fortnight,” she answered, with an odd smile. “Oh no; I can’t do without London
      and my friends—hideous London and disagreeable friends, at least so far as Walter is
      concerned. I suppose it’s my perversity and want of Sittlicher
       Ernst, again. I am going to Paris this evening. I have a notion of taking Boris out
      of his English school and sending him to the Lycée. I feel I have had a surfeit of
      respectability and æstheticism, and that I’d rather my son were a Frenchman and a Bohemian.
      It’s a whim. Perhaps it will make me return a frantic Anglomaniac. Fancy if Boris were to grow
      up a thing like this!” pointing to Hamlin,—“a horrible pseudo Sir Galahad, as Watty was at
      sixteen. Faugh! I couldn’t bear it. Good‐bye, Annie dear; I fear you must think me an immoral
      woman, and that my German professor wasn’t so far wrong. Good‐bye, my beautiful Madonna of the
      Glaciers,” and again Miss Brown was half
       stifled in the cloud of oriental perfumes, as Madame
      Elaguine kissed her cavalierly on both cheeks.
“Come along, Watty!” cried Sacha; “can’t you learn to open the door for a woman?”
“Good‐bye, Miss Brown,” and Hamlin gave a little sigh of weariness as he pressed Anne’s
      hand.
Miss Brown remained in a state of vague fear all that day. Was that love—at least on
      Hamlin’s part—that look of bored disgust with which he had responded to Madame Elaguine’s
      provocation? Anne grew pale at the notion of that fortnight of Sacha’s absence. Would Hamlin,
      fickle, easily wounded in his vanity, sated with Madame Elaguine’s Russian ways, remain
      faithful to the absent woman? Would he not rather return and begin afresh that old, old story
      of Platonic adoration, of self‐reproach, with what his cousin called Madonna of the Glaciers?
      And as Hamlin was leaving, he had said to her half audibly, “If you will allow me, I will come
      to‐morrow afternoon
       and see what can be done to my Vision of Beatrice, if you
      will give me a sitting.”
A sitting! Anne’s heart had sunk at the mere word.
But the next morning she found on the tray on which her breakfast was brought up a twisted
      note. It was from Hamlin, written late the previous night.
“DEAR MISS BROWN,” it said,—“I fear you will think me very uncourteous to break through our
      engagement for to‐morrow morning. But I am feeling rather anxious lest Madame Elaguine should
      get imposed on about the school for her boy; so I shall join her for a few days in Paris. Pray
      forgive my apparent rudeness.—Yours sincerely, W. H.”
“What’s your news, Annie?” asked Mary Leigh, who had come in to see after her invalid. “You
      look as if you had come in for a fortune!”
Anne made an effort and laughed.
“It was only Mr Hamlin postponing a sitting which I was to give him. I really
       don’t feel much like sitting yet. Mr Hamlin’s gone to Paris
      to look after a school for Boris Elaguine.”
“And Madame Elaguine?”
“Madame Elaguine—went yesterday.”
“Oh, indeed!” answered Mary Leigh; and as she said that, a wave of red came into Miss
      Brown’s pale face—why, Anne could not herself have explained.
