
CHAPTER V.
MISS BROWN felt very excited as the brougham drew up at Mrs Argiropoulo’s, and they
      entered her large house, blazing with lights and crammed with flowers. She followed Mrs
      Spencer timidly up‐stairs; but the men who crowded the landing never guessed that this
      majestic and imperturbable creature could possibly be nervous. At the top of the stairs,
      receiving her guests, an occupation (called seeing a few friends) which excluded her from her
      own drawing‐room the best part of the evening, was Mrs Argiropoulo, gorgeous in old lace and
      diamonds, and withal excessively vulgar.

“I am so glad to see you, dear Miss Brown,” she exclaimed to Anne’s
      astonishment, despatching the other comers with a mere frigid handshake. “I do think it is
       so good of you to come.”
“I wanted to come.”
“You are such a darling,” went on the fat Greek lady. “Come along—I have kept
      seats for you and Mrs Spencer for the recitation. Dear old Gosselin is going to recite for
      us—he is staying with us. I beg your pardon”—this last remark was addressed to a compact crowd
      of ladies and gentlemen on the threshold of the largest reception‐room, into which the lady of
      the house summarily elbowed her way.
“Follow me,” she whispered, as Anne, bewildered among the lights and noise, tried to pick
      her way over the trailing skirts, and every one turned to stare as she passed—“Here,
      Euphrosyne”—perceiving one of her big bouncing daughters in the crowd—“I want to introduce you
      to Miss Brown. Do
       keep that chair to the left for the Duchess of
      Orkney—mind.”
The spacious drawing‐room was filled, as for a theatrical performance, with rows of chairs,
      wellnigh occupied already. Into the very first of these Mrs Argiropoulo led Anne and Mrs
      Spencer.
“Sit down,” she whispered. “I do hope you’ll enjoy yourself, Miss Brown. You’ll hear
      Gosselin beautifully here. Oh dear, there’s the dear Marchioness of Epsom; goodbye”—and she
      whirled off her portly person.
“Goodness!” whispered Mrs Spencer, “old Argey has actually put us into the best places!”
Anne looked round. In front was a vacant space, with an open piano, and some chairs in a
      corner facing the company. All round and behind were chairs, and only a little gangway
      remained leading to the piano, next to where Mrs Argiropoulo had placed Anne. She had never
      seen such a crowd of magnificently and oddly dressed people in her life. Old ladies in velvet
      and diamonds,
       young ones in Worth toilets, or weirdly attired in lank robes
      and draperies, with garlands of lilies or turbans, or strings of sequins in their disorderly
      locks.
“I scarcely know any one here,” said Mrs Spencer, looking round like a rapid little bird,
      “except one or two artists—there are three or four R.A.’s—horrible creatures, to think the
      public is so wickedly infatuate as to buy their pictures! Will Englishmen ever have any poetic
      feeling in art? Papa would rather die than be an Academician. There’s little Thaddy
      O’Reilly—horrid little jackanapes—in the door. That old flat‐faced man is Lord Durrant, the
      critic. All the frumpy people with the diamonds must be peeresses, I’m sure. There’s Cosmo
      Chough just come in,—they’re all looking about for somebody or other. There’s Browning talking
      to old Argiropoulo. Oh, here’s little Thaddy! How do you do, Mr O’Reilly?”
Mr O’Reilly, a callow critic who united æstheticism with frivolity, bowed, and cast
       curious glances at Anne. For a moment she felt horribly
      ungrateful about the dress. She was sure that little O’Reilly was thinking that it was a
      night‐gown.
“Who’s the lion to‐night?” asked Mrs Spencer.
Mr O’Reilly fixed his eyes on Anne, and answered languidly, with a faint smile—
“Why, how can you ask, Mrs Spencer? Have we not all been invited expressly to meet Monsieur
      Gosselin and his charming friends, the ladies from the French comedy? No one comes to see
      lions or lionesses here, it is much too intellectual for that.”
“Do tell me who is the lion of to‐night,” asked Mrs Spencer, laughing.
“Haven’t I told you that there never are lions here? only an occasional man of
      genius, shipped over fresh, between petroleum tins and sewing‐machines, from America, may
      stray in in top‐boots and a red flannel shirt—or it so happens that a beautiful woman is first
      noticed here—or Victor Hugo walks in
       quite casually to tea—or the ghost of Byron mistakes this for
      Westminster Abbey. Oh, no lions, never. Besides, here is Monsieur Gosselin, and
      here is Mademoiselle Meringue and Madame Gauffre just come in. You see, Miss Brown, how
      perfectly true it is that we are to meet them. They are taking their place behind the piano.
      Yes, that is Madame Gauffre with the diamond butterfly. You perceive how we are to have the
      pleasure of making their acquaintance. Do you remark the vacant space round the piano? Miss
      Euphrosyne Argiropoulo and her sister are alone privileged to enter it, and the waiters also,
      to talk to Monsieur Gosselin and his fair comrades, and offer them refreshments. It is what I
      call a moral cordon sanitaire, separating these artistes from the highly respectable company all round.”
“How horrible!” said Anne; “and do they pay them to be insulted like that?”
“Pay them? oh, never. The Argiropoulos are far too delicate for that. Monsieur
       Gosselin and mesdames of the comedy are intimate friends of
      the house: they have been dining here, and they are so kind as to recite a piece or two to Mrs
      Argiropoulo’s guests. Let me see—what’s he going to recite—ah—‘Un Beignet.’ That will be
      delicious.”
Gosselin had come forward, his opera‐hat in his hand, and begun to recite. It was a very
      delightful performance, and Anne enjoyed it greatly. Besides, it was a great relief to find
      that this entertainment was a performance, and not as she had dreaded, a series of
      introductions and conversations with celebrities. There was a dead silence during Gosselin’s
      recitation, except near the door, where people kept pressing in and out. When he had ceased,
      Anne looked round. She was surprised at the aspect of many of the company. They had evidently
      not been listening at all, but looking about, straining to see some one in the front rows. In
      a minute the little gangway leading to the piano was crowded.

Posthlethwaite, whom she had met several times before, was elbowing his unwieldy person—a
      Japanese lily bobbing out of the button‐hole of his ancestral dress‐coat—towards her. He had
      scarcely begun a description of a picture which he had just seen, representing “Aphrodite
      tripping with pink little feet across the dimpled sea sands,” when Mrs Argiropoulo came up
      with several gentlemen about her, whom she began rapidly to introduce to Anne: two of them
      were famous painters; one a well‐known sculptor; another was an aristocratic drawing‐room
      novelist; the fifth a man of fashion. They all stood in the gangway around Anne’s chair, while
      Posthlethwaite, who was not the person to be ousted, propped his elephantine person against
      the end of the piano, and leaning down his flabby flat‐cheeked face and mop of tow, continued
      conversing with Miss Brown, regardless of the new‐comers, who exchanged smiles as they
      listened to him with much more amused attention than they had listened to
       Gosselin. Anne was very bewildered; and as she answered the
      remarks of the party surrounding her, she became aware that the people behind were all looking
      in her direction—looking, doubtless, at Gosselin and his ladies behind the piano, or at
      Posthlethwaite. For a moment Anne turned round, wondering whether she should see Hamlin. But
      instead of Hamlin, her eyes met a face as familiar as his—a dark, rather snub face, with bushy
      black beard and hair, which emerged high above the heads of a knot of literary and political
      celebrities. She started imperceptibly, but turned away, and looked towards the piano, where
      Madame Gauffre had begun to recite, her plump little black figure standing out against the
      moonlight flooding through the window, in strange contrast to the yellow light of the room, in
      which dimly loomed the tops of trees and the towers of Westminster. Could it be her cousin
      Dick? Anne rarely mistook people’s faces, and least of all was it possible for her to mistake
       Richard Brown’s, though she had not seen him since that
      morning in Florence. But what should Richard be doing here, in this fashionable party? It was
      evidently a mere accidental resemblance, but it brought up a painful train of thought. Anne
      had once or twice written to her cousin and guardian from school, in a formal cold way, and he
      had let her know that he had become a partner in the military foundry, and had changed his
      address. She had got a vague idea that he was now rich. But she had not yet let him know of
      her arrival in England, and she felt ungrateful and rather ashamed, for, after all, he had
      always wished her well, and had been her playfellow. If he should have thought that she was
      ashamed of him? Heaven knows that was not her feeling, but she felt against Richard Brown a
      vague, instinctive aversion, as to something insulting and degrading to herself. She
      determined, however, to write to him the very next day.
With a shrill exclamation and a pert curtsy,
       Madame Gauffre, who was reciting the part of a schoolgirl of
      fifteen, suddenly came to an end.
“How do you do, Annie?” said a voice behind her.
She turned round. It was Richard Brown.
“I saw you as soon as I came in,” he said, calmly pushing aside the astonished
      Posthlethwaite, “but I have only now been able to make my way here. How do you like Madame
      Gauffre? don’t you think she’s delightful? or rather, I ought to ask, how do you like
      London?”
The voice was always that same deep one, which, when lowered to a whisper, had something
      curiously hot and passionate about it; but the accent and the easy worldly manner seemed as if
      they could not belong to Richard Brown.
“Who the deuce is that fellow?” asked Posthlethwaite angrily of Mrs Spencer.
“I don’t know—I’ve never seen him. Do you know, Mr O’Reilly, who that big black
      man is, that has just come up to Miss Brown. Not one of our set, that’s
      certain.”

“Oh Lord, no!” answered the little journalist. “You don’t read newspapers in your set, do
      you?”
“We always read the ‘Athenæum,’” answered Mrs Spencer, seriously.
“Newspapers are Cimmerian inventions,” said Posthlethwaite. “I’m a republican, red,
      incarnadine, a démocrate for Robespierre; but I never take
      up a paper, except to see which of my friends have left town.”
Thaddy O’Reilly laughed. “Oh, well, you won’t find Education Brown in the ‘Athenæum,’ Mrs
      Spencer—a mere barbarian, Goth, Philistine, but well known in Philistia. He’s a tremendous
      Radical, goes in for disestablishment, secular teaching; an awful fellow for obligatory
      education and paupers; he’ll be in Parliament some day soon, for he’s backed by all the black
      trade.”
“Surely it is very easy to feed paupers, as people used to, don’t you know, in Chaucer?”
      said Mrs Spencer, simply and seriously.

Young O’Reilly went into an inaudible but convulsive giggle.
“Anyhow, that’s Brown—‘Peace by Expensive Warfare Brown’ we call him. Look at him; he’s a
      force in his world, as your father is in yours.”
“I wish he’d keep in his own coal‐cinders,” retorted Posthlethwaite. “What business has he
      to talk to—”
“By Jove!” exclaimed O’Reilly, “it never struck me,—Anne Brown—Richard Brown,—perhaps
      they’re relations!”
“What do you think of her?” whispered Mrs Argiropoulo to the little knot of artists whom she
      had assembled.
Posthlethwaite, as usual, answered for the company.
“’Tis the body of a goddess; we must give it the soul of a woman.”
“That’s Hamlin’s look‐out,” answered Paints, the R.A.
“Why, what’s become of him?” they all asked. “Surely he was to be here.”

“Oh, be sure he’s lurking around here,” answered O’Reilly; “of course he keeps in the
      background—enjoys his triumph from afar. You don’t sit in front of your own picture on the
      first Academy day, do you, Paints?”
“Mr Posthlethwaite, will you take Miss Brown in to supper?” cried Mrs Argiropoulo, who was
      working up and down the crowd.
Richard Brown had already given Anne his arm.
“That can’t be,” cried Mrs Argiropoulo. “Mr Posthlethwaite must take you in,
      dear. Dear Mr Brown, will you take in my daughter?”
“Good‐bye, Annie,” whispered Richard Brown. “I will come and see you to‐morrow.” And he let
      his cousin be borne away in triumph by Posthlethwaite.
“Of course, Mr Posthlethwaite must take in Miss Brown,” explained Mrs Argiropoulo to Mrs
      Spencer; “he’s the most conspicuous man, after all; and, as it were, it stamps her at once. By
      the way, two R.A.’s, Paints and
       Smeers, have already said that they would like to paint
      her.”
“Walter Hamlin will never let her be painted by an R.A.,” answered Mrs Spencer, fiercely;
      “and Annie has far too much artistic feeling to endure such a thing. Why, Mr Bones has been
      drawing her for the last week, and papa made a crayon of her.”
As Anne passed through the crowd on Posthlethwaite’s arm every one turned to look at her.
      And then it suddenly flashed upon her that she was the person people had been staring at,
       she was the lion of the evening—she, the servant whom the great poet‐painter had
      adopted. Every one was looking at her; she felt horribly alone, numb, unreal.
At that moment Hamlin came up.
“Have you amused yourself?” he asked. “Why, what’s the matter? do you feel ill?”
“Only very tired. Oh, why didn’t you turn up before?” Anne’s voice was so wretched and
      supplicating that Hamlin felt quite terrified.

“Where’s Mrs Spencer?” he asked. “It must be that hot room. Edith, do take Miss Brown home,
      she looks so awfully tired.”
“Permit me to take you down‐stairs,” said the mellifluous fat voice of Posthlethwaite.
“I will take Miss Brown down myself, if you please, Posthlethwaite;” and Hamlin pushed the
      prince of æsthetes roughly aside.
“Why did you not show yourself the whole evening?” asked Anne feebly, while he was helping
      her on with her cloak.
“Why—because—I thought I had no right to monopolise you always,” answered Hamlin in a
      whisper.
When the two women were alone in the brougham, Anne could stand it no longer; and leaning
      her head in the corner, she began to cry.
“Why, what’s the matter, Annie?” cried Mrs Spencer, drawing her close to her. “What’s the
      matter, my dear girl?”
“Nothing—nothing,” answered Anne, wiping her eyes. “I suppose it is because I am so
      worn‐out—so—”

“It’s that vile, ostentatious party,” replied the little woman, half in consolation, half in
      pride—“mere stupid crushes—no real society, as we have it. And I do think it
       is so disgusting of Mrs Argiropoulo to make all the people stare at you as if
      you were a burlesque actress. Oh, I know that set of lion‐hunting, purse‐proud, would‐be
      artistic people. They would have your photograph in all the shop‐windows at once, and Royal
      Highnesses to meet you. Papa and I always wonder that Walter hasn’t cut all those horrid
      sycophants before. You know that it’s only artists and poets of our school who will ever
      appreciate you really, although the others would hawk you about as a sort of professional
      beauty.”
