
CHAPTER XI.
IN the blazing drawing‐room, where a crowd of black coats and shining bare
      shoulders and fashionable dresses contrasted drolly with the melancholy thin Cupids of Burne
      Jones, the mournful mysterious ladies of Rossetti, which adorned the walls, one of Mrs
      Argiropoulo’s many musical celebrities was wailing Austrian popular songs at the piano. Miss
      Brown, who had undergone the universal staring and received the general congratulations with a
      monosyllabic composure much criticised on all hands, had slipped away, when the Austrian tenor
      approached the piano, to the furthest end of the room, where she was half protected from sight
      by the plants of an adjacent conservatory. All this triumph, people said to themselves
      , as they looked round at her seated alone in the corner,
      dressed in a wonderful garment of cloth‐of‐silver, resting her dark head on her hand, was too
      much even for her. Yet in reality Miss Brown did not feel any emotion; she was too tired for
      that. She felt as if she had just finished a long journey, or as she used sometimes to do
      years ago after a hard morning’s ironing in summer—weary, broken, too numb for thought or for
      pain. The guttural voice of the Austrian tenor, wailing out the simple little mountain songs,
      which would at any other time have brought the tears into her eyes and a thought of death into
      her heart, seemed to her vague and distant like a voice in a dream; and like a crowd seen
      through a mist seemed all these very concrete men and women all about her. As the last notes
      of the song died away, she felt the touch of a fan, the downy stroke of a bunch of feathers,
      on her neck. It was Madame Elaguine behind her; but the sight of Madame Elaguine caused Anne
      no emotion, and she
       followed the Russian woman, who beckoned her into the
      neighbouring conservatory, in the same absent way as she had answered the congratulations of
      her acquaintances.
“You are very tired, Annie dear,” said Madame Elaguine, in one of her caressing
      half‐whispers, but fixing her eyes on Miss Brown with a look which was anything but a caress.
      “All this emotion—this general ovation and triumph, this great joy of satisfied love—has been
      too much for you, poor child!”
Anne shook her head, thrown back on the Persian embroidery of an ottoman, among the large
      tropical leaves and the delicate stems of bamboos and fern plants. She knew that this woman
      wished to insult her; but she was too weary and absent‐minded to care.
“I am merely rather tired. I didn’t get much sleep last night,” she answered, as she might
      have answered the maid who pulled up her blinds in the morning. Madame Elaguine seemed a
      hundred miles away from her: she
       shrank neither from a woman whom she loathed, nor from a
      woman who, she felt, was bent upon insulting her.
She did not feel Madame Elaguine’s glance, although the glance was concentrated hatred and
      outrage.
“Poor child!” repeated Sacha, taking one of her hands and pressing it between her own
      burning ones. “Poor child! Ah, well, I won’t bore you with congratulations. I know Walter
      sufficiently well to know how happy he will make you; and I know how deeply you have loved him
      all the while, and how faithfully he has always loved you. But I want to give you a little
      wedding‐present. I have brought it here, because Walter has written to me that you don’t want
      to have your bliss disturbed, and are going off at once. Quite right. When people are very
      happy, there’s something immodest in letting the world see it and be jealous; that’s the
      classic view, isn’t it?” As she spoke she drew from out of her cloud of lace and feather
      trimmings a little leathern case.

“Oh dear no,” went on Madame Elaguine, “you mustn’t think I’ve been ruining myself. I’m far
      too much of a pauper and far too selfish to go making handsome presents. It doesn’t cost me
      anything, you see, for Walter gave me them last month; and as I really don’t care a jackstraw
      about pearls, and I accepted them merely to please him, I think it’s much better you should
      have them to make the set complete, since you have the necklace.”
The case contained two large pearl ear‐rings, which Anne immediately recognised as part of
      the set once belonging to Hamlin’s mother which he had shown her long ago at Wotton. Round her
      own neck was the former Mrs Hamlin’s pearl necklace; he had given it to her that evening, not
      a fortnight, perhaps, since giving Sacha the ear‐rings.
Anne looked at the ear‐rings for a moment, feeling the triumphant eyes of Sacha upon her;
      she felt also her face grow crimson, and her soul waking out of its state of lethargic
      indifference, with a fierce desire to tear the pearls
       off her own throat, and crush them into the carpet with her
      foot.
“Thank you,” she merely said, closing the box and handing it back to Sacha; “I don’t think I
      could wear them, Madame Elaguine. And I don’t think my husband would wish me to wear them,”
      she added, but the words half stuck in her throat.
“Won’t you, really?” said the Russian. “I assure you Walter will be most mortified if he
      hear that you have refused them. It would be a hundred pities that the set should be spoilt. I
      wouldn’t have taken these, if he hadn’t told me that I should have the rest. You see, I was
      the nearest of kin last month. And I’m sure it would make poor Aunt Philippa turn in her grave
      to know that all her things did not go to Miss Anne Brown. Ah, well—as you like. I can always
      get them exchanged at the jeweller’s for something else—or I’ll tell Walter, and he can buy
      them back for you. That’s more like a pauper’s proceeding.”
“Thank you, Madame Elaguine,” said Anne,
       preparing to rise, “I think I ought to go and talk to some
      of the people in the next room.”
But Madame Elaguine laid hold of her wrist. “Don’t go yet, my dear Madonna of the Glaciers—I
      shan’t see you again, perhaps, for a long while, and I want you to tell me some things. I’m a
      horrible ill‐bred little creature, I know, but I can’t help it. I’ve always had a lot of
      morbid curiosities. One of them is how love‐marriages are made up—how it all comes about. You
      see I wasn’t married for love—I was married for money by my Russian relations. But I always
      think I should like to know about love‐marriages. Tell me what Walter said to you—how he did
      it. I wish I’d seen it.”
Anne’s face was burning. Each of Madame Elaguine’s words was a piece of insolence.
“Did you always love him—ever since the beginning—ever since he sent you to school; and have
      you always gone on caring for him in the same way?” went on Madame Elaguine. “Fancy, I thought
      you didn’t care much for
       Walter, almost disliked him; I almost thought you were in
      love with your big black cousin. It was like my obtuseness! Do tell me all about it . . .”
“There is nothing to tell you, Madame Elaguine,” said Anne. “Mr Hamlin and I are going to be
      married, that’s all.”
“In short,” answered Madame Elaguine, bursting into an angry laugh, “you thought better of
      it; you learned to appreciate the satisfaction of getting a handsome husband, with a good name
      and a good fortune. I think you are quite right. Mrs Hamlin of Wotton sounds better than Mrs
      Richard Brown. Or else are you still sufficiently human to enjoy making a man give the cold
      shoulder to another woman? I fear I must spoil your satisfaction in this. I have never cared a
      button for Walter. I would not have married Walter for anything you could offer me; I only
      cared to bring down his pride a little, in remembrance of the days when his great virtue of
      seventeen had me turned out of my uncle’s house, like a
       housemaid who has made love with the butler. As to Walter
      himself, you are welcome to him, though I don’t promise that some day the whim may not return
      to me to amuse myself a little more at his expense.” Miss Brown looked at Madame Elaguine with
      disgust: this delicate charming little creature seemed suddenly transformed into Mrs Perry’s
      housemaid Beppa, whom she had overtaken one day, years ago in Florence, browbeating and
      insulting the laundress’s girl, accusing her of trying to get between herself and the
      man‐cook.
“All this is very useless and disagreeable,” she said, rising to go. “Good‐bye, Madame
      Elaguine.”
But Sacha laid her hand on Miss Brown’s arm.
“I see,” she said, “your friend and former master Mr Perry has been entertaining you with
      anecdotes of my life, and perhaps Edmund Lewis has been doing so also. Very shocking, weren’t
      they? Well, I won’t insult you any longer with my presence. But I
       think it’s as well that you should know in time that if I
      have been in the mud according to your ideas, Walter Hamlin has been into it with me. It’s
      rather difficult to make such things clear to a Madonna of the Glaciers, but perhaps Mr Perry
      will help you to understand the matter. To put it plainly, ever since you fell ill, Walter has
      been my lover.”
The little woman spoke in a very low but very distinct voice, unabashed, brazen, almost
      smiling. She said the last words not in shame, but in triumph; hurled them at Anne as an
      outrage, almost as a thunderbolt.
“I knew it already,” answered Miss Brown, gathering her white brocade skirts about her.
“You knew it!” exclaimed Madame Elaguine, staring at her as if she could not believe her
      ears.
“You knew it!” she repeated after a moment, a sudden triumphant scorn coming into her face.
      “You knew it, and you make him marry you all the same! Well, I wish you all possible
      happiness, and I rejoice that
       Walter has got a wife who understands so well how to deal
      with him. As to me, pray don’t think that I bear you any malice. I am only surprised and
      amused; and extremely interested, from the psychological point of view, in finding that a
      virtuous woman may condescend to things which would turn the stomach of a woman who has no
      pretence to virtue.”
Anne brushed aside the palm‐leaves and ferns of the conservatory door. A sudden pain, as of
      a blow with the fist, was at her heart. She did not answer, for she felt that there was truth
      in Sacha’s insult.
Miss Brown had forgotten that ignominy is an almost indispensable part of all martyrdom.
She found Hamlin standing in a little knot of friends.
“I fear I must be going home rather early,” he said, “as I set off for the Italian lakes
      tomorrow morning, and all my packing still remains to be done. And I think,” he added, with a
      kind of supplicating look, “that Miss
       Brown looks rather tired also, and ought to let me escort
      her home.”
Anne nodded. She saw the burly shoulders, the bushy black head of Richard Brown in the
      crowd, and she dreaded meeting him.
“Let us go,” she said.
But as they were turning away, Richard made his way to his cousin.
“Good evening, Annie,” he said, in an off‐hand voice; “I have had no opportunity of
      congratulating you and Mr Hamlin.”
“Thank you, Dick,” answered Miss Brown, her eyes mechanically avoiding his. “I’m sorry it’s
      so late; the carriage is at the door, and Mr Hamlin and I must be leaving.”
“Ah, very good!” said Brown. “Well, then, I will take you down, and help you to get your
      wraps, while Mr Hamlin finishes taking leave of his friends.” He gave a contemptuous nod to
      Hamlin, waited for Anne to have said good‐bye to her friends, and pushed his way with her
      through the crowd, while
       Mrs Argiropoulo murmured, for the thirtieth or fortieth
      time that evening—
“Well, I must say it is a satisfaction to see two people who are really made for each other,
      like Walter Hamlin and dear Anne.”
There was no one as yet in the highly æsthetic study, which had been turned into a perfect
      exhibition of fantastic shawls and opera‐cloaks. They had said nothing while going
      down‐stairs, and even now Richard Brown was silent, as he hunted about for his cousin’s
      cloak.
“Anne, are you there?” asked Hamlin’s voice from the corridor.
Richard Brown’s heavy brows contracted. “Here’s your fan,” he said, stooping to pick it up.
      “Good‐bye, Nan! I hope you may be happy—”
She stretched out her hand. “Good‐bye, Dick!” said Miss Brown, raising her eyes shyly upon
      him; “you have been very good to me—”
Richard looked at her for a moment as she stood under the lamp, in her shimmering white
       dress. Then, as she was going away on Hamlin’s entrance, he
      turned round suddenly to her and murmured, in his hot angry whisper—
“Good‐bye, Nan—you mercenary creature!”
A few intimate friends had assembled near the hall door, to say good‐bye.
“Here, Mr Chough,” cried fat old Mr Saunders, the impeccable disciple of Fra Angelico,
      “you’ll be just in time to write a nice bridal ode while Miss Brown packs her boxes to‐morrow.
      Mind you cut out Spenser and Suckling and all the rest of them, old boy.”
Cosmo Chough, his cat‐like black whiskers brushed fiercely over a shirt fantastically
      frilled and starched, to show his eighteenth‐century proclivities, made one of his beautiful
      bows.
“Some better poet than I must write that ode,” he said; “all that her poor servant Cosmo can
      do, is to thank Miss Brown from all his heart for marrying his dearest friend.”
Anne heard the voice of the Poet of Womanhood vaguely, distantly, like all the others.

“Is the carriage there, Mr Hamlin?” she asked.
“Here it is. Good night! Good‐bye!” cried Hamlin. He jumped in after her.
“Oh, Anne! that you should really have loved me all this time—you, really you; and that I
      should never have understood it,” he whispered, pressing her hand, as the carriage rolled
      off.
“Are you cold, my love?”
Miss Brown suddenly shivered, as he put his arm round her shoulder. The flash of a street
      lamp as they passed quickly, had shown her Hamlin’s face close to her own, and radiant with
      the triumph of satisfied vanity.
