
CHAPTER II.
THEY remained about a fortnight completely solitary in the large house. Hamlin was
      finishing a poem and correcting the proofs of his next volume. Anne was continuing her usual
      literary studies, but now with the addition of some books and pamphlets on political economy,
      which had been incredulously lent her by Richard Brown. The two young people had never seen so
      much of one another, and they were, Hamlin in his dreamy manner, Anne in her serious,
      practical way, very happy. Mrs Macgregor went on reading her old‐fashioned freethinking books,
      and giving out cynical remarks, which her amiable and utterly gullible character deprived of
      all weight. She was the elder and considerably
       older sister of Hamlin’s mother, and had lived in the house
      for many years as a widow. She had been twice married, each time for love, and each time to
      men who, if one might trust her nephew, had been immediately reduced by her into the most
      devoted and timid slaves; yet she always spoke of marriage as if every misfortune of her
      existence was due to it. Imbued with the pseudo‐scientific and somewhat anti‐social philosophy
      of early deism (though herself a rigid stickler for decorum), Mrs Macgregor had a way of
      talking of love and marriage which for some time had made poor Anne profoundly miserable: men
      and women, averred the old lady, were, whatever they might pretend to the contrary, entirely
      at the mercy of their animal passions,—to suppose that any one successfully resisted them was
      sheer folly; marry people must, but marriage was the most unfortunate of all necessities, the
      beginning of all unhappiness, the end of all independence, self‐respect, and pleasure in life;
      it was the long waking up from a disgraceful
       delusion; yet this disgraceful delusion, this drunken
      condition called love, was (always according to Mrs Macgregor) the one beautiful and poetical
      thing in the world.
“I don’t believe that all people are like that, Aunt Claudia,” Anne would often exclaim
      indignantly. “I don’t believe that all people marry from unworthy passion, just to wake up and
      find its unworthiness. I am sure that if love were such a vile thing, and marriage such a
      mistake, every man or woman with any self‐respect and self‐restraint would refuse both.”
“Oh, my dear child,” Mrs Macgregor would answer with a smile, “wait till you are a little
      older and see what a disgusting thing life is.”
“If it is,” answered Anne, feeling quite nauseated and terrified, and at the same time
      resolute in herself—“if it is, Aunt Claudia, it is because men and women are mostly such
      wretched, weak, silly, base, puling creatures.”
Then, when she saw Hamlin, and thought of
       the noble way in which he had acted towards her, of the calm
      and clear love and gratitude which she felt towards him,—when she thought of the things which
      they talked about together, of the desire to become worthier with which his love had inspired
      her, of the greater trust in his own worthiness which she hoped her love was instilling into
      him,—nay, when she looked at that thoughtful, delicate, almost diaphanous face of his, Anne’s
      anger towards the old lady would turn into mere pity; she would merely, in her own certainty
      of worthiness, smile at what she now considered as the mere empty talk of a disgusting school
      of thought, or, at best, as the lamentable generalisations from a horribly exceptional family,
      such as she understood, vaguely, that of Hamlin’s father to have been. And, for the rest, Anne
      believed that though people were very ridiculous, and affected, and mean in little matters
      (she was thinking of the Spencers, and the Saunders, and so many other of her æsthetic
      friends), and although they might also, like
       Cosmo Chough, make the mistake of thinking indecent things
      interesting and dramatic, the vast majority of mankind and womankind was really very pure, and
      generous, and loving at bottom. So, after a time, she listened to Mrs Macgregor’s remarks with
      only a little habitual and instinctive annoyance, but without any kind of serious belief in
      them. And when Aunt Claudia would sometimes allude to the bad lives which had been led in this
      particular house—to the vices (taking them quite as ordinary matters) of Hamlin’s grandfather
      and father and uncles, of the neglect and violence which her sister, Hamlin’s mother, had
      suffered from, hinting that, if one only knew, the self‐same things were happening in every
      other family on earth,—whenever there came any such allusions, Anne would carefully, as it
      were, close up these loopholes into a past, in which she scarcely believed and from which she
      shrank: the world seemed to her as good, and healthy, and strong, and easy to understand as
      herself. But while she did thus,
       Anne was so gentle and sympathising to Mrs Macgregor, that
      the old lady was never hurt by her contradictions; indeed she would sometimes say that, were
      she not persuaded that no law of nature can have any real exceptions, she would almost believe
      that Anne was quite different from any other woman that ever was.
It seemed somehow, here all alone in this ancestral home of Hamlin’s, as if the fate which
      Hamlin had refused to forestall was working itself happily out; and as if, tacitly, the
      poet‐painter and the girl whom he had educated were becoming affianced to each other. None of
      the outward ceremony was broken through; he was always Mr Hamlin, and she Miss Brown, and
      there was never an allusion permitted to any more intimate relations. But it seemed perfectly
      natural that he and she should go walks together; that Aunt Claudia should leave them alone at
      breakfast and luncheon; and that, when the old lady had retired to her room, they should
      remain,
       with brotherly and sisterly ease, though not brotherly and
      sisterly free‐and‐easiness, talking together of an evening. And as they talked, their plans
      seemed constantly to merge; that they should be separated never occurred to either (except
      when Hamlin was in one of his tragic moods), although not a word passed to settle their future
      together. The long courtship, the long enjoyment of a ceremonious and unfettered love, was
      what Hamlin had wished for, and what he had; to a fixed future, a family and family
      affections, he was not the man to look forward; it would have to come, and he did not feel any
      dislike for it, but he gave it no thought. As to Anne, she had never made up her mind that she
      had a right to be Hamlin’s wife; to have thought so for one moment would have seemed to her
      grasping ingratitude; and she was too happy in the present to think about the future. The
      thing to be thought of was to become worthy of him, that was all.
