
CHAPTER VI.
HAMLIN did not succeed in doing much that first sitting. He had thought that Anne
      Brown’s head would be an easy one to sketch; but it proved just the reverse. Those salient and
      outlandish features, which he had thought he could catch in half an hour, were turned into
      caricature by the slightest exaggeration, and exaggeration was almost inevitable. He made
      several beginnings, and scratched them all out; and at the end of a couple of hours he felt
      that he positively could not go on; he had become quite fidgety over his work.
“I have bungled everything,” he said at last, rising, “and kept you here for nothing,
       Miss Brown. The fact is, that you are far more difficult to
      draw than I expected.”
He felt very humiliated at having, as it were, to confess himself a bad artist before such a
      model.
“Try again,” suggested Perry. “I daresay Annie will sit for you again—won’t you, Annie?”
“If Mr Hamlin wishes me to sit, certainly,” answered the girl simply.
“She is confoundedly difficult to draw,” said Hamlin, when she had turned her
      back.
“She’s difficult because she’s a kind of mystery,” explained Perry. “I’ve felt it ever since
      we have had her. One thinks there must be something behind that face, and yet it seems to be a
      mere blank. My belief is, that people of this condition of life often have very little
      character—at least none in particular developed. Because, after all, it’s talking and jawing
      about things which don’t matter a pin that develops our character. The people who have no
      opportunity for that remain quite
       without character, until some day they are forced to choose
      whether they’ll be self‐sacrificing creatures or mean pigs.”
“There’s something in that,” answered Hamlin, tearing up his abortive sketches in a huff;
      “but it is hard that a man should be unable to copy the shape of a handsome face
      as he would copy the shape of a handsome vase, without wondering what there may be
      inside.”
The fact was, that the utter silence of his model, and his own utter silence, except when
      begging her to turn a little more in this direction or that, made Hamlin nervous. He had, of
      course, sketched and painted scores of people who had sat as utterly silent as Anne Brown, but
      then Anne Brown was not a model of that kind. Indifferent as he felt towards the hidden
      reality of this girl, he was, nevertheless, fully conscious that she was a personality,
      something much more than a mere form; or rather, the form itself was suggestive of something
      more. It would be an easy thing to have to sketch Michaelangelo’s Dawn, or
       his Delphic Sibyl become living flesh, in utter silence with
      those eyes fixed upon one. If only he could speak to her, or make her speak, he was persuaded
      it would be much easier; but for some unaccountable reason it seemed impossible to set up a
      conversation. One morning accident came to Hamlin’s assistance. Strolling about after
      breakfast, he found in a corner of the vineyard, where the trampled grass revealed the recent
      presence of the little Perrys, a couple of books carefully buried under a heap of dead leaves
      just where he chanced to walk. The children had evidently hidden them out of mischief. One was
      a cheap copy of Dante, with notes—the other an Italian grammar. Turning to the fly‐leaf he
      found, written in a curious hand, a stiff imitation of English tradesmen’s writing, the name
      “Anne Brown.” He wiped the books, for they were wet with dew, and deposited them upon the
      window‐sill of the nursery. At half‐past nine the girl came to the studio. She had been
      sitting a little while, when Hamlin,
       bending over his work, suddenly broke the silence—
“I find we have a common friend, Miss Brown,” he said.
The girl, without stirring, opened her large eyes.
“A common friend?” she asked, with a scarcely perceptible agitation in her quiet manner;
      then added, “I suppose you mean Mr Perry; I haven’t many friends now anywhere.”
“Oh! this is the friend of a great many people—thousands—besides ourselves, so you need not
      feel jealous; his name is Dante.”
“Indeed!” answered Anne Brown, and relapsed into silence.
But silence did not suit Hamlin. “I found two books belonging to you in the vineyard early
      this morning,” he continued; “and I put them on the nursery window‐sill.”
“Thank you,” replied Miss Brown, in her taciturn manner; “I missed them last night.”
“I was indiscreet enough to wonder whether
       you and I cared for the same things in Dante,” pursued
      Hamlin; “so I ventured to open the book. I found you had marked the passage about
      Provenzano.”
“Yes,” said Miss Brown.
“How is it that you marked Provenzano, and did not mark Ugolino, I wonder?”
“I don’t care about Ugolino. He was a traitor.”
“Do you consider that traitors ought to be starved to death?” asked Hamlin, with a
      smile.
“I don’t think any one ought to be starved to death,” she answered very seriously; “it is
      too dreadful. But I don’t care about Ugolino, because he was a traitor; and the Archbishop was
      a traitor too. There is no one to be glad or sorry about.”
“And Francesca da Rimini? Do you find there is nothing to care for or be sorry about in
      her?”
A faint redness welled up under the uniform brown pallor of Anne Brown’s face.

“The husband was quite right,” she said, after a pause.
“You are very severe,” remarked Hamlin—“much more severe than Dante. He was sorry for
      them.”
“They were quite happy,” she answered. “They did not mind being killed; they did not mind
      being driven about in the wind, of course”—then she stopped short suddenly.
“Why of course?” and Hamlin went on scraping at his pencil.
“Because I don’t think one would mind, if people cared for one, being driven about in the
      wind like that. Lots of people have been driven about in revolutions, and put into dungeons
      together, and so on. If they had put papa in prison, I should have wanted to go in with
      him,”—for once she spoke with a certain amount of vehemence.
Hamlin looked up from his pencil‐cutting. The expression which he suddenly met in her face
      made him feel that at last he had what he wanted. It was a curious mixture, possible
       only in those strange features, of a kind of passionate
      effort with dogged determination: the head a little lifted, cheeks and lips firmly set; but in
      the eyes, and even in the curl of the close‐set lips, a sort of strain, as of a person trying
      to inhale a larger amount of air, or to take in a larger sight. In a second it was gone.
“That is what I want!” thought Hamlin; “the Amazon or Valkyr—as I thought.”
“Tell me why you care for Provenzano,” he went on, now much more interested in his work
      again.
“Because he was so proud, and did not like to do humble things,” she answered; “and yet he
      begged in the streets for a ransom for his friend.”
She showed no desire to say more, and Hamlin was now engrossed in his work. They exchanged
      but a few trivial remarks during the rest of the sitting. The girl seemed to have contracted a
      habit of silence, to break through which required a positive effort. When the
       sitting had come to an end, Hamlin asked whether she could
      possibly give him another.
She hesitated. “If Mrs Perry wishes it, of course,” she answered.
“Excuse me,” corrected Hamlin. “Mrs Perry’s consent may be necessary for you; but for me,
      the sitting depends upon your wishes, Miss Brown.”
“I don’t care one way or another,” she answered hurriedly.
Mrs Perry of course gave her consent.
She had carefully collected and pieced the scattered remnants of yesterday’s abortive
      sketches, and Hamlin found her pasting them on to cardboard.
“Do let me keep them, dear Mr Hamlin,” cried Mrs Perry; “they are the most precious things I
      possess.”
“They are horrible rubbish;” and Hamlin rudely tore them to shreds. “If you want something
      of mine, I will make you a sketch of little Winnie—only please don’t keep these fearful
      things.”

“Thank you, thank you so much!” she exclaimed—“but oh, mayn’t I keep this? it
      is such a lovely head!”
“It’s the head of Miss Brown,” he answered angrily. “You don’t care for it much on her
      shoulders,—why should you care for it on my paper—an abominable caricature? Really, I must be
      permitted to tear it up”—and he tore it into a heap of little pieces.
The next day but one he had another sitting from Anne Brown; and he was so pleased with his
      drawing, that he begged for permission to finish it in colours. During these additional
      sittings there was not much conversation. The Dante topic was perfectly worn to shreds, till
      at last it seemed as if it could be made to go no further. In despair, Hamlin remembered the
      Italian grammar which he had picked up together with the Dante.
“What do you want with an Italian grammer?” he asked. “You surely don’t require to study it
      yourself, Miss Brown?”
“I want to teach some day,” she answered.

“Do you mean to teach the Perry children?”
“Oh no—to teach, to be a daily governess, what we call a parlatrice here. It is not difficult. The lessons are all conversation. Many
      English ladies want those sort of lessons. I know a girl, the daughter of Mrs Perry’s
      dressmaker, who gives ten lessons every day, and and gets two francs a lesson.”
“Ten lessons a‐day! But that’s fearful. What awful slavery! Surely you don’t want to do
      that?”
“I wish I could. I should be so happy.”
“Then you want to leave the Perrys?”
“I want to give up being a servant.”
Hamlin paused, and looked at this superb and regal creature. He did not know what to
      say.
“You don’t care for children?” he asked at random.
“I don’t know. I don’t care for these children,” she answered bluntly.
“I thought women always liked children.”
She smiled bitterly.

“Oh,” she said, “children are worse sometimes than grown people; and then one can’t resent
      it, or answer bad words, or strike them, just because they are children.”
“Then you think you would prefer being a teacher of Italian?”
“Oh yes, I must become that some day; I study when I have a little time. A teacher talks
      with ladies, and talks about all sorts of things.”
“How do you mean—about all sorts of things?”
“About things—which are not things to eat, or mend, or clean,—about books, and places, and
      people.”
Hamlin could not help smiling. “Is that such a rare pleasure?” he asked, thinking not of the
      girl with whom he was talking, but of those weary æsthetic discussions which he had left
      behind him in London.
“Miss Curzon used to talk about books to me—and about music, sometimes,” said the girl. “She
      made me read Shakespeare with her. That is long, long ago.”

“And since then. Do you never talk about such things?”
“Never.”
“Never?”
Anne Brown raised her eyes quietly. “Never, except with you, sir.”
Hamlin did not answer.
Towards the end of the sitting, he suddenly looked up.
“Have you ever read the ‘Vita Nuova,’ Miss Brown?” he asked.
“What’s the ‘Vita Nuova’?”
“It is a little book by Dante, in prose and verse, telling how he met Beatrice, and then how
      she died. It is much more beautiful than the ‘Divina Commedia.’”
She looked incredulous.
“Is it more beautiful than Bertran del Bornio, where he carried his head like a lantern? Or
      Bocca degli Abati, where they all change into snakes? Or Cacciaguida when he prophesies about
      Dante’s exile?”
“It is quite different—all about beautiful things, and love.”

“I don’t care for that.”
“You must read it some day, though.”
Miss Brown was silent, and relapsed into her usual sullen appearance.
“I say, Hamlin, old fellow,” said Perry, as they walked up and down in the garden that
      evening, “do you care to see the festival at Lucca to‐morrow? I’m going to take the children
      in for a treat, and I shall take Annie too—for she never gets any amusement, poor girl. I’ve
      hired a waggonette—will you be of the party?”
“Will you let me think about it, Perry? I don’t much go in for festivals.”
“This is a picturesque affair—really worth seeing.”
“By the way,” asked Hamlin, “I have nearly finished my sketch of Miss Brown, and I should
      like—I suppose I ought—to make her some little present.”
“I wouldn’t,” answered Melton Perry sharply; “she’s an odd girl, and you might just hurt her
      feelings. You see her father was a republican, and that sort of thing, so she’s got
       all sorts of notions about equality and so forth. Awful
      bosh, of course, but still I think it’s as well she should have them as not.”
“I didn’t mean any money,” said Hamlin, feeling himself grow red at the mere thought.
“Then, if you will run the risk, give her some school‐books. You know she wants to set up as
      a teacher. Grammars—that sort of thing.”
Hamlin made a gesture of disgust.
“Horrible!—to give her grammars!”
“It’s what she wants.”
“Why, it would seem—well—it would be like encouraging her to become a daily governess.”
“That’s just what I wish to do.”
Hamlin did not answer. The idea of Anne Brown giving lessons at two francs the hour jarred
      upon him.
