
CHAPTER II.
ANNE BROWN awoke with a vague sense of gladness, but no very clear notion of where
      she was. Then it came upon her that this was Hamlin’s house, that she would actually see him
      again in a few hours; for it was as if she had not seen him at all the previous evening. The
      sun was streaming through the blinds, filling the room with a yellowish light; from without
      came a sound of leaves, of twittering birds, and the plash of the steamer‐paddles in the
      river. Anne looked round her and wondered. She had never seen such a room as this in her life:
      the wails were all panelled white, except where the panelling was interrupted by expanses of
      pale‐yellow chintz; the furniture also was of old‐fashioned chintz; the
       mirror was like what she had seen in the illustrations to
      an old copy of ‘Sir Charles Grandison’ which had belonged to Miss Curzon; the tapered chairs
      and tables to match. There were blue‐and‐white jars and pots all about, and old‐fashioned
      china things on the dressing‐table: except for the fac‐similes of drawings by Mantegna and
      Botticelli, and the coloured copies of famous Italian pictures which dotted the walls, the
      room might have been untouched since the days of the first Georges. She remembered that Hamlin
      had told her that the house was an old one; but she could not understand how everything came
      to look so very spick and span and new. She got up and went to the window. Below, in the
      little garden, was a lilac‐tree bursting into flower, and a yellow laburnum. A milkman’s cart
      was drawn up before the door. In front were the trees, in tender leaf, and the wooden parapet
      of the river‐walk; then the Thames, still wide, but so different from what she had seen it the
      previous evening: a clear grey stream
       reflecting green banks and cloudy blue sky, with here and
      there a barge or boat moored by the shore. The sky was blue, but covered with moist clouds,
      and it seemed to Anne that she could almost see where it arose on the horizon, so low did it
      seem. There was a scent of recent rain in the air, a shimmer of moisture on the leaves and
      grass. Was this London, which she had always fancied so noisy, and grimy, and vulgarly
      new?
Anne was already half dressed; but she spent some time wondering which of her frocks she
      should put on: they had been made expressly for London, and greatly admired by the girls at
      Coblenz, but now one looked more absurd and frumpish than the other. At last she put on a sort
      of greyish‐blue tweed, such as were then worn on the Continent, and having looked at herself
      rather anxiously in the glass, she opened her door and hesitatingly went out into the passage.
      All was perfectly quiet as she went down the carpeted stairs, wondering at the tapestry and
      brazen wrought shields and
       plaster casts and curious weapons which covered its walls;
      she could hear only the ticking of the old clock, which stood in its tall inlaid case in the
      hall. After the bustle of girls and servants at the Coblenz school, and the hundred and one
      noises of screeching well‐pulleys, whirring buckets, whistling starlings, singing and
      chattering servants, clattering crockery, which greet the early riser in an Italian
      house,—this silence seemed to her almost eerie, and she wandered about over the noiseless
      floors like the knight in the palace of the sleeping beauty. She found her way into the
      drawing‐room, where she had been received the previous evening; there was another next to it,
      and a kind of little library beyond. It was, indeed, an enchanted palace; the walls were all
      hung with pictures and drawings, and pieces of precious embroidery, and burnished oriental
      plates, and the floors spread with oriental carpets and matting, which gave out a faint,
      drowsy, sweet scent. The curious furniture was covered with old brocade and embroidery,
       and in all corners, on brackets and tables and in cabinets,
      were all manner of wonderful glass and china, and strange ivory and inlaid Japanese toys.
      There were flowers, also, about everywhere, and palms in the windows. In the library were more
      books than Anne had almost ever seen; and in the chief drawing‐room a beautiful grand piano,
      not made like those of our days, but with slight straight legs and a yellow case painted with
      faded‐looking flowers. Anne looked at everything with astonishment and awe: it was like the
      rooms in Walter Crane’s fairy books, with their inlaid chests and brocade couches, and
      majolica vases full of peacocks’ feathers.
It took her a long time to take it all in. She stole to the piano, opened it gently, and
      played the accompaniment of a song of Carissimi’s, which Hamlin was fond of, but inaudibly,
      without letting her fingers press down the keys. Then she looked at everything once more. She
      was beginning to get familiarised with the pictures on the wall; the pale, delicate
       bits of landscape; the deep‐coloured pictures of ladies in
      wonderful jewel‐like robes, with mysterious landscapes behind them; the drawings of strange,
      beautiful, emaciated, cruel‐looking creatures, men or women, with wicked lips and combed‐out
      locks,—all these things, which were like so many points of interrogation—when the door opened
      and the maid appeared.
“I have been looking for you everywhere, miss,” she said. “I thought, as you didn’t answer
      when I knocked, that you must still be asleep, so I carried your tea down again. Mrs Macgregor
      is going to have breakfast now, and says, would you mind having it in her room with her, miss,
      as she never goes down till lunch?”
Anne followed the servant to Mrs Macgregor’s room, where she found the old lady in her
      dressing‐gown, before a table spread with eighteenth‐century china, or what to Anne seemed
      such.
“What an hour you do get up at, Charlotte!” said Mrs Macgregor, kissing Anne on both
      cheeks. “We never think of getting up
       here before half‐past nine. Walter never comes in till
      luncheon‐time, because he has so far to come, and is up so late every night. Turn round; let
      me see what you look like this morning.”
And Mrs Macgregor made Anne turn round slowly. She looked at her approvingly.
“You’re a handsome girl, certainly,” she said; “not the style that used to be admired in my
      time,”—and she smiled with the faint smile of an old belle,—“girls had to be slight, and fair,
      and with little features then. But you’re just what they like now. I’m thankful at least that
      Walter has not brought home a bag of bones like the other beauties of his set.
       Loveliness in decay, that’s what I call their style; but you look a good
      flesh‐and‐blood girl.”
Anne did not know what to answer; she poured herself out a cup of tea in silence, and
      vaguely ate some bread and butter. The old lady was good‐natured, garrulous, flighty; but yet,
      beneath the shiftiness of her exterior, there seemed to be something real, something
       sad and bitter, when you looked at her thin drawn mouth and
      melancholy eyes.
“That’s a pretty frock you have on, my dear,” she pursued, “and I think it very
      becoming. But you’ll see that Watty won’t like it. He’s quite the—what do you call
      it?—medieval sort of thing,—no stays, and no petticoats, and slashings, and tags and
      boot‐laces in the sleeves, and a yard of draggled train—that sort of thing. Oh, you’ll find it
      a queer world, the world of Watty’s friends. Do you ever see ‘Punch’? That’s the sort of
      thing. They’re all great beauties and great painters and great poets, every man
      and woman of them. Wait till you see little Chough and young Posthlethwaite (I forget his real
      name). Ah, well, it’s perhaps better, after all, this kind of fooling, and masquerading, and
      writing verses about things people would horsewhip a man for saying in prose; it’s perhaps
      better, after all, for Watty, than the sort of life which we led when he was young”—and Mrs
      Macgregor became suddenly very silent.

After breakfast Anne was free until luncheon‐time, as Mrs Macgregor proceeded to lie down on
      her sofa and read Leigh Hunt’s ‘Religion of the Heart,’ or Fox’s ‘Religious Ideas,’ which Anne
      saw lying on her table. Hamlin’s aunt had evidently been an esprit
       fort in her youth, and possessed in her bedroom a whole library of what were once
      deemed literary firebrands, but might nowadays be described as mild, old‐fashioned
      free‐thinking literature. Anne roamed about the drawing‐room once more, looking again and
      again at the pictures, and opening the books, as people do in a strange house, before they can
      settle down. She timidly also opened the piano, but shut it again after a minute. Then she
      took a volume of Jean Paul out of a shelf, and carried it up into her room. Finding it too
      dull to read, and with an irritating sense that she ought to be doing something definite, she
      wrote a letter to Mrs Simson, and one to the little New Zealander. She felt so much like a
      fish out of water that Coblenz seemed more than her
       birthplace, and the people there more than mother and
      sisters. At last she heard one o’clock strike, and soon after there came a knock at the
      house‐door, and running to the window she saw Hamlin standing on the doorstep. She withdrew
      her head quickly, and went down to meet him.
He was more respectful than ever,—asked her how she had slept, and what she thought of the
      house.
“It’s lovely,” said Anne, “and it is so nice having everything old about one.”
“Everything old?” asked Hamlin.
“Yes; all the hangings, and chairs, and tables, and mirrors, are of the time of the building
      of the house, aren’t they?”
“Oh goodness, no,” answered Hamlin, sadly; “I only wish they were. They’re bran‐new, every
      stick of them. Everybody has them now; nobody makes anything except imitation old‐world
      things.”
“Why don’t they try and make something good and new—something out of their own
       heads, as the old workmen did?” asked Anne, looking with
      wonder upon these new things which seemed so old.
“There is nothing to nourish art nowadays,” said Hamlin, seating himself opposite her and
      looking her full in the face as he used to do long ago at the studio in Florence. “Art can’t
      live where life is trivial and aimless and hideous. We can only pick up the broken fragments
      of the past and blunderingly set them together.”
“But why should the life of to‐day be trivial and aimless and hideous?” asked Anne, a vague
      remembrance of things which she had heard her father say years ago about progress and modern
      achievements returning to her mind as it had never done when, in the letters which he used to
      write to her at Coblenz, Hamlin had said before what he was saying now.
“I don’t know why it should be,” replied Hamlin, “but so it is.”
“Can’t we prevent it?” asked Anne, scarcely thinking of what she was saying; conscious
       only that she was really once more in his presence.
Hamlin shook his head sadly.
“Why cannot we revive those?” he said, pointing to a bunch of delicate pale‐pink roses,
      which drooped withered in a Venetian glass. “What is dead is dead. The only thing that remains
      for us late comers to do is to pick up the faded petals and keep them, discoloured as they
      are, to scent our lives. The world is getting uglier and uglier outside us; we must, out of
      the materials bequeathed to us by former generations, and with the help of our own fancy,
      build for ourselves a little world within the world, a world of beauty, where we may live with
      our friends and keep alive whatever small sense of beauty and nobility still remains to us,
      that it may not get utterly lost, and those who come after us may not be in a wilderness of
      sordid sights and sordid feelings. Ours is not the mission of the poets and artists of former
      days; it is humbler, sadder, but equally necessary.”
“Oh, but you must not say that!” cried
       Anne. “What you do will last, don’t you know, like the
      things which people were able to do formerly.”
Hamlin shook his head, and remained for some time with his beautiful greenish‐blue eyes
      fixed on Anne, as she sat twisting and untwisting the fringe on the arm of her chair.
“There is one consolation, Miss Brown,” said Hamlin, rising from his chair and leaning
      against the chimney‐piece, all covered with Japanese cups and curious nick‐nacks, and not
      taking his eyes off her, “and that is, that even now, Nature, which is so barren of painters
      and poets, can produce creatures as wonderful as those who inspired the painters and poets of
      former times—a consolation, and at the same time a source of despair.”
Hamlin spoke these lover‐like words in a tone so cold, so sad, that Anne did not at first
      understand to whom he was alluding, and looked up rather in interrogation than in
      embarrassment.
A bell rang. “There’s lunch,” said Hamlin. “We must finish our discussion afterwards.”
