
CHAPTER III.
WHILE she was in this perplexity about Hamlin, Miss Brown received a visit from her
      cousin Dick. She had scarcely seen him, and never alone, since that memorable walk home from
      Professor Richmond’s lecture. Whether from the sense that he had gone too far, that his
      violence had offended and frightened her; or whether, more probably, from his having rushed to
      the conclusion that she was unattainable and perhaps unworthy of his seeking, Richard Brown
      had kept studiously out of her way.
For the first time in his life he came in with hesitation and almost shyness. He sat down by
      the side of her arm‐chair, and spoke with a gentleness, a courtesy, that were quite unusual
       in him, and had a charm just from their contrast with his
      downright and gruff personality. The conversation rolled upon various indifferent subjects; he
      seemed to be feeling his way to something, trying to decide whether she was strong enough to
      admit of his saying something which weighed on his mind.
“You are nearly recovered now?” he asked. “Do you feel as if you were getting your strength
      back, Anne?”
“Oh yes,” she answered; “I feel wonderfully well. I have been for a drive these last few
      days, and I am sure I could walk, if only they would let me. I only feel very tired and lazy
      every now and then.”
There was a pause.
“Do you remember what you told me that afternoon when we walked home from Richmond’s
      lecture—a rainy day at the end of March?” he asked suddenly.
“Yes, I do.”
“You said, if you remember, that you did not care for Mr Hamlin, and that you felt
       yourself bound to him only by gratitude and the sense that
      he wanted you—do you remember, Nan?”
“I remember perfectly. Well?”
Richard Brown had spoken slowly and watching her face; and he seemed surprised at the
      perfect calm which he read in it.
“Well, I think it is right that you should know what is by this time known by all your
      acquaintances. Walter Hamlin no longer wants you; he has entirely thrown you over for another
      woman. He is—I don’t know exactly what to call it, and don’t mean any innuendo—well—the
      accepted lover of Madame Elaguine.”
Anne nodded.
“I know it,” she answered coolly. “I have known it, or at least guessed it, since a long
      while.”
Richard was surprised, and, unconsciously perhaps to himself, mortified. He had always
      resented his cousin’s fidelity to Hamlin, had always, with his tendency to seek for base
       motives wherever he could not sympathise, suspected that
      this fidelity was a mere cover for an unworthy love of the fine æsthetic gentleman or for his
      fortune and position; and he had anticipated a certain pleasure in seeing Anne wince beneath
      his revelation.
“It is no business of mine to pass a judgment over Mr Hamlin,” he proceeded slowly, and
      wondering, suspicious as he always was with women, of the genuineness of Anne’s
      imperturbability; “the whole business seems to me quite consonant with all my notions of his
      character.”
“I do not think Mr Hamlin has acted dishonourably towards me,” put in Anne, quietly; “on the
      contrary, I feel sure that he reproaches himself much more than he need.”
“Very likely. What I was going to say is merely that this new turn which matters have taken
      necessarily implies an entire change in your position towards Mr Hamlin. He no longer wants
      you; you are therefore free. Am I correct in my view of the case?”

He was speaking with a deference to her opinion quite new in him.
“As far as I can judge,” answered Anne, playing with a big lapis‐lazuli rosary which she had
      taken off her neck, “I think you are quite correct, Dick. I believe I am free.”
She hesitated and spoke the last words almost inaudibly, as if superstitiously afraid that
      they should be heard.
“In that case I presume you will have to remodel your life. Have you thought of any
      plans?”
“I have thought over the matter a good deal. My intention, as soon as Mr Hamlin and I have
      come to an explanation, which will be shortly, is to go to Ireland for a few months with Mary
      Leigh, to finish getting well and to finish some preparatory work, and then to go up to
      Girton. I should be able to pass the entrance examination in another three months. You see,”
      she added, “Mr Hamlin, in spending the money that he has in turning me into
       a lady, has made it difficult for me to take to any such
      livelihood as would have naturally been mine under other circumstances; and I think,
      therefore, that I have a right to invest a portion of the money which he has settled upon me,
      and which he fully intended me to keep in any ease, in qualifying myself for the only sort of
      business for which I am now fit. He has settled upon me the equivalent of five hundred a‐year,
      apart from the expenses of this house, of which I know nothing. Much less than that would more
      than cover the expenses of keeping me at Girton and of starting me as a teacher or journalist;
      and once fairly started, I hope I should be able to support myself and gradually to refund
      this money. Do you think that would be fair, Dick? You see, it is quite useless for me to
      think of ever repaying, even if money could repay in such matters, what Mr Hamlin has spent
      upon me during all these years.”
She seemed to hesitate, to be afraid of being
       mean, of appearing to take advantage of Hamlin’s
      generosity.
“Do you really contemplate renouncing the fortune which Mr Hamlin settled on you? giving up
      all the luxury to which he has accustomed you, Annie?”
Richard Brown, disinterested though he was, was too deeply impressed with the mercenary
      temper of mankind, to believe very easily in such sentiments.
“Why, of course,” answered Anne. “When Mr Hamlin marries his cousin, he will find, that he
      has not too much with all his money. And I would certainly not keep any of it as soon as I
      could do without; though heaven knows I am not ungrateful, nor so silly as to fancy that I
      should be in the very least lightening my obligation towards him.”
Richard did not answer for a moment. “Listen,” he said, not without hesitation “I am nearer
      to you than Walter Hamlin and whatever I am, I owe it to your father. I find I have just made
      a very considerable
       and quite unexpected profit off some mining shares which Mr
      Gillespie left me. Let me advance you out of this money whatever may be wanted to defray your
      expenses at college; you will repay me when you find it convenient. In this way, you will be
      entirely independent of Mr Hamlin at once: you can let him have all his money.”
Richard Brown hesitated, in a way very singular in his cut‐and‐dry nature; he seemed
      prepared for a rebuff.
“You are very kind, Dick; but I can’t accept your offer. I owe it to Mr Hamlin, in return
      for all the generosity he has shown towards me and would still show, that I should never
      accept anything from any man but him, even if I were not resolved never to put myself under
      such an obligation again. I have no right to prefer your generosity to his.”
Richard Brown was silent. Then, after a moment, they fell to talking about the plans and
      theories which occupied Cousin Dick’s mind. He was unusually gentle and modest;
       he really seemed to be losing some of that narrowness which
      had been the ugly side of his powerful and upright nature.
“You are becoming quite tolerant, Dick,” remarked Anne. “Six months ago you could never have
      conceived that any one unlike yourself or differing from your views could have anything good
      in him. I am very glad; it will make you more hopeful of the world, and show you a lot of
      energy and good faith which deserves to be united to your own, and which you would formerly
      have thrown upon the dust‐heap.”
“You are right,” answered Brown. “I feel that I have diminished my own usefulness by not
      admitting any other kind of usefulness than my own. I often catch myself thinking, now, that
      my great danger lies in my tendency to underrate people; sometimes it seems as if, unless I
      can struggle against it, it will invade and sterilise my whole nature.”
“I am so glad you feel like that, Dick.”
“And do you know,” he continued, “I
       think this change is due to you; knowing you has shown me
      how horribly unreasonable and unjust I am apt to be in my preconceived notions. I really did
      think you an æsthete once, Annie; nay, at one time, I was so base as to think that you were
      base, that you cared for Hamlin’s position and money and good looks, while not caring for him.
      Will you forgive me, Annie?”
He bent over her, and took her hand. She let him hold it for a minute. She felt so strangely
      free, so safe, so happy somehow with this man, whose presence had so often been a threat and
      an insult.
“I wonder whether you will ever learn to be just to Mr Hamlin,” she mused.
“I will do my best.”
She had withdrawn her hand from his.
“I wonder whether I have ever been just to Mr Hamlin,” said Anne.
Richard reddened.
“What makes you say that, Nan?”
“I don’t know. I feel how difficult it is
       for a nature like mine to be just towards, to understand,
      any one outside it.”
“Can you be just towards me?” he suddenly asked.
“I am, I think.”
“Do you think, then,” went on Richard Brown, “that during the time you spend at Girton you
      could try a little and understand me,—you could try and like me a little, Annie?”
“I do like you, Richard,” she answered coldly; but a quiet happiness, like that of a
      windless, half‐covered morning in the fields, stole over her.
“I don’t mean this,” he said, rising. “I want you to like me, Nan, as much—as much as you
      thought you liked Walter Hamlin.”
Anne shook her head sadly.
“That is quite impossible,” she said: “one doesn’t feel like that twice, I fancy, Richard,
      any more than one believes twice in angels or such things.”

Richard Brown frowned. She could never pluck Hamlin, Hamlin in some shape, real or false,
      out of her heart.
“Good‐bye,” he said; “I fear I have tired you. Annie,” he added, “it is idiotic, isn’t it?
      but all the time you were ill, even until I came into this room, I kept hoping that you might
      have lost your looks—that Hamlin might be quite unable ever to care for you again—that you
      might have ceased to be, in this sort of way, above me. And yet, when I saw you, I was glad it
      was not so. Oh, Nan, promise me you will try and like me a little.”
“Please don’t say that, Dick. I have been a slave, a prisoner. Can’t you understand that my
      great joy is the sense of my freedom, my sense of belonging to no one, caring about no one?
      Can’t you understand that it seems horrible to me to even think that I could ever care for any
      one again? Can’t you let me enjoy my liberty, at least until I have realised that it isn’t a
      dream?”

She spoke with impetuosity, but gently; and her cousin did not feel rebuked.
“By the way,” he said, “I suppose you have heard who is expected here soon—your old friend,
      Melton Perry.”
“Melton Perry!” cried Anne. It seemed such centuries since she had heard that name last.
      “Oh, I shall be so glad to see him, he is such a good man!”
She walked up and down after Dick had left.
Melton Perry! the name brought up the far, far distant past—a vision of the untidy house at
      Florence; of Mrs Perry’s lean and Sapphic profile; of the tall grass and crushed herbs in the
      vineyard of the Villa Arnolfini; of Hamlin as she had first known him—a mysterious,
      unattainable ideal high above her; of the studio at the top of the tower; of herself, as she
      recollected herself to have been, a sombre, unhappy creature, with whose identity she seemed
      to have no connection, and into
       whose dark and confused mind she felt unable to see. There
      was something very painful in this sudden return of the past in company with her old friend,
      and Anne thought bitterly of the difference between the dreams of happiness, so positive, so
      perfect, of those days, and the reality of happiness, so negative, so poor—consisting in what?
      in being left to herself—which belonged to her now. And yet, after all, as she looked into her
      girlhood before Hamlin’s coming, she recognised the same negativeness; she had wished to be
      free, to be a daily governess, to depend upon no one for her livelihood, to be able to know
      something of a wider life. She had never hoped, scarcely even wished, for happiness; the
      semblance of it had passed before her eyes, had, for a brief time, made her life more acutely
      sensitive; but she returned to the negative: it was the law of her life.
And, as she cleared her mind of all vain regrets, she became aware that, in a manner,
       this return upon her scene of Melton Perry was like the
      ringing of the bell, the orchestral flourish, which ends a piece as it has begun it. The
      comedy of her love for Hamlin, and of Hamlin’s love for her, was over; and she felt impatient
      for Melton Perry’s arrival.
