
CHAPTER VI.
MISS BROWN did not hand over the anonymous letter either to Madame Elaguine or to
      Hamlin. She felt that she had now no longer a right to do so. Sacha had, in the vague pouring
      out of words of that fit which Anne had witnessed, let out her secret; but Anne had no right
      to use it or to act upon it. She could only watch and wait.
Wait!—but in what a different spirit! Wait, not for the hour of death, but for the moment of
      freedom, of complete freedom.
“What has happened to you?” asked Mrs Spencer, meeting her on her way back from Madame
      Elaguine’s. “Why, you look quite another being, Anne—as if some one had left you a
      fortune!”

“No one has left me anything,” said Anne. “I feel very happy, that’s all.”
“But where in all this wretched London have you been that you should feel happy?”
Anne laughed.
“I have been to see Madame Elaguine.”
Mrs Spencer frowned.
“Well, that wouldn’t be enough to make me feel happy, I confess. Was Walter
      Hamlin there? I believe it’s his safest address now, isn’t it?”
“Mr Hamlin was there,” answered Anne, sternly.
“Mark my words!” said Mrs Spencer that evening to her father and husband, and to one or two
      of those well‐thinking æsthetes de la vieille roche, whom
      Hamlin had basely deserted. “Mark my words! Anne Brown has got impatient with all this
      philandering of Walter’s about that precious Russian of his. There has been a grand scene, and
      Hamlin has come round to reason. I met her returning from that Elaguine woman’s to‐day, and
       she never looked so happy in her life. She said Hamlin had
      been there, and I know that she gave them both a bit of her mind. She’s a proud woman, Anne
      Brown, and could squash that little Russian vixen like that!”
“But, my dear Edith,” objected her father, seated among an admiring crowd in his dusty
      studio at Hampstead, among his ghastly Saviours on gilded grounds, and Nativities, in despite
      of perspective—“how de ye know that there’s ever been any philandering between ’em?”
“Oh papa, really now you are too provoking!”
“Oh, Mr Saunders, how do we know anything?” chorussed the two or three elderly poetesses and
      untidy Giottesque painters of the circle.
“P’raps ye don’t know anything, any of ye!”
Mrs Spencer sighed, as much as to say, “See what it is to be the long‐suffering daughter of
      the greatest genius in the world, and pity me!”

Cosmo Chough had been reading some of his ‘Triumph of Womanhood,’ lying on the hearth‐rug in
      the studio.
“Do you think he has proposed?” he asked, darting up, with beaming eyes.
“Proposed! I should think so, and been told not to play such tricks again.”
“Ah!” cried Chough, “thank heaven. I—I—” but he stopped.
“You shall send Anne your Ginevra in the Tomb, papa, as a wedding present.”
“Don’t be in too great a hurry,” said old Saunders; whereupon he was jeered at with all the
      respect due to so great an artist.
For the first time after so long, Anne felt happy. A load was off her mind. That Hamlin
      should love Sacha, and Sacha Hamlin, was the miracle which alone could release her, and
      releasing her, put an end at the same time to the horrible false position into which Hamlin’s
      self‐engagement to a woman so different from himself created for him also in the future. And
      now only did it strike Anne that perhaps
       she had no right towards Hamlin to pay off her debt of
      gratitude at the expense of what might be his future misery as well as hers. Had Hamlin been
      sufficiently infatuated to wish to marry a woman whom he did not really and solidly love,
      would it have been right on her part to let him have his way? All these doubts, which she had
      previously put behind her, as mere selfish sophistry to tempt her from her duty, now rushed
      home to her. But they came no longer to torment, but to add to the relief, the cessation of
      bondage. Hamlin would never, she said to herself, have been really happy with her as a wife;
      and now it happened that he had met the woman who, whatever her shortcomings, seemed to suit
      him. That Sacha Elaguine was an undisciplined, thoughtless, rather sensuous woman, loving
      excitement and art, and indifferent to abstract good and evil, Anne fully admitted; but were
      not these the very qualities which would make her appreciate what in Hamlin was original and
      charming, and blind
       her, for her happiness (and added Anne, convinced by sad
      failure of the futility of trying to change people’s nature) and for his, to his weak sides?
      And Sacha had just that exuberant passionateness, more of the temperament and the fancy than
      of the heart, which Hamlin required, and which she, Anne, so lamentably lacked. For Sacha also
      it would mean a new life: it would mean, for the poor, excitable little woman, always
      defrauded of affection and of an object of adoration, a reality in her life, something to
      love, to worship, to pet, to flatter—something to make her forget her miserable bedraggled
      childhood, her wretched married life, her persecution and her maladies. This it would mean to
      them; and to Anne it would mean . . . Ah! Anne did not dare to think what it would mean for
      her; she was not yet sure. She might be mistaken, she was still bound to doubt. And still,
      that great bliss, at which Anne was afraid to look, meant only what to other women would have
      been a poor gift: liberty
       to gain her bread, to feel and think for herself—a life’s
      solitude.
Days passed on; and Anne, instead of being, as she expected, disappointed, was confirmed by
      every little thing in her belief. On one pretext or other, Hamlin was perpetually at Madame
      Elaguine’s. The latest excuse for seeing her was to paint her portrait; so, for a number of
      days, Sacha came every morning to the house at Hammersmith, and spent a couple of hours at
      least closeted with Hamlin in the studio. Anne usually received her, and she frequently stayed
      to lunch; and Miss Brown could not help feeling indignant at the coolness with which Hamlin
      amused himself playing with two women: he was perpetually trailing after Sacha, he was
      perpetually, she felt persuaded, talking about life and love and himself in a way which was
      equivalent to making love to the little woman; and yet, he would still come and sit at Anne’s
      feet, and represent himself as the dejected and heartbroken creature whom only a strong and
      pure
       woman could help. Once, Miss Brown had considerable
      difficulty in restraining herself when, after a day spent with his cousin, he came in the
      evening to her, and began the usual talk about his soul being shrivelled up.
“I feel I am not worthy to live!” he exclaimed. “I have become too weak and selfish to enjoy
      the world; I feel that I am sinking into a bog of meanness and sensuality; and yet I cannot
      even become the mere beast that I ought—the mere beast that would be satisfied with the mud. I
      keep looking up, and longing for higher things which I cannot attain.”
“How very sad!” said Anne, icily; “what a pity you can’t make up your mind! it would save
      you much valuable time. But then, I suppose, it always comes in usefully for sonnets. That is
      the great advantage of being a poet.”
Hamlin was silent. He had—she felt sure, and she was indignant as if at an affront—imagined
      that he might tempt her into saying—“I will raise you,” while his poor, giddy,
       irresponsible cousin was being dragged further and further
      into a passion which she would never recover from—for she, at least, had a heart and he had
      none.
“You despise me!” cried Hamlin, after a minute.
“I thought your indecision between the bog and the stars rather contemptible, certainly,
      just now. But I now see that such conditions are as necessary to you as a poet as are your lay
      figures and studio properties to you as a painter. It was my ignorance.”
Hamlin fixed his eyes on the ground. He looked very weak and miserable, and like a man who
      feels that he has dishonoured himself in some way. But to Anne it was all merely a piece of
      acting—the climax of that long and nauseous comedy of self‐reproach and self‐sympathising, of
      pretending to hanker after evil and good, that was equally indifferent to him,—that comedy
      which had begun long ago in his letters to her at Coblenz, which she had watched with
      admiration, and love, and agony
       at first, and with contempt and disgust at last. And she
      was hardened towards him. She could have said to him—“Go and marry Sacha!” only that at this
      moment such a notion seemed an insult to his cousin, and that a horrible fear possessed her
      that he would seize upon that, and try and work her and her anger into this very patchwork of
      artificial and morbid sentiment over which he was for ever gloating. Once or twice, indeed, it
      did occur to Anne that perhaps this whole flirtation with Madame Elaguine had been got up by
      Hamlin for her, benefit; that he was playing with the heart of the foolish little woman (who
      did not realise that he was making her love him) merely to provoke Anne’s jealousy—to move her
      by this means, since he had failed by every other. But even if it had been thus begun, and
      Miss Brown shrank from believing that Hamlin would have been so deliberately base, it was
      clear that the comedy had become reality—that he cared for his cousin and she for him.
      Perhaps—perhaps—all this remorse was real
       after all. But Anne’s heart had got hardened against him:
      she could no longer, do what he liked, believe that there was anything genuine in him.
Meanwhile Hamlin’s perpetual attendance on Madame Elaguine had become apparent to every one;
      and even Mrs Spencer admitted to her father that Hamlin could not have proposed that day she
      had met Anne.
“That is to say—mind you, I daresay he actually did propose; but that wretched woman somehow
      contrived to talk him over again. I believe she’s capable of everything!”
“Well, my dear,” said her father, “it goes a little against your theory that Miss Brown
      looks just as happy as possible.”
“Because she’s too honourable to believe!” exclaimed Mrs Spencer; and forgetting the many
      acrimonious remarks in which she had indulged against Miss Brown, and the many times she had
      sighed at Walter Hamlin taking up with a “mere soulless Italian” instead of with this or the
      other Sappho or Properzia dei Rossi
       of her circle, she added—“I always knew that Anne was one
      of the noblest women in the world; and the nobler women are, the less will they believe in the
      baseness of men. For my part, I think love and marriage are the greatest curses of a woman’s
      life.”
In which sentiment poor Mr Spencer modestly acquiesced.
“I shall have to warn her some day, if no one else has the courage to do so,” she said. Of
      course no one else did have the courage. Edmund Lewis became every day more and more offensive
      in manner to Miss Brown; he hated her, and he enjoyed seeing her what he considered
      ousted.
Mrs Macgregor, although she went on abusing Madame Elaguine for being the Sacha of other
      days, lived too much in her bedroom, saw too little of what was going on even in the house, to
      guess at anything. Mary and Marjory Leigh looked on in wonder and indignation; but Anne’s calm
      and cheerful manner forbade their saying anything. Did
       not Anne know better than any one how Hamlin felt towards
      her? and if Anne was satisfied, must it not all be a delusion?
“Besides, Hamlin is too honourable,” said Mary, forgetting about the letter to Harry
      Collett; “and how could a poet, an artist, prefer an odious, rowdy, hysterical creature like
      Madame Elaguine to such a being as Anne Brown?” The mere thought seemed a profanation.
“I don’t think Hamlin is a bit noble,” said Marjory, sternly; “and such a little wretch is
      just likely to pamper his vanity—and Anne is too honest to do that.”
“Every man has a nobler and a baser side,” said Harry Collett, mercifully. “Madame Elaguine
      (though I think it very uncharitable to hate her because she is a little rowdy, and I’m sure
      she’s quite innocent) may flatter Hamlin’s worse part. But the nobler will always have its
      way, and with it Miss Brown. Walter is weak, but he can see the difference between an inferior
      woman and a superior one. Besides, after all, she is his cousin, and I see
       no reason to go tittle‐tattling because two cousins are
      friends.”
“That’s the way Harry pays off Hamlin for writing that beastly letter about me!” said
      Marjory to her sister, when Mr Collett was gone. “How I do hate evangelical charity! how I do
      wish Harry had just a little of the bad in him!”
Mary laughed, and catching hold of Marjory, kissed her.
“What do you mean?” cried Marjory, indignantly breaking loose.
“I mean, Marjory dear, that though you imagine the contrary, you are very, very glad that
      Harry is just what he is.”
“Well, perhaps I am. But still, oh, I do hate . . .”
And thus the Leighs, being very happy themselves, forgot Anne Brown’s supposed grievances,
      even as the best of us, being happy, will forget the wrongs of others.
But there was one person who could not forget what seemed to him the most frightful
       sacrilege in the world; and that person was Mr Cosmo
      Chough. He considered himself as the assistant high priest of the divinity called Anne Brown,
      and he believed that it was his duty to bring back the high priest in person, namely Hamlin,
      to the worship from which the powers of evil had momentarily seduced him. But he thought it
      more simple to apply to the offended goddess than to her recalcitrant priest, who, to tell the
      truth, had treated his vague remarks with considerable scorn. Accordingly, one day (June had
      come round now) Miss Brown was informed that Mr Cosmo Chough desired to see her.
“How ao you do, Mr Chough?” said Anne, stretching out her hand to the little man, who came
      in with even more than usually brushed coat and hat, and more than usually blacked boots, his
      lips squeezed into a long, cat‐like grimace of solemnity, his brows knit gloomily, and walking
      on the tips of his toes like an operatic conspirator. Mr Chough sat down and sighed.

“Will you have some tea?” asked Miss Brown, with her hand on the bell.
The poet of womanhood darted up, laid one hand lightly on Anne’s arm, and opening and
      straightening out the other with an eloquent gesture, said—
“Excuse me. I would rather have no tea. I want your attention—your best
      attention—seriously and at once.”
Anne could not help smiling.
“You can have both some tea and my best, my very best attention,” she said.
Mr Chough sighed, and waited gloomily until tea had been brought, absolutely refusing to
      open his lips.
“Have you brought something to read to me?” asked Anne, thinking it might be some new bit of
      the ‘Triumph of Womanhood,’ which Cosmo Chough most innocently read to all the ladies of his
      acquaintance, only Anne having the courage to say every now and then, “I think that had better
      be omitted, Mr Chough. I think people will give it
       a bad meaning which perhaps you don’t intend.”
“I have nothing to read,” answered Chough, solemnly. “I have come to ask your advice about a
      matter more important than any literary one.”
“You shall have it if I can give any. Go on, Mr Chough.”
“Well, then,” began Cosmo, stooping forward on his chair and frowning, “let me premise that
      I have two friends whom I greatly value. I am not at liberty to mention their names; but I
      will call one the Duke, and the other la Marquise.”
“Oh!” cried Anne, laughing, “I fear I can’t give you any advice about such exalted people as
      that. I am a woman of the people, and have never known a duke in my life.”
“One moment’s patience, dear Miss Brown. This Duke—who lives—well, let us say he has a
      magnificent hôtel entre cour et jardin in Paris, has been
      affianced ever since his childhood to the Marquise, who is the most beautiful
       and divine woman in the world, as he, indeed, is the most
      accomplished gentleman, besides being my dearest friend; and they have been looking forward to
      a union which will make their happiness, and that of their friends, perfect. Do you follow
      that? But now—” and Cosmo Chough, stretching out one long thin leg, so as to display his small
      foot and the martial wrinkles of his boot, and propping his elbow on his other knee—“now,
      mark. There comes into our perfect duet a discordant voice. A certain lady, whom I will
      designate as the Queen of Night”—and he made his cat’s grimace, and pausing, looked mournfully
      at Miss Brown, who sat quietly by, bending over a piece of embroidery which she was doing from
      a design by Hamlin.
“Well!”
“Well, this lady, by some occult power of which I cannot judge, gains possession of the
      fancy of the Duke—not of his heart,—he still continuing to love the Marquise coralment, as the trouvères
      say,—and in short leads him,
       without however, as I said, in the least diminishing his
      passionate love for the Marquise, into acts, or at least appearances, which, to the mind of
      the vulgar are incompatible with such love. What do you say to that?”
Little by little Miss Brown had guessed what Chough was hiding beneath this grotesque piece
      of romancing.
“I say that the vulgar are probably right; and that the Marquise, for all the coral love of the Duke, had better throw him over, if she has a
      grain of self‐respect. Will you have another cup, Mr Chough?”
Anne spoke coldly and indifferently; and Chough, who, despite his vaunted knowledge of the
      human heart, was the most obtuse of good‐hearted little people, actually prided himself upon
      having put his case so delicately, that Miss Brown could not even guess as yet that she was
      alluded to.
“But the Duke would die were he to lose her! The Queen of Night, who is a wicked
       fairy—une méchante fée—une fernme
       serpent
 —une mélusine, enfin tout ce qu’il
       vous plaira” (Chough always liked to show off his French)—“has fascinated only his
      fancy, not his heart. It would be most unfair if he were to lose the Marquise. Well, to
      proceed; the remedy would easily be found. La Marquise, like all passionately loving women, is
      a little cold and proud—tant soit peu hautaine et
      glaciale—need only thaw towards the Duke. She need only say or make a friend tell
      him, that she adores him and that he is her sole happiness—and see! the Queen of Night’s
      spells are forthwith broken by the power of true love—the Eternal Womanhood reasserts its
      right, and all is happy again. But the mischief is, that there is no means of bringing this
      home to the lady. Lately, indeed, a trusty and respectful friend, an Italian—a poet of some
      small distinction, I may add—ventured so far as to acquaint her of the public rumour
      concerning—I mean concerning the Duke and the Queen of Night—in an anonymous letter . . .”

Miss Brown suddenly sat bolt‐upright, and fixing her eyes on Chough, said—
“You don’t mean to say that you—you actually concocted that ridiculous missive?”
“Ridiculous missive! What ridiculous missive?” asked Cosmo Chough, striking an attitude.
“Well, I ought rather to say that most ungentlemanly anonymous letter, written in Italian
      which would make a cat laugh.”
“Ungentlemanly! ungentlemanly!” howled Chough; but in reality what he was thinking of was
      Miss Brown’s stricture upon the Italian.
“Oh, Miss Brown!” he cried, after a minute, “and it is possible that you should so far have
      misunderstood the friend who respects you most in the whole world, as to have supposed that
      that letter had any evil intention? Is it possible that you, who have of all people in the
      world been kindest to me, who have been as a mother to my children—that you should have such
      an opinion of me?”
Poor Cosmo had let go all his affectation;
       he wrung his hands in real distress, and he actually seemed
      to be crying.
“Oh fool, fool that I was, trying to do good, and merely making myself seem an odious
      ungrateful wretch!”
His sorrow was so genuine that Miss Brown felt quite sorry for him.
“Come, come, dear Mr Chough,” she said, “don’t distress yourself. I think you did a rather
      improper thing, but I am quite persuaded that you merely wished to do good.”
And she stretched out her hand.
Chough struck his head with his fist.
“Ah, you are good—you are too good—dear, dear Miss Brown! but I shall never
       recover from it—never. To think I only wished to do good—and you think me a
      slanderer!”
“Oh no,” said Anne, quietly, “I don’t think it for a moment. I know that all that letter
      contained was true, except that you were unjust to one of the parties; for I am sure Madame
      Elaguine is not at all base, and has no conception of what she is drifting into.”

Chough gaped in astonishment.
“You believe it to be true, and yet . . .”
“How can I help believing by this time what every creature can see, and what every creature,
      except themselves perhaps, must and does see as clear as the sun at noon?”
Anne spoke very composedly.
“But if that is the case—if you know—why then, how is it that you don’t—well, that you don’t
      put a stop to it?”
“One can’t put a stop to what has already taken place.”
“Oh, but you can—you can—and it was in hopes of your doing it that I wrote that letter. It
      is to entreat you to do it that I have come now, dear, dear Miss Brown, to supplicate, to
      implore you . . .”
“To do what?” There was a freezing indifference in her voice.
“To do what? Why, to do everything and anything! Dearest Miss Brown, I know, I understand
      fully, that Hamlin has acted unworthily towards you. I know, I admit, that
       to a woman like you—all passion, all nobility—Hamlin’s
      behaviour must be odious. But would it not be worthy of you to reflect that Hamlin is a poet,
      and acting merely as a poet must act? A poet is a double‐natured creature, a baser and a
      nobler nature, and his whole life consists merely in receiving as many and various impressions
      as both his natures can receive. A poet must know the stars, and know the mud beneath his
      feet; he must drink the milk and the absinthe of life,—he must love purely and impurely, with
      his heart, with his fancy, and with his senses—ah, you frown!—well, but such the poet is, such
      is Hamlin. His soul loves and adores you; what if, at the same time, his baser nature, the
      satyr in the god, be caught elsewhere? He loves you none the less; yes, he loves you even at
      the moment . . .”
“I think this all rather disgusting, don’t you, Mr Chough?” said Anne, sternly.
“Nay, have patience—for the sake of Hamlin, for the sake of your own noble goodness
      ! He loves you: and it requires but a look, a word, a
      message, to make him forget that other love, to make it evaporate like opium‐fumes. Oh say
      this word—say it—and blow that ugly cloud of impure love from off the fair resplendent face of
      his devotion to you! Write to him—speak to him. Empower me, oh dearest lady, to tell him that
      you love him, and that this wretched fancy of his is making you miserable!”
“It is not,” answered Anne, harshly; “it is not doing anything of the sort, and it is no
      more a fancy than his love for me. As to Madame Elaguine, she is in every way fit to be his
      wife.”
“His wife!” screamed Chough, and looked as if he would faint; “and you would let your
      resentment go thus far—you would let the nettles choke the roses, the impure passion choke the
      pure one, you would sacrifice him and yourself—you would let him . . .”
“I would let him marry his cousin. There is no impurity about it, so please don’t revert to
      that, Mr Chough. She is just the woman
       who might make him happy; the inclination is perfectly
      natural and proper.”
Chough started up. “Oh, you saint! you noble heroic woman!” he cried, kissing Anne’s dress
      enthusiastically.
“What are you doing, Mr Chough?” she asked angrily.
“I am kissing the holiest thing I shall ever touch,” answered the little man solemnly. “Yes!
      you are a saint, an Alkertis, an Iphigenia! But we will not let the monstrous self‐sacrifice
      take place! No, by heaven! never, never! You shall not give up your happiness; I will speak to
      Hamlin. I will tell him all, all—that you love him . . .”
“I do not love Hamlin,” said Anne sternly, pronouncing every word clearly and slowly.
“You do not love Hamlin!—you do not want—”
Poor little Chough was so utterly dumfounded that he had not the breath to finish his
      sentence.
“You have obliged me to say what I never
       intended to say to any one,” said Anne. “No; I do not love
      Hamlin; and if he marry his cousin, I shall be happier than I thought I ever could be.”
“You love another!” whispered Chough, his eyebrows and whiskers standing on end.
“Neither him nor any one else.”
“Then why—why have you not told him so? Why make the sacrifice of your inclinations—because,
      marrying him, you would be—why?”
“Mr Hamlin has done everything for me. I was a penniless, ignorant servant. He had me
      taught, he gave me his money, he gave me more kindness and trustfulness and generosity than
      any man ever gave any woman I think, and I must pay my debt. If he wants me, he shall have me.
      If not, so much the better for me.”
There was a silence. Anne took up her piece of work; Chough sat rapping gently on the table
      with his finger‐tips, looking wonderingly at her.

At last Miss Brown spoke.
“You have got my secret out of me, Mr Chough. I don’t believe much in you poets; and I think
      you are a giddy, often a foolish man. But I think you are a gentleman at heart, and a good
      man; and as such, I trust you never to let out, either by speech or hint or look, positively
      or negatively, a word of what I have told you. If Mr Hamlin marry his cousin, so much the
      better; if he marry me, so much the worse. But what must be, must be. And come what may, I
      depend upon you, as the only friend upon whom I can rely, to forget all that I have told you
      to‐day. Will you promise?”
Miss Brown looked very solemn; and Chough was overcome by an almost religious awe.
“I promise never to reveal,” he said quietly, “but you must not ask me to forget; I have
      neither the power nor the right to forget the best thing I have known in my life. Goodbye,
      Miss Brown, and God bless you!”

And Anne, who believed only in right and wrong, felt really the better and stronger for the
      blessing of the preposterous little poet of Messalina and Lucrezia Borgia, who declared
      himself to be an atheist when he did not declare himself to be a Catholic mystic.
