<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER XX WAS NOT THIS LOVE INDEED?
But a week passed, and no news came. Rupert, who had never been in love till he saw
      Hippolyta, and had felt that she was always near him at Falside, now discovered with joy and
      amazement, which gradually turned to unmixed pain, how closely she had been knit to his
      heart-strings. Her image was before him day and night; he consumed long hours in adding to her
      portrait—which of course he had brought with him—the touches that were to make it, not
      perfect, but less unlike the cherished original. He brooded over the words, the looks, the
      little loving tokens which had assured him of her affection. And he would have given worlds to
      see her again as on the night when, laying her hand on his breast, she asked him whether he
      thought that Lady May loved him as she did. But these things did not atone for her absence;
      they could not fill up the void. A sense of exile weighed upon him; and
       when these first days were over, but for very shame he would have gone back to
      Trelingham. He thought of writing; but ought not her silence to be respected? She would hear
      that he had kept his word, and for the present it must suffice. He would not intrude on her
      privacy while Colonel Valence was at home. The resolution cost him an effort, which only
      ceaseless riding in the less-frequented outskirts of London, and desperate attempts at reading
      all manner of hard books in his studio, could support. Painting, except the touches above
      mentioned, was out of the question. He had not certified friends of his arrival, nor did he go
      near a club; his accustomed haunts were left unvisited, and he went hither and thither, like
      the ghost of Rupert Glanville, speaking to no one, taking no interest in the movement around
      him, or in the press and throng of the London season, which was now at its height. Not a soul,
      except the aged woman that took charge of his studio, and the housekeeper who presided over
      his establishment, knew that he was extant among the millions of the great city.
It had lasted more than a week, and Rupert, on a certain evening, was walking down the long
      dreary road, bordered with commonplace shops, the line of which was occasionally broken by
      melancholy-looking private houses, that led in the direction of Fulham, where his studio lay.
      The dinner-hour was past, and he thought of dining extempore , as his aged female
      called it, in front of Hippolyta's picture, which was
       hanging on the easel. Then he would smoke a cigarette, and read or dream before
      the fire according to his feelings. It had been a chill day with much rain and wind. The
      clouds seemed to draw the night after them, and as he walked on, tired and dispirited, Rupert
      said to himself that he could not hold out longer, and he would write to Falside on the
      morrow. He wished there had been a star or two in the sky; it was one great blackness in front
      of him, and when he turned round to survey the road by which he had come, the dull flare of
      London shooting up into the heavens struck him as more dismal even than the darkness. He came
      to the lodge that formed an entrance to his studio, and seeing no one within, passed on and up
      the steps at the end of the narrow garden-path which led to it. He had the key in his pocket;
      but on trying it found the door unlocked. He entered, pushed aside the curtain which hung over
      it, saw candles lighted on the table, a fire burning bright on the hearth and sending a
      welcome glow through the apartment, and, rising from his favourite easy-chair—Hippolyta.
He could not believe his eyes. 'What!' he cried, 'you here, Hippolyta, darling? I am mad or
      dreaming.' He ran to clasp her in his arms. She drew back, but gave him her hand with a smile.
      He was all amaze.
'No, you are neither mad nor dreaming, Rupert,' she said quietly; 'it is Hippolyta, and I
      thought you would never come.'

'But you did not write, you sent me no word of your visit,' he cried; 'how could I imagine
      it? When did you arrive? Have you had anything to eat? What can I get for you?'
She sat down again, and motioned him to a seat near the easel. 'Be quiet,' she answered;
      'what an excitable person you are! I have dined, and do not want anything except a cup of tea,
      which I will make by and by for both of us. You look tired, Rupert, where have you been
      spending the day?'
'Oh, I don't know,' he replied; 'it matters not. But are you staying in town? or how is it
      you come so suddenly?'
'I think you must have your tea first,' she said, 'and then we will talk about it. At
      present not a word more.' And she threw off her cloak and began to search for the tea
      things.
'You must let me help you,' said Rupert, his spirits wonderfully revived at the beautiful
      apparition. 'You cannot guess the geography of this place.' Accordingly, they were soon
      opening cupboards, bringing out the curious old bits of china in which Rupert took a certain
      pride, and, it must be confessed, getting a great deal in each other's way. At last Hippolyta
      insisted on his sitting down where she bade him, and herself arranged the low table in front
      of the fire. It was a cosy scene. The light played here and there on the quaint cups and
      saucers, brought out the gleam of the silver, and showed pictures, statuettes of marble, heavy
      crimson draperies,
       and the confused mingling of carved woodwork, half-theatrical costumes, vases of
      flowers, painters' lay-figures, and pieces of shining armour, which made up the
       ensemble of Rupert's abode. Sitting there with the dark night about them, the rich
      folds of crimson drooping to the floor, amid a stillness hardly broken by the far-off murmur
      of the London streets, Rupert and Hippolyta might have fancied themselves in a world from
      which reality was shut out. He said to her, 'We have never been so much to ourselves as now.
      How still the night is! Can you imagine that London is at the door?'
'You are right,' said Hippolyta. 'We were not so much alone the first evening I saw you,
      when you dined at Falside. Do you remember the stillness then? But the thought of an immense
      city near heightens it. Ah, that first meeting! I suppose you are confident even now that you
      cared for Hippolyta as soon as you set eyes on her?'
'Confident!' cried Rupert; 'I know it, and so do you, although you pretend not.'
'And what of my feelings?' she asked mischievously. 'You would not, of course, allow them
      such a capacity for enthusiasm? You believe that I waited until you spoke, and then gracefully
      yielded.'
'Why, Hippolyta,' he said with emotion, 'I should never dream that ther was anything in me
      to call out enthusiasm. You must not drive me wild with happiness.' His countenance glowed as
      he reflected on what she had suggested.

She went on. 'But you are aware that I believe in the equality of the sexes; therefore, if I
      like, I can suppose a woman's love to be as fervent and lasting as a man's. Nay, there may be
      love at first sight in us too, weak as we are.'
'Do you mean, Hippolyta, that when you told me your name at the chalet you were as much
      moved as I was?'
'Would you scorn me if I said so? Well, Rupert, I want you to be sure of this—when our eyes
      met for the first time our fate was decided.'
He looked at her in great surprise, as well as delight. There was a meaning in her words
      that he had yet to unravel. She spoke in clear firm tones, but her eyes were fixed on the
      ground.
'You are an extraordinary woman,' he said, 'and you have your own way of captivating a poor
      fellow. If you did, indeed, care for me as much as I did for you from the hour of our meeting,
      it is plain that we were intended for one another. And so we are. Nothing can separate
      us.'
'Dear Rupert,' she said, 'you asked me why I came. Let me tell you. But promise that you
      will hear me to the end and express no feeling one way or the other till I have said my last
      word. A woman's last word,' she went on, smiling for a moment, 'you think it will be long in
      coming. But no, it is a short story. Do you promise?'
He did not know what to make of her. 'I promise, surely,' he said.

She folded her hands over her knees in a favourite attitude of hers, and lifted her eyes
      steadily to Rupert's face. He could not help feeling excited, but he kept still.
'I must begin,' she said, 'with what happened after you left Trelingham. I could not speak
      to you in the Countess's hearing, or I should have begged you to wait another day. It was
      possible that my father would wish to see you. However, you had given me your promise, and I
      was not surprised on hearing that you had gone. I learned it only three days after, when my
      father bade me farewell and I was able to call at Trelingham. They were three busy days; and
      you will perhaps forgive me if, in the joy of seeing my father again, I put off, or rather
      could find no time to write the note I intended. We had so many things to settle. I told him
      our story. He knows all about you; likes you, I think, and said I must please myself. As for
      him, the summons he had been expecting for months had come at last. He was allowed only the
      necessary time to put his affairs in order and to say good-bye. I do not know whither he has
      gone. All I know is that he will have to run the extremest risk. I must be resigned, he said,
      if I never see him again. It is hard, Rupert, is it not?'
She was too much affected to go on. Rupert looked at her with pitying eyes. 'Is there no
      remedy?' he inquired. 'Could you not persuade your father to renounce the enterprise?'
'Oh, impossible,' she said; 'I know him too well.
       When he decides that a duty lies before him he will go through fire and water;
      there is no holding him back. I did not venture on a word of dissuasion; but I said, as he was
      going, "And so, father, you leave me alone in the world." I could not forbear saying that. But
      he kissed me, and answered, "You will not be alone if Mr. Glanville is true," and without a
      word more he left me. Hush, you are going to speak and to violate your pledge. No, Rupert,
      wait. This is not the end of my story.
'I felt miserable indeed when he was gone. Towards evening the cottage looked so desolate
      that I resolved to avail myself of Lord Trelingham's hospitality, and occupy the room which he
      calls mine, the dear old man. It was dark when I arrived, and the place looked strangely quiet
      after the brilliant spectacle of the birthday festivities, the dress ball, and the
       tableaux vivants . The music of the dance had been ringing in my ears incessantly
      till I entered the vestibule; but there, under the sudden conviction that it was all over,
      that it had gone like a vision of the night, it seemed to stop. I felt that you were gone.
      Would not an instinct have drawn you from your upper chamber, brought you from the chalet, had
      you been there and Hippolyta at the door? Ah yes, Rupert, you love this poor foolish maiden,
      and she loves you, I think. So they came out and made me welcome, and told me of the pleasures
      I had missed by going home; and that you, to their astonishment, had not stayed out the
      festivities, but had been hurried
       away on they knew not what business to London. And then they praised the
      tableaux, and we were deep all that evening in questions of Celtic poetry and the significance
      of the San Greal. Lord Trelingham asked me when my father would come again. I told him I did
      not know; that all was uncertain with him and consequently with me, but, as the truth was,
      that he had been pleased on hearing of my new life among these kind friends, and especially
      that I had witnessed the glories of the coming of age.
'The change and stir were good for me. I could not have borne the solitude of Falside. But I
      was haunted by a vague suspicion that Lady May, who is the least friendly of them all, had
      looked at me askance, perhaps because she imputed to my interference your leaving the Court. I
      could not tell, and I did not think much of it. Next morning, as I was sitting by the window
      where you found me that day, —you have not forgotten?—it struck me as extraordinary that there
      was not one of the family to be seen. Where could they all be? They had left me after
      breakfast and scattered as usual; but the long absence from the morning-room was not usual, at
      least when I happened to be staying in the house. I began to think what it might mean. Towards
      one o'clock, however, the Countess ran hastily in, and— you know her way—without preface or
      preliminary, threw her arms about my neck, kissed me in a sort of rapture, and cried out,
      "Wish me joy, my dear, she has refused him." I was bewildered. "She—who?" I
       asked. "Refused whom?" The Countess did not leave me in doubt. "May has refused
      my Cousin Tom," she said, and danced down the room in wild excitement.'
Rupert gave an exclamation of surprise. He remembered the fragment of conversation he had
      heard, when walking on the front terrace, between the Countess and Lady May. The words came
      back to him as they had been uttered by Karina, 'Well, then, if you do not care for him, you
      ought to refuse him.' Had Tom Davenant proposed to the Earl's daughter? He put the question to
      Hippolyta.
'You shall hear,' she answered. 'When I could get the Countess to be still and sit down like
      a reasonable creature, she began, without pressing, to explain the events of the morning. She
      had been aware, for some time, that a crisis was at hand. Every one knows, and indeed she is
      not by way of making it a secret, that she wishes to marry Mr. Davenant. She told me as much
      herself at the outset. But it appears that Mr. Davenant some two years ago made a formal offer
      of marriage to Lady May through her father. The Earl did not consider it necessary to tell his
      daughter then, and insisted on her cousin's silence till he came of age. But the young man
      adhered to his resolution. At the earliest moment he could, when all the guests, including his
      mother, had left Trelingham, he went to the Earl and renewed his proposal. What passed between
      them nobody of course can tell. Karina, who never quitted her Cousin Tom's
       footsteps during those days, saw him enter the library, and half an hour
      afterwards heard Lord Trelingham ring his bell. She was still watching when the servant who
      answered it went off again to Lady May's room, and the latter came downstairs—looking very
      much concerned, said Karina—and knocked at the library door. It opened, Lady May went in; and
      the Countess, steady at her post, heard a murmur of voices, one of which by degrees became
      loud and firm. The conference lasted not very long; and Karina, fearful of what might happen
      if she were discovered lingering so near, walked down the hall and stood by the entrance,
      pretending, as she told me, to be looking at the weather. She heard the door open again, and
      Lady May came with hasty footsteps along the hall. Karina turned as she drew near. Her
      cousin's face was hot and flushed; she looked angry. On seeing the Countess she paused,
      hesitated, and struck, as it would appear, with a sudden inspiration, walked over to her, and
      said, "Karina, you may marry Tom when you like. I will never marry him." These were her very
      words. "Have you told him so?" the Countess inquired. "I have told him in my father's
      presence; and now I hope there will be an end of this." Karina stayed to hear no more. She
      came on the instant to find me, whom she supposed to be in the morning-room; for, as she said,
      a joy that one cannot communicate is not worth having. And besides —.' Hippolyta looked about
      and stopped in her embarrassment. She did not see her way to continue.

'Yes,' said Rupert, 'and besides? What other reason had she?'
Hippolyta heaved a sigh. 'These are curious confessions to make,' she said. 'You must know
      then, Rupert, that the Countess wanted to thank me for my share in the transaction.
      My share? I asked her what it had been, and she told me. I felt ashamed while she spoke. That
      Russian lady was born to make mischief, as you will grant when I tell you about her.'
'I grant it already,' said the artist; 'she is cunning and unprincipled.'
'Cunning, certainly,' replied Hippolyta; and she rehearsed the conversation which had taken
      place at Falside between herself and Madame de Lutenieff, delivering, as she judged to be
      expedient, a round unvarnished tale. Rupert was very angry; he saw now that his suspicions had
      been well founded. This woman would have set Hippolyta and Lady May at daggers drawn to
      achieve her purpose.
'She came to thank me,' said Hippolyta, almost in tears, 'for the admirable way in which I
      had played my part and stirred Lady May to jealousy, not only during the week before the ball,
      but on that evening. My sudden departure, followed by yours next day, she called a
      master-stroke. I could hardly find words, but I assured her that it was pure accident which
      recalled me to Falside. "Accident or design," she replied, "it could not have happened better.
      My Cousin May has been ever since in a state of the
       deepest melancholy, and all idea of rewarding Mr. Davenant for his great
      kindness in proposing is at an end." I had nothing to remark on that point, and was silent.
      But she would not let me alone. She congratulated me on my philosophy, wished she were as
      detached from the world herself, and assured me I had done an excellent thing in helping Lady
      May to follow the path of affection. Her conclusion was, "She will now marry Mr. Glanville,
      and they will live happy ever after. And, my dear Hippolyta, it will have been all your
      doing." Oh, how can one woman stab another in this deliberate way!'
'Women of the world, as you call them, Hippolyta, are capable of everything,' said Rupert;
      'they have no heart, or have gambled it away. And so, May Davenant is to marry me, whether I
      like it or no. I wonder what that lady herself thinks about it.'
'You will not wonder long; I am coming to that,' she answered very seriously. 'Karina had
      only just finished speaking when Lady May came in. I had often thought her a person of violent
      temper, but she was now in a state of excitement such as I had never witnessed. Her eyes
      blazed. "Karina," she said, "this is a matter on which the less secrecy is kept the better."
      And with that she turned to where I was sitting. "I daresay you have heard, Miss Valence, from
      my cousin here what has just taken place?" I murmured assent. "Yes," she said, "it is true. I
      have refused Mr Davenant once and for all. It is not, it shall not be a secret. You may
      mention it to
       whom you please. Mrs. Davenant will hear, no doubt, that the offer has been
      made, and then all the world will know of it." Karina interrupted her. "If it depends on Tom,"
      she said, "Mrs. Davenant will not be any the wiser. I am sure he will not tell her."—"Well, it
      is all one to me," said Lady May; "my cousin means well, but I am not going to be importuned.
      I will not stand in your way," she said to the Countess with a forced laugh. "Thank you so
      much," answered Karina in her mocking tone. "As I was telling Miss Valence, we shall read one
      of these days that a marriage has been arranged and will shortly take place between Lady May
      Davenant, only daughter of the Earl of Trelingham, and the distinguished artist, Mr. Rupert
      Glanville."
"'You have been telling Miss Valence that?" exclaimed her cousin, drawing a step nearer. The
      Countess shrank away. "Well, why not?" she asked, still bent on making mischief. The reply
      seemed to stagger Lady May. "Why not?" she echoed absently. And then recovering herself, she
      looked straight into my eyes. "Would it make any difference to you, Miss Valence, if I did?"
      she asked in her loftiest manner. My heart sank within me. "You are the best judge of your own
      actions," I replied, showing as little feeling as I could. "Then you are not in love with Mr.
      Glanville?" was her question, full of mockery and malice. Karina looked on, amused. I rose; I
      would not wait to be further questioned. "Make my excuses, please, to Lord Trelingham," I
      said, "and
       allow me to wish you good-morning. This is the last time I shall trouble you,
      Lady May." I was going to the door when the Countess interposed. She begged me not to take
      offence; it was her fault, her cousin meant nothing. Lady May stood perfectly silent, and I
      thought would not speak. But she felt, I suppose, that she had been guilty of a breach of good
      manners, and that it was due to herself to tender an apology. When she saw I was bent on
      going, she stepped forward and begged my pardon. She had not meant to be rude. She was
      excited; would I forgive her? I thought of the Earl, who had been so kind to me, and how my
      departure at that moment would make a reconciliation between the families more impossible than
      ever. And if I went, would it not seem a confession that you and I—? In short, I did violence
      to myself and answered meekly. But I could not stay, as they wished me, beyond the next few
      hours. My head ached, and I was, you may imagine how wretched. Mr. Davenant did not appear at
      luncheon. He was busy, the Earl said, preparing for his journey to Foxholme, where he had to
      meet the tenantry next day. The Countess was radiant, Lord Trelingham serious, Lady May
      sullen, like one that cannot forgive herself for seeming lowered in the eyes of a friend. I
      was glad to get home. I shall never, never visit Trelingham again.'
'Nor I,' said Glanville; 'I will acquaint Lord Trelingham by the next post that our
      engagement is
       ended. My poor darling, how you must have suffered!' He would have taken her
      hand; but Hippolyta, who had drawn closer to him in the excitement of her narrative, stood up,
      and walking towards the fireplace, said, with her eyes averted:
'But why did I not remain at home? You do not ask me that. Oh, no,' she exclaimed suddenly,
      'give up your engagement at Trelingham you must not. Honour is honour.'
'It will be only paying a forfeit which I can well afford,' said Rupert, 'and I cannot look
      Lady May in the face again after her atrocious behaviour.'
'Yes, you can,' said Hippolyta, speaking in a wonderfully quiet tone.
'How is it possible?' he asked. 'Do you think I could go on living at the Court while you
      were in a kind a exile at Falside?'
'I shall not go back to Falside,' was her reply.
'What!' said Rupert, astonished; 'not go back? Have you any other plan? What is it? tell
      me.'
'Then be quiet, as you promised,' she said; and with great seriousness, always keeping her
      eyes averted, she went on, 'Why do you think I came here tonight? To inform you that Lady May
      had hurt my feelings? No, not exactly. When a girl like me has lost father and mother, when
      she is her own mistress, alone in the world, without any one to look to for light or guidance
      except the man she loves, what do you suppose she ought to do?' Her voice sank to a whisper as
      she ended.

Rupert sprang from his chair. 'My darling Hippolyta,' he cried, 'do you mean to say that you
      will marry me at once?'
'I mean,' she said, as he took her to his bosom, 'that I am yours in life and in death.'

</div></body></text></TEI>