<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="29">
CHAPTER XXIX LIKE MADNESS IN THE BRAIN
The blow which had thus been struck at the heart of Rupert Glanville was so
      unexpected, and its occasion so wrapt in mystery, that the young man, on reading Hippolyta's
      brief sentence, announcing as it should seem an everlasting farewell, refused to believe and
      stood there incapable of realising it. His face was calm as that of a man who has just been
      shot dead. Hippolyta vanished? But why? he asked himself again. She must have simply been
      called away by a sudden emergency; she would return in a few hours; or she had heard from
      Colonel Valence and he was in danger, dying perhaps, and in need of his daughter's presence.
      Surely it was that which, giving her an overwhelming shock, had disturbed her reason; that or
      the attack of disease alone could have made her set down those few wild words which he read
      again and again, vainly striving to make them tell more than their own meaning. He drew a
      chair
       to the writing-table, and sat down by it, looking out of the window in a dazed
      and helpless fashion, not able to think or to act, every faculty benumbed and a weight like
      ice in his bosom. The entrance of the housekeeper roused him as from a stupor. Ought they to
      do anything? Had Mr. Malcolm any orders to give? Rupert laughed sardonically on hearing the
      name which had gone with his golden honeymoon. It was nine months, almost to the day, since he
      brought Hippolyta from his studio to Forrest House. Nine months! good heavens, how happy they
      had been, how swift to come and go, like a broad stream of sunshine losing itself in the
      smiling ocean! It was all over. 'A dream, a dream,' he murmured to himself. Or was he dreaming
      now? The housekeeper spoke again; and he gave a start at the sound of a strange voice in
      Hippolyta's boudoir. He had forgotten that any one was there. 'What did you say?' he inquired,
      passing his hand over his forehead. Orders! No, he had no orders to give; and he turned over
      the scrap of paper which he held between his fingers, vaguely imagining there might be some
      message on the back which he had not seen, to say that it was all a jest, all make-believe,
      and Hippolyta would come ere the day was spent. There was nothing except the fatal sentences
      written on the paper; he knew it before he looked. But this slight action brought him to
      himself. Hippolyta must have been seen when she went away; if not by the servants, yet by
      those who were passing along the street, by the
       neighbours, the police, by whatever people might be about in the early morning.
      What if a misfortune to her father had driven her out of her mind, and she were wandering
      somewhere without any one to take care of her! The thought was terrible, inciting him to lose
      no time in seeking her traces, and allowing him, till she should be found, to believe that she
      had not known what she was doing when she wrote him farewell. Was it not a symptom of madness
      that people turned against those they loved most dearly, and fled from them? This appalling
      comfort that Hippolyta might be out of her mind was a sad testimony to the overthrow of
      Rupert's happiness. 'Why, oh why,' he cried in despair, 'did I not come on last night instead
      of lingering in town? I should have noticed the change and ascertained the cause of it; a few
      hours would have made all the difference. We could have called in a physician, set some one to
      watch over her to see that she did not stray away by herself. But let us do what we can and
      not delay.' He was eager and active now; the stupor had passed for a while, because a ray of
      hope seemed to be dawning again. The more he considered the stronger he found those evidences
      of Hippolyta's mental aberration which the circumstances of her flight seemed to give. She had
      not taken anything with her in the shape of money or clothing; she had made no preparations
      for a journey, long or short. Her books, correspondence, wardrobe, were all in perfect order,
      as Mrs. Leeming had seen them only the day before.
       There was no sign of hurry or confusion in the room, nothing out of place, except
      in that pleasant way which betokened that some one had made a home of it. The note she had
      received from Rupert and had read in the hall when she came in last night was lying on her
      dressing-table with her keys. Only her hat and cloak were gone. Rupert questioned the servants
      closely. Had any one found a door or window open that morning? No, but the housemaid, on going
      to unbolt the front door, was astonished to observe that it was unfastened. Some one must or
      might have left the house that way; all other means of exit were as they had been left the
      last thing at night.
Had Mrs. Malcolm appeared in any way strange during the past few days? Had she received
      letters, or heard agitating news, or done or said anything unusual? In answer to these
      inquiries the housekeeper mentioned the two letters received last night, told what she knew of
      the trouble and flight of Annie Dauris, and of Hippolyta's anxiety to discover and bring her
      back. The girl, she added, was not yet found; neither did they seem aware at the gardener's
      cottage of anything peculiar in Mrs. Malcolm's conduct. They were very much attached to her,
      and she had displayed great kindness towards them. Rupert sent for William Dauris. The
      gardener came immediately, with an expression of intense sorrow in his countenance, and so
      deeply grieved on hearing of Hippolyta's disappearance from home that he could hardly reply to
      the questions which Rupert addressed
       to him. He was evidently as much in the dark as any one else. He could not think
      so feeling a lady as Mrs. Malcolm would have set out on a long journey, especially if it was
      connected with his daughter, and not come to say good-bye, or at least send them word that she
      had found a clue. She had certainly been much troubled when she heard of Annie's misbehaviour;
      he knew that she had made inquiries everywhere, and had even gone into the East End herself to
      help them on. How did she go, Rupert asked, by what conveyance? William Dauris could not say;
      he thought the coachman had driven her. The coachman was sent for, and gave his account, which
      was not much. It had been Mrs. Malcolm's custom to have herself driven a couple of miles along
      the London Road and then dismiss him. He believed that she often engaged a cab to take her
      much farther, into town, he supposed. But he had never driven farther himself except three
      days ago, when she told him to take her to an address in Grafton Place, Strand,—a Mr.
      Mardol's,—and afterwards—
Rupert almost leaped out of the chair in which he was sitting. 'What name did you say?' he
      cried. 'Mr. Mardol's? Grafton Place? Are you sure?'
The coachman was quite sure. Not only had he asked Mrs. Malcolm the address twice over, but
      he heard Mr. Mardol's name several times when he drove on to the East End, whither Mrs.
      Malcolm was accompanied by a gentleman from Grafton Place.
'Oh, I see now,' exclaimed Rupert with a sigh of
       relief; 'it will all come clear. Thank you, Thomson, thank you; you have given me
      the clue I wanted. Why did you not inform me at once?'
Thomson had not felt certain that it mattered, or he would have spoken. He knew the house in
      Grafton Place, and the other off Saffron Hill. If Mr. Malcolm wished to see them himself, he
      could get the brougham ready at once.
'Right, quite right, Thomson,' said his master; 'be quick about it. I will drive to Grafton
      Place. Mr. Mardol is a friend of mine. There has been some misunderstanding, I suppose; that
      is all. It is nothing, nothing. Only look about you. I shall be waiting till you come.'
The coachman departed on his errand; and William Dauris, who had been standing silently near
      during this conversation, took heart again on seeing how Rupert's face brightened. He appeared
      like a changed man.
'Then we shall have Mrs. Malcolm back?' said the gardener timidly.
'Oh, never fear,' replied Rupert, shaking him warmly by the hand; 'back this evening, no
      doubt. Ladies will give us these frightenings now and then,' he said, smiling as one does to
      assure friends that one has escaped a great peril.
'I am very glad,' said William, 'and so will my wife be when I tell her. She has been crying
      ever since the housekeeper brought us the bad news.'
He said no more, but went away quietly. Rupert,
       who had not taken off the travelling wraps in which he had alighted from the
      hansom, walked from the front door to the gate and back again, up and down the garden path,
      till the brougham came in sight. He at once ran to meet it, leaped in, and told the coachman
      to use his utmost speed till they reached Grafton Place. He would willingly have galloped with
      the horses, so great was his excitement. To have done with the journey and clasp Hippolyta in
      his arms again—he could think of nothing else. He would forgive her at the first word; but she
      must never so frighten him again.
In the midst of these disjointed reflections the thought presented itself, 'But suppose she
      were not in Grafton Place?' Why, he replied at once to himself, he had not fancied she would
      be there; at least it could not signify; Ivor would know where she was, what motive had
      induced her to leave home suddenly, and in what frame of mind she had come to him. The reason
      of their meeting was plain enough. Ivor, Hippolyta, and Colonel Valence were all mixed up in
      that mad revolutionary movement which appeared to delight in these mysterious vanishings and
      trap-door scenes; there had been some plan afoot, and Hippolyta was required to take part in
      it. 'But,' said Rupert, in a gayer mood now that he was going to see her very soon, 'I shall
      not allow this doctrine of blind obedience to come between husband and wife. The next time
      Hippolyta sets out on a humanitarian expedition
       she shall take me with her, or I will know the reason why.'
The drive was horribly long, but it could not last for ever. At a little distance from the
      house Rupert pulled the check-string and got out. It might be an alarm or a warning to the
      conspirators, as he termed Ivor and Hippolyta in his recovered good-humour, if the carriage
      were to drive up to the door. Bidding Thomson, therefore, wait round the corner, he walked on
      briskly to his friend's house, with which he was familiar from of old, and rang the bell as
      quietly as the agitation of his nerves would let him. The door was not opened at once. 'Ah,'
      he said under his breath, 'Ivor is cautious; he perhaps wishes to reconnoitre before parleying
      with the enemy. I will pay him out for this.' He had hardly got the words out of his mouth
      when Ivor opened the door. 'What, you, Rupert!' he cried joyously; 'who in the world would
      have thought it? Come in, my dear boy, and let me look at you. I have been working at high
      pressure to make up for lost time. That is why I did not come at once; I was busy.'
And with delight overspreading his rugged features Ivor, lifting the curtain of stamped
      leather with one hand, pushed Rupert gently forward with the other into his workroom. A lad,
      who happened to be assisting him, retired at the sight of a stranger through another exit.
      Rupert was half-minded to call him back. He dreaded some trick of collusion, he knew not why.
      Ivor had never deceived him in his life;
       but in the present excitement suspicion caught at a film of gossamer. The boy
      disappeared; and Rupert, who could endure the suspense no longer, turned at once on his friend
      without preface or introduction, and cried, 'Where is Miss Valence, Ivor?'
Ivor stared at him. 'Miss Valence?' he repeated. He seemed quite lost. Rupert thought he was
      dissembling, and he could not bear it. 'Yes, Miss Valence,' reiterated the artist in an angry
      voice. 'Come now, tell me what you have done with her.' And he took Ivor by the shoulder.
The astonishment of the latter increased. 'But, my dear fellow,' he said, looking for an
      explanation of this strange scene in Rupert's eyes, 'I don't know who Miss Valence is. I never
      heard her name in my life.'
Rupert turned white with passion. 'Never heard her name,' he exclaimed, 'and she was with
      you three days ago, and you went with her to Saffron Hill. Shame on you, Ivor; how can you
      tell me so?'
Ivor was bewildered still, but not quite so much.
'Indeed!' was his reply, 'so that is the lady's real name. I thought there must be
      something.' And then, turning to Rupert, 'I give you my word this is the first I ever heard of
      a Miss Valence. The lady who came here three days ago announced herself as Mrs. Malcolm. It
      appears that she gave a false name.'
Rupert, listening impatiently, was now bewildered in his turn. He said slowly, 'My dear
      Ivor, you
       surely knew the name of Miss Valence, Colonel Valence's daughter?'
'Neither Miss Valence nor Colonel Valence, as I am an honest engraver,' said his friend;
      'you must be dreaming, Rupert. What has come over you this morning?' He made Glanville sit
      down, and, in drawing him towards the light, was disconcerted at seeing the ashy paleness of
      his cheek.
'What in Heaven's name is it?' he inquired with anxious affection. Rupert kept studying
      every expression that passed over his friend's features, anticipating, somehow, that the mask
      would fall and the truth declare itself. But Ivor looked the soul of candour and innocence.
      The artist was staggered. He sat up, pulled himself together with an effort, and said, with an
      imploring accent in each of his words:
'Do be frank with me. You must know Miss Valence and her father. They are Socialists like
      yourself; and I believe you have already received communications from them, although I never
      spoke to you about them. The lady that came here—you knew she was Miss Valence.'
'I declare to you solemnly,' said Ivor, 'I knew no such thing. The first time I set eyes on
      her was three months ago, by mere accident as it seemed, in Denzil Lane, as I was coming out
      of a house where I had been on business. She told me her name was Mrs. Malcolm, and—' he
      hesitated for a moment, but continued deliberately, 'I also learned, though I ought not to
      tell you so, that she belonged to our
       society. More than that I neither know nor desired to know. What you say about
      previous communications is impossible. Who is Miss Valence, then, and why does she go
      by another name?'
Unless Ivor was playing a part with unparalleled sang froid and equal
      heartlessness, he must be speaking the truth. Still, he was not his own master; there might be
      an obligation among Socialists to deceive one's dearest friends for the good of the society,
      thought Rupert; and in that case it would be in vain to persevere with his questions. The fear
      of losing Hippolyta returned with horrible force. He must try again.
'I don't wish to inquire into your secrets, Ivor,' he began mildly; 'I have always respected
      them. Only tell me where Mrs. Malcolm is,—let us call her Mrs. Malcolm, we need not quarrel
      over a name,—tell me how I can send her a message, and I will thank you from the bottom of my
      heart.'
There was the sound of tears in his voice.
Ivor, if not sincere, was a consummate villain, who did not need to learn from the greatest
      how to tear his friend's heart. He stood seemingly in the uttermost bewilderment, incapable of
      answering a word, and trying to make sense of what had just been spoken by Rupert. When at
      length he found his voice he did but mutter, 'Miss Valence, Mrs. Malcolm?' as though the two
      names were a subject of unmixed surprise and perplexity to him. Nay, the sight of Rupert's
      affliction moved him almost to tears,
       and he said, forgetting apparently what had been asked by the latter:
'Is there any reason why you should take this deep interest in the lady? If it is one you
      can confide to me, I will do all in my power towards discovering her, as I understand from you
      that she is no longer to be found. I was utterly ignorant that you cared for any woman,
      Rupert.'
The artist's suspicions were not to be laid by kindness. He knew only too well that
      Hippolyta had conveyed the message to Ivor Mardol, which compelled him to quit Trelingham on a
      secret expedition. This questioning about his own interest in Miss Valence was to throw him
      off the scent. He cursed Socialism and the revolutionary ideas which made a friend like Ivor
      disloyal, as he answered:
'What my reason may be for inquiring about Mrs. Malcolm signifies to no one but myself. I
      want to know where she is, and I believe you could inform me, if it was not for some oath or
      other you have taken. Will you do so, or are we to break off our friendship here and now?'
'Rupert, my dear Rupert, what madness has come over you?' exclaimed Ivor in unfeigned
      distress. 'I cannot do more than assure you that three months ago Mrs. Malcolm was a perfect
      stranger to me, that I have never known her address, and that I know it now as little as you
      do.'
'And Miss Valence brought you no message when
       you were living at Trelingham, in the chalet?' inquired Rupert with intense
      sternness.
'None whatever,' replied Ivor; 'the message I received, and which I remember you saw, came
      from—' he paused.
'From whom?' said Rupert.
'I must say no more about it. These things are really secret, and they do not concern you,
      Rupert, nor yet Miss Valence. I implore you to let the matter drop.'
'Very well,' said Glanville sullenly, rising as he spoke. 'Then here we say good-bye, and
      that is the end of an old song.'
He went to the door. Ivor followed. 'You are not going for good, are you, old fellow?' he
      said tremulously, endeavouring to detain him.
'Yes, I am,' he returned, shaking off the hand that was laid affectionately on his arm.
      'This is the last you will see of me.'
He threw open the front door and walked into the street. Ivor, wounded in his deepest
      feelings, and more sensitive to the change in Rupert's affection than to the affront he had
      received, stood on the threshold watching him till he turned the corner. It would be no use
      calling him back while he was in such a mood. Ivor shut the door, went back to his workroom
      and took up the plate on which he was engaged. He could not go on with it; his thoughts were
      all abroad, and his fingers would not serve him. After nearly a year's absence to meet and
      part like
       this! Rupert was not a good correspondent, resembling in that particular most men
      of genius, who find occupation without difficulty, and are loth to forego present delights for
      the monotonous work of recording the incidents of the day. But few letters, therefore, had
      passed between these friends; and the nature of Ivor's cosmopolitan interests on the one side,
      combined with Rupert's desire to conceal Hippolyta's residence and way of living on the other,
      had made intimate correspondence difficult, if not impossible. Love is the sworn foe of
      friendship, and puts out lesser lights, as the sun quenches the stars. Nor is cosmopolitan or
      religious enthusiasm, which you cannot share with a friend, less likely to estrange you from
      him. In spite of all this, the devotion of Rupert to Ivor was intense and heartfelt; while
      Ivor would have sacrificed their friendship to nothing less sacred than a sense of duty. Had
      he done so now? His confession or the discovery of Hippolyta alone could decide.
So Rupert might have argued in cold blood. But his blood was not cold; it was boiling in his
      veins as he walked away in search of the brougham, convinced that Ivor had sheltered Hippolyta
      or was conversant with her design in quitting Forrest House. At that instant he cared not a
      jot for any man's friendship; and he flung Ivor's from him as a thing soiled and worthless. He
      would be his own friend and seek Hippolyta till he found her. Who was the other she had called
      on? Thomson would know. He stopped
       the carriage, which was slowly moving up and down, and before he entered it, made
      the coachman repeat what he had begun to say in the morning about driving Mrs. Malcolm to some
      place near Saffron Hill. Thomson had a good local memory, and knew the street near St. Audry's
      Church. He had seen the clergyman, also, as he was handing Mrs. Malcolm to her carriage.
      Rupert told him to drive thither. He could not conceive how a clergyman should come into the
      story; but it was so mad a world, and the rage of new opinions had spread into such
      unsuspected quarters, that his surprise by no means equalled his determination to find out the
      share which this apparently socialistic preacher had taken in decoying Hippolyta.
It was late in the afternoon and already dusk when the brougham drew up as near Mr. Regan's
      as it could be safely taken. Rupert, not venturing to give his card, whether as Mr. Glanville
      of Clarence Gardens, or Mr. Malcolm of Forrest House, merely said in answer to the servant who
      answered his knock, that he had urgent business with the clergyman. She had admitted that he
      was at home, although Rupert, not knowing his name, or whether there were one or more, had
      made a random guess in simply asking for him under that general designation. When he spoke of
      urgent business, she left him standing in the dark passage and disappeared. Returning not long
      after, she showed him into the sitting-room, which was almost as dark; and there he waited,
      considering
       with himself how he should begin the cross-examination to which he intended to
      submit the unknown ecclesiastic. Mr. Regan came in, apologised for the want of light, turned
      on the gas, and made ready to listen. The artist judged it prudent to begin with Ivor Mardol's
      name.
'Excuse me,' said Mr. Regan at once, 'I trust you have not come about the business which
      brought Mr. Mardol here some days since. I am certainly not my brother's keeper in this
      instance; and if you want him, you must go to his chambers.'
Rupert looked at him. 'I do not know whether it is your brother's business or not,' he said
      curtly; 'it may be, if your brother, or yourself, for matter of that, be a member of a secret
      society.'
'I, my dear sir!' exclaimed the clergyman in accents of dismay; 'for what do you take me? As
      for Maurice, I give him up. I cannot deny, how much soever I may deplore, his connection with
      plotting and nefarious men.'
'I thought so,' said Rupert, his face darkening; 'and was it about your brother that the
      lady came who accompanied Mr. Mardol?' The murder was out, he said to himself. These were all
      meshes of a net in which, by whose fault it did not signify, Hippolyta had been entangled.
Mr. Regan examined his visitor's looks, and became more cautious.
'I know nothing of the lady except that she called herself Mrs. Malcolm. I told her what I
      have already
       repeated to you, that if she wished to hold communication with my brother, the
      only way was to call at his chambers.'
'Cannot you inform me of Mrs. Malcolm's business with your brother?' inquired Rupert,
      moderating his tone. 'I assure you it may be a matter of great, of vital importance.'
But the clergyman was not to be disarmed. He had a great regard for his brother, worthless
      though Maurice had proved himself. On many a previous occasion he had thrown the shield of
      silence over his delinquencies; and the stern, serious manner of the artist, who gave no name
      and seemed to have business of an unpleasant sort in hand, determined him to say as little as
      possible. Instead, therefore, of disclosing the errand on which Hippolyta had come, he
      answered deliberately:
'If you will let me know whom I have the pleasure of addressing, I may be better able to
      judge whether you would be interested in Mrs. Malcolm's business. But I must decline
      discussing it with a stranger.'
Except in Forrest House and among the acquaintance of his servants, who could not be
      expected not to talk of their master, Rupert had never assumed the style and title of Malcolm.
      What name should he give? Would this suspicious clergyman tell him anything he did not know,
      even when he had run the risk—for a risk it was in either case—of appearing as Malcolm or in
      his own name? It did not seem probable. Allowing, as was now evident, that the motive
       for Hippolyta's leaving home—he still called it home —was connected with the
      designs of revolutionists, he might be certain that they would guard their secret jealously.
      He must try another means.
These thoughts passed through his brain while he was putting on his glove. He had remained
      standing, and Mr. Regan had not come many steps inside the door. He now said:
'My name is of no consequence. I will only ask you to inform Mrs. Malcolm, if you should see
      her again, that her visit here is known by those who seek her, and that she will do well to
      communicate with them if she desires to prevent the most serious harm.'
He meant it for a threat of suicide, and Hippolyta, he thought, would so understand it. Mr.
      Regan answered, with much dignity, that he did not suppose the lady would call again. He was a
      frigidly-correct, not an inquisitive man; and although, a few moments after Rupert left the
      house, he heard the sound of wheels driving away, he would not so much as look through the
      window to ascertain what species of conveyance it was that had brought his anonymous and
      unwelcome visitor. Rupert, on the other hand, when he had been driven the length of a street,
      bethought himself that it would be well to know the clergyman's name. He got out, therefore,
      and inquired at a little shop hard by who it was that lived at the address he mentioned, for
      he had learnt that from Thomson. The shopman, not without pomposity, answered, 'The
       Reverend Philip Regan.' A light flashed across Rupert's mind. 'Philip Regan?' he
      said, 'I remember now. By heaven, it is the very clergyman Hippolyta wanted to see,—how long
      ago? Before Christmas. Yes, it is months since she spoke of him; and I, dolt as I was, made a
      jest of it when she seemed to be telling me why she wished to call. But did she really mean me
      to know, or was it only a ruse? The thing must have been going on then, whatever it was. And
      she seemed so happy; the cloud had quite passed from her which I noticed at the beginning of
      our life together.'
He groaned aloud when he thought of it. Was she the guileless creature he had loved and
      worshipped, or full of design and treachery? Oh, it did not matter now, not now; let her only
      come back and his heart would be open to her as of old. How could he live without Hippolyta?
      The strong man leaned his head upon his hand, crying like a child, as the carriage rolled
      forward through the interminable London streets, the gas-lamps flaring on each side of it, and
      the noise of traffic and the roar of vehicles seeming to mock his grief with their soulless
      reverberations. Where was she now, when the night had drawn on, when every one that had home
      or shelter made towards it? She was in peril and far from the heart that loved her best in all
      the world; he knew no more, but alas, he could not be uncertain of that. She was surely
      miserable and a wanderer on the face of the earth. Perhaps she was alone; or, if not, in
       the power of villains who would make of her, generous, confiding, ardent as she
      was, the tool of their murderous ambition. Other women, carried away by the frenzy of
      revolution, had whetted the knife or sharpened the dagger. And Hippolyta, with her wild
      enthusiasm, might think to emulate the Charlotte Cordays who had risen up throughout Europe in
      these anarchic times. When Rupert thought over it all, he cursed Edgar Valence and Ivor
      Mardol, to whose influence early or late he attributed the evil which had fastened on
      Hippolyta like a disease. But for Colonel Valence, the love which had innocently sprung up
      between them would ere now have been crowned with marriage, and Hippolyta be happy as the wife
      of one whose reputation, at any rate, was not altogether unmatched with her beauty and grace.
      Or, allowing the first false step, she might still have dwelt in seclusion, surrounded with
      every homage, her slightest wish anticipated, enjoying happiness and giving it in the way she
      had chosen. But no. What her father began, this false friend must accomplish. She had
      sacrificed the world to Rupert; she had now been prevailed upon to sacrifice him and all his
      hopes and joys to the Revolution. Glanville was cut to the heart. What should he do to-morrow,
      when no Hippolyta was near him? And would to-morrow be only the first of many days to be
      endured alone, without love, without friendship, all the light gone out of his life? Surely he
      must find her or make an end.

With these sad thoughts weighing on him, Rupert arrived, after his long journey through the
      lamp-lit streets and the straggling suburban lanes, at Forrest House. He sat alone at table
      and forced himself to eat, knowing how much was to be done, or attempted, on that morrow which
      he dreaded to see. It was like a meal at the side of the grave. His food choked him. There was
      no letter or message from any one. William Dauris had come round at nightfall and inquired
      whether Mrs. Malcolm were returned, or what news they had. 'Tell him there is none, as yet,'
      said Rupert wearily. He did not desire to see the man; he shrank from contact with any one
      that had known Hippolyta as from everything she had touched. But the latter feeling gave way
      to overpowering tenderness when, late at night, he entered her boudoir and sat down in her
      favourite place near the window. There the signs of her recent presence, the trinkets lying in
      a pretty feminine disorder, the scarf thrown carelessly down, were so many arrows to wound
      him. How well he remembered their bright caressing lovetalk during those long summer evenings,
      when they watched the stars rising like silent silver fires into the sky and shining down upon
      them peacefully! How beautiful she looked when, her eyes seeming to kindle under her golden
      hair, she spoke in tender accents of the charm that love had cast over them both, and of its
      glamour which was life, and truth, and the heart of existence! He had been delighted and
      amazed, during those hours of rapture, at her
       strange high poetry. Alas, alas, had she not been such a votaress of enthusiastic
      beliefs, had there been mingled in her some grains of vulgar commonplace, she would be now
      turning his solitude to heaven. But he rebuked the profane thought. Hippolyta might be
      impulsive, wild, demoniac in her headlong aspirations; vulgar or commonplace she never could
      be. It was her unlikeness to other women, her supremacy of spirit as of outward loveliness,
      that had brought him to her feet. And the deity was vanished, the shrine broken. He sat during
      the night alone with his sorrow, going over these things till the repetition racked his
      brain.
Alone, indeed, he was; singularly, fatally alone, now that he had broken with Ivor Mardol.
      If Hippolyta was gone the way he supposed,—and what other way could she have gone?—but one man
      in London could aid in her recovery, and that man's lips were sealed; or rather, he was the
      criminal and would be the last to confess his crime. Ivor was daring and resolute; he
      believed—like Robespierre, said Glanville to himself—in his own integrity, and behind him were
      the resources of a great association, pledged to second its agents in whatever they undertook,
      and hesitating at no turpitude. What was Rupert against such odds? He might instruct his
      lawyer, call in the police, offer rewards; and when he had done all this, the only result
      would be to publish Hippolyta's disgrace to the light of day and blast his own character. What
      he did, therefore, must be done
       warily; he could not take any one into his confidence. In the neighbourhood of
      Forrest House it would be incumbent on him to appear as Mr. Malcolm; but he dared not present
      himself under a feigned name to the police authorities. Mardol and Hippolyta had doubtless
      weighed these things, and knew how difficult they made pursuit and discovery. The more he
      thought of them now, the less he was inclined to his first conjecture, that disaster had
      turned her brain, and her flight had taken place in an hour of madness. Nothing, it should
      seem rather, had been wanting to the deliberation of it. What cruel, cold words she had left
      behind, as her farewell to the man she loved? They stabbed him again and again with their icy
      point; he could bear almost anything else, but not to recall that line and a half. ' "Brief,"
      ' he said to himself with the curious aptitude we have for remembering well-known verses or
      sayings when our nerves are highly strung,—' "brief as a woman's love, or the poesy of a
      ring." Oh, true, Hamlet!' he cried.

</div></body></text></TEI>