<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">
CHAPTER XXIII GO NOT, HAPPY DAY!
The explanation which lay close at hand, which indeed Rupert would have been almost
      glad to receive, that she repented of her daring, and was ready, though ashamed of confessing
      it, to go through the form of marriage, did not even occur to Hippolyta. It was not true. A
      universal nonconformist does not feel the shock of any one act which, by itself, would be a
      challenge to society at large. Why, then, was she melancholy? She did not know. And, like the
      determined character she was, she formed a resolution to shake it off. Perhaps it came from
      having so little to do. She had not been taught to spend her days in amusement, but in labour;
      and this life of silken ease did not agree with one whose care had been extended not only to
      the management of Falside, but to the large correspondence which she received or transmitted
      on behalf of Colonel Valence, and whose exercise had been riding over a wild country.

'It must be that,' she said to Rupert, as they were driving after the conversation we have
      recorded. 'I am much like a peasant girl in my tastes; and although these hours of talking and
      moving about the garden are exquisitely dear to me, they suppose habits, good or bad, which I
      have not acquired. You artists, I see, are indolent by nature; you get enough outdoor exercise
      by fancying the landscape you are going to paint, or, perhaps, by looking at one you have
      painted. But we poor creatures of clay must gallop over the fields, plant the trees, and mow
      the grass which you are content to be gazing at. Tell me what I should do, not what I should
      be or suffer; for I was made for action.'
'You talk,' answered Rupert, with his ironical smile, 'like a great philosopher—I forget his
      name— who said that action was the end of life. It is a doctrine that doesn't agree with me.
      The art of doing nothing demands unusual genius in this wretched country, where everybody
      seems to have lost the knowledge of its existence. But it is a very fine art indeed.'
'I daresay,' answered Hippolyta, who had her own small gift of irony; 'and you practise it,
      don't you, Rupert, when you spend every hour of daylight painting, and all the dark hours in
      thinking over what you are going to paint?'
'I knew how to be idle once,' he replied, 'but it was in my better days, when the first
      delight of inspiration made work not only impossible but absurd.
       I should then as soon have thought of painting my imaginations as Adam of
      leaving Paradise to make himself a plough and raise corn in the North-Western territory. My
      Paradise was within. What did it matter to anybody else if I did not work? I was happy.'
'What made you work at last?' she inquired.
'I do not know. Ambition, I suppose. Or it may have been the awakening of a new faculty
      which the books describe as the need of expressing one's self. It is a curious law that when
      we have gone on thinking a certain time we must tell our thoughts to somebody else. Murder
      will out, and so will genius.'
'And love, too,' she said, blushing. 'You have forgotten that.'
'Oh, love,' he said, 'of course; but love is such a born babbler.'
'I was thinking of another kind of love,' she went on when he stopped; 'you must not laugh
      at it, although in you it has not awakened yet—that love which my father calls philanthropy!
      Don't you think there may be a passion of pity, a desire to help human creatures because they
      are human?' She seemed a little anxious to hear what he would say.
'My dear,' he answered, 'Colonel Valence is a man of remarkable character and pronounced
      opinions. I was not brought up in the same school. I dislike the sight of misery—at least,' he
      added with a smile which showed he was not serious, 'when it does not lend itself to
      picturesque treatment. But in abstract
       virtues I have very small confidence. To me the human race seems too large a
      thing to care about. To tell the truth, I don't care about it. But,' he sad, looking at her,
      'you have a motive in asking me. What is it, dear? In you these abstract virtues become a
      quality I can love. Do you want me to turn philanthropist? I will try, though I warn you the
      attempt will most likely prove a dead failure. I am no Abou Hassan, if that was the good
      creature's name that begged the recording angel to set him down as one that loved his
      fellow-men. I neither hate them nor love them. What I say to them is, you let me alone and I
      will let you alone. But I can try, you know.'
'It is not that,' she answered; 'I was thinking rather of myself. When you are away from me,
      what shall I do to keep myself alive? There is nobody to visit, and I could not subsist on
      visiting, if there were hundreds. You have forbidden me to engage in household work, so that
      will not be a resource—at least until I have coaxed you into a better mind. Reading,
      practising music—oh dear! what are these but the make-believe employments of a fashionable
      young person who knows no other way of killing time? I do not wish to kill time, but to live,
      and it has occurred to me that I might take lessons in my proper profession—of looking after
      men and women in distress.'
'But can you go about and not be discovered?' he asked, with the uncertain accent of a man
      who
       would like to refuse, and yet was willing to yield for love's sake.
'Why should I be discovered? The only human being that has an interest in me besides you,
      Rupert, is my father. If I could have foreseen these events I would have asked his guidance.
      Now it is too late. He gave me no address; he said that there was none to give, and I must
      wait patiently for his return—if return should be possible to him. Our old Dolores will send
      me the message when it comes. As for others, who is there? I am quite alone, without friend or
      relative in the world. The change of name will be enough to guard against accidents. It would
      be another thing were you to accompany me, for you have, unluckily, celebrated features; and
      others besides Mr. Davenant might remember the portrait in the Academy. But, sir, you shall
      not come anywhere within reach of my poor.' She gave him a charming look.
'And will you, Hippolyta, promise not to visit houses where there is infection? I shall not
      consent otherwise,' he said in determined accents.
She reflected before answering. 'I do not think it is quite right to promise absolutely. How
      could I visit on both sides of an infected house and shrink from entering there? But since you
      are lord and master, I will engage never to do so without consulting you first. Will that
      satisfy you?'
'Yes,' he replied, 'for I shall never give you permission.'
       And so it was settled, and Rupert turned the horses' heads towards home.
They spent the rest of the evening in making arrangements for his departure, and planning
      methods of correspondence. The latter was not easy. Hippolyta, as they were sitting after
      dinner in the twilight, looking out on their garden, suggested that Mr. Glanville might write
      direct to his friend Mr. Malcolm at Forrest House; and if Mrs. Malcolm answered for her
      husband by writing to Mr. Glanville's house in town, whence her letters should be sent on
      under cover, there would be little chance of detection, especially when she had mastered the
      new style of caligraphy whereat she was now diligent. To provide against accidents they fixed
      on a set of enigmatical expressions, which might be inserted in the Times if other
      channels of communication were not speedy enough. And, at the worst, Mr. Malcolm could
      telegraph from Forrest House to Trelingham Court. These young people grew merry over the
      difficulties in which they found themselves. It seemed an excellent, and might prove an
      exciting, game of hide-and-seek. They did not trouble about the distant future. One thing must
      be done at a time, one business put out of hand. When the designs in the Great Hall were
      pretty well complete, Rupert fancied he might leave the rest of the details to one of his
      friends. In that case they would leave England and fix their home in France or Italy. Much
      might depend on the adventures, in regions whither Glanville
       could not follow him, of Colonel Valence; something, too,—the artist murmured in
      a low aside, —on the development of Hippolyta's character under these novel influences, and
      with so great a break between her present and her former life. At any rate, they would not
      stay in England a day longer than was necessary. None are so free as English travellers on the
      Continent; they have slipped the collar of their dear native habits, and their reputation,
      gained at the cost of some eccentricity during the last seventy years, is now well established
      as men and women who are a law unto themselves. The essential thing was to get quit of
      Trelingham and its associations. Denying themselves a longer tête-à-tête now was the
      sure means of making it perpetual hereafter.
But when, on the morrow, Rupert was gone, Hippolyta shut herself up in her room. She left
      untasted the dainty meal which had been prepared by the housekeeper. She had never felt so
      lonely in her life. Sitting at the window whence they had gazed out together at the fading
      light, and enjoyed the perfumes of the garden beneath them during the long evenings of June,
      she went over the thoughts they had shared, the words of affection and trust they had spoken.
      For one short month she had known what human companionship was in perfection; she had tasted
      the honey-sweet nectar, and its delight, mounting to her brain, had filled every little act
      and momentary interchange of feeling with unspeakable poetry. This, then, was the crown of
      life—to love and to be loved; there
       was nothing beyond it, nothing to compare with it, nothing that would compensate
      for its loss. But why should she fear to lose it? Rupert was frank and faithful; what greater
      proof could he have given of his ardent devotion? He would never be false; the heaven of their
      love was sure. And yet, and yet, how melancholy was her feeling now he no longer sat by the
      window, telling her of the thousand things he knew! A few months ago he was a stranger whose
      life or death mattered to her not at all; now he was her world, her paradise, her god.
While she stayed in her attitude of wistful reflection, and the sky grew clearer and the
      faint hues of sunset died away into a steely twilight, the forerunner of the stars which by
      and by would rise in the summer night, she heard the sound of music, of an organ playing and
      voices accompanying it, in the church whose southern windows were visible from her own. There
      were lights within, and the stained glass, which must have looked dark to the worshippers, had
      now become faintly transparent on the outside, showing, although in dull confusion of colour,
      the forms of saints and angels, of quaint vestments and broad glowing wings, crimson or ruby,
      intermixed with the gold of sceptres, crowns, Gothic lilies, and other medieval symbols. It
      was a fantastic, unreal vision, as of life in a child's picture-book, or on a long roll of
      tapestry, unlike anything we see walking the world, without perspective or proportion, but
      perhaps for that reason appealing to a sense of dim possibilities which lurks in our severest
       calculations and is never more awake than when we have lost what we prize.
      Hippolyta, still chewing the cud of sweet and bitter fancy, at first took no notice of the
      stained windows; yet the vision pleased her unawares, the medley of colours made her smile,
      and if it did not soothe, it distracted her. Imagination played among them and endeavoured to
      make out the innocent child-faces which were seen in reversed outline, yet even so preserved
      something of their comeliness, and grew fairer as the evening closed in about them. It was a
      large building, and the windows stood high between their buttresses. More and more distinct
      and solemn pealed forth the tones of the organ; its music rolled along the painted windows and
      seemed to be echoed back from the farther end of the church; while the voices of the choir,
      coming in from time to time, rose and fell in a slow religious chant, subdued to perfect
      harmony where Hippolyta sat listening,—or could it be called listening? for she heard the
      voices as she might have heard the winds in a forest, not heeding them, though allowing her
      thoughts to be influenced by their unceasing murmur. She did not know what the voices sang,
      why the lights were kindled, or the painted windows began to blaze at that hour. These things
      did not enter into her life, but they exalted and in some degree pacified her melancholy,
      connecting it with the grave enthusiasm of the unknown rite, with old-time memories and the
      sadness of the world. It seemed as though out of the darkness had risen a company, strange to
      her and never before seen,
       which in language incomprehensible yet significant chanted their sorrows, their
      hopes, their dim aspirations, telling her that she was not alone in the troubled night. They
      were human beings, not supernatural visitants; but, hidden while they sang, they might have
      put off the grotesque accidents of humanity, its vulgar habiliments and grossness of
      surroundings; they were spirit-voices, uttering themselves from a heart like her own. She
      listened more intently, and that heart melted. Sweet tears began to flow, tears of compassion,
      at first for herself, and then for she knew not what,—for the grief which makes men and women
      desolate, for the heavy fate that weighs upon our mortal frame, for the hope that is long
      deferred. Her thoughts wandered away from Rupert into realms of vague surmise and meditation.
      It was an experience not unlike that which had befallen her on the evening of the ball, when
      amid the strains of joyous music one single note of wailing had brought her the vision of the
      suffering multitude. But in the great bursts of organ music there was nothing discordant or
      lightly mocking; hope and pity were blended in the enunciation of a harmony without end. She
      did not despise herself for letting the floods of this sacred music pour in upon her soul, as
      she had been tempted to despise herself during the waltz. For it seemed to her that all the
      sweetness was purchased here by self-sacrifice, by fellow-feeling with them that suffered,—the
      great article of her creed early and late. She could not have told when the organ ceased. Her
      mind was far away.

</div></body></text></TEI>