<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII AN ENCHANTED ISLAND
' Dear Ivor,' wrote Glanville next morning, 'your friend Rupert has not been slow
      to seek wisdom at your hands when he thought it lacking in himself. And you have shown as much
      pleasure in giving as he in receiving; while, which I take to be a sign of perfect friendship,
      he has never once thanked you. But now, he is going to put your philosophy to the test—not
      your affection; no, indeed, who could think it?
'My dear old fellow, I want you to give me not advice, but two or three weeks of your
      existence. I am lost if you do not come to Trelingham Court. You exclaim at the notion; but
      without you I cannot stay here. You know to what severe fits of depression I am liable; one of
      them, owing to a misadventure that I witnessed yesterday, has come upon me again, and I shall
      not shake it off in the mental solitude of this place. Other reasons, curious and important,
      would have led me to write yesterday. I will explain
       when you come, and you shall decide whether they would have justified me in
      asking you to break through your rule and mix in this kind of society. I should tell you that
      Lord Trelingham, who sends a most cordial invitation, and will be charmed to make your
      acquaintance,—this banal phrase is not without meaning in the present instance,—knows
      the ways and customs of the artist tribe too well to think of binding you down to formal
      observances. You may live as retired here and as much at your ease as in your own sanctum. I
      have informed him, so far as was required, of the manner in which you meet the world, or, to
      speak more truly, get out of its way. You shall be a hermit at Trelingham, if you will come,
      and meet only those you like. If you say the thing is impossible, then, Ivor, I must go back
      to London. To not a soul in the world but yourself would I reveal this streak of madness—for
      what else can it be? I was caught, by the bye, in a storm yesterday afternoon, have neither
      eaten nor slept to speak of in the last twenty-four hours, and shall want you if I indulge
      myself in a slight attack of fever. But what is the use of going on? Send me a line and say I
      may expect you to-morrow evening. I enclose directions for the journey.
RUPERT.'
It was altogether true. Since yesterday morning the reasons for which Glanville would have
      summoned his friend to Trelingham had yielded to others of a very different complexion. The
      overstrained temperament
       of the artist, who works by feeling and imagination where other men are busy
      only with their hands, was suffering from the combined effects of long hours spent in the rain
      and excitement consequent on the shipwreck. This latter experience will be understood by any
      one that has had the misfortune of witnessing a great fire in which lives have been lost. The
      senses seem all wrapped up in the horror of it; the mind cannot get away from it; the eyes
      still see what has happened, and have in them a hot sensation. Nor will the impression pass
      for days. Glanville was feeling a kind of nausea which made it impossible to touch food; and
      when he woke from such sleep as came to him in the morning, he knew that an old and dreaded
      enemy stood by his bedside. He called it depression, melancholy, a streak of madness; it was
      all these, perhaps. When he was younger, at school, he had often suffered from it; but, as he
      said, except Ivor Mardol, no one guessed that so mercurial and cheery a nature could be
      hypochondriac; nor was he so wanting in prudence as to let his 'friends' know of the complaint
      which made him miserable. A man who is to succeed should never acquaint the world that he is
      sick, or sore, or sorry. He will meet, if he does, with contempt, not compassion. There are
      secrets which make up the greater part of many a life, but will never be uttered; secrets that
      explain sudden downfalls, want of enterprise, rashness in the wary, and intoxication in the
      self-controlled. But the explanation cannot be given, and the world wonders.

Glanville did not send his letter until he had seen Lord Trelingham, and ascertained that he
      need not delay because of Tom Davenant's illness. The Earl believed that he would soon be
      right again. He strongly desired to see the portrait of Lady Elizabeth restored to something
      of its pristine glory; nor was he unobservant of the worn and pallid look which testified in
      Glanville to the agitation he had gone through. Lady May insisted that he should see the
      physician who drove over in the course of the day from the county-town to attend her cousin.
      But the artist firmly declined. He would admit only that he was tired, and that a fire would
      make his room more comfortable. It was a curious fact, connected with his 'streak of madness,'
      that, whenever it affected him, he shivered and could not get warm. 'Diminished circulation
      and intermittent pulse,' the physician would have said, shaking his head a little, and
      prescribing quinine and gentle exercise. But, unlike most who suffer from slow circulation,
      Glanville at such a time hated sunshine, and would sit in a chill room rather than face it.
      What he asked was a fire, and to lie with a cloak about him on a sofa. These moderate luxuries
      were bestowed on him; and he hid himself away in his den, like a wounded animal.
As the afternoon wore on he thought he must rouse himself and pay a visit to the real
      invalid, who had only strained his shoulder, and bore it like a man, instead of surrendering
      to phantasmal terrors from the void inane. Tom Davenant was lying in
       bed, as near the open window as the nurse would let him. On seeing Glanville he
      held out his hand, saying how kind it was of him to come, and that he hoped no mischief had
      befallen him during the storm. A twinge or two of pain interrupted the good-natured fellow
      before he could finish his sentence. The artist, who admired both his bravery and his
      unconcern, knew better than to praise either. He merely said, 'Oh, I am all right, thank you,'
      and began to inquire about the shipwrecked vessel, where it was from, and how many it carried.
      I think that by some knack of freemasonry which goes with reserved speech, he contrived to
      inform Tom, through the medium of these collateral questions, that he looked on him, if he
      might say so, as an exceedingly fine fellow. Tom, at any rate, was very cordial and
      communicative. Lord Hallamshire had come up to see him after luncheon, and brought the whole
      story of the shipwreck. It was an English sailing-vessel, coming home from the Cape, with only
      three passengers, and a crew, all told, of four and twenty. They had been driven out of their
      course in a fog, and, intending to make the Channel, had slipped by Land's End, and run clean
      into the heart of the storm which had been travelling partly ahead of them. No one on board
      knew the coast or its soundings. When Glanville saw them, it was their expectation every
      moment to be driven upon shore underneath Trelingham Church; nor did they suspect the
      neighbourhood of Yalden Harbour, which, owing to the mist, they had never
       once sighted. A sudden change in the direction of the gale had turned the vessel
      round High Cliff and on the bar. Long before that, however, she had refused to answer her helm
      and was rolling at the mercy of wind and tide.
'Twenty-seven on board,' said Glanville, when Tom had brought the narrative to this point.
      'And how many saved?'
'Eleven,' replied Tom quietly. 'We did what we could; but the sea was awful. Our boat
      rescued six, and the other which followed us picked up the rest. Mr. Truscombe will be pretty
      well worn out by the time he has seen to the survivors and buried all that may be thrown on
      shore. He is down there now; Lord Hallamshire left him in the midst of living and dead, for
      the poor things that were saved are quite destitute.'
Glanville started. 'Thank you for reminding me,' he said. 'I will go down and see whether I
      can be of use.' And in ten minutes he was riding along the avenue on his way to Yalden—not as
      one that hurries in vainglorious mood to proffer his aid, but ashamed that he had waited for
      another to rouse him. He reflected with surprise on the likeness between his own depression,
      which kept him lying on a couch all the morning, and Colonel Valence's despairing philosophy,
      which looked with dry eyes at a perishing crew. He could excuse himself only by saying that
      melancholy was his complaint, that it prostrated his courage and benumbed his faculties. But
      what did
       he know of Colonel Valence? He rode on, and reached Yalden in a more tranquil,
      though not less melancholy frame of mind. For it was only as he went to and fro by the side of
      the good clergyman, ministering such help and consolation as he could to the survivors—who
      were all much distressed in mind and body—or assisting with his own hands to lay out the
      remains of the dead,—only then, amid these dismal surroundings, did he feel that the dark
      spirit was loosening its hold on him. Mr. Truscombe would not let him stay all night, as he
      proposed, but sent him back to Trelingham, where he arrived late, to encounter the kindly
      reproaches of the Earl and his daughter, to take a hasty meal, and to lie down tired, but not
      altogether miserable.
Next day a telegram announced that Ivor Mardol might be expected by the fast train which,
      two days previously, had brought down the artist and Tom Davenant, and was obliging enough in
      that way to open our story. Lady May inquired whether he would at once take up his abode in
      the hermitage. But Glanville assured her that such a proposal directly made would frighten him
      into the severest observance of the proprieties, although to his exceeding discomfort. A life
      in the hermitage would be best for him, no doubt; only, like a bird, he must enter the cage of
      his own accord. He was the sort of person that, from intense shyness, refuses what he knows to
      be pleasant, and what he would much like to accept. 'But,' continued the artist, 'please, do
      not think him
       unmanageable, or morbid, or, as perhaps my account of him has led you to
      believe, in any way ridiculous.' Lady May declared that she was far from dreaming of such a
      thing. 'I do not wonder,' she said, 'if original people—in a society of portentous dulness
      like ours, where the outside is solid and the inside hollow—have to wear a mask. They cannot
      help being shy, because they are always solitary; conversation as it goes on around them must
      sound like the cawing of rooks. I honour Mr. Mardol's shyness. It seems to be founded on
      genius and character, not on the fear of man's opinion.'
'It is founded,' replied Glanville, 'on absorption in the greatest thoughts, which often
      makes him disregard little things when he should be attending to them. He does not wish to be
      or to appear singular; but his exceptional gifts make him so; and he is startled into shyness
      when the difference between himself and others comes out.'
'You say he is learned?'
'Beyond comparison the best-read man of my acquaintance. Speaks half a dozen languages,
      understands as many more, and is at home in all literatures.'
'And his profession—is he skilful in it?'
'A most sure and delicate touch. His eye quick in discerning the finest shades, and an equal
      lightness of hand in rendering them.'
'But why is he not celebrated? Has he no ambition?'
'I do not think he understands the word. He
       earns money and gives it away; talks to me when he wants society, or goes among
      the working men in his neighbourhood; travels occasionally in a modest way; can bear his own
      company for months at a time; and would expire with shame if any one pointed him out in the
      street. Is there not a Roman poet who calls that the summit of ambition—to be pointed at as
      you go along? It would kill Ivor Mardol. I think he would give a gallery of his finest prints
      to buy the cloak of darkness they tell of in fairy tales, and go about in it unseen.'
'Your friend is a phoenix, not an engraver,' said Lady May, smiling. 'I shall be curious to
      see him. But is he, then, to be accommodated with an ordinary guest-chamber, like any other
      mortal?'
'For to-night and to-morrow I think it will be wisest. Afterwards, I will ask you to show
      him the hermitage.'
In this way Ivor Mardol came to Trelingham.
If Lady May Davenant had expected to discover in his outward appearance tokens of the rare
      excellence within, she must have been disappointed when Glanville presented his friend to her.
      Without showing any trace of the 'half-breed' which her cousin had fancied him to be, he
      looked a man whom you might easily pass in the average. His height was not commanding, nor
      were his features handsome. By the side of Glanville he looked plain and slight. He was very
      thin, stooped a little in the shoulders, walked negligently though not without ease, and for
      some
       time hardly lifted his eyes from the ground while his hostess addressed him.
      When he did so, however, he showed a countenance that, in the manly expression of Robert
      Burns, 'had received its patent of nobility direct from Almighty God.' Intellectual
      distinction gave his dark and rugged features a stamp that you might seek in vain among the
      crowds wherein he would so readily have been lost. There was a steady look in those
      penetrating eyes, an attentive pose of the head, a resolution in the attitude, an absence of
      the slight nervous motions associated with ordinary shyness, that told the spectator of a man
      whom it would be dangerous to grapple with and hard to overcome. He spoke in very brief
      sentences, and very little, turning his gaze rather upon Glanville than Lady May, with an air
      of affectionate anxiety that did not escape the latter. What he did say was to the purpose,
      phrased with admirable clearness and decision, but in no sense over-confidently; and his
      subdued voice had the resonance which indicates that the speaker possesses one, and that the
      most persuasive, of the gifts of oratory. Glanville's delighted ear made him sensible of the
      contrast and harmony which these two voices produced. 'How well they would match in singing!'
      he said to himself. The commonest tones in Lady May were of a certain grandeur; if you
      listened, you could not but experience a thrill of admiration. Ivor Mardol, on the other hand,
      suggested in his voice all that was keenly passionate and caressing; it was light and high
      rather
       than deep, the music of a reed-pipe, not of the swelling organ-stop. One was
      reminded of an English song-bird, singing on the topmost bough when winds are hushed. Or to
      speak more precisely, such was the similitude that occurred to Lady May, when Ivor, forgetting
      himself in the presence of the view that lay extended before the drawing-room windows, began
      to talk at his ease. The qualities of his speech may be summed up in this, that he said
      nothing for effect, that if he spoke at all, it was on his part thinking aloud, and almost
      (that there should be no difference is impossible) in the words he would have chosen had he
      been alone. Sincerity and directness in talk are among the lost arts in civilised life; and to
      fit them in with its requirements is not less rare than to possess them. We are trained to
      make language hide thought and the want of thought; and the more refined our conversation the
      nearer it approaches to an algebra of which every man keeps the key in his own bosom. Our
      words express little or nothing, and they imply no more than we find convenient. Now, Mardol,
      I do not say spoke all that he had in his mind,—often he kept silence even from
      monosyllables—but what he did speak had a picturesque force and a high relief which made the
      language of common men insignificant. Instead of showing you the painted canvas, he seemed to
      show you the lion. This, perhaps, made it undesirable that he should be much in polished
      circles, where lions, and, much more, badgers and jackals, are hinted at rather than spoken
       of, and never introduced to evening parties. But I am fallen on a vein of
      moralising. Let us to our story.
When the great storm was over, and the sky once more visible in cloudless calm, the summer,
      as though rejuvenescent, continued many days bright and serene. The verdure had never been
      more tender, nor the purple bloom of the heather more enchanting; not a leaf hung yellow on
      the branches, nor did the petals of the roses fall until fresh buds were springing to take
      their place. All day a mild and tranquil splendour dwelt upon the waters, which, rippling
      under a soft breeze, rolled in musically over sand and pebbles, or plashed with murmuring
      sound against the rocks. Only Glanville, in the midst of that fair landscape, gave a thought,
      oftener than he would, to the gray cemetery where beneath one large mound, marked as yet with
      no inscription, lay hidden what the waves had cast up. His melancholy, assuaged by the coming
      of so dear a friend, was yielding to other sentiments—to the affection which Ivor's presence
      inspired and was ever drawing forth in brotherly act, to the desire for work which he felt
      again lit up in him, to a real and growing attachment, of its own kind, but very genuine, to
      the Earl and Tom Davenant; perhaps also to a feeling which he would not define, nor altogether
      admit, towards the daughter of the house into whose company for hours every morning he was
      thrown. Do not be hasty, reader; you are actute and have a practised eye for possibilities;
       but you know as little about the matter as Glanville did himself. Have I dropped
      a hint that he was beginning, dimly, to think of Lady May as not merely a model for the
      restored countenance of her ancestress? Be it so; but I have gone no further. His mind was
      interested, his fancy—a young man's fancy, ever on the wing—was drawn in the direction of this
      rare exotic flower, planted in our northern clime. So much I do confess. Beyond that, let all
      be uncertain.
On being introduced to the picture-gallery, Ivor at once recognised the Madonna of San
      Lucar, which he called, however, by another name—the Virgin of the Seraphim , from
      the messengers arrayed in kingly vesture and moving as on wings of light, who heralded therein
      the ascent of the crowned lady towards the empyrean. It was attributed to an otherwise unknown
      monk, Fray Raimondo, whose works, though not numerous, exhibited the union of high artistic
      skill with transcendent mysticism. Lord Trelingham inquired whether a copy of the picture was
      extant. He received for answer that only one such had been set down in the catalogues—a copy
      in debased style which, taken from the Escorial by French soldiers, had since found its way
      into Russia. There the record broke off, nor was it possible to say who was its present owner,
      nor, consequently, to ascertain in what condition, after so long a period, it might be. His
      counsel, Ivor went on, would be to set about restoring the canvas immediately,—which he
      offered to do on the ground that his experience in the rougher technicalities of art
       had been considerable; and that, while he was so engaged, Glanville should
      execute a portrait of Lady May, from which afterwards the countenance of the Madonna should be
      painted in. If this did not prove satisfactory, a replica of the original might be attempted.
      The entire undertaking was delicate and hazardous in the extreme; but Lord Trelingham could
      not surrender his hope of preserving in this way one of his rarest treasures. He consented,
      and the sittings began.
To find a place for them was easy. The picture-gallery suggested itself at once. It had
      light and space, and would furnish a morning-room for the Countess or any other that chose to
      look on. When he painted Glanville was not disturbed by conversation; and he cared not whether
      he were tête-à-tête with Lady May—except in the artistic sense—or had a company about
      him. He felt no embarrassment in her presence and as little in theirs. Brush in hand, he could
      maintain a discussion when painting a portrait, though not while engaged on landscape or the
      grouping of figures. With Ivor it was otherwise. To him silence and solitude were as necessary
      as fresh air and open windows. Nor dared he bring his mechanical appliances into the splendid
      gallery. Lady May, whom with characteristic modesty he consulted through Glanville, suggested,
      as though it were an inspiration, the chalet. He had not seen it, nor had his perfidious
      friend.
'Then you shall at once,'replied Lady May, and
       she laid her hand on the Countess's shoulder, where that pensive beauty stood
      gazing at large out of window lost in sad thoughts of Tom Davenant's captivity in his room.
      'Come, Karina,'said her cousin, 'a truce to your reveries; they are really becoming a mania.
      We are going to visit the chalet, and these gentlemen will accompany us.'
Karina sighed, looked at the gentlemen with a mournful sweetness of expression, which
      implied not regard for them, but regret for the absent; and suffered herself to be led away.
      Since Cousin Tom was not there it mattered little where she went. Mr. Rupert Glanville, who
      had never felt the pangs of disconsolate love, was exceedingly amused, though his speech
      bewrayed him not. All he did was, as they went along, to ask the Countess a number of
      indifferent and worldly questions, not bearing on the illness of Tom Davenant, and to watch
      how her mind slipped away from them. She answered at random; and he secretly enjoyed her
      blushes when she found she had been talking nothing to the purpose. Her ordinary state,
      wherever Mr. Davenant's image did not occur, was one of serene self-control; and now she felt
      vexed at herself and annoyed with Glanville, whose frivolous chatter (for so in her wrath she
      termed it) made her trip into these ridiculous mistakes. She answered him soon with yea and
      nay, letting the words drop from her lips as they might, and fell to plucking the petals of a
      rose she held in her hand till they were scattered on the pathway.
       'You will have to leave the gravel and follow this track over the grass,'said
      Lady May, when they had descended for some time. 'The path we are on,' she added, in an
      explanatory tone to the artist, 'goes winding about till it reaches the upper terrace again.
      There is a short cut through the rather tangled brake, which will take us first up and then
      down into the glade where the Hermitage stands. Are you afraid of the wet grass?'
'We will follow you, Lady May,'said Glanville. 'But the Countess?'and he turned an inquiring
      glance on the Lady Karina. She looked down at her boot and across at her cousin. 'I think I
      will go back,'she said; 'I don't like walking over wet grass,'—to which she subjoined in a
      reflective manner, 'and I may be wanted at the house.'
'Nonsense, my dear,'cried Lady May; 'who could want you? My father is in his library,
      writing a tract on the connection between the medieval reredos and the mosaics of San Clemente
      at Rome.'She endeavoured while saying these words to look serious, as a daughter should, but
      her eyes would brighten in spite of herself. 'You know he cannot bear to be disturbed. There
      is no one in the place but Tom, and we have promised, if he is awake, to pay him a visit at
      two o'clock. Come, Karina; you don't mind the grass more than I do.'
The unwilling victim bowed her small fair head, and followed in the train of this haughty
      Zenobia. Neither of the gentlemen could lead the way, for
       they did not know it. The track along the grass became fainter and soon
      disappeared altogether; but they saw an opening in the shrubs, which here flourished
      luxuriantly; and with more scrambling through briars and rending of garments than Lady May
      expected, they ascended the side of a thickly-wooded ridge, where they could see no distance
      before them and only a long clear strip of blue sky overhead. The morning was fresh and balmy;
      an abundant dew brought forth on every side a fragrance as of paradise; and the smell of the
      stone-pines which rose on the low crest had that penetrating sweetness, so keen and
      exhilarating, which is like a sudden breeze sweeping inland from the sea and laden with its
      odours. But there was no view on the crest; it was all a thicket growing high above their
      heads. A rugged descent, where the pathway turned continually to avoid the huge masses of rock
      that lay across it, brought them, still under dark boughs, half way down on the other side.
      The wildwood trailed off to right and left; the last of the stone-pines fell into the rear;
      and a cry of delight from the gentlemen showed that they were rewarded for their pilgrimage by
      a lovely view.
They were standing on the lower side of a gorge not more than thirty yards wide; and over
      against them rose a steep and almost inaccessible wall of verdure to a height which, though in
      perpendicular measurement it could not have exceeded three hundred feet, looked noble and
      imposing; while the close-set vegetation and bosky undergrowth gave it a
       soft beauty of aspect to which the firs, standing in long rows at the summit or
      springing abruptly from the sides, added a touch of ruggedness. At their feet, almost hidden
      among the trees that fringed it, ran a clear brown stream, sparkling a little way off in the
      sun, and as it descended the valley broadening till it might have borne a small boat, if the
      stones over which it swirled in diamond-like mist did not proclaim it dangerous to launch
      anything on the troubled waters. The gorge turned at a sharp angle on the side over against
      them, but on their own fell away more gently, melting by degrees into the wide expanse of
      moor, and allowing a dim and distant glimpse of the sea above Yalden. They could see the
      wooded height over the stream stretching towards fresh woods and fresh heights. But their gaze
      was speedily drawn up the valley, and a second exclamation of wonder followed upon their
      discovery of its new and singular charms. The apparent source of the stream was a large piece
      of water, lying in view where they stood, but more of it, as they perceived on going a few
      steps, spread out behind the ridge that served them as a coign of vantage. It was an irregular
      sheet, formed by nature, and hemmed in by the granite cliffs which, coming out bare to the
      north, did not allow it, except for about sixty yards, to present a wide expanse. Here it
      filled the valley from side to side. Deep in its placid bosom were reflected the fleecy clouds
      set in a great blue sky, the rising wall of verdure, and the dark granite crags which, by
      their fantastic shapes
       and riven sides, reminded one of a castle in ruins which has a tower or two
      still intact. About midway between shore and shore, standing up in the water and anchored, so
      to speak, in its own shadow,—which came out foreshortened in every variety of peak and
      overhanging roof,—itself a picture of balconies, outside staircases, ivy-mantled porches,
      glistening windows with creepers falling over them, was visible, in the clear stillness of a
      summer morning, the object of their expedition. With delighted looks they beheld the
      Hermitage.
'It is a scene of fairyland,'exclaimed Rupert; 'an enchanted island, where the Sleeping
      Beauty should be dreaming away her hundred years till the Prince comes to waken her.'
'That was a palace in a garden,'said Ivor, who could not turn from the exquisite vision, but
      for the moment had lost his shyness; 'a palace with thickets of roses fencing it all about.
      Whereas this, which you called a chalet,'he just glanced towards Lady May, 'is a
      lake-dwelling, such as was intended, though he had not tools or skill to realise it, by
      pre-historic man.'
'One feature it has in common with the lake-dwellings,' remarked Glanville. 'There is
      absolutely no way of reaching it except in a boat.'
'No,'answered Lady May; 'and even that is at the discretion of the hermit. For, if you
      notice, the steps which descend from that projecting ledge, or floor of the verandah, are
      fastened merely by rings, and may be drawn up when the lake-dweller pleases. It was
       a fancy of my grandfather's. The architect wanted a bridge on this side; and in
      wet weather it would be a convenience, for the lakelet is stormy enough at times. But my
      grandfather had a model, "in his mind's eye," he used to say; and nothing would persuade him
      to allow the bridge.'
'He was right,'said Glanville; 'there is something impressive in the utter isolation of such
      a dwelling. It seems to belong to another world, to be "an exhalation from the watery deep," a
      fixed vapour, taking the appearance of things we know, but ready to dissolve at a breath.'
'Is that poetry?'inquired the Countess, with a simple air. 'All I can see is a cottage made
      of little church roofs and old planks, which must be damp in winter.'
This original account of a lake-dwelling made them all laugh, except the author of it, in
      whose opinion, as she declared poutingly, it was much nearer the truth than Glanville's
      'exhalations'and 'fixed vapours.'She was proud of being matter-of-fact, and said so. A stray
      reminiscence of Cousin Tom, however, gleamed upon her as she spoke; and Love contemptuously
      shook his light wings when she repeated that 'she liked matter-of-fact people.' Was the young
      gentleman up at Trelingham Court 'matter-of-fact'? was he not—but there is no need to pursue
      her meditations. She laughed at herself in a minute or two, though she took care to wait until
      no one was watching.

There was a small boat-house on each side of the lakelet. The party entered a
      tolerably-sized skiff which they found under shelter, and Rupert and Ivor Mardol took the
      oars. To make up for her little outbreak of pettishness, occasioned solely by a love for
      matter-of-fact people, Karina insisted on steering. She was not a creature to bear malice. The
      water was very still, and so warm and pleasant that they lingered on their mimic voyage to
      bask in the air and take a steadier look down the valley, which, seen from this point,
      appeared high and narrow, with the broad gleam of the sea and an intensely blue sky over it,
      for a perspective. No habitation save the lake-dwelling could be discerned; the belt of tall
      brushwood under the lee of which they were loitering hid Trelingham Court; and the purple moor
      was shut off by the ridge they had descended. A more lonely, a more beautiful, a more
      tranquillising scene, who could imagine? They forgot to praise and were silent. Even the
      restless Karina felt its subduing influence; much more did her cousin and the two friends.
      Transparent light brooded on the glassy depths which no ripple stirred, and seemed to dye the
      surface with a thousand emerald tints, bright or dark, as it reflected the rich vegetation
      that, embowering the hillside, crept down to the edge of the mere, and threw out straggling
      branches to the water-lilies floating on its bosom. A trance at noon-day fell upon our
      pilgrims; they dreamt with open eyes.
'Does no one live in the chalet? or is it abandoned
       to pre-historic man?'asked Rupert, in the light tone which sometimes indicates
      that thoughts too solemn for speech have passed through the air.
'My father used to spend a day there formerly, but he finds it too cold,'said Lady May. 'My
      cousin, too, when he wants a little quiet fishing, has it put in order, and will not come up
      to the Court for a week if the weather favours him. It is an excellent place for trout; and I
      am told, though it seems hardly credible, that salmon find their way up that rocky stream. It
      has deep holes in it where they can lie at their ease. When they reach the lakelet, I can
      fancy their enjoying its depth and coolness before starting on their journey seaward
      again.'
'It was here,'said the Countess plaintively, 'that I was to have taken my lesson in
      fly-fishing.'Her grief returned at the thought.
'Well, you may take it still,'said Glanville. 'Mr. Davenant is recovering; and if he cannot
      join the next salmon-hunt, there will be all the more reason why he should come here to throw
      the fly.'
This was an expectation to caress and make much of. The Lady Karina began to steer again
      with a lighter heart, and forgave Glanville. A few strokes brought them to the side of the
      Hermitage. The waters were still swollen, and their skiff rose to the middle round of the
      ladder. A chain hung down over the verandah for the oarsmen to seize; the boat was made fast
      to it; they ascended with quick and easy steps, although the feeling was much like that of
       getting up a ship's side, and were soon assembled, without a wet foot or other
      mishap, on the floor of the verandah. The chalet was built somewhat like a cabin on the main
      deck of a steamer. Round it was a broad open space, paved with coloured woods, and overhung
      with a sloping roof to keep out the rain. Casements fitted in made this a comfortable
      promenade, or deambulation, as the Romans called it, in wintry weather. They were now standing
      wide open, shaded by the too-abundant creepers; but the house was airy and dry, furnished with
      simplicity, as became its pretensions, but the details carried out in admirable taste. There
      lacked nothing to the hermit's comfort; his study, fitted with volumes of the poets and books
      on fishing; his sleeping apartment, contrived with a pleasant outlook towards the morning sun;
      his dining-room, bright and cheerful as the scene of temperate enjoyment and philosophic mirth
      should be; his small but elegant kitchen, copied, as to its decorations, from Pompeii; and a
      guest-chamber in the snuggest corner of the house, sheltered from wind and storm by the hills
      which looked down upon it,—these, with a watch-tower, skilfully perched up among the gables,
      made a lake-dwelling at which the heart of the troglodyte would have rejoiced. But Ivor Mardol
      was no troglodyte; he had not hitherto dwelt in a cave; and his heart laughed within him, o
      use an Homeric expression, when he thought of exchanging, for at least a few hours every day,
      the splendours of Trelingham Court for this lovely, lonely
       hermitage. He stood in admiration, above all, of the kitchen, a temple of ideal
      coolness, contrasting with the fiery dens wherein our meals too commonly are made ready at the
      expense of temper and religion.
But Rupert, although he praised what he beheld, inquired after some reflection:
'But where is the servants' accommodation? I don't perceive any.'
'What!' cried Ivor, looking at him with large eyes, reproachfully. 'Do you imagine that a
      hermit has anybody to wait on him? Where would be the charm of solitude, if another human
      being dwelt and cooked within these walls? For my part, I should flee out of them and build
      myself a hut in the wood over against us, did such a demoniac presence come to trouble
      me.'
The grave earnestness wherewith Ivor delivered this protest amused Lady May, and she laughed
      more heartily than Glanville had known her to do. He laughed with her, and for some time
      nothing serious could be said. At last the lady, whom Ivor was now looking at, not as rebuking
      her, but as wondering that she should laugh, recovered herself, and said:
'But you are very right, Mr. Mardol. When my father stays here he brings a cold luncheon
      with him; and Mr. Davenant—as my grandfather used to do—not only catches his own fish, but
      cooks them, and will not allow a servant to come up the ladder whilst he is here.'
'I surrender,'said Glanville, 'to such examples;
       and I grant the romance of the thing, provided one knows how to cook. Do you,
      Ivor?'
' Qui nescit coquere, nescit regnare ,'replied Ivor. 'How should a man be lord of
      himself that has not full dominion over a mutton-chop? I learned the art long ago. For me, a
      kitchen, especially when it is redolent, as this, of Pompeii and Hadrian's villa, has no
      terrors, but a charm unspeakable.'
'Then,'said Lady May, 'if you can be satisfied with the light, you will bring the canvas
      hither, and enjoy that perfect freedom which I know you prize. But I hope you will give us the
      pleasure of your company at dinner as often as possible. However, both then and at all times
      you must look upon yourself as unshackled by our formal ordinances. You see, Mr. Mardol, I
      have learned how great a lover of solitude you are.'
'But,'he replied, 'do I really understand that it will not seem strange to you if I spend a
      day or two in this cottage and do not dine at the Court?'
'Certainly,'answered Lady May; 'we know it will give you pleasure, and it will therefore
      please us. I think Mr. Glanville touched on this point in conveying to you my father's
      invitation. We could not dream of inflicting on you the captivity which is often another name
      for staying in a country house.'
'This is, indeed, most kind,'cried Ivor; 'more than I dared imagine, much less propose. I
      have lived so long by myself,'he continued apologetically,
       'that it makes me wretched to be in any company— even in my friend
      Glanville's—for a whole day without a break. I will not abuse the freedom you bestow on me.
      But it is delightful.'
They mounted the quaint staircases that led in the open air from one verandah to the next,
      and from that to the watch-tower, wherin was a chamber having windows in the four walls and a
      different landscape visible through each of them. At this height the sea became a vast sheet
      of gold, on which the waves, not otherwise to be made out, shone like an endless tracery where
      every point sparkled and the finely-curved lines were interwoven as with a needle. The
      brightness was intolerable, the radiance golden, like clear glass. 'If you could dip your
      pencil in that,'exclaimed Ivor, addressing his friend, 'you might paint with molten
      sunlight.'
'Ay, indeed,'returned the artist; 'it puts one out of conceit with painting, when we know
      that a sheet of white paper is the most dazzling brightness we can attain. Here is the crystal
      sea, shot through and absolutely bathed in a fiery element which the eye cannot bear to look
      upon. Will any canvas render it?'
'How dark the ships come out in all this light!' said Lady May. 'The white sails seem lost
      in the overpowering radiance. All one can perceive are the heaving hulls, like lines of ebony
      crossing the gold. Cannot you fancy creatures of a finer make, with slow-moving pinions,
      traversing that shining space,
       or treading its pavement, which seems all ablaze, on errands to a distant
      world?'
"'He maketh the winds His messengers,"' said Ivor in a musing tone. 'What deep sayings there
      are in that old Hebrew book! Not slow-moving, though majestic in their march, and
      irresistible,—the four winds, angels between earth and sky,—binding one element with another.
      It is the life of Nature exhibited in vivid allegory.'
'Do you think the angels an allegory?' asked Lady May, not like one surprised or shocked,
      but as seeking to know his opinion.
'I think,' he replied, 'that Nature is a living miracle, not a dead machine. To me it is
      full of eyes which are always gazing into mine.'
'And these are angels?' she said, bending her own eyes upon him earnestly, and forgetting
      that they too might scorch and burn.
'You may call them so; why not?' he answered. 'Through them I discern that all things are
      known to one another and reflected, as in countless mirrors, from world to world.'
'You remind me,' said Lady May, 'of the famous verses in Faust;' and she repeated them: 'Wie
      Himmelskräfte auf und nieder steigen Und sich die goldnen Eimer reichen! Mit segenduftenden
      Schwingen Vom Himmel durch die Erde dringen, Harmonisch all' das All durchklingen!' She
      recited well. The artist could not help
       admiring her. People are commonly shy of repeating verse; she did not mind. 'How
      finely Goethe renders our modern thought!' said he.
'Yes,'replied Lady May; 'I don't think the worshippers of angels would recognise their creed
      in him.'
'What matter?'said Ivor.
They were forgetting luncheon. The Countess, partly because she was hungry, and yet more
      from a dread that in lingering so unconscionably they would be leaving no time for a certain
      visit as a sister of charity in the afternoon, reminded them of the fact. 'I don't see any
      angel coming to us with a golden pail,'was her comment on the Lady May's quotation. 'Had we
      not better be going towards luncheon? It is past one.'
Thus admonished they came down from the watch-tower, embarked in the skiff, and shot rapidly
      across the water. Glanville moored the boat where they had found it; and, avoiding the
      brushwood and the stone-pines, they walked, at a pace to satisfy the Lady Karina, along an
      easier path, which brought them to the front terrace. They were all tired, yet delighted with
      their morning. An appetite for luncheon is a blessed thing; each of them was so seasonably
      graced; and even the sad brows of Glanville, where gloom put on a cloud from time to time,
      unbent at the merry meal. His friend, of more equable temper, felt that his happiness had no
      alloy. He was still in thought on the watch-tower, looking over the golden
       sea, and contemplating the white-winged messengers as they moved about it. Once
      or twice a pair of dark eyes glanced in upon the vision and faded as quickly as they came. He
      had seldom enjoyed a morning so much. Ah! Ivor the philosopher, beware!
Next day he took up his abode at the Hermitage.

</div></body></text></TEI>