<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER XIV IN FAIRYLAND
He made no reply. The apparition was so sudden, so utterly unexpected, and the
      light, whether of the sun or of Hippolyta's presence, so filled his eyes that he had not a
      word to say. He looked strangely forlorn, in spite of the air of distinction and the beauty of
      feature which made him, when his feathers were preened, an Arabian bird among artists. The
      lonesome moor, with its streak of watery sunshine, the huge overshadowing cliffs, the shining
      grass and thunderous purple of the heather, gave a setting to the figure and appearance of
      Rupert which disclosed more of the inward man, the melancholy, brooding spirit, than was often
      visible. Hippolyta was struck silent. She waited now, uncertain whether she ought to have
      accosted him, until he should speak.
He rose with a fatigued expression, looked round, and said, as if to himself, 'I must have
      lost my way.' He did not seem to notice the young lady; nor can
       I affirm that during the first few moments he had distinguished between the
      vision in his brain and the form that came galloping over the moor.
'If you were going to Trelingham,' replied Hippolyta, 'you have certainly lost it. The Court
      is sixteen miles off, and in the opposite direction to this.'
Glanville was fully awake now. 'I am much obliged for the information, Miss Valence,' he
      answered in a conventional tone, 'and shall be grateful if you can point out the road. I have
      never been in this part of the country.'
'There is no road,' she told him; 'you are on the moor. And, if there were, you could not
      walk sixteen miles before nightfall. The sun will be down in less than an hour.'
'I must get back,' repeated Glanville. He gave an exploring glance over the country, hoping
      to see a human habitation if not a village or hamlet. It was all wild and bare. Hippolyta had
      said truly; he was on the moor; there was not the vestige of a track. He had been walking over
      the heather and did not notice it. What was to be done?
The young lady reflected, and seemed to have made up her mind while he was looking about
      him. 'You cannot get back this way,' she said, 'nor is it the slightest use ot attempt it. You
      would be lost in the mosses which you have passed without seeing them, I suppose. But Falside
      is hardly a mile off, and you can there be put on the right road.
       Do come, Mr. Glanville,' she said insistently, for he showed no sign of
      accepting her invitation.
Now he looked at her and smiled, though still in his melancholy fashion. 'I will come,' he
      said, 'if you can forgive me. Not,' he added, 'that you ought. I know I am inexcusable. But,
      if you will not overlook my great fault, I must stay here until morning. I can make my way
      back in the light.'
'Stay until morning, and be frozen! No, indeed,' cried Hippolyta, 'that you shall not. Come
      now, show that you know how to be obedient to a lady.' She was smiling without an effort, in
      the most kindly way. 'I do forgive you. Artists are strange people. One cannot treat them like
      the rest of mankind.'
'You forgive me!' exclaimed Rupert; 'I will follow you to the end of the world.'
She held up a warning finger. 'No, only to Falside,' she said.
He helped her to mount, and, in a dream of sweet intoxication, walked by her side as she
      rode quietly along. She did not ask him any questions. How he had got thither was evident—by
      losing his way. But what made him lose his way? If Hippolyta guessed at the reason, she kept
      her conjectures in her own breast. Occasionally she glanced down at him; but when he looked
      up, with something of that half-foolish and wholly ecstatic smile on his lips which betokens a
      young man's first sensations of happiness, she was discreetly gazing over the moor. She was
      glad she had forgiven him. He must have
       undergone a self-inflicted penance since she ran away from him on landing out of
      the boat. Perhaps he had gone into the rain and wandered all those hours to punish himself for
      his rudeness. At any rate, he was too haggard and woe-begone to be severely dealt with now.
      She would really forgive; nay, she would try to forget.
Rupert, thinking neither of the past nor the future, but as happy as a dog following his
      mistress, kept on walking mechanically, and did not even ask when they should arrive at
      Falside. He did not want to arrive there. It was enough for him to be near Hippolyta. Had she
      proposed to ride to the other end of the rainbow which he beheld spanning the moor, he would
      have said, 'Why not? let us go by all means. We shall perhaps find the golden cup the children
      talk of now we are together.' I doubt that her pony would have consented so willingly. When
      they passed certain rocks and turned to the left, that little beast shook himself and began to
      express a decided wish to canter. Hippolyta pulled him in. 'No, Djalma,' she said, 'you must
      be patient. Mr. Glanville would not care to keep up with you at a trot after his day's
      expedition. We shall cross your old friend, the Yale, in a minute,' she said, turning to the
      artist. 'It rises a little way off, and comes down into our valley on its journey to
      Trelingham.'
As she spoke they came to a narrow wooden bridge, which Djalma crossed at a quickened pace,
       and a few yards in front Rupert saw a good, well-preserved pathway leading down
      between rock and wilderness into the hollow. Trees began to peer up, there were breadths of
      cover right and left a little farther on, and the sound of murmuring leaves and waters filled
      the air. Hippolyta struck through the wood like one who was familiar with every step of it;
      Rupert followed close; and they came out after ten minutes' slow riding upon another road, not
      so broad as the first, which, turning very abruptly, brought them to a garden-gate
      overshadowed with foliage. Rupert ran to open the gate. He could see only a short distance in
      front, for the trees overarched and came down so close that it seemed as if they were entering
      another wood. But soon they reached a second entrance, clear of trees, and flanked on either
      side by a low wall, which permitted a view into the valley and across to the neighbouring
      heights. It was a ravine, at the head of which, on a projecting terrace near the waterfall,
      rose in picturesque beauty the gables of a double cottage. 'That is Falside,' said Hippolyta,
      pointing with her whip. 'You are welcome, Mr. Glanville.' She did not wait for his thanks or
      his assistance, but dismounting and throwing him the reins, she added, 'Will you kindly hold
      Djalma while I go and call some one?' Saying which she went rapidly up the path and
      disappeared round a corner of the cottage. If Rupert could have made sure of being unobserved,
      I think he too would have put his arm round the pony's neck and saluted him
       on the forehead. But he was prudent. No more risks through excess of
      demonstration for him. Djalma, therefore, had to be content with much patting and caressing,
      which, like all beings accustomed to adoration, he took as a matter of course. He was
      wondering when the groom would come, and not attending to Rupert at all.
When the groom did arrive he was by no means of that spruce description which is usual in
      great English houses like Trelingham Court. He was an old man with white hair and an
      exceedingly wrinkled forehead, dressed in plain rough clothes, more suitable to a gardener or
      man-of-all-work than to the guardian of so beautiful and well-kept a steed as Djalma. His
      eyes, which were very dark and glittering, made it clear that he was some kind of foreigner,
      to say nothing of the expressive gesture, indicating a doubt or a question, as Rupert fancied,
      with which on seeing the artist he turned to Miss Valence. She merely shook her head and bade
      Rupert relinquish the reins, which he did unwillingly, as one that gives up a beloved charge.
      'Now,' said Hippolyta, 'will you come into the drawing-room while Djalma is taken round to the
      stable and Andres gets your own room ready? He was not expecting a guest, or you might go with
      him at once.'
Rupert obeyed, not being clear in his own mind as to what was proper or becoming. He said
      when they passed the threshold, 'Is it not possible for me to go on at once to Trelingham? I
      ought not to
       trespass on your hospitality. I thought you spoke of putting me on my right road
      when we reached Falside.'
'The way is plain enough from here,' answered Hippolyta, 'but almost as long as your journey
      across the moor. And if you could only see, Mr. Glanville, how tired you look—' A thought
      seemed to flash across her mind while she was speaking, and she examined his face with no less
      attention than he had bestowed on hers in the chalet. 'I do believe,' she went on, 'that you
      are more than tired. Have you eaten anything since breakfast?'
Glanville entreated her not to trouble herself about so small a matter. He had not, in fact,
      eaten or drunk since the morning, and was beginning to feel the effects of his involuntary
      fast. But Hippolyta, with the woman's feeling that men are always ready to eat and cannot,
      like themselves, live on three grains of rice a day, was shocked to hear it. She begged him to
      sit near the fire and not stir till she came back. Then, running hastily out of the room, she
      left him to his own reflections, which were not disagreeable, but had lasted only a few
      minutes when she returned, bearing the requisites for afternoon tea, as Rupert would have said
      in any other drawing-room. Here it was probably not tea, but ambrosia, nectar, the amrita
      cup,—some enchanting draught with immortality among its ingredients. Hippolyta set the tray
      down; and, with a smile, remarked to the artist: 'I cannot offer you wine, for my father does
      not drink it or suffer it near him.
       I fancy that tea will do you more good. Andres will show you to your room when
      you have taken a cup and feel warm enough to leave the fire; and we shall dine as soon as
      possible.'
Rupert was more and more embarrassed, though happier than words can express. Was he to dine
      alone with Hippolyta? The gods be thanked. But what would men, and especially women, say? It
      was like getting into heaven by a forbidden door. He could not refuse; neither could he
      suggest that there were difficulties, that the world had its customs. Suggest such a thing to
      Hippolyta, who moved about with the grace and security of a young maiden in her own home,
      busy, unaffected, and the very picture of innocence! 'Oh, Mrs. Grundy,' he thought with a
      sigh, 'how terrible and absurd is thy dominion over the souls of men!'
It did not appear that Hippolyta minded Mrs. Grundy in any way. She was the princess
      receiving a shipwrecked mariner into her palace; a beneficent Calypso, to whom the rumours of
      the world did not penetrate, as she dwelt in her sequestered island, amusing herself with
      divine songs and a quick-footed steed. Had she no servants but Andres? The place seemed
      silent, buried in deep sleep. No footfall was heard about it; no sound but the murmuring
      cascade; no voice within or without. Neither did Hippolyta appear to expect attendance. Did
      she abide all alone, like this, whenever Colonel Valence was absent? She had described him as
      living very little at Falside.
       It was an extraordinary manner of passing her existence for a young girl,
      especially one so bright and vivacious as Hippolyta. Was it imaginable that she liked or could
      endure it long? At this point in his meditations the lady offéred him a cup of the ambrosia
      she had been preparing. It was very good. Rupert felt like a new being when he had drunk it;
      moreover, he secretly resolved to look upon it as the enchanting draught which henceforth
      bound him to exist under the governance and in the toils of Hippolyta. It was her own doing,
      and he would always plead it in excuse if she wished him to become a stranger again. But that
      he thought impossible after the events of the day.
'Do you live at Falside by yourself?' he ventured to ask.
'It depends on my father,' she replied; 'I see nothing, and I desire to see nothing, of what
      is called the world. No fashionable lady ever comes to me, and the only one I wish to know is
      Lady May Davenant. But Falside, though solitary just now, is not so for the most part. My
      father calls it the refuge of the destitute. There is seldom a month that some unfortunate
      man, pursued by the continental police, does not make his way to our retreat. The room you
      will sleep in to-night has been a hiding-place for the most distinguished revolutionists, from
      Mazzini to Felix Pyat. So that it is no new thing, you see,' she added, laughing, 'for me to
      receive an illustrious guest.'

'You must have gone through a strange experience,' said Rupert. 'But you cannot, I suppose,
      have seen the older men who are Colonel Valence's contemporaries. They have succeeded; and
      now, if still living, they sit in the high places of the world.'
'That is true,' she replied; 'I never saw Mazzini, for example. Those I know best are the
      men of the latest time, cosmopolitan and socialist rather than patriotic.'
'Do they interest you in life as much as they might in a book?' Rupert could not refrain
      from this question, but his curiosity was not altogether personal. Hippolyta did not resemble
      the masculine creature to whom he would have attributed a love of socialist theories or
      schemes of revolution.
'The men less than their doctrines, and not so much as their adventures,' was her unexpected
      reply. 'Like the saints of all religions, they are repulsive until you come to know them. But
      I am quite willing to minister to their wants. It is the only way in which I can help the good
      cause. Some, too, have a strangely captivating eloquence, like Kossuth. But he and the
      Hungarians belong to the aristocracy of revolution; and now they have set their crown of St.
      Stephen on the head of an anointed king, I fear that they will think no more of their
      down-trodden brethren all over Europe. Even Kossuth, with his hatred of the House of Austria,
      is at heart a political revolutionist and nothing more.'

She spoke warmly, and Rupert listened with admiration and suprise. He did not pretend to
      feel much with those that desire universal change. He was an artist, and dreaded the advent of
      democracy. But he could have worshipped any doctrine which came to him impersonated in such a
      form. However, he was spared making his profession of faith; for Andres, coming in as
      Hippolyta finished speaking, announced that the stranger's room was ready. Glanville rose. He
      could think of more things than one at a time, and he had made up his mind, while reflecting
      on Hippolyta's eloquence, as to what it behoved him to do.
'Miss Valence,' he said, going up to her, 'I can never thank you for such great kindness as
      you have done and intend for me. But I am quite sure that I ought to return to Trelingham.
      They did not know I was going any distance; I meant to have been at the Court for luncheon.
      And Lord Trelingham is so considerate, so nervous, too, since the shipwreck, that if I stay
      out they will spend the night in looking for me.'
He spoke reasonably, and Hippolyta was persuaded. She insisted only that he should stay for
      dinner. Andres, who was their coachman when they required one, would drive him, not over the
      moor, but round by the good roads on that side of the country. It would take time, but save
      mishaps, and Trelingham might be reached before midnight. When these things were clear Rupert
      followed Andres,
       who took him out of the cottage, and by a covered way up some steps into another
      building, almost as large, that stood behind it and contained kitchen, housekeeper's room, and
      two or three guest-chambers. An ancient lady, as un-English in appearance as Andres,—she was
      his wife,—now took charge of Glanville, and led him upstairs to a small and plainly furnished
      room, where she left him without a word. It was the way at Falside to do everything as
      silently as possible. All manner of strange guests came thither, many of whom spoke no English
      and bore no particular name while under Colonel Valence's roof. Whether Glanville was a
      refugee or an ordinary wayfarer who had been lost on the moor did not signify to the helpmate
      of Andres, nor did the good man enlighten her. An old revolutionist himself, he had asked in
      dumb show, on seeing him, whether Rupert was one of theirs. Hippolyta had used the English
      fashion of shaking her head to say no, and Andres, by this time somewhat naturalised,
      understood, but was not quite certain.
Rupert came quickly down again, and entered the drawing-room. But he found no Hippolyta. He
      had leisure to look about him now, for he had observed nothing but Miss Valence's face and
      motions while she was making tea. It was a library rather than a drawing-room, with
      bookshelves round the walls, and otherwise somewhat solidly furnished. But a nice disorder,
      and the presence of flowers and needle-work, were signs that Hippolyta made it her
       usual abode. On examining the shelves he saw books in every European
      langage,—some with extraordinary titles, betokening new systems of philosophy or of
      government, and a large number of modern poets and novelists. Among the latter were works he
      had never come across, which it surprised him to see in a lady's collection. But he reflected
      that, in all likelihood, it was Colonel Valence and not Hippolyta who studied these daring
      romances. He could not associate her with the books that were there.
She came in while he was looking at them. 'My father is a great reader,' she said, 'and had
      taught me, too, how to read. He prefers for enjoyment the ancient authors. So do I, I think.
      They have a calming influence when one's mind has been excited by the works of living men and
      women.'
'Do you read Greek, then?' inquired Glanville, taking out a handsomely bound volume, the
       Antigone of Sophocles, which happened to be in front of him.
'I suppose I may say yes,' was her answer. 'I have been learning it for some years. I can
      read Antigone , and know it almost by heart. What a noble character she was! Like
      some other Greek women she deserved to belong to the new era.'
'Then you know these lines?' said Glanville, turning to a passage I need not transcribe, for
      it is, like the landscapes round Vesuvius and the Campanian coast, a possession of modern
      times as of antiquity,—the marvellous scene where Antigone, standing at first with head bent
      to the ground in the
       presence of Creon, lifts up voice and eyes, saying that neither Zeus, nor
      Righteousness, assessor of the gods, had established among men the law which she had violated
      in burying her brother.
'Know them?' cried Hippolyta; 'how should I not? They sound in my ears as the very gospel of
      eternal right for woman.' And taking the volume from him, she read in tones of strong feeling
      the lines that come after, at once so calm and pathetic. 'Imagine,' she said, when she had
      come to the end of the passage, 'can you imagine a woman of our time, brought up as most are,
      saying in the face of social ordinances, base, unjust, and cruel, words like these—if the poor
      version I once made gives their meaning? Antigone says to the King: '"Such mighty heraldings I
      never dreamed, Mortal, were thine as could prevail to break The gods' unwritten and unshaken
      laws: Not of to-day or yesterday are these, They live from everlasting, nor doth man Behold
      the source when they to light have risen." How often has the whole artificial polity of men
      seemed to dissolve under the charm of an appeal like this to nature, to the truth of things,
      against the untruths which make the world poor and contemptible! Antigone will always be a
      type of the true woman. Do you not think so?'
'You ask a terrible question,' replied Glanville. 'Antigone died in obedience to commands
      which she thought to be from the gods. And you know
       they were nothing of the kind. More is the pity! Could it signify to Polynices
      whether his dead body were eaten by kites and eagles, or buried with libations? Antigone died
      the martyr of a custom.'
Hippolyta looked sad while he was speaking. 'Ah,' she said, 'I did not think you would view
      her in that light. She was the martyr of sisterly devotion, which is an eternal law, not of
      custom. But have you no feeling, then, about the grave of any one you have loved?' Her voice
      sank a little; she was grieved.
'Do not, pray do not misinterpret me,' exclaimed Rupert eagerly. 'I think Antigone one of
      the purest and most unselfish of heroines. Nor would I blame her tenderness to the beloved
      dust of a brother. But it is the way with us men to do battle for a cause rather than for a
      person, or—how shall I say?—for an emblem.'
'And women—for what do they give themselves?' she inquired, still speaking in the low sweet
      voice, with its touch of sadness. Rupert fixed his eyes on her, not daringly, but with a light
      shining out of them as he made answer.
'For love,' said he.
She was silent. She closed the volume and restored it to its place. A moment after dinner
      was announced, and they passed into the dining-room. It was not so large as the one they had
      left, and looked out on another side of the cottage. A bright fire was burning in the grate.
      Andres, who had forgotten to draw the curtains, now shut out the October
       night, which seemed raw and chill. Hippolyta motioned Rupert to a seat at the
      bottom of the table and took her place opposite him. She had none of that trembling shyness
      that might have been expected in one so young. Evidently she had been accustomed to receive
      guests and entertain them in the self-possessed way she used towards the artist. He felt that
      the tête-à-tête meant less than he had imagined. Hippolyta had no need to keep him at
      a distance. She seemed to have forgotten their meeting at the Hermitage altogether.
But it was not so. After dealing with indifferent topics, she came back to it of her own
      accord. 'I suppose,' she said, smiling, 'it was a social ordinance that I should not have
      taken the boat and explored a sacred dwelling like the chalet as I did to-day. However, it was
      not a command of the gods; and my conscience leaves me at rest.'
Glanville was sure that Lord Trelingham would have been delighted to show her over the
      Hermitage. It was a pity that his own friend, Ivor Mardol, had not been there to welcome her;
      he was exceedingly proud of having such a quaint habitation, and made a very tolerable hermit,
      too.
'Yes,' answered Hippolyta, 'though I know Lord Trelingham only by report, I have a great
      affection for him. Every one says he is the kindest of men. But a reconciliation between him
      and my father has long been out of the question. I do not think my father bears him malice;
      and I daresay Lord Trelingham
       would take his hand, if it were offered, which it never will be. I could not
      have asked his permission to visit the chalet. Yet I have long wished to see the inside of it.
      Riding that way, it is provoking to pass so many times in sight of a curious, uninhabited
      house, with strange stories attaching to it, and memories of my father and grand-father, both
      of whom spent weeks at a time there when they were young. I have often told my father I should
      like to go over it.'
'And what did he say?' asked Rupert.
'Oh, he was indifferent. He tells me that I have no part in the quarrel between himself and
      Lord Trelingham. Not being Lady Alice's daughter, I am really a stranger to the Davenants, who
      perhaps never heard of me. But I should not have cared to hurt his feelings by visiting the
      chalet when he was at home. I shall tell him, of course. At a distance he will have other
      things to think of, and he will not mind.'
The dinner could not last long. Though no wine appeared on the table, it was one of the
      pleasantest in Rupert's life. He must go now; and Hippolyta, with the thoughtless cruelty of a
      young lady who was not in love, when she saw that he had no greatcoat or other defence against
      the night air, insisted on his wrapping himself in a soft woollen shawl which was assuredly no
      part of Colonel Valence's apparel. The foolish young man was now quite enough intoxicated not
      to recover from his state of delirium so long as
       the remembrance of that night stayed with him. Hippolyta, on bidding him
      good-bye, detained him for a moment. 'If,' she said, 'when you are telling your adventures at
      Trelingham, you will assure Lady May that I have always wanted to make her acquaintance—I
      should rather say, to have her for a friend—and that Colonel Valence knows and does not
      disapprove, you will be doing me a kindness, and,' she continued, with a little more colour
      coming into her cheeks, 'you will atone for the impetuosity of this morning, which I forgive
      the artist because—because,' she concluded merrily, 'he seems to have no difficulty in losing
      himself.'
Rupert promised, of course. What would he not have promised? It was another link between
      them. He knew from Lady May's silence, from her never mentioning Falside or Colonel Valence's
      daughter, that no other way of conveying it could be open to Hippolyta. So much the better. It
      made him, in a sort, her representative, her accredited ambassador at Trelingham. But one
      thing remained which, in spite of his devotion or because of it, he had not promised, which
      nothing short of necessity should compel him to do; and that was to mention where and how he
      had met Hippolyta. Their meeting, he said to himself, was in a realm with which strangers and
      denizens of the everyday world had nought to do—in the kingdom of poetry, in Fairyland. Should
      he tell Lord Trelingham that he had dreamt a midsummer night's dream on an autumn
       morning? Not though his reward should be,—he stopped when he came to this
      reflection. For the sentence would have ended by bestowing on him the hand of Lady May. He was
      sitting in the dogcart by the side of the old coachman, Andres; and, if he blushed, the dark
      night concealed his shame. Twenty-four hours ago and less he had been resolved to ask Lord
      Trelingham for his daughter. Had the incident of the morning not taken place he must to-morrow
      have been uniting his fortune with that of a lady whom he did not love, whom he had never at
      any time loved. What an escape! He knew the difference now. A single day had sufficed to show
      him his delusion. Was he grieved on Lady May's account? Love has been defined as l'égoisme
       à deux . Rupert was in love with Hippolyta, and for him the Earl's daughter was merely a
      lady whose portrait he had painted. I do not say he would have summed the position in these
      harsh words; but, it is quite true, the first hours of love are like a deep delirium wherein
      the patient sees only what imagination bodies forth. The world of reality slips away into
      unfathomable waters and is found no more. Lady May had ceased to mesmerise him.
It was a pitch-dark night. Andres had received his instructions from Hippolyta, and drove
      warily along, neither making a remark nor troubled at the artist's silence. They might have
      been travelling towards the centre of the earth or through a succession of coal-pits for all
      that was visible on either side.
       Glanville, who had a horror of darkness, grew tired and fell into a dose which
      was perpetually interrupted by the jolting of the vehicle over stones and rough ground, or
      stopping to ascertain where the road turned. Several times Andres dismounted to make certain
      that they were not passing the cross lanes from Falside to Trelingham. It was weary work, made
      endurable to Glanville only by remembering that he was wrapped in Hippolyta's woollen shawl,
      which he meant not to return, if Andres could be got to overlook it, until he had an
      opportunity of thanking its owner in person. What ridiculous image and relic worshippers are
      all the slaves of Cupid! How could a woollen shawl make Glanville happier except by making him
      warmer? And yet it did, and not in that way alone.
It wanted little of midnight when they came to the front terrace of Treligham Court. Andres
      rang the bell, saw Glanville safely down from his high seat, demanded the shawl by a
      respectful but not to be resisted gesture, and without waiting for fee or reward drove away in
      the dark. Lord Trelingham and the rest of the family were in the drawing-room, to which Rupert
      accordingly proceeded. There was some little commotion, followed by anxious questionings, on
      his appearance. The Earl had been alarmed and at a loss what to do, for no one could tell him
      in which direction his guest had walked out. Ivor Mardol, who had not gone to the Hermitage
      that day, was waiting for him, uncertain whether he should
       renew the efforts he had made a couple of hours previously to find him in the
      thick darkness. He had been searching on the Yalden side of the Park. But, of course, his
      search had been in vain. To Lady May the date marked out for something notable had seemed to
      be ending in calamity; she thought Rupert might have been drowned, waylaid, murdered, she
      could not tell what. Her joy on seeing him was proportionate; but she dared not trust her
      feelings, and spoke no more than she could help. Glanville, never used to giving a long
      account of himself, now briefly explained that he had not walked in the direction of Yalden,
      but had crossed the stream and lost his way on the moor. A lucky accident had taken him near
      Falside, where he had been given something to eat and enabled to reach Trelingham.
'Did you see Colonel Valence?' inquired the Earl, scanning his face eagerly.
'Colonel Valence was not at home,' replied Glanville.
'Who was, then?' asked Lady May.
The artist, with a great appearance of sleepy distraction, answered in two words, 'Miss
      Valence.'
'Oh, Miss Valence,' cried Lady May, glancing towards her father; 'then you will have a
      singular story to tell, I am sure.'
'I don't know,' said Rupert, feeling more and more sleepy; 'but whatever it is I will tell
      you to-morrow morning. Excuse me, Lady May,' he continued,
       'the long drive and the dark have taken away the little sense I had. Will you
      allow me to bid you good-night? I am ready to fall down and sleep on the floor.'
They let him go. He looked as tired as he said. The Earl would have liked to ask him about
      Falside, which he had not seen, except in the distance, for several years. And Lady May, on
      retiring to rest towards one o'clock, had only one thought in her mind, but it kept her awake
      for hours. He had seen Miss Valence; what was she like? Was she the sort of person to
      captivate Rupert, who was surely of a susceptible temperament, yet seemed on his guard against
      the approach of love? She could not be certain that he cared for herself in any passionate
      way. Would he care at all, would he care more for Miss Valence? An anxious problem.
Rupert fell fast asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow; and during the next eight
      hours paid equal attention, that is to say none at all, to Hippolyta and Lady May.
And Hippolyta? It would be interesting to know her thoughts after that passionate pilgrim
      had vanished into the dark. Could Rupert's undisguised admiration have kindled in her an
      answering gleam? Who knows? For, after one brief interview, the heroine in Shakespeare found
      herself inquiring, 'Even so quickly may one catch the plague?' Certain it is that Hippolyta,
      before going to her room, sat down
       to read once again the concluding scenes of the Antigone . 'Yes,' she
      said to herself with decision as she came to the end, 'I was right. It is the Gospel of
      Woman!'
END OF VOL. I

</div></body></text></TEI>