<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER XXX INTER MORTUOS LIBER
But something must be done without delay. He would return to his house in
      Belgravia, to be nearer the scene of action, if action there should be. For it was not
      imaginable that Hippolyta would show herself in the vicinity of Forrest House, situate in an
      out-of-the-way, peaceable suburb, not known for its connection with aught more revolutionary
      than borough politics. Much more likely that she had left England and was travelling to
      Berlin, or St. Petersburg, or New York, to the centre of the storm-cloud that might be on the
      point of bursting on the head of Prince or President. What were the newspapers discussing?
      They sometimes held out storm-warnings of this kind also, and might for once be useful to him.
      Glaville did not believe in journalism, and seldom read a line in the daily prints. But now he
      went to his club, and sitting down in the library, which at that time of day was solitary as
      an African wilderness,
       turned over the files of the week's intelligence. Pah, how vapid it seemed! Did
      the nations put this stale vinegar to their lips every morning, and take it as sent down
      overnight from the suppers of the gods? What rinsings of Olympus! He turned the pages to and
      fro, travelled down the leading articles, sounded the solemn depths of the Foreign
      Correspondence. It left him uncertain. There were plots and rumours of plots, meetings of
      European workmen, strikes at Breslau, at St. Etienne, at Barnsley, on the railroads of New
      England, and among the cotton-spinners in Italy. Signs of a possible storm he read everywhere,
      but from what quarter would the lightning flash out? An infernal machine of the latest
      invention had been discovered at the Winter Palace, in the Emperor's writing-desk, and several
      of his confidential aides-decamp had been arrested on suspicion. The police had dissolved a
      socialistic gathering of Free Czechs at Prague; and the guard round the English Prime Minister
      was to be considerably strengthened in consequence of the last attempt to blow up his country
      seat. In yesterday's Times Glanville read with a beating heart that two women had
      been stopped by the Belgian police on their way from London to Brussels, and that compromising
      documents had been found in their possession which indicated the outbreak of another dynamite
      enterprise, though whether in Moscow or St. Petersburg it was not as yet possible to say. The
      description given tallied in neither case with Hippolyta, and the news was too recent; yet
       Glanville could hardly restrain himself from starting at once for Ostend. When,
      however, he reflected that his presence and the inquiries he must make would serve, in a
      foreign country, only to inculpate Hippolyta, if she were one of the women captured, and that
      more light would be thrown on the affair in the course of the next few days, he judged it
      prudent not to run after an uncertainty. One thing was clear, that Colonel Valence's daughter,
      if disposed to thrust herself into peril, might find the occasion wherever she happened to
      cast her eyes. The battle seemed to be raging along the whole line.
As he read on, not knowing what else to do, his attention was caught by one of the many
      advertisements which promise secrecy and success in the investigation of cases like
      Hippolyta's. He wondered that he had not thought of it before. But Glanville was a man who
      would hardly stoop to pluck a jewel out of the mire if there was a likelihood of soiling his
      fingers. The idea of a private police was repugnant to him, and was associated in his mind
      with every form of vice and degradation. Truly, it might be said of this artist-temperament
      that he was gentlemanly to his very finger-tips. Now, however, when he required a search to be
      made, and could not turn to the authorities of Scotland Yard, he clutched at the only means
      which appeared feasible; and taking the man's name and address, went home and despatched
      thence a carefully worded letter, in which he begged him to come immediately to Clarence
      Gardens
       on a matter of the utmost urgency. He might name his own terms, but there must be
      as little delay as possible. Glanville, after reflection, had resolved to prosecute the search
      in his own name.
It was well he did so, for Mr. Bernstein, when he appeared in the course of a couple of
      hours and was introduced into Rupert's study, began the conversation easily with an allusion
      to the artist's fame, and the pleasure it gave him to recognise the fidelity of the portrait
      which had created such a sensation in the Academy two years ago. Glanville, whose talent for
      self-mockery had been a good deal cultivated, said in reply, that to be famous was indeed a
      fine thing, and offered to paint Mr. Bernstein, if that gentleman would sit to him. The answer
      was a not unpleasant smile, which served as garnish to the aphorism, pronounced by the
      detective with a business-like air, that time was money. He preferred to sit on golden eggs
      rather than in the luxurious but expensive chair to which Glanville invited him. The artist,
      however, had been really struck with the capacities of Mr. Bernstein as a subject. As his name
      indicated, he was a German, or more accurately speaking, a Polish Jew. It is possible that in
      the sacred pages of the Almanach de Gotha —a volume never to be mentioned without
      reverence—there may be illustrious and even princely Bernsteins. But this was not one of them.
      Plebeian, not prince, was stamped on his yellow forehead, his starved and sallow countenance,
      and his drooping shoulders. He was of unusually
       small stature, though not a dwarf; and the meagreness of his general appearance
      denoted either scant opportunities of eating, or a severe control over the grosser appetites.
      But it was the pear-shaped head, with its flaming coal-black eyes, and long, curling,
      coal-black hair, that had drawn Glanville's admiration. The vitality in that dried-up organism
      must have been immense; it seemed to pour out at the eyes and to overspread the parchment-like
      features; it was suggested in the snaky curls which would doubtless, if one touched them, give
      out electric sparks like the back of a tiger. The man, though no patrician, was full of
      intellect and energy; there could not have been a drop of Western blood in his veins, nor a
      fold of Teutonic dulness in his brain. Glanville beheld him with the same mingling of wonder,
      curiosity, and dislike which he had felt in reading the grimmest pages of the Old Testament.
      He was a leaf torn out of the Book of Judges.
When he had taken a seat where he could observe Glanville closely, and the artist was
      reflecting how he could give sufficient information for the purpose of recovering Hippolyta,
      yet keep himself in the background of his narrative, Mr. Bernstein, who, with his head
      slightly bent on the right side, appeared to be looking him through and through, lifted his
      yellow hand impressively, and with forefinger held up as if to bespeak earnest attention,
      began in a strong penetrating voice, where the German accent made itself harshly felt, 'Before
      you tell me the story which I see
       you are turning over in your mind, let me sketch the principles on which I
      conduct my office. They are simple. On your side you purchase, and no doubt you require,
      absolute secrecy. You shall have it. But on my side, acting under your directions, I can
      require nothing except what you wish to grant. Are you interested in succeeding; greatly,
      deeply interested? If so, your account of the situation will be absolutely frank and complete.
      But if you are not, you will either keep something back, or overlook some little detail on
      which all the rest hangs. I have had large experience, and I have always seen, as your poet
      Shakespeare says, that "riddling confession finds but riddling shrift." Now, sir, we can
      proceed when you like, and I am at your service.' He unbent his warning attitude and leaned
      back in his chair.
Glanville, though in deep trouble of mind, could not refrain from smiling at the quotation,
      so quaintly borrowed for the purposes of private inquiry from Romeo and Juliet , as
      well as at the straightforward shrewdness of the old man, who spoke with official gravity. But
      the words came home. What should he disclose, what keep to himself? He took the wa that
      promised the least difficulty.
'The facts,' he said to Mr. Bernstein, 'on which I should like you to exercise your skill
      are as simple as your principles. A lady—'
'Of course,' said Mr. Bernstein, taking out his pocket-book; 'what is her name?'
'Her name is Hippolyta Valence, but she has
       been known for the last nine months as Mrs. Malcolm. She has suddenly disappeared
      from home, and I am commissioned to discover and if possible bring her back.'
'Commissioned by Mr. Malcolm?' inquired the Jew, scrutinising his every feature.
Glanville was at a standstill.
'I see,' said the other, 'you do not know whether to tell me. Perhaps Mr. Malcolm is of no
      consequence; perhaps it all depends on who Mr. Malcolm is. Let me know the rest, and we will
      come back to this point.'
'No,' said Rupert, forcing the words through his teeth, 'it will not do. I am Mr.
      Malcolm.'
'Good,' was the answer, 'now the mountain is levelled, and we shall see our way. The lady
      has left you, and you wish her to return. Very well; can you say who is the gentleman? Have
      you any suspicions?'
'There is no gentleman,' returned the artist, blushing all over; 'that is what makes the
      case extraordinary.'
The Israelite shook his head in sign of doubt. 'Such a case would be extraordinary indeed,'
      he replied with a philosophic smile, and then shrugging his shoulders as he spoke; 'but it
      does not happen. You will find there is a gentleman. It may well be that you have never seen
      him, but that is nothing. Now tell me where Mrs. Malcolm lived, and what society was within
      her reach during those nine months.'

Rupert, omitting the scene in the studio, which he despaired of making credible to this
      hard-headed cynic, as he appeared to be, told all the rest faithfully so far as knew it. There
      was so little, however, to tell. The Jew, as if he had been a Queen's Counsel examining a
      hostile witness, obliged him to discriminate between the facts about which there could be no
      doubt, and the inferences which Glanville was inclined to draw from them. But he did so with a
      gentleness that encouraged and did not confuse the mind; he was astonishingly observant of the
      artist all through, and seemed to take down his notes with a flash of lightning. When the
      flight of Annie Dauris was mentioned, followed at three days' interval by that of Hippolyta,
      he lifted his pencil and said, 'Have you searched out the antecedents of that young woman? The
      case grows clearer. I daresay when we come upon the trace of Annie Dauris we shall discover
      the second gentleman not far off.'
Rupert again denied vehemently that Hippolyta's motives for quitting Forrest House were of
      the nature alleged. But it was true that he had not much information about Annie Dauris.
      However, it could be obtained from her people. And he went on to speak of Hippolyta's frequent
      visits to the East End, culminating in her appearance, after Annie's flight, at the door of
      his friend Ivor Mardol. This led him, under impressive silence on Mr. Bernstein's part, to
      introduce the subject of Nihilism. He had no sooner done so than the Jew rose from his chair,
      saying
       hurriedly, 'Why did you not begin at the beginning? There may be two leading
      motives here. Was Miss Valence a Nihilist before you made her acquaintance?'
'She has been educated in revolution,' replied Glanville; 'it is her own and her father's
      creed. Colonel Valence has taken a decided share in all the movements of the last thirty years
      against the social order.'
Mr. Bernstein, looking very grave, sat down again. 'Let me hear all you know about Colonel
      Valence,' he said, 'especially his aliases .'
'His what?' inquired Glanville, not catching the word.
'The names under which he has travelled. You do not suppose a conspirator has only one set
      of visiting-cards in his pocket,' returned the Jew placidly.
'I know nothing of all that,' replied Glanville.
'Miss Valence never talked to you of her father or of secret societies then?'
'Never in that way. I did not wish for confidences about them. It was the same with Ivor
      Mardol. If he had an alias I never learnt it.'
'No, that is evident,' said Mr. Bernstein; 'and Mrs. Malcolm, you say, took no money with
      her when she left you?'
'Not a shilling, I believe; not even what was in her purse, which I picked up next morning
      on the floor by her writing-table.'
The affair looked darker than at first. When nearly two hours had been spent in Rupert's
      examination,
       and he had, or seemed to have, nothing to add, the Jew, running his eye down the
      pages of his pocket-book, said in a judicial tone, 'There are several alternatives, of which
      the least probable is that Colonel Valence, acting alone, has sent for his daughter. That will
      be seen into, but for the present may be omitted. The others reduce themselves to these: Miss
      Valence, acting in collusion with Annie Dauris, which we may take for granted, has put herself
      under the protection either of Maurice Regan or Ivor Mardol, whichever of them she has fallen
      in love with. Your mistake, my dear sir, lay in your supposing that a lady, brought up in the
      principles of the Revolution and among revolutionists, would or could remain faithful to a man
      who did not satisfy that side of her temperament. No doubt her inclination for yourself was
      very powerful, but it was not rooted in the deepest passion of all, to which it has now
      yielded. You may be right in supposing that she has been engaged, or will be later on, in
      carrying out the Nihilist designs; I should think it very likely. But it will always be under
      the orders of her lover. We have found the gentleman, you see. What makes it slightly
      embarrassing is that there are two of them.'
'I cannot believe it,' said Rupert, groaning aloud at the picture of Hippolyta's degradation
      conjured up before him. 'I had rather see her dead than so shamefully dishonoured. It is
      impossible.'
'Yes, yes,' replied the Jew; 'you naturally feel so. And yet these impossible things are
      mostly true. À

propos ,' he went on, in a tone of calm inquiry, 'there has been no search made in
      the dead-houses?'
'Where?' cried Rupert, shuddering from head to foot. 'You—you must not say such things to
      me, or I shall do you or myself a mischief.' The horrible suggestion completed his dismay.
      Hippolyta dead! Dead perhaps while he had been lingering at Forrest House and over the files
      of newspapers! He almost fainted at the thought. 'Why do you not go at once?' he cried to Mr.
      Bernstein, who sat waiting impassively till he should recover. 'Inquire everywhere. Put out a
      reward. Tell the police to have the canals, the Serpentine dragged.'
'Patience, patience, my dear sir,' replied the Jew in soothing accents; 'everything shall be
      done as it ought. Is it not a proverb with you, the more haste the worse speed? We cannot
      inform the police like that. If they meddle, they will do as they have always done, and throw
      out the child with the bathwater.'
'What do you mean?' said Glanville, his mind still confused with horror.
'I mean that the Nihilists, or Socialists, call them what you will, have friends among the
      police, or among their acquaintance, and therefore can know when they are coming. It is not my
      way to employ the police. And see you, sir,' he continued, with a ring of decision in his
      voice, 'I will show you my mind as if you were reading it on paper. I do not feel sure that we
      shall recover Mrs. Malcolm. If it
       was only an affair of the heart, I could promise something. For love is very
      indiscreet and given to talk; and he does not mind being found out, he is so proud of himself.
      But there is another passion here, nearly as strong, which desires concealment and knows many
      hiding-places all over Europe. More than that, I have not any business with secret societies.
      I am a stranger to politics and revolutions; and the province I have assigned myself is
      entirely confined to private life. If I was to put my hand into politics I should be putting
      it into the wolf's throat. One must not lie between the hammer and the anvil or it will go bad
      with one.'
'But you will take up this inquiry,' said Rupert, 'if I ask you, and pay whatever you
      demand. The politics are nothing to me—only bring back Miss Valence; it is all I want. For
      what I care, the Nihilists may blow up the Tower of London to-morrow.'
'That would not be my sentiment if I were an English citizen like you,' returned the
      Israelite. 'But you do not understand my position. I have to live and move about in a
      subterranean region, which is full of mines and—how do you say?—countermines. Look, it is like
      a London street. Under the pavement which the carriages of the great people roll over, there
      are the water-pipes, and under them the gas is laid, and beneath that again is the main
      drainage, and deep down, in the bowels of the earth where all should be still as a mouse,
      there is the
       railway with the trains tearing along,—you say tearing? —and there are stations
      with their lights, and the boys selling journals, and people eating and drinking at buffets,
      and I know not what. Such is the world to which I also belong. The police do not like me, for
      I take the bread out of their mouths; the International does not like me, for it is impossible
      that I should not know of their doings one day or another; and so my people encounter great
      risks. I tell you, then, that if Mrs. Malcolm has thrown herself under the ægis of the
      revolution, I may hunt out where she is, but to bring her back I cannot give a pledge. Is it
      understood?'
When Mr. Bernstein spoke hastily, he fell into the German idioms to which his youth was
      accustomed, diluting them in a menstruum of French, as is the way with nearly all who have
      travelled much in their time.
Rupert answered with the utmost impatience, 'For God's sake, let me have tidings of her, and
      we will decide the rest then. Only lose no more time.'
He laid on the table a purse of sovereigns, which Mr. Bernstein said he preferred to a
      cheque as being safer; and, when arrangements for corresponding had been made on both sides,
      he saw the Jew off with a sense of alleviation, for the interview had tried him exceedingly.
      As soon as the door was shut on that venerable figure, he returned to his study, and, throwing
      himself on the sofa, fell into a troubled sleep. Mr. Bernstein, meanwhile, bearing an epistle
       from the artist, drove at his top-speed to Forrest House, to inspect, as he said,
      'the basis of operations.' He had a strong belief that the localities tell half the story when
      they are examined by a careful eye.
It was late in the evening when Rupert awoke, not so much refreshed as shaken and unnerved
      by the nightmare slumbers into which he had fallen. One dread predominated—the horrible fear
      evoked so calmly by Bernstein, that Hippolyta might have done herself a fatal injury or have
      met with foul play. To know that she was living, though degraded and estranged from him for
      ever, would have been consolation, in spite of what he had exclaimed a few hours ago.
      Hippolyta's death was an evil without a remedy; he would bear anything, however disgraceful,
      rather than that. Search the dead-houses, had Bernstein said? What were the dead-houses of
      London? Whither did they take the drowned, and the murdered, and the bodies of suicides in the
      great Babylon? There was no Morgue as at Paris. He began to think over what he had
      seen from time to time in the newspapers on this frightful subject. It seemed to him that he
      ought to go from one hospital to another, from one workhouse to another, and make inquiries
      that very night. But the Jew would do all that was necessary, and let him know if anything
      came of it. Rupert, with many a sigh, had given him the only portrait he possessed of
      Hippolyta. It was the one precious thing he carried with him wherever he went. You remember
      it,
       reader? The sketch made in happier days, soon after their engagement, which
      represented Hippolyta in her riding-habit, as Rupert beheld her for the first time when, in
      the Hermitage, she turned round from Ivor Mardol's book-shelves, and faced the intruder.
      Nothing could be more light or graceful. But Mr. Bernstein, who had not been shy at expressing
      his admiration for Rupert's portrayal of himself in the Academy, knew human nature too well to
      say a word on receiving this of Hippolyta. He was sharp of speech and independent; but that
      silence was golden naturally occurred to him on observing the look with which Glanville
      abandoned his treasure. Yes, the private-inquiry office would send what intelligence it might
      have; and the artist had implored Bernstein not to delay, be the hour day or night, in
      despatching his messenger to Clarence Gardens. But an unrest drove him forth, and once he was
      in the streets, he might as well, it seemed to him, do that which lay nearest his heart and
      gain assurance, if possible, that Hippolyta was yet living.
For the second time, then, he found himself wandering about London alone, possessed with the
      thought of her, as on that night which had seen the commencement of their guilty happiness.
      Guilty, did he call it? Yes, he acknowledged his sin. He would not pretend that he was
      blameless, or had been coerced by a stronger will. He ought to have resisted. The doom might
      have fallen upon Hippolyta which had now overtaken them both; it was
       fear of it that had swayed him then; but he saw now with fatal clearness that
      what would have been at the worst his misfortune was become his unpardonable crime. The night,
      which was wild and stormy with chequered moonlight, reminded him of the flying clouds and cold
      brilliancy of that former scene, when he had spent hour after hour meditating on the
      temptation instead of resisting it. Again his thoughts reverted to the solitude of that night,
      the silent ghostly bridge, and the flood of waters hurrying between its arches to the sea. Was
      Hippolyta floating along the river now, or hidden in its depths amid the unutterable
      pollutions that had revealed themselves to his vision where he stood, gazing into it? He dared
      not go near it yet. He would inquire at a police station, at one or two of the workhouses
      which he supposed must be in the neighbourhood, whether the dead body of a woman had been
      found that day or the day before. It was late, and suspicions might be aroused; but he could
      not go home, and, while he was abroad, this spirit of unsatisfied longing drove him on.
He did inquire, at first with no result. There had been accidents within the last
      forty-eight, within the last sixty, hours of all kinds—drowning, burning, fatal collisions in
      crowded streets, children run over, the bodies of new-born babes found on the public
      highway,—casualties in the battle of life which is ever going forward under the cloud of
      civilisation that hides it and yet heightens its horror. But
       on the list of the dead was no woman such as Glanville, who dared not use too
      particular a description, inquired after. Was he sure, they asked, that it was a case of
      drowning? Other kinds of accidents were taken to the hospitals,—indeed these were, too, when
      there seemed hope of restoring animation. Rupert said in a low voice, 'Thank you,' and went on
      his way. What was it he thanked them for? The little courtesies which soften and adorn our
      commonplace life have in them something hideous, grotesque, sardonic, when they are repeated
      amid the horrors of death. He turned to the first great hospital of which the name was ringing
      with monotonous iteration in his brain. He entered the hall, which at that hour, with the
      lights halfturned down, looked vast and solemn. There was some one keeping vigil, who rose
      when he appeared on the threshold and came towards him. In a whisper he asked whether any one
      had been brought there lately from the river or elsewhere, any accident, —a woman, young,
      fair-haired,—and he described Hippolyta. The night-porter could not say; he would make
      inquiry, and he went in search of a nurse. Soon they both came back, whispering. The nurse
      looked at Glanville, saw he was a person of distinction, and replied that such a young woman,
      but poor, in ragged garments, had been brought in early that morning, not from the river, but
      from a common lodging-house. She had poisoned herself in a fit of despair, of shame, it
      appeared. They
       had brought her round a little, but she could not live. They did not know her
      name or history. Would the gentleman see her? He followed the nurse at once, stepping
      noiselessly upstairs, and was shown into a great ward, full of beds, in almost every one of
      which lay a sleeping patient. On his right, near a window, he was bidden to look close and say
      whether he recognised the young woman that lay there staring at him with eyes wide open. She
      was not asleep, nor yet fully awake, but dazed and speechless. Oh no, it was not Hippolyta.
      How could they speak of that as fair hair? They had never seen the golden locks which had
      wounded his heart. The features were pretty but wasted; he knew what sort of woman it was; and
      while he said so to himself in a low whisper, the staring eyes seemed to gather consciousness
      and to look at him more fixedly. No, no, not Hippolyta. Again he thanked them and went
      out.
The clouds were drifting still, and the moon high. He rambled aimlessly, falling into a slow
      walk, until, as he moved past some huge building, his memory tapped him on the shoulder, as if
      to say, 'Ask the question here; it is a workhouse which you pass when you are driving to the
      station for Trelingham.' He rang the night-bell, inquired, was told that others had been there
      already on a like errand, and that only the corpse of a boy, whom his mother had stabbed the
      day previously, lay in the mortuary awaiting an inquest. 'Bernstein, then,' he said to
       himself, 'is taking pains, as he promised. Why do I not go home?' But his limbs
      were possessed with the spirit he had called up. On he went, uncertain of the ways, now
      hither, now thither, sometimes inquiring when he found himself, he knew not how, at the door
      of a police-station, sometimes when his hand was on the bell turning as from a fruitless
      search and passing by. Still, the instinct that led him seemed to unlock these grim
      repositories; and he remembered years after the vision of the dead and drowned which in that
      long night was opened to him. He saw more than one woman, young or old, lying in her shroud
      prepared for burial, or in the clothes she had worn when casting herself into the river; and
      the wan features and startled eyes remained with him as a memory which he could never blot
      out. What a terror clung to the withered, gray tresses, stained with mud from the Thames,
      which he noticed, and that instant stereotyped on his brain, when casting a hurried glance
      into the dead-house, —at Kensington was it, or in what other place? He did not know, but he
      remembered the long gray tresses, which were not Hippolyta's, yet moved him to compassion as
      though there could be a likeness between them and her sunny curls. Enough, enough. He would
      not follow the spectre that held him so fast by the hand, but return to his miserable couch
      and wait. The morning brings good dreams, he said, and his eyes filled with womanish, helpless
      tears. If but in a dream he might see her for a
       moment, only once, only for so long as would let him fix again in memory the
      features whose outline was already growing dim. It was so little to ask. But his prayer was
      vain; and though he slept, not even in his dreams would the lady of his heart appear to
      him.
Ten days and nights passed in bootless wanderings through the immeasurable forest of London,
      in sighs and tears, and all the sad accompaniments of a downfallen love which seem so bitter
      to him that undergoes them, so trivial and unnecessary to others that only look on. It is
      strange how the bleeding of a man to death, which has happened sometimes on the ruin or loss
      of a beloved person, should tend to excite mockery; and yet it does. Glanville, with this
      arrow in his heart, would not have dared to face his friends; he hid away from the intimates
      who would have thronged round him had they known he was in town; and his feet strayed
      involuntarily towards the places where he thought Hippolyta might be concealed, in the dens of
      East London, which, as he had gathered from William Dauris, she had been visiting while he was
      at Trelingham.
On the tenth day Mr. Bernstein, who had sent him short messages of no very definite import
      during this time, appeared once more in his studio. He looked calm and collected—a contrast to
      Rupert, whose eyes were beginning to show that fatigued expression which follows upon anxiety
      continued
       over sleepless nights. The Jew, however, had not been idle. Warranted by the
      artist's letter to Mrs. Leeming, at Forrest House, he had searched into every corner of the
      old mansion, and, though discovering no clue to Hippolyta's disappearance, had been rewarded
      by finding Annie Dauris's letter, brought by the little boy on the morning of her flight, and
      locked up in one of Mrs. Malcolm's jewel-boxes. At the same time he had appropriated certain
      scraps of paper which enabled him to compare Hippolyta's former handwriting with that which
      she adopted in corresponding with Rupert. All that the gardener or his wife had to tell of
      their daughter, and of the lady's interest in her and attempts to bring the girl to a sense of
      her duties, he likewise knew, although he did not go near the cottage in Church Lane. He had
      even come upon the trace of Annie, who, it now appeared, had gone, as Hippolyta surmised, to
      Charlotte Fraser's, stayed with her a day and a night, and afterwards plunged into the obscure
      regions of London rascaldom, either, as he supposed, in search of Maurice Regan, or to meet
      him by a preconcerted arrangement.
Rupert paid little attention to all this. What did it matter where Annie Dauris went? She
      was not Hippolyta. The details of private inquiry, however interesting to Mr. Bernstein, were
      to him ignoble and disgusting. But he woke from his lethargy when the Jew went on, in the same
      unimpassioned voice, to say, 'We have likewise examined
       Mr. Mardol's connection with this strange affair. When I heard the story from
      you last time I could not satisfy myself as to which of the two gentlemen, Mr. Mardol or Mr.
      Regan, was principal, and which was accessory—to use the terms of the law. I am now confident
      that Mr. Mardol has directed the game all through, while Mr. Regan may have held the cards. I
      do not say otherwise as to that,' he concluded.
'I was sure of it,' said Rupert in a low voice; 'but could I think that Ivor was a
      villain?'
'I did not say so,' replied the Jew; 'it is not for me to make a moral appreciation of his
      acts. But, first of all, did he not say that he was unacquainted with Mrs. Malcolm until he
      saw her in Denzil Lane?'
'Certainly,' answered Rupert; 'he gave me his word of honour that it was so.'
'Very well; and perhaps it was clever of him to persist in a system of complete denial, for
      he may have dreamt to himself that you could not reach the evidence. But one has found in his
      desk a number of papers, written in cypher indeed, to which we have not the key—that can
      wait—but in the known characters of Miss Hippolyta Valence. I will show you one morsel.
      See'—and he laid on the table a long thin strip of foreign note-paper covered with writing,
      which Rupert instantly recognised as Hippolyta's. He covered his face with his hands. She was
      lost to him for ever. Good heavens! how had he been deceived?

'Much,' said the Jew continuing, 'would depend on the date of this correspondence; but some
      of the envelopes found with it retain their postmarks, which are of two and even three years
      back. It is to be concluded, then, that your friend was not speaking the truth when he denied
      to know Miss Valence. And as the girl Annie Dauris will account for the intrusion of Regan, we
      may assume in our future investigations that Mr. Mardol is the person to watch and
      convict.'
'But what has he done with Hippolyta?' exclaimed Rupert; 'you should have watched him
      already.'
'We have done that, to be sure,' said Bernstein; 'he does not leave home, however, except to
      go among the working men whom he is in the habit of visiting, and they appear to know nothing.
      Neither does he send letters by post. There was one he posted two days since. It was to you.
      Did you receive it?'
Rupert was fairly startled on hearing this slight but extraordinary proof of the
      completeness with which Mr. Bernstein conducted his investigations. He opened a drawer behind
      him and took out the letter. The Jew's eyes glittered for a moment like those of a gamester
      sweeping the stakes into his pocket.
'You have not answered it yet,' said he, looking attentively at the artist; 'what will you
      say to your friend?'

'Don't call him my friend, or you will drive me mad,' cried Rupert. 'No, I have not
      answered, though how you know that is a mystery. Are you also acquainted with the contents of
      this letter?' holding it out as he spoke.
Bernstein quietly waved it back with a motion of his hand. 'I have seen them,' he said; 'Mr.
      Mardol repeats the asseveration that he is innocent of Miss Valence's disappearance, and
      offers to help you in whatever steps you may undertake for her recovery. Not true? Is that not
      it?'
'Yes,' answered Rupert, more astonished than he chose to say. The Jew waited for him to
      continue, but as he seemed lost in thought, Mr. Bernstein himself resumed the thread of the
      conversation.
'If I might offer you an advice,' he said, 'I would accept Mr. Mardol's proposition.'
'What!' exclaimed the artist; 'take his hand again, after all these things; after breaking
      with him as I have done? Never! Our friendship is at an end. He has murdered it.'
'Ta, ta, ta,' said the Jew contemptuously; 'that is the reason itself of my counsel to you.
      The proverb says, "To a rogue, a rogue and a half." Mr. Mardol is a false friend, you say.
      Good—then you must be more false friend.'
'I could not do that,' said Rupert slowly. Mr. Bernstein got up and came to within a foot of
      where he was seated. The artist in surprise eyed him, not without curiosity.

'My dear sir,' began the private detective in his hortatory voice, 'Mr. Mardol is, you say,
      a villain, a taugenichts , or what worse; but when he wrote to you he was doing you
      one service and me another. We will succeed by his means. But, Mr. Glanville,' he went on
      sternly, 'how will we succeed if you do not keep your share of the bargain?'
'What do you mean?' said Rupert, rising in his astonishment.
'I mean,' said the Jew, 'that it was understood between us that I should conduct this
      search, not you. And you are crossing our path at every turn, and asking imprudent and
      unnecessary questions, and raising the dust of suspicion where it is not easy to bring water
      and lay it. Why should you go to the dead-houses and the hospitals? If there was anything I
      would have informed you. But it is like two packs of hounds running down the same hare. They
      do only run into one another, and the hare escapes to her form. So is it with hunting in these
      fields. With one word, it cannot go on.'
Rupert felt the justice of his remarks and endeavoured to apologise. But it was a bitter
      draught, explaining the restlessness of a great sorrow to this vulgar Jew. 'Oh, Hippolyta,' he
      thought to himself, 'how are we fallen! Must you be dragged in the mire, and our love be
      desecrated like this?' Mr. Bernstein was not unacquainted with the outward fashion of intense
      grief. He listened to the apology and seemed satisfied.

'There are attenuating circumstances, I know,' he said; 'it is not my purpose to forsake
      this investigation, which promises to be curious. But now Mr. Ivor Mardol comes to our aid.
      You desire something to watch. Watch him. For, I must tell you,' he went on as if to
      anticipate Rupert's objections, 'you did not right, eleven days since, when you threw away the
      opportunity of seeing all he would do. It was the very time when you should have clung to him
      like a leech. Ah yes, like a leech. But there is no loss, because he has laid his plans
      cunningly; and in what place Mrs. Malcolm may be, she will stay there until the storm has
      blown over. It was done at a stroke, cleverly, when you could not be there. Accordingly, it is
      now required to lay by hurry and passion, to persuade Mr. Mardol that you take him at his
      word, and to constitute yourself his gaoler, which you may do, if you please, from henceforth.
      And you will do it, if you are truly attached to Miss Valence. On the other foot, you will
      lose her once for all.'
The last words told. It was quite true. Granting that Ivor Mardol was the agent who had put
      all this machinery in motion, there could be no method of gaining control over it so effectual
      as to be ever by his side on terms of close friendship. Treachery was it? But who had been
      traitor first? And if, as he pretended, Ivor was innocent, there could be no harm in accepting
      a proposal he had made himself. When the letter came containing his attempted exculpation,
      Rupert had been minded to fling it in the fire without
       opening it. He was now glad he had restrained his passion. There were signs of
      relenting in his attitude as he sat down once more and motioned Bernstein to his seat.
'What do you advise?' he asked, without looking up.
'I shall advise,' answered Bernstein, 'something which is full of hazard, especially for a
      celebrated man like yourself. If you wish to pry into all Mr. Mardol's doings, you must become
      a member of his world— in other words, a Nihilist.'
'I become a Nihilist!' cried Rupert, with a mocking laugh. 'The suggestion is piquant. Why
      don't you bid me sell myself to the devil, eh, Mephistopheles?'
'Because I am not Mephistopheles,' replied the Jew, as calmly as before, 'and because it
      would not advance matters, unless that potentate could tell us where Miss Valence is now.
      Come, Mr. Glanville, think it over, and you will confess it is the only way. I can watch Mr.
      Mardol so long as he keeps on this side of the curtain; but when he goes through it into the
      secret chamber of his fellow-revolutionists I cannot, or at any rate I do not desire to follow
      him. I have told you it is not my department. But you, who do not care if the anarchists blow
      up the Tower of London to-morrow, need not be scrupulous in joining them. You can then keep an
      eye on Mr. Mardol during every one of the twenty-four hours. He did not foreshadow this move
      when he wrote to you his letter.
       It will give him the checkmate. He will be in your hands like a child or a
      teetotum, to spin round.'
All this appeared plausible enough; and to a desperate man, whose prospect in life without
      Hippolyta seemed like a long unbroken winter, the reasons which Bernstein urged with force and
      conviction might well prove decisive. They did so, in fact, although not until the Jew had
      presented them in the strongest light, adding that in the alternative of Glanville's refusing,
      he would throw up the game and sweep the pieces from the board. 'When you have become one of
      the society,' he continued, 'the match will be in your favour. I suppose Mrs. Malcolm
      cherished a real affection for you. In that case she may be persuaded to return, since in you
      she will find the realisation of her ideal, who should undoubtedly be a hero of the new order.
      Besides that, you will acquire friends whose co-operation may be indispensable, but of whom
      the very existence is not as yet known to you. Acknowledge Mr. Mardol's letter, appoint him a
      meeting here, and tell him frankly that you believe his defence, and only wish now to discover
      Colonel Valence. For that purpose you entreat him to make you an entrance into the society. He
      will at first refuse on the score of principle. But, tell me, you have never posed as a friend
      of absolute power? You are known as a free-thinker, and have nothing to unsay? If I had not
      ascertained that such was your reputation I would not have presented myself with this
      proposition in my hand.'

Rupert could not help admiring the combination of frankness and guile in Bernstein's
      proposal. To make an anarchist of a free-thinking artist was by no means difficult; and were
      example sufficient to justify that course it might be had for the asking. More than one
      well-known poet and painter had been enrolled in the Nihilist ranks. Nay, was it not the
      consummate littérateur , Turgenieff, who had invented the name? But it might be too
      late. Would not Ivor suspect this instantaneous conversion?
'No,' answered the Jew, 'not if you are as unreserved as I advise you to be. Make the prime
      motive your desire to meet Colonel Valence. The rest, considering your previous history and
      opinions, will seem perfectly reasonable. I should tell you that, while we know Mr. Maurice
      Regan left England last Friday on his way to Brussels, we cannot discover Colonel Valence or
      any one that has heard his name out of the neighbourhood of Falside, where inquiries were
      instituted immediately.'
'And the women arrested at Brussels?' asked Rupert, 'is anything further known of them? In
      the English newspapers it is only said that they have undergone a fresh examination.'
'Here are their photographs, with the accompanying description by the Belgian police,'
      replied Bernstein, taking a packet out of the valise he had brought with him into the room. 'I
      do not think either of them can be Miss Hippolyta Valence.'
Neither did the artist, when he had seen the
       portraits and studied the accounts sent with them. One of the faces was too old,
      the other too young; and it was impossible that Hippolyta, however skilful in disguising
      herself, should have altered the very contour of her features. What was known of the women's
      antecedents, though needing confirmation, made the non-identity yet more certain. He gave back
      the parcel to the Jew, promised he would send for Ivor that afternoon, and arranged the plan
      upon which, in the alternatives of success or failure, they were to proceed.
When Bernstein was gone Rupert hastily scribbled the words, 'Come and see me at once,' and
      sent them by a messenger to Grafton Place. In a short time the sound of wheels was heard at
      the door, and Glanville, watching from the dining-room window, saw Ivor Mardol alight and run
      up the steps. Determined to act his part thoroughly now he had taken it up, Rupert came out
      into the hall, shook Ivor by the hand—a pressure which his old friend warmly returned—and led
      him into the study, where Bernstein's chair, standing in the middle of the room, testified
      that a visitor had not long departed. The sudden change in Rupert's behaviour, which he had
      been far from expecting—or was it anything else?— occasioned such uncontrollable emotion in
      Ivor that for some minutes he was unable to speak.
I have said that Rupert had almost in excess the artistic quality which seizes upon the
      present with a passion and firmness of grasp, which are utterly
       beyond the reach of those in whom reason and memory are stronger than
      imagination. It is the endowment which makes a consummate actor. And another gift he had which
      does not so often accompany it, due rather to the melancholy underlying his everyday
      character,—I mean that of keeping a secret from friends who, in other respects, were admitted
      to the fullest confidence. He could be frank enough to win implicit trust for what he said,
      while he was giving in return only so much as he deemed expedient. These were dangerous power,
      and he knew it; but the time seemed to have arrived when he must stake or lose all, and he
      resolved to play the game boldly. It roused an excitement within him which, like one fever
      driving out another, made his grief for Hippolyta, though not less real, in some degree less
      poignant. Towards Ivor Mardol, who had lied to him deliberately, who had for years been
      carrying on relations with Colonel Valence's daughter which must have continued during her
      stay at Forrest House, Rupert's feeling was that of the Red Indian who treads noiselessly in
      every footstep his intended victim has made, always seeing his murdered man —to quote Keats's
      fine expression—a little ahead of him, and following with uplifted tomahawk until the moment
      is come to strike him dead. Treachery for treachery! Be it so. What other way was there of
      recovering Hippolyta or avenging her loss?
With the caressing eloquence, therefore, which he knew so well how to practise, Rupert,
      waving aside his
       old friend's attempt at exculpation as needless, and excusing the harsh words
      that had sundered them during these days on the ground of sudden, irresponsible passion, went
      straight to the point he intended. He might count on Ivor's devotion, might he not? On his
      help in the calamity which had befallen him? Yes, he knew it. That was the reason he had sent
      for him. Rupert confessed, in terms of affection and self-rebuke, that he had been punished
      for keeping a secret from his dearest friend. That secret was the love which had sprung up,
      how, where, and when it mattered not, between himself and Hippolyta Valence. He watched for a
      change in Ivor's countenance, but no, the dissembling was perfect. Well and good. Hippolyta,
      who had had her own motives for living under the name of Mrs. Malcolm, had disappeared and
      could no longer be found. She had not returned to Falside; in London, what hope was there of
      coming upon her traces? The speaker's voice faltered as he went on to declare that he did not
      believe she was dead, or had met with a violent end. In the first outbreak of distress and
      fear he had charged Ivor with abducting her. It was, of course, absurd. He would not dwell
      upon the painful exhibition he had made of himself that morning. But, surely, some one had
      induced her to quit the house in which she had been residing and, without a moment's notice,
      to abandon those to whom she was dearer than life. Who could it be? After long meditation he
      had arrived at the belief that it
       was her father, Colonel Valence. What did Ivor think?
Ivor, who sat listening with his eyes fixed on Rupert, had not asked, and did not ask now,
      under what circumstances a young lady like Miss Valence was living away from home. It would
      have been an unpleasant query, though put by a friend. Rupert supposed that he was aware and
      did not require telling. Nor was he surprised when Ivor, instead of assenting to his theory
      about Colonel Valence, replied simply that he knew not what to think. He was evidently
      unwilling that Rupert should tear down the shelter afforded him by Hippolyta's father,—a thing
      which might speedily have happened were the Colonel sought after and proved innocent. Rupert
      returned to the charge; and Ivor, after making protestation that he did not wish to think evil
      of a man he had never seen (Rupert almost ground his teeth on hearing him repeat the
      falsehood), at last yielded and said, 'Suppose it were he, then?'
'Then,' cried Rupert, feigning more passion than he felt, 'I must discover him wherever he
      is,' and he straightway proceeded with the second half of the scheme. When he spoke of joining
      the anarchists his friend smiled; but, as he went on to assert with growing vehemence that he
      should certainly do it, cost what it might, Ivor turned pale. Did he see his plans checkmated?
      But he merely said, 'If you had resolved on it, Rupert, why did you not join our society
      before telling me? I need not have known;
       whereas, hereafter, you will be putting me in a dilemma where I must either
      denounce my friend or break my pledged word to my associates. Are you not aware that it is
      incompatible with the existence of a secret society to allow men like yourself to enter it, or
      not to denounce them if by any means they have got in?'
'Men like myself!' repeated his friend. 'Ah, to be sure, you mean traitors and disbelievers
      in the principles of revolution. But I shall be no traitor. I am as ready as yourself to
      subscribe and to propagate the creed you maintain.'
'Readier, perhaps,' said Ivor, with a melancholy smile; 'but that will hardly save you,
      should your motives for joining us be revealed, as they might be.' He spoke with much
      deliberation.
Rupert looked at him. Was it a veiled threat? 'Yes,' he said to himself, 'I dare be sworn
      they would be revealed when it suited this fellow's convenience; but that is part of the
      risk.' And then aloud, 'No, Ivor; they would be quite safe so long as you were the sole
      confidant of them, which is what I have in view. I want you, in short, to introduce me —to be
      my sponsor and the guarantee for my orthodoxy.'
'Me, my dear fellow,' exclaimed Ivor with agitation in his bearing and accent. 'Could there
      be anything more unfortunate? It is impossible. In the first place, knowing your motives, I
      should be acting a disloyal part to the association; and, in the second, I
       am myself under a cloud and what you may call excommunicate from the
      brethren.'
Glanville heard him with increasing hatred and admiration. He was an abominable liar and
      scoundrel, but how ready, how fertile in device! It had not cost him a moment to strike out a
      double line of fortification between himself and the enemy. But it should not avail him. The
      artist affected not to take his words seriously.
'Bah, my dear Ivor,' he said, 'do you mean to tell me there is a single lodge in Great
      Britain that you could not enter this evening, and bring a friend in your train, if you
      chose?'
Ivor seemed to feel embarrassed. 'No,' he replied, though with evident reluctance; 'I do not
      say that. The matter is not one I can explain to a stranger, since all are strangers,' he
      added, as if to preclude offence, 'who have not taken our engagements. But I may tell you that
      I have been deprived of the offices I held, and am looked on by the most influential leaders
      with extreme distrust and dislike. I have attended no meeting for months. I do not know when I
      shall.'
'Here is an opportunity,' returned Glanville, who did not believe a syllable of what Ivor
      had just trumped up, as he scornfully whispered to himself. 'You could not have a better. You
      are a strayed sheep returning to the fold of your own accord, and bringing another to prove
      your sincerity. It is the very thing.'
Mardol shook his head. 'No, it is not,' he said.
       'I mind my own risk as lightly as any man. But I will not encourage my friend to
      thrust himself, unarmed, into the lion's den. Do be persuaded, Rupert. Leave it to me to find
      Colonel Valence and his daughter, since you are sure they belong to us. I will make search in
      all directions.'
'Leave it to him, ay, that is what he would like,' was the mental commentary with which
      Glanville heard these words. He must strike the decisive blow. He stood up, walked across the
      study, and put his hand on Ivor's shoulder. Ivor turned his head towards the face which was
      bent down over him.
'Look here, Mardol,' said Rupert in clear metallic tones. It was so seldom that he called
      his friend anything but Ivor that the young man put his hand to his heart with a sudden pang
      on hearing the colder designation. Rupert, who knew how sensitive his affection was, or had
      been, noticed the gesture with satisfaction. Was he still capable of being wounded? So much
      the better.
Glanville, hardly pausing, continued what he had intended to say. 'Things between you and
      me'— such were his words—'have come to a pass where friendship must show itself heroic or must
      cease altogether to exist. There is no method by which I can hope to recover Miss Valence, or
      even to learn whether she still breathes, but this of entering your association. You, and you
      alone, can open the door to me. Do so, and you shall have your fitting reward, if you require
      any beyond that of helping a friend.
       Refuse, and we part, not now in passion as we did ten days ago, but with our
      eyes open, and for ever.'
He went back to his chair and sat down. Ivor's paleness became ghastly and his breath was
      like that of a man labouring under the greatest agitation. At last he said, 'Rupert, it is a
      hard battle. Will you give me your solemn promise not to betray the secrets, whether political
      or nonpolitical, of the society?'
'With pleasure,' answered Glanville, who perceived that he was relenting. 'I will keep all
      the ordinances with the same fidelity which you would exact from the meanest member.'
'There are no mean members,' said Ivor; 'we are all equal once we have taken the oath.'
'Very well; then count me as your equal in this respect. I want to see Colonel Valence, and
      I am prepared to pay the price. Can I say fairer? Come, decide.'
'It shall be as you wish,' said Ivor, his voice sinking. 'What would life be without your
      friendship?'
'What, indeed?' returned the artist in the bantering tone with which he was accustomed to
      receive Ivor Mardol's idolatries when they were at school together. The light mockery seemed
      to exhilarate the heart to which it was addressed. Ivor, too, rose from his seat, and
      stretching out his arms and shaking himself, as though to get quit of a burden, he said in a
      lighter tone to Rupert, 'And to which party among us do you suppose Colonel Valence to belong?
      Is he a Spartan or an Athenian?'

'I am sure I cannot tell,' said Rupert; 'explain your meaning, my philosopher.'
'Not now,' answered his friend; 'this conversation has fatigued me horribly. By and by. I
      will take you first, however, to see the Athenians. Hold yourself free from engagements till
      you hear from me.'

</div></body></text></TEI>