<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
CHAPTER XXII EATING THE LOTUS DAY BY DAY
The time is a month or so since Rupert's long drive out of town; the scene an
      old-fashioned garden, shaded largely with elm and lime, but with sunny spaces too, where
      flowers and fruits and vegetables seem to be growing side by side in pleasant neighbourhood. A
      hot July sun is sending down its floods of splendour, but little tempered by the specks of
      cloud which hang timidly in the sky, and are the remnant of a glorious fleece that melted into
      the azure some hours ago. Three o'clock is striking from the church steeple, which can be seen
      at some distance peering up through the trees; for, near as it is to London, timber of an
      honest, ancient sort is still plentiful all about, and especially on the long ascent of the
      main road, which within the memory of man was the High Street of a thriving village, but is
      now fresh named, to denote its absorption into the mighty maze of the great city. A second
      clock makes itself heard in a
       second church, more modern than the red brick edifice which has served the
      parish time out of mind—more modern and much nearer, since only the garden wall divides it
      from the garden. It is a large, handsome building of ragstone, and will look picturesque when
      the mosses and ivies have grown over it and taken from it the too fresh appearance as if it
      had been built yesterday. Other houses, of many shapes and varying dates, but most of them
      counting their century, are within view, each with its own garden, and with rows of plants in
      bloom at the upper windows—for we cannot see the lower ones here. There is a quiet hum in the
      atmosphere as of business, which keeps the place alive and astir, but which has not
      overpowered its habit of retirement, of well-to-do leisure, of middle-class ease and
      plenty—perhaps one should rise to a higher strain and say, of refined gentility seeking to
      combine the neighbourhood of town with trim gardens, winding green lanes, a pathway beyond the
      palings over-arched with boughs like the boulevard of a foreign city, and detached residences,
      inherited from one's grandfather, or taken at a handsome figure for a term of years. The
      prevailing tone is red brick, intermingled with dense green foliage; the roads are hard and
      firm, with a layer of white sand just now overspreading them, from which rises an occasional
      cloud of summer dust. No railway station comes nearer than a mile; and the omnibuses which
      convey the pilgrim hither are less gaudily painted than those which perambulate the leading
      thoroughfares of Town.
       Smart carriages roll from time to time up the ascent, which is now called in the
      street directory Bransmere Road; and their brilliant lamps, when in winter they draw up before
      various of these fine old mansions towards the dinner-hour, or stand waiting at half-past ten
      to take their occupants home again, are a pleasant sight under the trees, like the hugest of
      fire-flies resting motionless in the shade.
But why speak of winter on such a day? It is over and forgotten. All the doors and windows
      stand open, and on the road outside, which is just visible over the garden-gate, one can see
      the vibration in the air which is caused by a long and steady heat, and is the beginning—and
      as far as we ever get in England—of the mirage that works such deluding miracles in the
      countries of the sun. But there is a pleasant feeling of coolness in the central alley with
      its screen of overhanging boughs. And there Rupert and Hippolyta are walking side by side,
      slowly, as if to take in the beauty around. They are under the spell of this exquisite summer
      afternoon, when to live is simply delightful, and to be in each other's company the crown of
      joy.
Hippolyta speaks. 'I never saw a prettier old garden. It is full of flowery nooks where no
      foot seems to have trodden, places all tangled in roses and wildbrier, which some day you
      ought to paint, Rupert. I do not think I have thoroughly explored it yet. As for the house, I
      give it up. When I fancy the last door has at length been unlocked, the
       last case of old china discovered, I find another door that I have overlooked in
      a corner or behind a screen, another room with curiosities enough to furnish a museum of
      jewellery, glass, and deep-hued porcelain. And the queer, old Dutch pictures, how odd and
      amusing they look! What a fairy palace to me, who have never seen such things except in
      show-houses abroad! I wonder you could live in London when you had this at your disposal.'
'I have not had it long to live in, remember. Nor, if you will believe it, should I feel, if
      I lived here, the inspiration to realise beautiful or odd fancies which comes upon me in that
      dark London house, or while I am endeavouring to save my life in crossing Piccadilly. I used
      once to think that an artist should paint with the loveliest scenes in view. But now I doubt
      very much whether it could be done.'
'Don't you feel inspired when I am here to be your muse of painting?' she asked with her
      bewitching smile.
He looked at her very tenderly. 'Inspired to work by and by; yes. But not when you are
      present. You send the sunlight into my eyes, and they are too full of colour to see.'
'By and by will not be long, Rupert,' she answered, no longer with a smile. 'Your holiday
      will be out in less than a week, and you must go back to Trelingham. How hateful! Why cannot
      we stay as we are, and you renounce fame as I have renounced society?' But, seeing him put on
      a serious look, she added,
       'Now, you dear boy, smooth out that wrinkled brow. You know I mean nothing
      except that I want your company always, and grudge every minute of it. You cannot renounce
      your fame; neither ought you to throw up your engagement with Lord Trelingham.'
'I will, if you wish, Hippolyta. What keeps me to it but a sense of honour? Name and fame
      were much to me when I had only myself to live for. It is different now. I can paint pictures
      to please you, or to express my own feelings, as other men write poems or achieve greatness in
      war. But for the public, my quondam mistress, I care as little as you do for the flowers you
      plucked last spring.'
'Yes, yes, Rupert, you are brave and loving. But I am not going to make a Tannhäuser of you
      for all that, although I may be thought no better than my Lady Venus,' and she covered her
      face with her hands. 'You shall return to Trelingham; but what, oh what, am I to do when you
      are gone? Our honeymoon is past in a moment. So long as you are with me it seems that time
      stands still; I do not reckon it or mind the hours at all. But what a long, long day of
      emptiness it was when you went up to town last week! Time stood still in another fashion then.
      I thought you would never come home. For it is home, is it not, this old house in a garden
      where you have hidden away your Hippolyta? At least, I have none if it be not.' She looked sad
      in the midst of her happiness. Rupert had noticed it before. Was it only the thought of
      parting with him? He felt uncertain.

'I wish you would tell me, Hippolyta,' he said, in answer to her speech, 'whether you were
      ever melancholy at Falside?'
'I melancholy! what makes you imagine it? Not in the least. When my mother lived, we were
      the brightest of company; and though I felt her loss exceedingly, and do feel it, I should be
      telling you false if I said that I was melancholy about her. It was a different thing from
      melancholy—pure, unmixed sorrow.'
'Yes, exactly. I think that must be very true. But since, since you left Falside, since I
      brought you here, has there not been a shade of melancholy on your countenance? I do not mean
      always; it was there a moment ago. It has come back since I began speaking.'
'I cannot see my own face,' she answered, and would have said no more. But something
      prompted her to continue. 'A woman, I can assure you, Rupert, knows very little of her own
      feelings. She wants a physician of the mind to interpret them, just as we call in a doctor to
      make certain that we have a fever. You ask me a question I have put to myself sometimes, but
      cannot answer. Shall we talk over it? Will you be the physician to enlighten me?'
'Then you have been melancholy even in the midst of our great happiness,' concluded Rupert
      with a sigh. 'And what have you gained by quitting the old paths? Ah, me!'
'Do not be troubled,' she said affectionately; 'am
       I not a woman and therefore subject to fears, to fancies, to overshadowing from
      those clouds of ignorance and superstition which have darkened the lives of one half the human
      race from the day it began? My reason tells me that we are, and for a long while must remain,
      the weaker sex, thanks to the institutions that have made us so. When I tremble and am afraid
      I know well it is the inherited malady which is giving signs of its existence.'
'And is that all? or do you repent of the step we have taken?'
'Ask me whether I repent of loving you! No, Rupert, I could not have imagined in my
      brightest day-dreams that such happiness was in store. It fills my heart to overflowing; and
      when you see me cry, as yesterday, you ought to think that it rains out of my eyes, for that
      is the reason, and will be, if I am agitated, restless, fervent. I must learn music to calm
      these wild transports. Have not you and I been in the golden heart of joy these many, these
      too quickly-passing days? I have felt like one suddenly caught up to the sun and allowed to
      wander at will through its glowing realms, with radiant lights on every side, and the dark
      earth so far away I could hardly tell where it was. Why,' she said, laughing, 'you will make
      me talk allegories, unless you say something yourself.'
'But still,' persisted Rupert, 'you have not always felt the radiance about you. The glory
      has changed, and melancholy come in its stead. Your temperament
       has been unequal; and once even, Hippolyta, I thought you avoided me.'
'Now you are giving me your own impressions, which may be nearer the truth than mine. It is
      such a strange, new feeling that you belong to another, and that the freedom of your former
      days will never return, is it not? Then, too, although what I did should be done over again
      to-morrow, if it were necessary, I am not the bold young lady you might have thought me,
      judging only by that night. I was bold at the time; and I daresay courage will never be
      wanting to me when circumstances are there to call it forth. But my resolution cost me an
      effort; the last part of it,' she went on, her voice sinking, 'more than I can well account
      for. I am sure that I do not fear death; and yet, since it is all over and past, my mind
      misgives me. I could not, indeed, indeed I could not have lived, Rupert, if you had sent me
      away. And so I tell myself when these sad thoughts come accusing me. It was not that I meant
      to alarm your affection; but when I considered the days I should have spent if we were to
      become strangers, I saw no motive for living. But I did in some way threaten you that night
      with what I should do, and now I am grieved over it.'
'Never mind, never mind, dearest,' he said. Their meeting in the studio was a thing he did
      not wish to recall; he had put it far from him, and not gone near the place except for a few
      hours, when he gave orders to have his pictures and painting materials
       carried elsewhither. He meant never to set foot in it again. For him it would be
      ever haunted with direful memories. He went on:
'From what you say, it is partly reaction, and will go off when you are quite used to your
      new surroundings. Do not give way to it. I shall never blame you for the past, and you must
      not dwell any more, Hippolyta, on the accidents that have brought us together. If you can
      resolve, as I have told you with all the earnestness of which I am capable, to go through the
      ceremonies of marriage, civil or religious, I am here to fulfil my part. I will not torment
      you about it, or say a single word more except by your permission. But, at all events, should
      you feel regret or discomfort, you know the way out of it.'
'I do, I do,' she answered. 'You are generous both in what you ask and in what you give up.
      I am not melancholy on that score, and not much on any,' she continued, brightening. 'We have
      talked too seriously, Rupert. Is it not time to drive somewhere and teach me my way about
      these rustic lanes? I shall want to know them well when you are in the West Country,—a
      thousand miles away from me,— since I cannot follow you.'
'I will order the carriage,' he said. 'Go to your room and get ready. There is a drive along
      the brow of the hill which we have not taken.'
She ran up the garden with a fleet footstep, and was heard a moment after singing in her
      room above, as she moved hither and thither. Glanville, his eyes
       and his heart full of love, gave a glance at her window, where for an instant he
      saw her dress fluttering when she passed, and went round to the stables a happy yet
      preoccupied man. What an inexplicable fate was his! The bright sky and summer hours, in which
      all things beautiful came forth to view, clad in their gayest attire, the very loveliness and
      wit of Hippolyta, seemed but to deepen his pensive mood. Their joy had been great—extreme; too
      great to last, he would murmur, when he looked on the countenance, of his beloved, and
      observed in it the shade of some bitter or painful reflection, which, like a change in the
      evening lights, was gone ere he could decipher its meaning. But his own feelings were not
      unmixed either. He had spoken the truth when, in the long hours of that night-wandering about
      London, he described himself as no libertine. The record of his life held in it nothing that
      men count disgrace. It has been widely believed that genius implies or requires
      self-indulgence, and that only the Fornarina can inspire a Raffaelle. The creed, however, is
      uncertain, and Rupert's autobiography would, on the whole, have tended to disprove it. I do
      not say that he was immaculate, that, more invincible than Samson, he had never been
      'effeminately vanquished.' But if he had now and again yielded to the temptation of a lovely
      face, a certain fastidiousness of sense held him above the vulgar range of low desire. He was
      serious, enthusiastic, given to labour, well content with Ivor's friendship instead of a
      thousand which
       were to be had for the asking. When love came, he said, he would make it
      welcome; and he waited, not impatiently, till its day should 'peer forth the golden windows of
      the East.' He had not been thought the worse company for a little self-restraint, although in
      consequence he never went beyond civil terms with various great persons in the world of art.
      When, as will happen, he heard the moral code expounded with that liberty which is thought to
      betoken a mind above prejudice, he felt little inclination to assent. Ivor and he were agreed
      that a man may discard the official religion, yet be under strict orders from a higher court
      to respect human nature in himself. He did not pretend to be an ascetic or a Puritan, but at
      six and twenty, he thought, there was no need to be in a violent hurry; he would not squander
      his youth nor drain a cup to which the great enchantment was lacking. It might be interesting
      to discover when and how he came upon the momentous truth that love is of the spirit rather
      than of earth and the senses, or by what process he had convinced himself that no warmth of
      affection will compensate for the absence of respect. He believed, too, in love at first
      sight, and discoursed wisely on the reciprocal attractions that Nature has put into hearts of
      flesh no less certainly than into threads of steel and amber. But he would have resisted his
      drawing towards Hippolyta had she not seemed in his eyes a lovely, innocent soul of which
      outward beauty was the fitting apparel. And now—?

I should be describing a phantasm, and not Rupert Glanville, did I pretend that when the cup
      which held this great enchantment, running over with love, was pressed to his lips, he did not
      drink deep of its sweetness. Enthusiasm was part of his nature, and he resolved to make
      Hippolyta happy, and himself through her,—happy as they could be in the abundance of their
      varied gifts, the freshness of youth, and the enjoyment of love. Putting the world out of
      view, dismissing every thought of the future, leaving his reputation as a man, his fame as an
      artist, to take care of itself, Rupert—not unlike the knight of love to whom Hippolyta
      compared him, but with eyes open and will determined—had come into the Venusberg and was
      willing to spend, not seven years, but his life to the very end with the lady of his devotion.
      If, on the one hand, he felt compunction for the daring step she had taken, on the other it
      was a dream of his earliest days to sacrifice himself to another. 'All for love and the world
      well lost.' Those were words he would have inscribed on his stainless shield, and counted them
      a consecration. Had Hippolyta required only the ordinary sacrifice which men approve, because
      it is cast in moulds familiar to them! But what was this new virtue rooted in something which
      to the common judgment looked like vice? Well, he did not dwell upon it in the first days of
      their life together. He shut out the judgments of society. Away from Trelingham, from London,
      where his letters lay neglected, in a house
       that had few associations with his previous existence, and seeing every moment a
      companion whose charm grew with the increasing confidence of their intercourse, who suffered
      from no misgivings as to the legitimacy or the unchangeable character of their relations, but
      was tranquil, and modest, and delightfully original in whatever she said or did, it is easy to
      understand how Rupert, like a man carried out to sea upon a great wave, was unable to return
      upon his former thoughts or to resist the current which drove him onward. He might rue it
      bitterly afterwards, when the wave was spent or the returning tide had cast him on shore. But
      there is a strong fascination in the opinion of another when it confirms or excuses our own.
      Hippolyta did not move, she did not look like a being upon whom degradation had fallen. She
      kept in her eyes that gaze of seraphic astonishment, as it has well been termed, which, when
      Nature fixes it in the human countenance, would persuade us against our senses that innocence
      dwells within. Its light was subdued by melancholy at times; and who, with the tender feelings
      of Rupert, could rebuke her then? He melted into adoring pity, into a childlike devotion that
      knew no bounds, and that uttered itself in terms which breathed the affection, the
      seriousness, the playful, half-deliberate simplicity of the heart when it is touched to the
      core.
The house to which he had taken her seemed made for a romantic chapter of existence such as
      they were going through. It had belonged to Rupert from
       the time he was at school, having been left him by an ancient lady, his
      grand-aunt, to whom he was very dear, though she seldom was in a state of health which
      permitted her to have a talkative and rather troublesome boy in the house. He had therefore
      seldom been on a visit at Forrest House, nor, it must be admitted, did he look forward to
      staying there; for it seemed to his juvenile apprehension dark and gloomy, full of uninhabited
      corners, and not lightened up by the extremely white face and long trailing garments of black
      silk, and the black lace shawls, which made up for him the impression of his grand-aunt. He
      liked her in his general way of liking all who were kind to him. But he was glad to be out of
      doors whenever Miss Atterbury would allow him to run about, and at other times to stay with
      the Dutch pictures and explain in his own mind the scenes which they delineated. When his
      grand-aunt died he attended her funeral; and he remembered, but not well, being told by a
      gentleman in black, who proved in after years to be the family solicitor, that Forrest House
      and the properties thereunto appertaining were his own, to be held in trust till he came of
      age. He thought little on the subject; his father's small estate, lying on the borders of
      Shropshire, and in a beautiful hilly region, pleased him much better than this old red
      mansion, nor did he for a long while understand that it brought him a not insignificant part
      of his annual income.
Immediately on the old lady's death it had been
       let, furniture and all just as it stood, to another lady not quite so old. She
      survived till Rupert was five and twenty; but he never had occasion to make himself known to
      her, and did not see Forrest House for a good fourteen years. Her death left it vacant; and
      the family solicitor was looking for a suitable tenant when Rupert, to his own great
      astonishment and with a feeling of shame, informed him that he might spare himself the
      trouble, and that the house was disposed of. What sort of person the incoming tenant was, or
      on what terms he had taken the place, Glanville did not say.
On driving thither that morning he had dismissed the cabman at the door, and showing a card
      from his solicitor to the housekeeper, who had never set eyes on Glanville, he went over the
      principal rooms. They were in admirable condition, and needed but some few alterations to fit
      them for Hippolyta. He gave the orders at once, stating his intention of taking possession
      that very afternoon, and assuring the housekeeper that she should receive a telegram from the
      solicitor which would authorise these prompt measures as soon as he had reached that
      gentleman's office. She inquired the new tenant's name. He had not thought of one, and did not
      answer on the spur of the moment. To the housekeeper he seemed rather absent-minded; but the
      fact was that he could think of no other name than his own. 'The solicitor will tell you,' he
      said; and he hurried away. He called the first cab which he saw going down the
       descent, and paid a hasty visit to his man of law, during which it appeared that
      Mr. and Mrs. Malcolm, intimate friends of his, wanted the house, and as they happened to be
      travelling in the neighbourhood would like to make trial of it at once. He was decisive and
      peremptory; dictated the terms of the telegram lest there should arise difficulties at the
      other end; left the solicitor's office the moment all was concluded, and on the stroke of noon
      entered the studio. Hippolyta was expecting him. No words passed between them except the brief
      sentences in which he asked whether she was ready, and what she proposed to do with the
      luggage she had left on arriving from Falside. It was thought prudent to take it with them;
      lost or relinquished luggage gives rise to inquiry; and they drove together, for the first
      time— these engaged lovers—in a London cab, not speaking one word as they went along. They did
      not even clasp hands. A feeling of some decisive event taking place, too grave and solemn for
      the expression of any sentiment, was in the hearts of both. Thus they set out on what seemed
      the interminable drive to Forrest House, and arrived about six o'clock. It was not twenty-four
      hours since Hippolyta had alighted in Rupert's studio.
But with the change of scene and of name— for to the latter precaution Hippolyta, though
      very reluctantly, gave her consent,—with this, I say, their solemn feelings vanished. The
      artist had disappeared; the young lady of Falside was known no more. Mr.
       and Mrs. Malcolm, a young married couple, ardently attached to one another,
      never seen apart by the neighbours who observed that Forrest House had been let, and
      unobserved by the rest of humankind, were living a fantastic, yet a real existence, which
      seemed to dispense with all ties of duty or obligations towards their fellows. They had but
      one duty, to be in each other's company at all times; but one obligation—which they did not
      appear to think a burden—that of loving one another. They fleeted the time carelessly, as in
      the golden age. They received no letters, read no journals, received no visits. The old
      housekeeper had strict injunctions not to admit callers beyond the gate; and when Sunday came,
      she was perplexed and horrified on seeing that neither the young lady nor her husband went to
      church. They might indeed be Roman Catholics, and were perhaps ignorant that the Gothic
      edifice on the other side of the wall was of that persuasion. She gently hinted as much to
      Mrs. Malcolm on the Monday morning; but no, Mrs. Malcolm said they were not Roman Catholics.
      And during the four Sundays of their stay hitherto they had not seen the inside of a sacred
      building. They spent the Day of Rest exactly like the other six days of the week, in painting
      and singing, and exploring the old house, and rambling about the garden hand in hand, or
      driving among the more sequestered lanes. Only once did Mr. Malcolm go up to town; and Mrs.
      Malcolm passed the whole afternoon near
       the garden-gate, sometimes opening it to look down the road, as though by
      looking and wishing she could bring him home a little earlier. When he did arrive she was
      overcome with infantine joy, and laughed and sang, and danced a step or two about him as they
      went up the path together. Neither housemaid nor housekeeper—there were only these servants
      indoors —had seen a bride so unmistakably in love. And the bridegroom seemed equally
      enchanted.
It was so indeed. Their attachment, sudden as on both sides it had been, like the outburst
      of birds in springtime under the influence of the newly-brightening sun and fresh warm air,
      was deep as their nature. Rupert, whose mobile temper and susceptibility of imagination added
      an intense earnestness to whatever he undertook, was now wrought up to a pure enthusiasm in
      which he felt like an actor in some great tragic movement, the dénoûment of which —as
      on the Roman stage when an emperor commanded— might become not acting but reality. He had
      lived much alone, and had acquired that turn for concealment or reserve which would have led
      him, without much pressing, to join in any kind of secret undertaking, provided it were not
      dishonourable. A secret marriage would certainly not have shocked him; and in keeping
      acquaintance at bay, inventing expedients which might throw them out, or making covert
      journeys into the blue distance, he would have been as fertile as the heroes of Dumas or
      Eugène Sue. But then, a secret marriage need not be dishonourable.
       And was the loyalty which now engaged him to live under cloud of night a thing
      to be ashamed of? or had he not done his best to persuade Hippolyta, and could he now by
      taking measures compel her to submit to the ways of the world? He would not do it, he said to
      himself; in all but name theirs was a true marriage; and the sense of mystery heightened his
      passion. Great as is the force of public opinion, and in various respects more potent than
      ever it was, it has nothing sacred about it, and a man who chooses to live out of society, or
      to live in it and be wary, need not fear that his individual freedom will suffer or his
      comings and goings be severely scrutinised. There are so many standards in the field, that he
      who does battle against one is pretty sure to find the folds of another waving over him.
      Rupert, indeed, could not have explained to a man of the world on what conditions Hippolyta
      had become his without exposing her and himself to ridicule. He would have been asked in a
      bantering voice why he sought far-fetched reasons for what was the simplest thing imaginable.
      But very few would have inquired, and still fewer cared to know, why Miss Valence had accepted
      him. All that society demanded of Rupert was to keep his own counsel, go his way, and observe
      the proprieties. Whether he lived a double life—was Mr. Glanville the famous artist in
      Belgravia, and Mr. Malcolm the idle young gentleman at Forrest House—concerned nobody but
      himself. The penalty was for bringing these things on the stage.
       And Rupert, who was well acquainted with the rules of modern society, although
      hitherto not called on to practise this particular one, felt by turns amused and
      melancholy,—amused at lying perdu in such a way when he ought to have been
      cultivating life in London drawing-rooms and enjoying the season; melancholy that it was for
      Hippolyta's sake he had put on the outward seeming of an ill-regulated life. He shrank from
      the question how long it might continue. He was in the fairyland of first love, of reverie and
      romance, of innocence which took on the colour of guilt, and of guilt which seemed primeval
      innocence. The world of every day might be near, but it was on the other side of the mountains
      which made a steep inaccessible wall between it and them. The lovers had only to forget; there
      came neither voice nor portent out of the rosy sky under which they roamed, or from the trees
      of the forest which grew up, friendly and large-leaved, around them.
No portent out of the rosy sky; but still, as we have seen, a something in Hippolyta which,
      like the thinnest cloud, was visible to another, to Rupert, not to herself whom it passed
      upon. She would be momentarily pensive, leaning her beautiful head upon her hand, with such
      tender, thoughtful grace as that of Juliet meditating in the balcony, while Romeo stands
      watching her. But she did not know why she should be less gay at one time than at another. It
      was a novel experience; for though she had gone through suffering in childhood, she had not
      dreamt sad dreams as she did now.

</div></body></text></TEI>