<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER XVI LA BELLE FILLE HEUREUSE, EFFARÉE ET SAUVAGE
Such was the event of which Rupert heard from the Countess when he came in; and at
      dinner she dressed it up in the grotesque fancies suggested by her imagination. She had never
      seen any one like Hippolyta. She compared her, as the artist himself had done, to a sylph, a
      creature of romance, imprisoned by Colonel Valence at Falside. They ought not to rest till she
      was delivered. Glanville laughingly inquired whether a captive sylph was in the habit of
      riding alone all over the country; and was told in reply that Hippolyta's captivity was moral,
      not a mere imprisonment of the body. She dressed with remarkable taste for one who had never
      seen a fashionable gathering; but that might be inspiration like Rachel's, who could have worn
      a tablecloth as if it were a princess's robe. And her manners, though wild, were beautiful.
      Therefore she must come out and be made know to civilised
       people. The Countess would do her that charity if no one else was willing, for
      she adored Hippolyta.
'Do you think her a sylph, Lady May?' asked Glanville.
'She seems to me a young lady of most unusual loveliness, and of great intelligence and
      decision. But I should not call her a sylph, because I don't know what the word means. It is
      one of those sentimental expressions that my cousin has learnt from her French reading.'
'You are always severe on my reading,' said Karina; 'but we cannot all be philosophers. A
      sylph is a beautiful creature with great dreamy eyes, and wings folded up in her corset, so
      that she has only to spread them and she can fly wherever she chooses. Don't you believe that
      Miss Valence could fly if she liked?'
'She has character enough to do anything,' said Lady May, 'and I am glad to have made her
      acquaintance. But we shall know more when she comes to Trelingham.'
It was evident that she had not spoken of the Hermitage. Oh, wise Hippolyta, thought Rupert.
      Now he should see her again; and the secret between them would give him an advantage. All
      love-making is a contest in which not a little depends on the given odds. Hippolyta was to
      some extent in his power. And he was no longer in hers—since she had kept silence when to
      speak might have put him in the wrong.

He watched every day till she came. A whole week moved on at the laggard pace of time when
      we are expecting something to happen. Ivor finished his work, or at least put it in order for
      Rupert to finish; packed up his belongings, and said good-bye to the Earl and Lady May with a
      tranquil mien in which none could have discerned the passionate regrets that filled his heart.
      Lord Trelingham begged him to come back as soon as he could; the Hermitage would be always at
      his disposal, and he might rest assured of a hearty welcome. He smiled sadly; no, he thanked
      them, it was most improbable that he should return. Circumstances, his way of life, imperative
      engagements, forbade the hope. But he would call on them in town? He did not know; the future
      was so uncertain. Then Tom Davenant said he must come to Foxholme; and poor Ivor turned away
      his face because of the shame and emotion that were gathering there. If Tom could only know
      upon what errand he was departing, the last thing he would have imagined would have been such
      an invitation. He loved the young man. But they stood ranged on opposite sides in the battle
      of life; and the trumpetcall which was sounding in his own ears sternly told him that
      friendship must yield to duty. 'I will come indeed, if I can,' he answered, 'but though I
      never should, believe that the fault is not mine. We are all creatures of circumstance.' Tom
      had, therefore, to content himself with the mournful pleasure of driving him to the station,
      which he did with
       exemplary skill, at the same time assuring Ivor that if he would not mind little
      deficiencies in writing and grammar—his ignorance of which the young man regretted, though too
      late—he, Tom Davenant, should find solace in corresponding with him. His friend smiled and
      said how grateful it would make him, adding that, in case he delayed an answer for some weeks,
      it would mean that he was gone from home. Characteristic of the man I call it, that his sorrow
      on leaving these two friends, Rupert and Tom Davenant, almost made him forget the love he was
      renouncing. Nay, he thought more of the new friend than of the old during those days; for the
      expected to meet Rupert again in London or abroad, but this might prove his last farewell to
      Tom Davenant. He had lived more than four months at the chalet. It was now November; and the
      winter of his discontent took from him, or made more piercing, the remembrance of those
      heavenly days when first he came. Happy if he could forget them altogether! But no, they would
      be a lifelong regret. Even as the thought crossed his mind he smiled bitterly. Lifelong might
      not be so very long after all. He was ordered to the front; and those who are to face cannon
      do not insure their lives at a low premium. He would not disclose to the friend by his side,
      or even to Rupert, how serious the danger had become; I should rather say, he could not, for
      they would have hindered his going. But a certain steady light in his eyes and involuntary
      tension of the muscles betokened the excitement under
       which he laboured. 'You are not very well,' said Tom to him; 'can't you wait a
      few days?' Rupert noticed his mood, was exceedingly gentle with him as on the like occasions
      in their previous intercourse; but ventured neither to ask a question nor to offer advice. He
      knew well that Ivor did not brook interference.
So he went away and disappeared into the unknown. Rupert, a few days after, requested that
      the chalet might be assigned to himself as a studio and general storehouse, for he did not
      wish to encumber the Great Hall as yet, and his sketches took up room. But he never went
      across the mere till he had ascertained that Hippolyta would not call in the morning. He was
      now assiduous in his politeness to Lady May, upon whose spirits a dull tranquillity had
      fallen, like yellow fog stifling and blinding her. She could not subdue the fascination of
      being with him; ever when he came into the room the others vanished from her eyes and she
      looked at him alone, and brooded over his slightest utterances. She did not fear Hippolyta
      much now; and not to be jealous was comparative happiness. There had come indeed an end of her
      confidences and of his listening to them. But when would he declare himself? For he was surely
      bound by what had passed.
It was a lovely morning when Hippolyta appeared at Trelingham, in a low chaise which she
      drove herself, while the silent old groom or gardener sat behind.
       She had come to spend the day, but not to dine; for she said in her note that
      they must excuse her shyness if she felt tempted to fly away again as soon as she found
      herself inside the Court. Glanville, who had been lingering since breakfast about the gate by
      which she was to enter and saw her drive by, himself lying close in ambush, ran along other
      pathways up to the house, and the moment he decently could sauntered into the morning-room
      where the three ladies were seated. That he blushed like a very young man on meeting those
      brown eyes need hardly be said; and if Hippolyta's countenance did not put on exactly the same
      shade of crimson, it may have been simply because hers was a pale ivory cheek and his was
      rather swarthy. They were both a good deal embarrassed, which Lady May ascribed to the
      circumstances of the adventure which had made them acquainted. She said to herself that Miss
      Valence, though she had sinned against propriety on that day, had done so ignorantly, while
      Rupert was often confused on coming into a room. They talked until the Earl came about the
      scenery of Trelingham Park, which Hippolyta did not know except on the outskirts. And the
      artist sat and gazed at her. She was more beautiful than ever. Lady May, whome he could now
      contrast with his divinity, seemed a majestic woman, allied to the dangerous creatures of
      forest or jungle in whose composition there is more fire than light. But Hippolyta did not
      belong to earth. Fervent she might be in her
       feelings, quick to speak and to move; her beauty was not childlike, nor did it
      appeal merely to the softer passions of pity and tenderness; but there was about her, all the
      while, an innocent directness, a virginal simplicity, which made of her 'a thing enskied and
      sainted.' When she answered Lady May her voice had in it a tone of great affection, which
      changed to something bright and sparkling if the Countess addressed her. But it was clear that
      she listened, even while joining in the conversation, for a step that happily was not long
      delayed. Every minute she had looked towards the door in anxious expectation; and when it
      opened and the Earl of Trelingham came in, walking with the feeble gait which was growing
      habitual with him, she rose at once and ran to meet the old man. He took both her hands in
      his, and, clasping them affectionately, led her towards the window. There was little need to
      say that he welcomed her; his emotion proved it better than words. After scanning her face
      eagerly in silence, he let go her hands, and said, 'You do not remind me of your father, my
      dear child. But so many years have elapsed since I knew his features well, that I may perhaps
      be mistaken. It is equally brave and kind of you to pay me this visit. My daughter has told
      you, I am sure, how glad we are to see you and what a hope we have that this may be the
      beginning of better things.'
'I know,' answered Hippolyta, 'and I wish I could help more in the matter than, I fear, is
      within my
       power. Of one thing pray let me assure you, for I am certain of it,' and she
      stopped as if for permission.
'Go on, my dear,' said the Earl; 'do not be afraid if you have anything to say.' He too
      seemed overcome by her great beauty and simple ways.
'What I want to tell you,' she said, 'is that my father has often spoken your name of late
      years, and never without affection. I cannot imagine why he has kept, and still keeps, aloof
      from his old friends; but there is no ill-feeling in it, of that I am convinced.'
'Thank God,' said the Earl, 'thank God! It is all I want,—to forget the past, which cannot
      be undone, and die in peace with all men. As regards your father, I did for a long while allow
      a feeling of resentment to come between him and me. It may have seemed unjust in his eyes that
      any one should have contested his rights as a father over the issue of his first marriage. But
      I went by the advice of others and my own conscience. However, my poor sister is dead, and you
      are Colonel Valence's only child, and it is time the past was buried.'
'My father has hardly ever mentioned Lady Alice in my hearing,' replied Hippolyta. 'It was
      almost by accident that I knew of his former marriage, and for months after coming to Falside
      I was ignorant that we lived near her family. My mother told me when she was very ill. I am
      like my mother. She was Spanish, and could not bear the English climate, although she did her
      best not to let my father see the harm it was doing her.'

'Was your mother Spanish?' inquired the Earl. 'Then, perhaps, she brought you up in her
      religious views.' Rupert waited with some curiosity for the answer.
'My mother did not bring me up at all,' said Hippolyta; 'she was an invalid most of her
      time. My father taught me all I know.' She spoke with composure, and seemed to have said all
      that she thought necessary. Lord Trelingham was too well bred to pursue the examination. His
      melancholy looks, indeed, bore witness to what he feared would have been the result. He blamed
      Colonel Valence, but it was impossible to blame his daughter; and the sad spiritual condition
      of so lovely and innocent a creature filled him with indignation, which went far to counteract
      his previous desire to condone the past. Meanwhile, Karina, whose eager spirits made her
      sometimes inconsiderate, inquired of Hippolyta, 'Do you never go to church then? I don't think
      your father does, at least in the country.'
Lord Trelingham, with some severity in his tone, interposed. 'My dear Karina,' he said, 'you
      must really not cross-examine Miss Valence. These are matters of conscience, about which we
      have no right to be curious.'
But Miss Valence was not offended. She replied at once to the Countess. 'I have been in some
      of the great churches abroad, when there was no service going on. But otherwise I do not know
      what is done in a church. My father did not teach me religion.'

This remarkable declaration, made in her natural voice, which was gentle and sweet, came
      upon her hearers like lightning from a clear sky. It startled them, although every one present
      had supposed it already. But there are so many things we know yet could not venture on putting
      into words. The Earl was inexpressibly pained; Lady May looked across at Glanville to see what
      effect this confession would have on him; and the Countess felt frightened, as though a snake
      had turned under her hand and bitten her. Rupert moved uncomfortably in his chair. It was a
      shock to him, certainly. He would have said, in the abstract, that with these matters women
      had nothing to do; they ought to keep to the religion in which they were born and leave
      speculation to the philosophers. But when his eyes fell on the beloved features again the
      discomfort vanished. Hippolyta sat, a picture of quiet beauty, untroubled by the momentary
      silence which had followed her declaration, and perhaps too little acquainted with the ways of
      the world to comprehend how much it had astonished them. She said 'My father did not teach me
      religion' as she would have said, had it been the fact, 'I was born blind.' She was not
      aggressive or defiant, but natural and innocent. Thus it came to pass that even Lord
      Trelingham's horror, which was exceedingly great, yielded to compassion, and he thought it
      more than ever expedient to make her at home among good Christians who might enlighten
      her.

But lest that terrible niece of his should ask more questions, he turned the conversation to
      Miss Valence's knowledge of the Continent, and they were soon deep in the comparative beauties
      of the Alps and the Apennines. Her parents, it was evident, had wandered fast and far, seldom
      staying long in one place, and never making the acquaintance of great families unless some
      member of them happened to be 'tainted with democratic opinions,' as Lord Trelingham would
      have called it, or, in Colonel Valence's phrase, 'enlightened and liberal.' There was
      something even slightly ridiculous in the way that names came up between the Earl and the
      young lady. If he mentioned a noble house, she often knew it; but when he went on to describe
      the august head thereof or his equally august consort, Hippolyta had never seen either, and
      owed her familiarity with the name to a scapegrace or scientific young man, the grief of his
      parents, who had served with Garibaldi in Sicily, or was famous in the Cretan or the Polish
      rising. Lord Trelingham bore it very well; this he had expected; and much as he might deplore
      the associations in which Valence had brought up his daughter, there were too many great
      Englishmen on that side to allow of unmitigated censure in the instance before him. The Earl
      was by no means liberal, but he was something which is perhaps as commendable in a world where
      we cannot have all we should like,—he was good-natured, and quite incapable of indentifying
      individuals with the doctrines
       they held. He therefore listened with patience and a degree of interest to the
      remarks, which were rather pointed than voluble, of Hippolyta on those revolutionary young men
      whose pedigree he knew in Lombardy and Languedoc. He was led to speak of his own travels,
      which had been extensive; but, interrupting himself suddenly in the midst of his recital, he
      asked whether Miss Valence had ever been in Spain. Yes, she told him, once, on the side of
      Barcelona. And Seville, did she know that picturesque city? She had not been there, nor had
      her father mentioned his early campaign in its neighbourhood. Then she knew nothing of the
      Madonna of San Lucar? Nothing whatever, she replied. He was astonished that so striking an
      incident of his first travels had not been a favourite theme of Colonel Valence's. However, it
      might help to soften him still more if he learned how narrowly the picture had escaped
      destruction. He would perhaps be touched on hearing it; for the sight of the portrait long ago
      had affected him powerfully and even brought him, one might say, from Spain to Trelingham.
Herewith the Earl invited Hippolyta to follow him to the gallery upstairs. She rose, nothing
      loth; and as he evidently wished the rest to accompany them, a general move was made. The
      Countess, again interposing as they went along, asked Hippolyta whether she knew what kind of
      picture was about to be shown her. The young lady, turning half round on the stairs, answered
      that she supposed it would
       resemble those she had noticed in the great collections on the Continent. 'You
      must not imagine,' she added innocently, 'that I have not studied the Christian mythology. I
      cannot say, indeed, that I am familiar with all its details.' Glanville fell back a step on
      hearing this language, and Karina did not open her mouth again for some time. She was daring
      herself, but she knew that ordinary people did not speak in this way; and again the simile of
      the snake occurred to her. Lord Trelingham was either deaf or preoccupied, and took no heed of
      the remark. Perhaps he was thinking how he could make the history of the picture brief yet
      intelligible; for, when they arrived before it, he began at once to run over the main points
      as we know them. He said nothing of Valence's motives for leaving England, nor of what
      followed when he came back to Trelingham. But how much of his narrative did the stranger
      apprehend? She stood like one spellbound, first eyeing Lady May and then lost in the
      magnificence and glory of the painting. The Earl ceased to speak, and there was a long
      silence, during which Hippolyta steadfastly gazed at it, never turning her head, with the
      expression of one who would learn a thing by heart. By and by she glanced towards Lady May,
      and going up to her, said in a whisper, 'Is not that your portrait? And when did you live in
      that wonderful world?' The question was extraordinary, but Hippolyta seemed in earnest. Lady
      May smiled with a feeling of anguish; she still felt the
       distance between herself and that ideal of heavenly innocence.
'The picture was painted long ago,' she replied, 'from an ancestress of mine. I sat to Mr.
      Glanville when it was restored; that is all.'
'And so,' Hippolyta said, 'it is only a piece of imagination. But how beautiful it would be
      if we could believe that somewhere in the heights or the depths there was a perfect human
      creature, one of ourselves, a woman, like this! Do you suppose there can be?' she asked of
      Lady May.
'I do not know,' was the answer, given somewhat impetuously; 'the medieval Christians
      thought so, as the Spanish and Italian peasants do still.'
'Yes,' said Hippolyta; 'I used to hear them sing and speak of the Madonna, and I called it,
      as my father did, mythology. But I was never so impressed with a painting as I am with this. I
      should be glad if it were a true vision. And yet we all say it cannot be. The peasants have
      their beautiful things to believe in, and the philosophers have none. That is what I am always
      hearing at home. It makes me sad when I think of it. If the truth is not beautiful, what is
      the good of it all?' She looked round, expecting some one, as it should seem, to answer. But
      they were too much astonished at such curious words on the lips of one so young.
'Such questions are not fit for you,' said Glanville, coming close to her. 'If you had lived
      with other young ladies you would not think of them. I, at any
       rate, believe that all true things, in the long run, will be found beautiful as
      well.'
'Then you disagree with my father?' she said inquiringly.
'I disagree with all gloomy creeds,' he answered. 'But come away, and do not look at the
      picture again if it distresses you.' Lady May listened; she heard something in his voice of
      which she did not approve.
'Oh, it does not distress me; on the contrary,' exclaimed Hippolyta, 'it would keep me
      looking at it all day. And at last I should beg the wonderful figure to open its lips and
      speak. What grieves me is, that with colours and a piece of linen you can express so much
      beauty—at so little cost—and yet the resources of the infinite cannot make this real.'
The Earl put in his quiet word. 'If you wish, my dear child, to believe it real, there is
      nothing to prevent you. I believe it in my own way; so do the multitude of Christians, and not
      the peasantry alone. But come, as Mr. Glanville says, for you are too susceptible, I see, to
      sudden impressions.'
She left the picture unwillingly, and looked back more than once as they went to the door.
      The incident had shown her in a strange and amiable light which endeared her to the heart of
      Lord Trelingham; while Rupert, mindful of his own enthusiasm when restoring the Madonna of the
      Seraphim, said to himself that this highly poetic temperament had at once seized its meaning
      and reality—a result which
       only days of study had brought about in him the sensitive artist. Hippolyta was
      peculiar; but where in heaven or earth could he find a more exquisite creation?
When, by and by, she spoke of returning to Falside, and the Earl was taking her to the
      ponychaise which had been brought round, that kind-hearted old man said to her, 'It was a
      great grief to me that Lady Alice left no children; but, although you are not my niece in
      blood, I trust you will always look upon me as your sincere friend, and come to Trelingham
      often. Your father and I were boys together, and I can never forget him.'

</div></body></text></TEI>