<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER XIX TABLEAUX VIVANTS
In proposing, out of her own head, a dress ball at which Miss Valence should be
      present, the Countess Lutenieff was carrying out one of those schemes, so dear to the impish
      character she affected, through which accidents of a perverse kind are wont to happen. She was
      not very learned or large-minded; and, like most ignorant persons of a quick-witted turn, she
      was subtle, preferring always the crooked path to the straight, and delighted when she could
      imagine that she made the puppets dance to her playing. Since she had recovered from the shock
      of her husband's death—it had taken her about six months, for she was of an affectionate
      disposition— her one aim had been to marry Tom Davenant, whom from a child she had worshipped.
      This alone reconciled her to the English sky with its everlasting gray tones, and the English
      manners at once so selfsatisfied and so chilling. But Mr. Davenant was a
       shy bird, and would not stoop at her call. Nor had she a falconer's voice to lure
      him back again from his pursuit of more interesting prey. He, like the rest of the Davenants,
      was guided by a fine sense of honour,—too fine thought the Russian lady, since it appeared to
      be driving him on a marriage with his cousin. And its recompense might possibly be the hand of
      Lady May in spite of the six years which divided their ages. Nothing, said Karina to herself,
      will make me secure on that side but a violent passion on the part of Lady May for some one
      who is not Tom Davenant. Might not Glanville be the man? She had hoped and prayed so while the
      painting went on in the picture-gallery; but that was now at an end. The artist seemed to be
      dominated by a fresh sentiment in which Lady May had no part, and as Tom's birthday drew near,
      bringing with it apprehensions of calamity, the Countess sat down to consider what could be
      done. If Glanville was not desperately in love elsewhere he would fall a sure victim to her
      cousin, provided that May Davenant cared to subdue him. And how make her care? A great
      passion, Karina had read in her French authors, is only a slight one thwarted by a great
      difficulty. Add jealousy to liking and the thing might be done. Whatever else was uncertain,
      it could not be doubted that May cared for Glanville more than she did for Tom Davenant. If
      she married her cousin, it would be from devotion to the name and ancient descent she had been
      taught to revere. Let her be infatuated
       about the artist, and her refusal of the cousinly hand would follow as a matter
      of course. Miss Valence had entered from the side-scene, therefore, just when she was wanted,
      and her cue, in the language of the drama, was 'green-eyed jealousy.' To promote that feeling
      in the breast of Lady May was now her cousin's dearest wish, her hourly and daily thought. The
      dress ball seemed to her an inspiration of some good genius. There would be much preparation,
      and at Trelingham a great deal of rehearsing—so to call it—with these original costumes, which
      would need to be carefully designed. And when the intimacy of the preparations had stung Lady
      May like a gadfly, the ball itself was to do the rest. She would see Rupert with Hippolyta.
      She would be mad with disappointment and jealousy, above all if her attention were directed
      that way; and when her feeling had reached that height—good-bye to Cousin Tom, concluded the
      Countess; he will speak only to be repulsed. Thus she thought, much musing; and the
      unconscious puppets fell into their places, and waited till she should pull the wires to begin
      their exhibition.
One point remained doubtful. Was there really anything between Hippolyta and the artist, and
      if so, how far had the attraction gone? To ascertain this was of the last importance. Too
      little would be as fatal as too much. Miss Valence went about in the most beautiful innocence,
      quiet and composed, like one that had not a care in the world. When at Trelingham her bearing
      towards Rupert was cordial
       and friendly, but disarmed suspicion; and though the artist was often in the
      neighbourhood of Falside he never passed its threshold. The truth was that with Glanville's
      roaming habits and Hippolyta's constant ridings unattended at what hour and in which direction
      she pleased, these young lovers could afford to be on their good behaviour at the Court. They
      met under every variety of circumstance, and the romance of concealment added not a little to
      their passion. It was not, however, a very wicked way in them. Colonel Valence had taught his
      child that she must search into her heart, follow where it loved, and not fear the
      consequences. Though no reply had come to her letter, she knew he would consent. He must have
      got beyond the reach of correspondence, she fancied; that was all.
Not long after the ball had been determined on Miss Valence was surprised one afternoon to
      see the Countess Lutenieff ride up to Falside, enter the library, and ask her dear Hippolyta
      for a cup of tea. She was all smiles and graciousness, hoping she had not interrupted the
      interesting work in which Miss Valence was sure to be engaged; but the lovely air and the
      absence of Lady May, who was visiting some distant friends for some few days, had tempted her
      to ride over the moor for a tête-à-tête , which she knew would be delightful.
      Hippolyta put away her books and papers, made her visitor welcome, and submitted to her fate.
      She was quick enough to perceive that Karina had laid her plan for an afternoon's talk, but
       on what subject or to what end, in so flighty a creature, it was impossible to
      conjecture. They sat by the open window, which was a bower of exquisite creepers, and looked
      down the valley over green meadows and cornfields where the blade was springing. Hippolyta
      waited and wondered. But the purpose which had brought Karina still lay hidden, sharp and
      cruel as it was, like the sword of Harmodius wreathed in myrtle. She touched many flowers of
      talk with her light wings, flitted up and down from art to social systems, from women to their
      dressmakers and the last new thing in female frippery, coming nearer and nearer to the point
      she had in view, sweeping round it in circles that ever grew narrower. She could be wily and
      indirect when she chose, although much of her ordinary conversation had the malicious naïveté
      of a precocious child's. And thus, without quite knowing how they came to it, Hippolyta found
      herself discussing Lady May's opinions on the subject of marriage and her probable destiny.
      Nothing could be less reserved or affected than the Countess while speaking of her cousin.
      'And oh, my dear,' she said, 'I thought how providential it was, the other day, that you gave
      us your own romantic views—delightful I call them— when May was by to hear you. It will, it
      must, I am sure, have done her good.'
'In what way?' inquired Hippolyta, languidly. She did not want these sentimental
      confidences, especially with the Countess.
'Ah, you know, a word in season does so much
       good. You were warning my cousin against a temptation which, with her present
      ways of looking at things, might well prove too much for her.'
'Indeed!' said Hippolyta. She would not encourage the Countess.
'Yes, indeed,' answered the other eagerly; 'no less than to make a real marriage de
       convenance where affection would have no share, to sacrifice a consuming passion to
      interest, or at any rate to opinion. You spoke so beautifully of obeying the impulse of the
      feelings. I am sure she agreed with you. Do you remember how little she seemed surprised by
      what were certainly bold views?'
'Yes,' said Hippolyta, feeling uncomfortable, though she could not say why. What was all
      this about? Had she any interest in it? She must know more. 'A consuming passion,' she said
      after a pause. 'That is very strong language. And have you been told who is the object of Lady
      May's devotion, or is it a secret?'
'I have not been told,' replied Karina; 'but to me it is no secret. What should you say to
      Mr. Glanville?'
Hippolyta's heart gave a great leap. The sword was out and had gone through her. 'Mr.
      Glanville?' she echoed under her breath. It was impossible to go on. The Countess waited, like
      some savage beast that sees its victim fascinated at its own first spring from the thicket.
      But Hippolyta did not mean to let her secret escape. She took in her hand the
       cup of tea which she had laid down, and went on with an effort, 'Mr. Glanville,—I
      have nothing to say to Mr. Glanville. Do you mean that Lady May would accept an artist? Would
      it not be marrying beneath her?'
'I did not talk of marrying; I talked of a consuming passion. That is just the point. My
      cousin, if she held your principles, would insist on marrying Mr. Glanville, for she has been
      in love with him ever since he came to Trelingham, and he with her. But she is tempted to
      marry Mr. Davenant, who stands next in the succession to her father's title and estates.'
This was overwhelming. The sword now was rifling her heart, turning in the wound it had
      made. Hippolyta was no woman of the world, and her poor brave defence was nearly at an end.
      Rupert in love with Lady May! The room reeled about her; she could not speak; she was
      incapable of thinking. Karina sat still, conscience-stricken at the apparent success of her
      stratagem, but yet enjoying its success. She had in her that mixture of cruelty and remorse
      which plays so strange a part in the Russian temperament. She was disgusted with herself; but
      nothing in heaven or earth would have stayed her hand now. In this contest Hippolyta was not
      her match. A pause of some moments ensued, at the end of which Miss Valence in a low unsteady
      voice, which could scarcely be heard across the table, murmured, 'In love with one another! It
      is impossible. I do not believe it.'

'No; I daresay you are as much surprised as I was when it first dawned upon me. Not that Mr.
      Glanville is unworthy of my cousin's hand; far from it, he would do honour to any woman.' This
      was cunningly said, as a compliment, forcible though indirect, to Hippolyta's own discernment.
      'But,' the Countess went on, 'if you had seen them, as I did, for weeks together, morning
      after morning in the picture-gallery, Lady May talking and Mr. Glanville looking at her, you
      would have no doubt on the subject.' Karina forgot, apparently, how often she had left them
      alone and departed on her own errands.
'Of course he looked at her,' said Hippolyta with a melancholy smile; 'how else could he
      have painted her portrait?'
'Oh, but there is looking and looking. Moreover, they engaged in the most confidential talk,
      quite like old friends. You know how charming Mr. Glanville's conversation can be when he is
      in the vein.'
Ah, yes, she did know, too well for her peace. It was a dangerous gift that sudden vehement
      inspiration which made his tongue so eloquent, his imagination so vivid and orginal, after a
      long interval of silence or depression. She had observed that when Rupert was in the mood any
      listener would suffice; all he seemed to need was an audience. The explanation which he gave
      her one day was plausible, but did not take away the peril. He said that when a man has lived
      by himself as much as he had done in former years, the necessity for speech becomes from
       time to time imperious, and it matters not whose is the open ear into which it is
      poured. He had a whole chapter of curious illustrations to the point, adding merely that he
      still found himself holding forth to an audience of one without minding whether his silent
       vis-à-vis were taking in every word he said or falling asleep open-mouthed under its
      influence. But she was convinced that when he chose to speak his audience would not slumber.
      Lady May had been charmed; yes, why should she not? Before Karina spoke that idea had crossed
      her mind. But had Rupert been charmed in turn? How was she to find out? what was she to think?
      Could she ask this chattering, frivolous, mocking lady, who cared little what game her shafts
      brought down?
But there was no need to ask. Karina went on with her story, founded on fact as we know, but
      embellished and exaggerated until it seemed that Rupert might have been kneeling at Lady May's
      feet, in the guise of a troubadour, imploring her to have pity on a desponding lover.
      Hippolyta could say little in reply, nor dared to utter that little. If she spoke, she was
      betrayed. Her utmost effort only succeeded in casting a doubt on Karina's powers of
      observation. But the Countess was not to be shaken. 'Rely upon it, my dear Hippolyta,' she
      said, 'Lady May is devotedly attached to Mr. Glanville, and he was not unwilling to accept the
      incense she offered. Three months ago I should have said he was in love with her; and I still
      think it, although
       naturally the opportunities for its display are neither so frequent nor so
      favourable as they were. You, of course, may have surer grounds to go upon.'
'What do you mean?' said Hippolyta, resolved to withstand this prying. 'You do not suppose
      Lady May would give me a confidence which she seems not to have bestowed on you.' She spoke
      hotly and angrily.
'Now, my dear,' answered the Countess, 'you will frighten me if you look like that. I mean
      no harm. But you are such a friend of Mr. Glanville's, since the day you gave him shelter,
      that I fancied he might have spoken to you of his longings, aspirations, and so forth.'
'He has never said a word to me about Lady May,' answered Hippolyta, still angry and
      miserable. 'Why should he come to me about her?'
'Why, indeed? But men like to take advice sometimes from a woman they can trust. However,
      all this is wide of the mark. It is curious how one topic leads to a hundred. For, you see, we
      began by saying what an excellent thing it would be if your principles could become those of
      Lady May. She ought to marry Mr. Glanville—'
'She ought to do nothing of the kind,' said Hippolyta, irritated into expressing more than
      was prudent. 'Let her marry her cousin, according to the custom of her class, and her own
      convictions of duty.'
'What?' said the Countess, delighted to see the
       flame spreading and glowing so warm; 'surely you are inconsistent, Miss Valence.
      Would you not have her marry the man she loves?'
'Not if he does not love her.'
'But he does, I can assure you. Mr. Glanville has peculiar ways, like all his tribe.
      Nevertheless, observe them during the next few weeks when they are together, and you will be
      as convinced of it as I am. Dear, dear,' she said, rising at the last words, 'how quickly the
      afternoon passes with a friend, especially one whose conversation is so engrossing! And the
      days are still short. Good-bye, my dear. Pray don't stir; I see you have much to do, if those
      piles of correspondence on the table are yours. May comes back the day after to-morrow, and
      you will be wanted, you know, to choose your Arthurian costume. Good -bye!'
She went off with a light step and a smile of triumph. Miss Valence would do her part. There
      was affection or ambition on her side, sufficient to make her an excellent rival—a Fair
      Rosamund to Lady May's Eleanor. The scheme promised admirably, and she sang little snatches of
      Russian or French ballads as she cantered along. Whether Hippolyta had been deeply wounded and
      might bleed to death she did not consider, nor did she care. She was fond of Miss Valence, in
      that selfish way which people have who like to see beautiful things about them; fond as she
      might have been of a lovely flower, or an Arab steed. But she had only one
       strong human feeling, and that was for no woman. She did mean to marry her
      cousin; and she would have immolated a thousand Hippolytas in one holocaust rather than give
      him up.
I will not say that she had roused the demon of jealousy in a heart so innocent, so little
      accustomed to seek itself or to indulge in malice and evil thoughts, as that of Hippolyta. So
      great a revolution was not to be accomplished in a day. But she had awakened her victim from a
      dream of childlike happiness, and, suddenly strking into the chords of her enchanted harp, had
      turned the music to harsh discords which went on sounding and jangling and would not be still.
      Colonel Valence had left his daughter without the usual safeguards of conventional religious
      training, and she had moved among the strange men and women that made her world, free as the
      weakest or the strongest of them, familiar with much more than the name of sin and moral
      degradation. For she had witnessed something of the misery upon which her father's damning
      argument against the society of to-day was founded. But, truly, as she declared to Lady May,
      her days had been spent without harm. She harboured no unbecoming thoughts; she was fearless
      and free; nor, until Rupert fixed his eyes upon her, had she known what it was to care for any
      man save her father. The power of first love is proverbially intense; and when it comes at
      once, without warning, to a heart so large as Hippolyta's, and hitherto so self-contained,
       it has a depth of sacred purity, of kindling fire. Had she spoken of a
      consuming passion she would have been better justified than the Countess, who employed such
      words because they sounded romantic and startling, not for any well-assured knowledge that
      they were true of Lady May. The Spanish temperament, the unfettered life, the enthusiasm for
      things demanding sacrifice, the glamour of a devotion, sincere and expressive, on Rupert's
      side, must all be remembered, if we would calculate what elements there were for jealousy,
      watchfulness, and a perplexed yet irresistible love in Hippolyta. She did not doubt the man
      who had breathed out his soul in passionate utterances before her. Perish the thought, she
      cried, when it rose from the deeps of her anguish like a phantom and threatened to eclipse the
      light of heaven. She knew that he was loyal; but was there full security from the past, or had
      he so entangled himself in its consequences that he might not hope to be free? Most men had
      such a past; her books told her so, and she could bear to think of it with an equal mind, if
      the curtain which had fallen over it for Rupert was never to be raised again. But how, if Lady
      May interposed, if a claim there really was, or an old love with which to be off ere he could
      be on with the new? Hippolyta was devoted, but she was likewise proud and generous. She would
      not be Lady May's rival should it appear that Rupert, in whatever fashion, had given her a
      promise, or that his affection was divided. As she came to this resolution her heart
       sickened within her. She sat motionless, where the Countess had left her by the
      window, gazing with fixed and meditative eyes over the valley till the moon rose up in the
      cloudy sky, her hands clasped on her knees, while she thought and thought, and the slow tears
      began to well up from within and form on the tender eyelashes. She did not know where to look
      for help. A Christian maiden, she said half-unconsciously, would have prayed for
      guidance,—whatever prayer was. But she could only resolve to be true and trusting, impartial
      to Lady May as to Rupert, and not unjust. It was a heavy burden for young shoulders, and the
      tears that fell at last were exceedingly bitter.
Her resolution, all this notwithstanding, held firm. She must ascertain the state of the
      case, and by that be guided. Until this afternoon she had given no assurance of attending the
      dress ball, which was a kind of entertainment alien from her feelings and characteristic of
      that social or aristocratic existence with which she could have so little in common. Rupert's
      pleadings even had not overcome her dislike to it; and the Countess, for all her zeal in the
      good cause, was obliged to be content with a very conditional acceptance. Now, however, she
      would take the rôle offered her and appear among the rest. Their frequent meetings,
      if she studied them with her eyes open, must surely betray the relation in which Rupert stood
      to Lord Trelingham's daughter. And if when the birthnight festivities were come her mind was
      not
       clear, she would ask Glanville the question, cost what struggling and shame it
      might. False, no, he was not false. It was easy for a man to be imprudent, but impossible that
      Rupert did not mean every word he had whispered in her ear. Great as was her trouble, so new
      and unexpected that it quite overcame her for days together, it left in the depths of her
      being an assured trust that love had answered love between them twain.
As soon as she dared, that is to say when her self-control was somewhat restored, she went
      over to Trelingham. Lady May had come back, bringing with her Mrs. Davenant, the well-known
      fashionable personage who called Tom her son, and expected from him a son's devotion, though
      she could not give up the world so far as to make Foxholme the pleasant place it should have
      proved to that amiable young man. She and Lord Trelingham, though of course very old
      acquaintance, had never got beyond the first stage of intimacy, while Lady May, to whom the
      frivolities of fashion were odious, was merely civil to her and did not see her more than
      twice in a season. She had come now to preside over the arrangements for keeping Tom's
      birthday and issue the much-coveted invitations which were to gather a numerous party at
      Trelingham. She, also, was asking herself whether her son had serious thoughts of marrying his
      cousin; and it was part of her endeavouring just now to find out the way he had spent these
      months in the country, with Lady May on the
       one side and Madame de Lutenieff on the other. For though Tom was an
      affectionate son he wrote seldom, and there was that in Mrs. Davenant's character which
      forbade him to let her see into his heart. There could be no real confidence between persons
      so unlike, however attached they might be to one another. Tom felt more comfortable at
      Trelingham than he had ever been under his own roof. He loved his guardian, the Earl, with a
      simple but earnest devotion, which had increased as the boy grew to man's estate; and he
      looked forward to being perfectly happy with him and Lady May, if the latter would consent to
      be his wife. He knew she was infinitely beyond him in cleverness and knowledge of the world;
      but, if anything, he was attracted rather than repelled by that circumstance. A stupid man, he
      argued, ought to have a clever wife who would keep him from blundering. He did not think
      himself unequal to the duties of a country gentleman; but, should he become Earl of
      Trelingham, there would be Parliament and the burden of society, and who could help him so
      well as Lady May?
That he would succeed his cousin if he outlived him was as certain as anything in this
      world. Lord Trelingham had assured him of it in so many words. It was a piece of eccentric
      generosity, perhaps of unnecessary frankness. But he had acted towards Tom Davenant during the
      last five or six years as he would have acted towards his own son; and it was in keeping with
      the rest of his conduct to give up Trelingham
       Court to the festivities which must otherwise have taken place at Foxholme.
The house party would be numerous, and was already gathering when Hippolyta called after her
      sad visit from the Countess. She went through her introduction to Mrs. Davenant without
      flinching, but was glad to escape into the Great Hall, where a kind of rehearsal for the
      tableaux was in course of arrangement. Rupert, who had not been able to go near Falside for
      several days, came to her as soon as she had exchanged a word with Lady May, and was so struck
      on observing her paleness and the dark rings round her eyes that he could think of nothing
      else. He drew her away, under pretence of showing her the dresses from which she was to
      choose, and in low passionate undertones implored her to tell him what was the matter. She
      could not mistake the feeling in his voice; it was that of the most devoted love. Her spirits
      revived; and, though she put him off with unmeaning answers, there was enough to cheer him in
      her assurance that she should soon be well. He looked at her with tender anxiety; he saw that
      something must have happened. But she had secrets which it did not become him to pry into; her
      troubles might be connected with Colonel Valence's numerous projects, and were not to be
      removed even by a lover's assiduity. However, he would not quit her side till she insisted on
      it; and his frequent glances towards her revealed a preoccupation which the Countess was
      delighted to behold, and which, in her careless infantine
       way, she pointed out to her cousin. Lady May was in her most difficult mood,
      irritated by the presence of Mrs. Davenant at Trelingham, dissatisfied with Rupert, and not at
      peace in her own mind. She had not conceived any great affection for Hippolyta; but now, under
      the Countess's malicious guidance, she saw, or thought she saw, enough to justify dislike and
      suspicion. Was Glanville bestowing elsewhere the love she had striven so desperately to win?
      It made her wretched when Miss Valence came near him, when he spoke to her in seeming
      confidence, when he showed how she must wear the elfin array in which he proposed to deck the
      Queen of Fairyland, as he smilingly called her. She was to be the Lady of the Lake.
All this reacted, according to Karina's deep-laid plan, on the feelings of Hippolyta. She,
      too, was made wretched; for Lady May, resolved on having her will, found means to engage
      Rupert's attention, and gave him so many commissions, had such a variety of questions to ask
      and possibilities to provide for, that the lovers, after their first greeting, met again only
      for an instant that afternoon. Time was when, if any one had charged May Davenant with being
      an adept in the arts of jealousy, she would have turned a scornful eye upon the speaker and
      bade him begone with a proud consciousness of her innocence. Nor am I saying now that she was
      mean or malevolent; she was passionate and had forgotten herself, that was all. But was it not
      a sad falling away on the part of
       that lofty spirit? Hippolyta, struck through with Karina's fiery shaft, suffered
      and was helpless. She had no arts to counteract the imperious charm of the Earl's daughter;
      and when she beheld Rupert's embarrassment, how he resisted in vain, nor would look steadily
      in the face of Lady May, she began to fear that an entanglement really existed, and went home
      more miserable than she came. Certainly, she might have demanded an explanation from Rupert,
      and one word would have sufficed to scatter the clouds in her heaven. But it was not the time;
      she dreaded an explosion which must have blasted all her hopes, or sent him from Trelingham at
      this unseasonable moment. The play was to be played out. She took her part bravely; but as the
      days went on she became more and more resolute in the thoughts which had begun to ferment
      within her.
That afternoon was a sample of those which followed. Rupert, engaged from morning till
      night, and often in Lady May's company, had less time than usual to spend with Hippolyta, and
      none to mark that her dejection was profound and her paleness increasing. To mark, I say; for
      he felt that there was a vague misunderstanding between them, which he meant, as soon as the
      festival would let him, to have thoroughly cleared up. Lady May, however, was his greatest
      trial. The intimacy that had so happily fallen through seemed reviving again, and with it a
      sense of the magnetic danger, so to speak, which had compassed him round about in the
      picture-gallery.
       When Hippolyta was present he felt it less; but then another peril awaited him,
      for he did not choose that his old sin should be ever staring him in the face, and yet it did.
      Certain confidential allusions, slight yet speaking glances which might signify nothing in
      Lady May, but were embarrassing to him, and a demeanour in which friendliness might have the
      greater share, yet love not be wholly wanting,—he could no more define these things to himself
      than he could photograph the wind, but he knew that it was not imagination which led him to
      fear them as the harbingers of catastrophe. What if Hippolyta should notice them too? He
      anathematised the folly of six months ago, his weakness when he ought to have been proof
      against this contagious sentiment. He would certainly at the very earliest quit Trelingham
      under one pretext or another, and put a solid interval of time between the painting of the
      Madonna with its mischievous associations and the work he had yet to do. There must be an end
      of this phantasmal coquetry, this mock sun of love which shone over against the true, and
      perplexed observers. He little knew the forces against which he was contending.
And so, amid fears and hopes and the strong resolutions of those upon whom fortune had laid
      the burden of a deadly struggle, Tom Davenant's birthday came. The house was full of guests;
      the Chase was thrown open, and the solemn early dinner appointed at which the Earl's tenantry
      were to hear their future lord deliver his maiden speech. The bright spring weather,
       dashed with a shower of rain, was all that could be wished; and if I do not
      dwell upon the events of the day, it is not because they deserved no sacred poet, but that one
      who knew how to adorn his grateful task with flowers of rhetoric to which I may not pretend,
      has already written of them in the County Chronicle , to the files of which I refer
      inquiring friends. For I must hasten to the evening, when a more select, but hardly less
      numerous, company was assembled in the Great Hall, and the tableaux vivants were
      beginning.
Hippolyta, who had accepted Madame de Lutenieff as her chaperon in default of another,
      descended from her room with beating heart, and was glad to find herself only just in time for
      her share in the representations. The Countess led her at once to the sort of green-room where
      the members of the first group were putting themselves in order. A stage had been erected at
      the end of the Great Hall, opposite the chief entrance. In front of it hung the ample folds of
      a curtain which was to draw up to the sound of music, when the tableau was arranged and the
      signal given. The scenes were to be presented at intervals, and to last only so long as might
      be required to take in their meaning and to distinguish the characters which made them up, for
      anything like a sensible interruption of the dancing was not proposed, and would have been
      received with scant favour. Rupert had advised that the grouping should follow the order of
      his frescoes, including some which
       were only among his drawings, but not as yet visible on the walls. Thus it began
      with the Finding of Arthur, when, in the great temple, he draws out of the stone the
      miraculous sword which has resisted the efforts of all pretenders to the crown of Britain. Tom
      Davenant, with his exquisite beauty of face and manly form, was the very model of a young
      hero, and not unnaturally had been compelled, against his will, to put on the trappings of
      Arthur. A crowd of knights occupied the foreground, behind them rose the dim pillars and vast
      recesses of a rude cathedral, and near the semblance of an altar stood Hippolyta, the Lady of
      the Lake, who was Arthur's fairy godmother, in converse with the mysterious enchanted Merlin.
      When they were all in their places a silver bell rang, and the curtain drew up.
It was a striking scene and called forth instant applause, which was hushed when the
      orchestra, composed of harps and flutes, began above the great entrance a shrill weird music
      to celebrate the coming of the King. It was Lady May who had devised this wild welcome, so
      unlike the harmonies of the modern muse, but for that reason symbolic of far-off ages when the
      appeal was to elementary passions rather than to a complex temperament like ours of to-day.
      The effect was strange but overpowering. While it lasted, Hippolyta, who had not ventured to
      lift her eyes at the beginning, looked up and saw the vast spaces before her filled with a
      motley crowd, in all manner of fantastic and glittering attire,
       while a flood of golden light fell upon them from the sides of the hall, where
      Rupert's grandly-conceived frescoes, marking out the whole extent they were by and by to
      cover, added an air of indescribable solemnity and antique grandeur to the vision. Never in
      her life had she beheld anything so beautiful. It dazzled and excited her; it gave her a
      larger sense of existence, palpitating with joy and passion. She could have been content, she
      thought, to gaze at it without going nearer. But in a few moments the music ceased, the
      curtain fell, and the Arthurian group, disappearing through the side-scene, was lost in the
      crowd below. She gave herself into the hands of the Countess and followed. The ball began; and
      Hippolyta, with mingled pleasure and dismay, found herself dancing with Rupert, who had
      instantly claimed her hand.
What she saw and experienced that evening, thanks to the novelty of her sensations, the
      secluded life she had led, the love which was filling heart and brain, the trouble of an
      uncertain future, and her joy in Rupert's triumph, it is not easy to describe. It was a whirl
      of excitement when time seemed short as a lightining flash, yet every moment eternal. The
      pauses in the dance, the bursts of barbaric music coming between, the delicate strange colours
      which had been so subtly combined in the grouping, the gleam of saffron and gold, of shining
      battle-axe and linked armour of steel, the perfume of tropical flowers which hung upon the
      atmosphere and penetrated
       her being, the steady blaze of light overhead, the sparkling of precious stones
      and waving of feathers and soft dark jets of velvet sheen, the sound of bubbling fountains in
      the conservatories which opened out of the ballroom into the garden beyond, —all this was
      mingled with laughing voices, with the play of outspread fans, and the movement of a multitude
      in whose eyes the light and the passion seemed to be reflected and to shine out again more
      intensely. It was a sea of life on whose waves, to the sound of enchanting music, she floated
      along. Sometimes Rupert held her hand, sometimes another whom she had never seen, to whom she
      spoke in dreamy whispers, not knowing what had been said to her. Out of the crowd a face
      surged up and gazed across inquiringly, as though seeking an answer in her eyes; but it was
      gone ere she could catch her breath and murmur, 'That was Lady May; what does she desire of
      me?' Or again, it was the Countess, smiling cold, inquisitive, mocking, as her voice floated
      over her shoulder and bade her rest a while in the shade of the cool ferns. And Rupert, where
      was he? She looked round in a vague, sweet trouble, and saw him leading out Lady May, whose
      earnest eyes seemed full of a steady fire. Could she not warn him, not rescue him from the
      danger? No, he was a thousand leagues away, and her hand could never reach him. As these
      thoughts came to darken the festival her heart beat faster with a sense of unspeakable love
      and pity. She felt that Rupert
       was all the world to her, that she could not live except in the sunshine of his
      presence, that to surrender him would be death.
But her meditations were again and again interrupted as one after the other of these
      brilliant masqueraders came up to solicit the honour of dancing with her. Hippolyta was so
      wrapt in her passionate griefs and longings that she did not realise the impression she was
      making in that unknown realm, where faces, voices, manners, were all novel and strange. Miss
      Valence's name was whispered from mouth to mouth; her father's story, so much of it as the
      public knew, was rehearsed again. Some, who had heard only of the marriage with Lady Alice,
      imagined that this was a niece of Lord Trelingham, now publicly adopted by him; and they
      wondered whether Tom Davenant would select her or Lady May for his bride. Others felt her
      beauty enhanced by the uncertain tales of her origin, for no one in that country-side had ever
      set eyes on her mother or could tell who she was. And the young men declared with enthusiasm
      that they had never seen such dancing. It was the perfection of unconscious grace, without
      effort or affectation; the true Spanish gravity with a world of passion in it; the movements,
      slow or swift, as the music demanded, always under control, not wild, but exquisitely
      self-contained. That evening Hippolyta and the lady of the lake melted into one lovely lissom
      figure, clad in a floating vestment of dark fairy-green, with golden
       hair falling down over the collar of wrought flowers which left the delicate
      throat bare, while a wreath of some strange bloom that resembled hyacinths decked the
      beautiful head, and gave her the look of sylvan majesty that befitted her in the legend. Nor
      had the warm paleness of her cheek, the light in her large, soft eyes, ever charmed the heart
      of Rupert as they did during those hours of dance and thrilling music. He could not turn his
      gaze from her; but it seemed to him that she did not always return it. Was she lost in the
      pleasure of the scene? He quitted the company among which he was standing, and came, on the
      pretence that she was wanted for the next tableau, and spoke to her. She answered like one
      whose fancy was roaming abroad; she was absent and preoccupied. When they entered the
      green-room to make some slight changes in her outward adornment which the tableau required,
      she did all in silence, as she was bid, not turning at the voice that spoke or appearing to
      distinguish the speaker. She took her place in the group of Launcelot and Guinevere, fixing
      her eyes, but yet absently, on Lady May, who bore with exceeding stateliness the character of
      the guilty Queen. Again, at the side of the painted forest, she looked on while the Countess
      Lutenieff, as the fay Vivien, charmed his secret out of Merlin; and her feeling was that, in
      the old white-bearded man, to her a stranger, who enacted the magician's part, she beheld
      Rupert yielding to the witchery of a maiden he did not love. When, from the floor of the Great
       Hall, she watched the scene of Tristram and Iseult, in which Lady May and the
      artist quaffed the love-philter which was to bind them in unfaithfulness,— a weird and
      powerful representation that stirred the spectators to demand it a second time,—she could
      hardly refrain from crying aloud, and the effort made her weak to fainting. She leaned back in
      her seat and closed her eyes to shut out the displeasing vision. But it would not leave her;
      it was still there in vivid colour as on the stage, Iseult holding forth the enchanted golden
      cup, and Tristram in the glow of his beauty and strength bending over it, his lips couching
      the beaker's brim that was to take away his reason for ever. The plaudits which rang through
      the hall, and were drowned in the strains of music overhead, piercing like the sea-bird's
      scream and dying off as into the wash of a sullen sea, made a tumult within her which left no
      room for thought, which stamped upon her memory an impression that must be indelible, and
      urged her to resolve her doubts at once, without hesitation. She watched till Rupert came into
      the throng once more. He was moving her way, and their eyes met. In an instant he was by her
      side. 'You must ask me to dance,' she whispered, and ere long they were moving in the
      waltz.
Her dream came back: she was floating on the waves of life to the sound of a mighty music;
      its single tones shot through her like silvery arrows, its complex strains lifted her upon the
      thunderous roll of waters away and away, with Rupert, the only tenant of her universe,
       holding her fast. He belonged to her alone, and she was of another sphere than
      the multitude moving in cadence around them. Still, she did not speak. And lo! the sudden
      vibration of a string which, for no more than a second, was heard through the music like a
      note of lamentation, turned her thoughts and her fancy. She beheld the world of suffering
      beneath the world of joy: on the barren shores lapped by these smiling waters an innumerable
      multitude were gathered from the four winds—all the poverty-stricken, the wretched, the
      homeless, the tear-besprent, the naked misery of those who crowded against one another to keep
      themselves warm, and who were reckoned by millions upon millions. She saw them clearly, with
      the mind's eye, too humbled and cast down to envy the joy they might not share, benumbed in
      their great misery by the sense of a long despair even more than by frost and cold. The
      masquerade of life was for the few; its bitter dismal reality, not tempered by dance or song,
      for the many. And what was she doing, Hippolyta, amid these splendours? Her place was not
      there, but with her brothers and sisters pining in wretchedness. She awoke from the excitement
      of the evening with a start. The air was suffocating, the perfume of these flowers delirious.
      She could endure it no longer. 'Take me away,' she said to Rupert as the dance was ending; 'I
      want the fresh air; I shall faint if I stay in the room.'
He looked round for the nearest exit, and, with Hippolyta on his arm, moved as swiftly as
      the crowd
       would let him towards the conservatories, which opened on either side of the
      stage into the garden. It would be cooler there. They arrived at a spot where great
      cactus-like plants, mingled with creepers, stood up in the moonlight which shone through the
      glass roof with a cold, uncertain gleam. There was no one near. The feeling of comparative
      solitude refreshed Hippolyta; and her thoughts began to take a definite shape. Rupert inquired
      tenderly whether she were better. She smiled, and did not speak for a little while; then,
      drawing him close to the window where the plants screened them, she said, laying her hand on
      his breast, 'Rupert, were you ever in love with Lady May?'
The question startled him. 'Ah,' he said to himself, 'it has come at last.' But he would be
      perfectly open. 'No, Hippolyta,' he answered, 'never; but, before I met you, I might have
      been. For a few weeks I thought even that I was.'
'Did you tell her your thoughts?' she asked. She felt an immense relief.
'Never,' he replied; 'had I spoken it would have been to Lord Trelingham.'
'Then you are quite free as regards Lady May; you have incurred no obligation towards
      her?'
Rupert, who had not expected this home thrust, turned red and pale. 'I will leave you to
      judge,' he answered, though not immediately; 'obligation of any palpable sort there is none. I
      have made neither speeches nor advances to her; but I have shown
       perhaps more sympathy when she spoke—it is now five months or more—than was
      prudent, since I did not love her.' He tried to explain. Hippolyta did not interrupt him. It
      was difficult to enlarge on the behaviour of Lady May without attributing to her thoughts of
      which he had no evidence.
When he came to a pause, Hippolyta, still looking at him, put a single question. 'Tell me,
      Rupert,' she said, 'do,' you think Lady may cared for you as I do?'
'As you do,' he repeated with fervour; 'ah, Hippolyta, who is like you in anything? I do not
      know; it is nothing to me what Lady May's feelings have been. You do not distrust me?' he went
      on anxiously; 'have I said or done anything to displease you?'
'No,' she answered simply; 'you are the same as ever. But suppose she did love you, could
      you always resist, always remember Hippolyta?'
'I see,' he said, 'you are troubled about it. Very well, I cannot blame a jealousy which
      comes of so great affection. Look here, Hippolyta, I also have been disquieted and not happy
      in this strange position; for, though I do not know what she feels, I have an uneasy dread
      that all may not turn out well. I had made up my mind to leave Trelingham for a month or six
      weeks, that there might be a break and a fresh start under less difficult circumstances. If
      you wish I will go to-morrow.'
'Are you not wanted here during the festivities?' she inquired.

'Not in any way. My work is done when the last of the tableaux has been given.'
Hippolyta, instead of answering, seemed lost in thought. Turning away, she walked two or
      three steps and stood apart, her eyes fixed on the waters of a mimic fountain which cast its
      spray around. What was she thinking about? Rupert did not dare to interrupt her. At length she
      came back, and, with an earnest, troubled expression, said to him, 'Go to-morrow, as you
      propose; it will be best. Only let me hear from you, and if I have anything to write,—you must
      give me your address.'
He put his hand to his pocket. There was no card in it. Tearing out one of his ivory
      tablets, he wrote a line or two in haste and handed them to Hippolyta. 'Write to my studio,'
      he said; 'I shall be there oftener than at home, almost every day, in fact; and there will be
      less chance of discovery. But I shall be glad,' he went on, 'when you allow me to end this
      concealment. It is a trial to both of us.'
'Yes,' she replied in her preoccupied manner, and said no more.
The crashing sound of trumpet-music came to them where they stood. 'We must return to the
      ballroom,' said Rupert; 'I shall be wanted for the next grouping.'
The words were hardly out of his mouth when they saw the Countess approaching, leaning on
      the
       arm of a cavalier. She addressed Hippolyta. 'My dear Miss Valence,' she said, 'I
      have been looking for you this quarter of an hour. Here is a message from Falside which I have
      undertaken to deliver. I hope it is nothing unpleasant.' She held out her hand as she spoke,
      and Hippolyta grasped the note that was in it.
'My father's writing,' she said, as the superscription caught her eye. She opened it and
      moved towards the light. The others waited. It was a very brief message apparently, for she
      had read it through in an instant, and turning to Rupert, said, 'I must go home at once. My
      father is there, and thinks he may have only a few hours with me.' She stopped as if
      uncertain, looked from the Countess to Rupert and back again; but Karina would not move. It
      was impossible to say a word more, to bid the artist stay till she had seen her father, or go
      as they had arranged previously. The note was urgent. Andres had come with the pony-chaise,
      and she must leave the future to chance. 'Good-bye, Mr. Glanville,' she said. 'You will have
      to invent a lady of the lake for the Passing of Arthur,' and she offered him her hand, which
      he clasped fervently. But he would accompany her to the door. Madame de Lutenieff went
      likewise. They were fated not to speak in private, it seemed. Messages were left for the Earl
      and Lady May; a second time their hands joined; Karina gaily waved her fan, and the carriage
      drove off into the moonlight night.

In less than twenty-four hours Rupert, convinced that safety lay in flight, had left
      Trelingham and returned to his house in town. He could wait there for news of Hippolyta.

</div></body></text></TEI>