
CHAPTER XII
Some one, he thought, kept him back from the body while they lifted it down from the cart;
     there was a stir and bustle and three or four people gathered round, hiding it for a moment
     from his sight. One, he remembered, had the goat by the horns and was trying to drag it aside;
     the goat was refractory, kicked and bleated and made itself the centre of a scuffle. Afterwards
     he pushed through them all and stood looking down at his wife.
As he looked at her—limp, with glazed eyes and fallen jaw—there swam before his memory a
     pitiful vision of the dear Griselda he had married. He saw her—this huddle of rags and dirt—in
     her wedding garments, fussed and dainty, with her bouquet tied with suffragette ribbons. He
     remembered the expression, self-conscious and flushing, wherewith she had given her hand that
     he might place the ring on her finger; and how, when they were first alone as man and wife, he
     had taken the hand that wore the ring and kissed it till she drew it away. The crowd in the
     little house at Balham, the handshakes, the well-wishing faces—they were all so close and so
     present that they gave the lie to this dead woman dropped by the roadside. He looked down
     stupidly while the bystanders whispered and stared.
He did not know how long he sat beside her, nursing a dead hand in his own; but he knew he
     hated and shrank from the people around him—a group that kept forming and moving away and
     whispering as it gazed at himself and the body of his wife. It was a changing little crowd,
     never more than a dozen or so; men and women who stopped in their passing by, muttered
     questions, heard low answers, looked curious or pitying and moved on. He hated its
     inquisitiveness, he shrank from its pity, desiring to be alone with his dead. That he might not
     see its curious and pitying faces he pressed a hand over his eyes.
After some time—either minutes or hours—came a hand on his shoulder that stayed till he moved
     and looked up. He who had touched him wore the garb of a priest; was stout, not over-well
     washed or brushed, but kindly of manner and countenance. He spoke while the crowd stared and
     listened; William moved his head irritably, muttered, "I can't understand what you say," and
     would have covered his eyes again if he had not heard an English voice beside him. It was a
     woman who had caught his words and now pushed through the bystanders: a tall young woman in
     tweed coat and skirt, who had stayed to look over the shoulders of the shifting group.
"You are English?" she said. "What has happened?" He stared up at her for a moment, amazed at
     the sound of his own tongue.
"My wife is dead," he told her; and, hearing himself say the words aloud, he burst into a
     passion of sobbing. Through it he choked incoherent appeals to "take them away—for God's sake
     to let him be alone." He turned his face to the wall and wept, long and brokenly, as one who
     has nothing more to hope; and for a time they left him till the paroxysm should wear itself
     out.
When he turned his head at last the crowd that he hated had scattered; perhaps the priest and
     the Englishwoman had persuaded it away, for they were the only two near him. The Englishwoman,
     with her hands thrust deep into the pockets of her tweed coat, was standing at his shoulder,
     waiting till he was ready to listen.
"Will you come with me?" she asked. "It will be better." Her tone, though very gentle, was
     authoritative and brought him instinctively to his feet; but once there he hesitated to follow
     her and stammered that he could not leave——
"It will only be for a moment. The priest—he will see—he will bring her."
She put a hand on his arm and led him unresisting down the street—a hundred yards or so, past
     the church and into a house standing back from the road in a garden. He knew afterwards that it
     was the village presbytery and that the little woman who moved aside from the garden gate to
     let them pass in was the priest's elderly housekeeper. His companion spoke to her in French, no
     doubt to explain their arrival; and the old woman trotted ahead to the house, opened a door to
     the right and ushered them into a sitting-room that smelt of unopened window. It was a
     ceremonious as well as a stuffy little room; there were good books lying on a table in the
     centre and stiff chairs ranged against the walls. Having offered them a couple of the
     stiff-backed chairs the housekeeper withdrew to her vigil at the garden gate; William sat where
     she had placed him, but the Englishwoman walked to the window.
"I wish I could help you," she said with her back towards him. "I know nothing seems any good
     at such a time, but if there is anything you want——"
She was giving him more than she knew by her presence, by speaking in their common tongue;
     the sound of the familiar, comprehensible English was as the breaking of an iron barrier
     between him and the rest of mankind. She was talking to him—talking, not mouthing and making
     strange noises. He was back in the world where you spoke and your fellows understood you, where
     you were human—intelligent, intelligible—not an animal guided by nod and beck or driven to
     labour by blows. Comprehensible speech meant not only sympathy, but the long-denied power of
     complaint—and the pent and swollen misery of his last few days was relieved by a torrent of
     words. She stood and listened while he sobbed and talked incoherently. There was small plan or
     sequence about his tale—he went backwards and forwards in it, started afresh and left gaps; but
     she realized that he was telling it not for her benefit, but for his own relief, let him pour
     himself out and refrained from interruption even when his talk was most entangled. She took it
     as a good sign when at last he paused and looked up to ask of her what it all meant, what had
     happened, and where he was now?
She told him, as briefly as might be, what Heinz had told him—of a world in upheaval and
     nations at grips with each other; the same story if not from the same point of view. She added
     that he was now on French soil (which he had not guessed) some miles from the Belgian frontier,
     and that it would be possible, she hoped, to make the journey onward by rail. The French were
     falling back and the district had been warned of the likelihood of enemy occupation; she
     supposed that the needs of the army had absorbed the local rolling-stock, for there had been no
     passenger train on their small branch line that day. The authorities, however, had promised one
     to Paris in the morning and she, herself, was waiting in the hope of obtaining a seat. She
     hesitated and broke off at the sound of shuffling feet in the passage outside—slow feet and
     uncertain, as of men who carried a burden. William heard the sound likewise and, guessing its
     meaning, would have risen and gone to the door; but she kept him to his seat with a hand on his
     shoulder and he obeyed the touch because, at the moment, it was easier to obey than to resist.
     He sat and trembled, twisting his fingers, while the shuffling died away into momentary
     silence, followed by trampling and the closing of a door as the burden-bearers went out....
     Then silence again, a much longer silence, till the stout priest entered the room, moving
     quietly, as men are accustomed to move in the neighbourhood of those whom no sound can arouse
     or disturb. He spoke softly at some length to the Englishwoman, who, having listened and
     nodded, turned to William and told him that if he would like to go to her——
He followed the priest down the passage to a room at the back of the house; wherein, on a
     table, and covered by a sheet, they had laid the body of his wife. There were long candles
     burning around the table and on either side of her a little metal vase filled with roses. The
     priest stood aside in the doorway for William to enter, bowed his head in a prayer and went
     out; when he had gone William crept to the table, turned the sheet from her face and looked
     down—on Griselda dowered with a grave dignity that had never been hers while she lived.... Some
     one had washed away the stains of the road and arranged the disordered rags that had once been
     a dress; the hair was smoothed out of its three-day tangle and her poor hands crossed on her
     breast.
He stayed with her till dusk had thickened into darkness, sometimes standing at her side to
     look down on her face, sometimes bowed to his knees by the burden of the years without her.
     When the priest came back to rouse him he was crouched in the attitude of prayer; but his
     prayer (if such it might be called) was only the eternal petition of the bereaved, "Would God
     that I had died instead!"
The village sexton was of those who had already fled at the rumour of the oncoming German; so
     that night the Englishwoman, who had acquired in a west-country garden some skill in the
     handling of a spade, took turns with a bent old peasant in digging a grave for Griselda. When
     daylight failed them they dug by the shine of a lantern; the Englishwoman was not
     over-imaginative or nervous but she found the job an eerie one—the more so since the
     square-walled cemetery, like French graveyards in general, lay well away from its village—and
     she was glad when the moment came to pay off her companion and return to her quarters in the
     little Hôtel de la Gare. Other formalities in connection with the funeral there were none—for
     the reason that the maire and his clerk, who in ordinary seasons would have devoted much time
     and stationery to the subject, had departed that evening, bearing with them the archives of the
     commune.
William, for his part, spent the night on the priest's horsehair sofa, next door to the room
     where the candles burned around the body of his wife. From weariness of the flesh he dozed now
     and again; but for the greater part of the night lay wakeful and staring at darkness. There
     were moments when the horsehair sofa shook beneath his sobbing; and there were others when it
     seemed to him impossible that a horror so brutal and so undeserved should have mangled his
     harmless life. At one such moment he crept from his couch, felt his way across the room and
     into the passage—possessed by some wild and unconfessed thought that he might not find Griselda
     on the sheeted table with her hands crossed over her breast. The door, when he tried it, was
     locked and the key withdrawn—fastened by the priest or his housekeeper before they retired for
     the night; but when he knelt down to peer through the keyhole he could see two of the tall
     church candles and the vase with its bunch of white roses that some one had placed near her
     head. He crept back, knowing that she lay there indeed, and sat down to stare at the darkness
     till it softened from black into grey.
The morning was still flushed in the east when the old woman came to him with bread and a
     bowl of coffee; the coffee was hot, aromatic and sweet, after the fashion of that which had
     once been brewed by Madame Peys—and, remembering breakfasts not eaten alone, his tears dropped
     into it thickly. While he ate, sitting humped on the edge of the horsehair sofa, the street
     outside was already astir with traffic, nomad and military; those fugitives who had rested in
     the village for the night were once more taking to the road, other fugitives from the
     neighbourhood were dribbling in to join them, troops were moving up and to-day was even as
     yesterday. When he had finished his bread and coffee the old woman signed him to the kitchen
     sink, where she furnished him with soap and a towel; and, the process of washing completed, she
     produced a clothes-brush, led him out into the garden and attacked with vigour the mud and
     stain on his garments. He was standing passively while she scoured at his shoulders when the
     Englishwoman came up, and, looking anywhere except at his face, put his wife's rings into his
     hands. There were two of them—the new gold band, with a month's wear behind it, and the little
     engagement half-hoop—and at sight of them the housekeeper ceased to scour and crept away with
     her brush. He looked down at them lying in his palm till the tears veiled them, and knotted
     them slowly and tightly in a corner of his handkerchief. His companion cleared her throat and,
     still looking anywhere except at his face, told him that the train to Paris—very probably the
     last one to run—would be starting that morning.
"Yes?" he said vaguely, conscious that she expected a reply.
She explained that what she had meant was, the funeral must take place immediately....
     Chiefly for the sake of breaking the silence she supposed that his wife was not a Roman
     Catholic?
He answered "No," staring at a row of hollyhocks and a butterfly that quivered above
     them.
She asked, she explained, because in that case the priest would have read the proper service.
     As it was ... She hoped he would understand that they had done their best to—be reverent. But
     there were difficulties—so many of the tradesmen were leaving or had left already. Carpenters
     and so on.... He listened stupidly with his eyes on the quivering butterfly, dumbly rebellious
     at the cruelty that tore him even from the body—and it only dawned on him what she meant by her
     stumbling hints when she led him through the house to the front door where a cart stood waiting
     with the priest at the horse's head. It was a farm-cart, borrowed by the priest from a
     neighbour; and on the floor of it that which had been Griselda lay coffinless and wrapped in a
     sheet. There were roses scattered on the folds of the sheet and the old Frenchwoman was waiting
     at the gate with a shapeless little wreath of her own manufacture which she pressed into
     William's hand.
They set out, a funeral procession of three, which at other times would have drawn many
     curious glances; the priest leading the horse and William and the Englishwoman walking side by
     side at the rear of the cart. The cemetery lay outside the village, a half-mile or so from
     their starting-point, and they passed wayfarers enough on the road, of whom some bared their
     heads and crossed themselves, and others were too busy with their own sorrows to give even a
     thought to the dead. The gate of the graveyard was narrow and it was with difficulty that the
     cart was manoeuvred between its posts. At an ordinary funeral the hearse would have remained in
     the road; but this was no ordinary funeral nor ordinary day, and it was as well not to tempt
     the footsore fugitive by the sight of a vehicle unguarded. Accordingly, the cart was manoeuvred
     through the gate before the priest, William and the Englishwoman lifted out the body of
     Griselda and carried it to the grave in the corner. The bent-backed old labourer was sitting
     beside it on the mound that would shortly fill it; he rose when he saw them, leaning on his
     spade and bared his grey hairs to the dead.
The grave was shallow—but, shallow as it was, the body, being coffinless, was lowered with
     difficulty and the Englishwoman led William a little way aside that he might not watch while
     the priest and the peasant performed the last service Griselda would require of man; he
     understood what she meant and stood with his back to the group round the grave, staring at a
     granite tombstone bedizened with massive bead wreaths. When she touched him on the shoulder, as
     sign that he might turn, the priest was crossing himself at his prayers and the old man
     standing by the heap of new turned earth. He went to the edge of the grave, looked down at the
     crumpled sheet and then stupidly round at his neighbour. He said nothing, but she thought he
     was expecting something; so, as the priest still prayed with closed eyes in silence, she
     struggled with the racial shyness where things of the spirit are concerned and, swallowing her
     tears, spoke the funeral words for Griselda.
"I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord: he that believeth in Me, though he were
     dead, yet shall he live..."
"Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord ... they rest from their labours."
"Man that is born of woman hath but a short time to live ... He cometh up and is cut
     down..."
"Lord have mercy upon us!"
It was all she could remember; and when William had whispered Amen they left the old peasant
     to his work.
