<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook, Yeast: A
      Problem</title><author>Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1851</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER X: ‘MURDER WILL OUT,’ AND LOVE TOO
Argemone need never have known of Lancelot’s share in the poaching affray; but he dared not
     conceal anything from her.  And so he boldly went up the next day to the Priory, not to beg
     pardon, but to justify himself, and succeeded.  And, before long, he found himself fairly
     installed as her pupil, nominally in spiritual matters, but really in subjects of which she
     little dreamed.
Every day he came to read and talk with her, and whatever objections Mrs. Lavington expressed
     were silenced by Argemone.  She would have it so, and her mother neither dared nor knew how to
     control her.  The daughter had utterly out-read and out-thought her less educated parent, who
     was clinging in honest bigotry to the old forms, while Argemone was wandering forth over the
     chaos of the strange new age,—a poor homeless Noah’s dove, seeking rest for the sole of her
     foot and finding none.  And now all motherly influence and sympathy had vanished, and Mrs.
     Lavington, in fear and wonder, let her daughter go her own way.  She could not have done
     better, perhaps; for Providence had found for Argemone a better guide than her mother could
     have done, and her new pupil was rapidly becoming her teacher.  She was matched, for the first
     time, with a man who was her own equal in intellect and knowledge; and she felt how real was
     that sexual difference which she had been accustomed to consider as an insolent calumny against
     woman.  Proudly and indignantly she struggled against the conviction, but in vain.  Again and
     again she argued with him, and was vanquished,—or, at least, what is far better, made to see
     how many different sides there are to every question.  All appeals to authority he answered
     with a contemptuous smile.  ‘The best authorities?’ he used to say.  ‘On what question do not
     the best authorities flatly contradict each other?  And why?  Because every man believes just
     what it suits him to believe.  Don’t fancy that men reason themselves into convictions; the
     prejudices and feelings of their hearts give them some idea or theory, and then they find facts
     at their leisure to prove their theory true.  Every man sees facts through narrow spectacles,
     red, or green, or blue, as his nation or his temperament colours them: and he is quite right,
     only he must allow us the liberty of having our spectacles too.  Authority is only good for
     proving facts.  We must draw our own conclusions.’  And Argemone began to suspect that he was
     right,—at least to see that her opinions were mere hearsays, picked up at her own will and
     fancy; while his were living, daily-growing ideas.  Her mind was beside his as the vase of cut
     flowers by the side of the rugged tree, whose roots are feeding deep in the mother earth.  In
     him she first learnt how one great truth received into the depths of the soul germinates there,
     and bears fruit a thousandfold; explaining, and connecting, and glorifying innumerable things,
     apparently the most unlike and insignificant; and daily she became a more reverent listener,
     and gave herself up, half against her will and conscience, to the guidance of a man whom she
     knew to be her inferior in morals and in orthodoxy.  She had worshipped intellect, and now it
     had become her tyrant; and she was ready to give up every belief which she once had prized, to
     flutter like a moth round its fascinating brilliance.
Who can blame her, poor girl?  For Lancelot’s humility was even more irresistible than his
     eloquence.  He assumed no superiority.  He demanded her assent to truths, not because they were
     his opinions, but simply for the truth’s sake; and on all points which touched the heart he
     looked up to her as infallible and inspired.  In questions of morality, of taste, of feeling,
     he listened not as a lover to his mistress, but rather as a baby to its mother; and thus, half
     unconsciously to himself, he taught her where her true kingdom lay,—that the heart, and not the
     brain, enshrines the priceless pearl of womanhood, the oracular jewel, the ‘Urim and Thummim,’
     before which gross man can only inquire and adore.
And, in the meantime, a change was passing upon Lancelot.  His morbid vanity—that
     brawl-begotten child of struggling self-conceit and self-disgust—was vanishing away; and as Mr.
     Tennyson says in one of those priceless idyls of his, before which the shade of Theocritus must
     hide his diminished head,—
‘He was altered, and began    To move about the house with joy, And with the certain step of
     man.’
He had, at last, found one person who could appreciate him.  And in deliberate confidence he
     set to work to conquer her, and make her his own.  It was a traitorous return, but a very
     natural one.  And she, sweet creature! walked straight into the pleasant snare, utterly blind,
     because she fancied that she saw clearly.  In the pride of her mysticism, she had fancied
     herself above so commonplace a passion as love.  It was a curious feature of lower humanity,
     which she might investigate and analyse harmlessly as a cold scientific spectator; and, in her
     mingled pride and purity, she used to indulge Lancelot in metaphysical disquisitions about love
     and beauty, like that first one in their walk home from Minchampstead, from which a less
     celestially innocent soul would have shrunk.  She thought, forsooth, as the old proverb says,
     that she could deal in honey, without putting her hand to her mouth.  But Lancelot knew better,
     and marked her for his own.  And daily his self-confidence and sense of rightful power
     developed, and with them, paradoxical as it may seem, the bitterest self-abasement.  The
     contact of her stainless innocence, the growing certainty that the destiny of that innocence
     was irrevocably bound up with his own, made him shrink from her whenever he remembered his own
     guilty career.  To remember that there were passages in it which she must never know—that she
     would cast him from her with abhorrence if she once really understood their vileness?  To think
     that, amid all the closest bonds of love, there must for ever be an awful, silent gulf in the
     past, of which they must never speak!—That she would bring to him what he could never, never
     bring to her!—The thought was unbearable.  And as hideous recollections used to rise before
     him, devilish caricatures of his former self, mopping and mowing at him in his dreams, he would
     start from his lonely bed, and pace the room for hours, or saddle his horse, and ride all night
     long aimlessly through the awful woods, vainly trying to escape himself.  How gladly, at those
     moments, he would have welcomed centuries of a material hell, to escape from the more awful
     spiritual hell within him,—to buy back that pearl of innocence which he had cast recklessly to
     be trampled under the feet of his own swinish passions!  But, no; that which was done could
     never be undone,—never, to all eternity.  And more than once, as he wandered restlessly from
     one room to another, the barrels of his pistols seemed to glitter with a cold, devilish smile,
     and call to him,—
‘Come to us! and with one touch of your finger, send that bursting spirit which throbs
     against your brow to flit forth free, and nevermore to defile her purity by your presence!’
But no, again: a voice within seemed to command him to go on, and claim her, and win her,
     spite of his own vileness.  And in after years, slowly, and in fear and trembling, he knew it
     for the voice of God, who had been leading him to become worthy of her through that bitter
     shame of his own unworthiness.
As One higher than them would have it, she took a fancy to read Homer in the original, and
     Lancelot could do no less than offer his services as translator.  She would prepare for him
     portions of the Odyssey, and every day that he came up to the Priory he used to comment on it
     to her; and so for many a week, in the dark wainscoted library, and in the clipt yew-alleys of
     the old gardens, and under the brown autumn trees, they quarried together in that unexhausted
     mine, among the records of the rich Titan-youth of man.  And step by step Lancelot opened to
     her the everlasting significance of the poem; the unconscious purity which lingers in it, like
     the last rays of the Paradise dawn; its sense of the dignity of man as man; the religious
     reverence with which it speaks of all human ties, human strength and beauty—ay, even of merely
     animal human appetites, as God-given and Godlike symbols.  She could not but listen and admire,
     when he introduced her to the sheer paganism of Schiller’s Gods of Greece; for on this subject
     he was more eloquent than on any.  He had gradually, in fact, as we have seen, dropped all
     faith in anything but Nature; the slightest fact about a bone or a weed was more important to
     him than all the books of divinity which Argemone lent him—to be laid by unread.
‘What do you believe in?’ she asked him one day, sadly.
‘In this!’ he said, stamping his foot on the ground.  ‘In the earth I stand on, and
     the things I see walking and growing on it.  There may be something beside it—what you call a
     spiritual world.  But if He who made me intended me to think of spirit first, He would have let
     me see it first.  But as He has given me material senses, and put me in a material world, I
     take it as a fair hint that I am meant to use those senses first, whatever may come after.  I
     may be intended to understand the unseen world, but if so, it must be, as I suspect, by
     understanding the visible one: and there are enough wonders there to occupy me for some time to
     come.’
‘But the Bible?’ (Argemone had given up long ago wasting words about the ‘Church.’)
‘My only Bible as yet is Bacon.  I know that he is right, whoever is wrong.  If that Hebrew
     Bible is to be believed by me, it must agree with what I know already from science.’
What was to be done with so intractable a heretic?  Call him an infidel and a Materialist, of
     course, and cast him off with horror.  But Argemone was beginning to find out that, when people
     are really in earnest, it may be better sometimes to leave God’s methods of educating them
     alone, instead of calling the poor honest seekers hard names, which the speakers themselves
     don’t understand.
But words would fail sometimes, and in default of them Lancelot had recourse to drawings, and
     manifested in them a talent for thinking in visible forms which put the climax to all
     Argemone’s wonder.  A single profile, even a mere mathematical figure, would, in his hands,
     become the illustration of a spiritual truth.  And, in time, every fresh lesson on the Odyssey
     was accompanied by its illustration,—some bold and simple outline drawing.  In Argemone’s eyes,
     the sketches were immaculate and inspired; for their chief, almost their only fault, was just
     those mere anatomical slips which a woman would hardly perceive, provided the forms were
     generally graceful and bold.
One day his fancy attempted a bolder flight.  He brought a large pen-and-ink drawing, and
     laying it silently on the table before her, fixed his eyes intensely on her face.  The sketch
     was labelled, the ‘Triumph of Woman.’  In the foreground, to the right and left, were scattered
     groups of men, in the dresses and insignia of every period and occupation.  The distance
     showed, in a few bold outlines, a dreary desert, broken by alpine ridges, and furrowed here and
     there by a wandering watercourse.  Long shadows pointed to the half-risen sun, whose disc was
     climbing above the waste horizon.  And in front of the sun, down the path of the morning beams,
     came Woman, clothed only in the armour of her own loveliness.  Her bearing was stately, and yet
     modest; in her face pensive tenderness seemed wedded with earnest joy.  In her right hand lay a
     cross, the emblem of self-sacrifice.  Her path across the desert was marked by the flowers
     which sprang up beneath her steps; the wild gazelle stept forward trustingly to lick her hand;
     a single wandering butterfly fluttered round her head.  As the group, one by one, caught sight
     of her, a human tenderness and intelligence seemed to light up every face.  The scholar dropt
     his book, the miser his gold, the savage his weapons; even in the visage of the half-slumbering
     sot some nobler recollection seemed wistfully to struggle into life.  The artist caught up his
     pencil, the poet his lyre, with eyes that beamed forth sudden inspiration.  The sage, whose
     broad brow rose above the group like some torrent furrowed Alp, scathed with all the
     temptations and all the sorrows of his race, watched with a thoughtful smile that preacher more
     mighty than himself.  A youth, decked out in the most fantastic fopperies of the middle age,
     stood with clasped hands and brimming eyes, as remorse and pleasure struggled in his face; and
     as he looked, the fierce sensual features seemed to melt, and his flesh came again to him like
     the flesh of a little child.  The slave forgot his fetters; little children clapped their
     hands; and the toil-worn, stunted, savage woman sprung forward to kneel at her feet, and see
     herself transfigured in that new and divine ideal of her sex.
Descriptions of drawings are clumsy things at best; the reader must fill up the sketch for
     himself by the eye of faith.
Entranced in wonder and pleasure, Argemone let her eyes wander over the drawing.  And her
     feelings for Lancelot amounted almost to worship, as she apprehended the harmonious unity of
     the manifold conception,—the rugged boldness of the groups in front, the soft grandeur of the
     figure which was the lodestar of all their emotions—the virginal purity of the whole.  And when
     she fancied that she traced in those bland aquiline lineaments, and in the crisp ringlets which
     floated like a cloud down to the knees of the figure, some traces of her own likeness, a dream
     of a new destiny flitted before her,—she blushed to her very neck; and as she bent her face
     over the drawing and gazed, her whole soul seemed to rise into her eyes, and a single tear
     dropped upon the paper.  She laid her hand over it, and then turned hastily away.
‘You do not like it!  I have been too bold,’—said Lancelot, fearfully.
‘Oh, no! no!  It is so beautiful—so full of deep wisdom!  But—but—You may leave it.’
Lancelot slipped silently out of the room, he hardly knew why; and when he was gone, Argemone
     caught up the drawing, pressed it to her bosom, covered it with kisses, and hid it, as too
     precious for any eyes but her own, in the farthest corner of her secrétaire.
And yet she fancied that she was not in love!
The vicar saw the growth of this intimacy with a fast-lengthening face; for it was very
     evident that Argemone could not serve two masters so utterly contradictory as himself and
     Lancelot, and that either the lover or the father-confessor must speedily resign office.  The
     vicar had had great disadvantages, by the bye, in fulfilling the latter function; for his
     visits at the Priory had been all but forbidden; and Argemone’s ‘spiritual state’ had been
     directed by means of a secret correspondence,—a method which some clergymen, and some young
     ladies too, have discovered, in the last few years, to be quite consistent with moral delicacy
     and filial obedience.  John Bull, like a stupid fellow as he is, has still his doubts upon the
     point; but he should remember that though St. Paul tells women when they want advice to ask
     their husbands at home, yet if the poor woman has no husband, or, as often happens, her
     husband’s advice is unpleasant, to whom is she to go but to the next best substitute, her
     spiritual cicisbeo, or favourite clergyman?  In sad earnest, neither husband nor parent
     deserves pity in the immense majority of such cases.  Woman will have guidance.  It is her
     delight and glory to be led; and if her husband or her parents will not meet the cravings of
     her intellect, she must go elsewhere to find a teacher, and run into the wildest extravagances
     of private judgment, in the very hope of getting rid of it, just as poor Argemone had been led
     to do.
And, indeed, she had, of late, wandered into very strange paths: would to God they were as
     uncommon as strange!  Both she and the vicar had a great wish that she should lead a ‘devoted
     life;’ but then they both disdained to use common means for their object.  The good old English
     plan of district visiting, by which ladies can have mercy on the bodies and souls of those
     below them, without casting off the holy discipline which a home, even the most ungenial, alone
     supplies, savoured too much of mere ‘Protestantism.’  It might be God’s plan for christianising
     England just now, but that was no reason, alas! for its being their plan: they wanted something
     more ‘Catholic,’ more in accordance with Church principles (for, indeed, is it not the business
     of the Church to correct the errors of Providence!); and what they sought they found at once in
     a certain favourite establishment of the vicar’s, a Church-of-England béguinage, or
     quasi-Protestant nunnery, which he fostered in a neighbouring city, and went thither on all
     high tides to confess the young ladies, who were in all things nuns, but bound by no vows,
     except, of course, such as they might choose to make for themselves in private.
Here they laboured among the lowest haunts of misery and sin, piously and self-denyingly
     enough, sweet souls! in hope of ‘the peculiar crown,’ and a higher place in heaven than the
     relations whom they had left behind them ‘in the world,’ and unshackled by the interference of
     parents, and other such merely fleshly relationships, which, as they cannot have been
     instituted by God merely to be trampled under foot on the path to holiness, and cannot well
     have instituted themselves (unless, after all, the Materialists are right, and this world does
     grind of itself, except when its Maker happens to interfere once every thousand years), must
     needs have been instituted by the devil.  And so more than one girl in that nunnery, and out of
     it, too, believed in her inmost heart, though her ‘Catholic principles,’ by a happy
     inconsistency, forbade her to say so.
In a moment of excitement, fascinated by the romance of the notion, Argemone had proposed to
     her mother to allow her to enter this béguinage, and called in the vicar as advocate;
     which produced a correspondence between him and Mrs. Lavington, stormy on her side, provokingly
     calm on his: and when the poor lady, tired of raging, had descended to an affecting appeal to
     his human sympathies, entreating him to spare a mother’s feelings, he had answered with the
     same impassive fanaticism, that ‘he was surprised at her putting a mother’s selfish feelings in
     competition with the sanctity of her child,’ and that ‘had his own daughter shown such a desire
     for a higher vocation, he should have esteemed it the very highest honour;’ to which Mrs.
     Lavington answered, naively enough, that ‘it depended very much on what his daughter was
     like.’—So he was all but forbidden the house.  Nevertheless he contrived, by means of this same
     secret correspondence, to keep alive in Argemone’s mind the longing to turn nun, and fancied
     honestly that he was doing God service, while he was pampering the poor girl’s lust for
     singularity and self-glorification.
But, lately, Argemone’s letters had become less frequent and less confiding; and the vicar,
     who well knew the reason, had resolved to bring the matter to a crisis.
So he wrote earnestly and peremptorily to his pupil, urging her, with all his subtle and
     refined eloquence, to make a final appeal to her mother, and if that failed, to act ‘as her
     conscience should direct her;’ and enclosed an answer from the superior of the convent, to a
     letter which Argemone had in a mad moment asked him to write.  The superior’s letter spoke of
     Argemone’s joining her as a settled matter, and of her room as ready for her, while it lauded
     to the skies the peaceful activity and usefulness of the establishment.  This letter troubled
     Argemone exceedingly.  She had never before been compelled to face her own feelings, either
     about the nunnery or about Lancelot.  She had taken up the fancy of becoming a Sister of
     Charity, not as Honoria might have done, from genuine love of the poor, but from ‘a sense of
     duty.’  Almsgiving and visiting the sick were one of the methods of earning heaven prescribed
     by her new creed.  She was ashamed of her own laziness by the side of Honoria’s simple
     benevolence; and, sad though it may be to have to say it, she longed to outdo her by some
     signal act of self-sacrifice.  She had looked to this nunnery, too, as an escape, once and for
     all, from her own luxury, just as people who have not strength to be temperate take refuge in
     teetotalism; and the thought of menial services towards the poor, however distasteful to her,
     came in quite prettily to fill up the little ideal of a life of romantic asceticisms and mystic
     contemplation, which gave the true charm in her eyes to her wild project.  But now—just as a
     field had opened to her cravings after poetry and art, wider and richer than she had ever
     imagined—just as those simple childlike views of man and nature, which she had learnt to
     despise, were assuming an awful holiness in her eyes—just as she had found a human soul to
     whose regeneration she could devote all her energies,—to be required to give all up, perhaps
     for ever (and she felt that if at all, it ought to be for ever);—it was too much for her little
     heart to bear; and she cried bitterly; and tried to pray, and could not; and longed for a
     strong and tender bosom on which to lay her head, and pour out all her doubts and struggles;
     and there was none.  Her mother did not understand—hardly loved her.  Honoria loved her; but
     understood her even less than her mother.  Pride—the pride of intellect, the pride of
     self-will—had long since sealed her lips to her own family...
And then, out of the darkness of her heart, Lancelot’s image rose before her stronger than
     all, tenderer than all; and as she remembered his magical faculty of anticipating all her
     thoughts, embodying for her all her vague surmises, he seemed to beckon her towards him.—She
     shuddered and turned away.  And now she first became conscious how he had haunted her thoughts
     in the last few months, not as a soul to be saved, but as a living man—his face, his figure,
     his voice, his every gesture and expression, rising clear before her, in spite of herself, by
     day and night.
And then she thought of his last drawing, and the looks which had accompanied
     it,—unmistakable looks of passionate and adoring love.  There was no denying it—she had always
     known that he loved her, but she had never dared to confess it to herself.  But now the
     earthquake was come, and all the secrets of her heart burst upward to the light, and she faced
     the thought in shame and terror.  ‘How unjust I have been to him! how cruel! thus to entice him
     on in hopeless love!’
She lifted up her eyes, and saw in the mirror opposite the reflection of her own exquisite
     beauty.
‘I could have known what I was doing!  I knew all the while!  And yet it is so delicious to
     feel that any one loves me!  Is it selfishness?  It is selfishness, to pamper my vanity on an
     affection which I do not, will not return.  I will not be thus in debt to him, even for his
     love.  I do not love him—I do not; and even if I did, to give myself up to a man of whom I know
     so little, who is not even a Christian, much less a Churchman!  Ay! and to give up my will to
     any man! to become the subject, the slave, of another human being!  I, who have worshipped the
     belief in woman’s independence, the hope of woman’s enfranchisement, who have felt how glorious
     it is to live like the angels, single and self-sustained!  What if I cut the Gordian knot, and
     here make, once for all, a vow of perpetual celibacy?’
She flung herself on her knees—she could not collect her thoughts.
‘No,’ she said, ‘I am not prepared for this.  It is too solemn to be undertaken in this
     miserable whirlwind of passion.  I will fast, and meditate, and go up formally to the little
     chapel, and there devote myself to God; and, in the meantime, to write at once to the superior
     of the Béguines; to go to my mother, and tell her once for all—What?  Must I lose him?—must I
     give him up?  Not his love—I cannot give up that—would that I could! but no! he will love me
     for ever.  I know it as well as if an angel told me.  But to give up him!  Never to see him!
     never to hear his voice! never to walk with him among the beech woods any more!  Oh, Argemone! 
     Argemone! miserable girl! and is it come to this?’  And she threw herself on the sofa, and hid
     her face in her hands.
Yes, Argemone, it is come to this; and the best thing you can do, is just what you are
     doing—to lie there and cry yourself to sleep, while the angels are laughing kindly (if a solemn
     public, who settles everything for them, will permit them to laugh) at the rickety old windmill
     of sham-Popery which you have taken for a real giant.
At that same day and hour, as it chanced, Lancelot, little dreaming what the said windmill
     was grinding for him, was scribbling a hasty and angry answer to a letter of Luke’s, which,
     perhaps, came that very morning in order to put him into a proper temper for the demolishing of
     windmills.  It ran thus,—
‘Ay, my good Cousin,—So I expected—
‘Suave mari magno turbantibus æquora ventis E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem ...
Pleasant and easy for you Protestants (for I will call you what you are, in spite of your own
     denials, a truly consistent and logical Protestant—and therefore a Materialist)—easy for you, I
     say, to sit on the shore, in cold, cruel self-satisfaction, and tell the poor wretch buffeting
     with the waves what he ought to do while he is choking and drowning...  Thank Heaven, the storm
     has stranded me upon the everlasting Rock of Peter;—but it has been a sore trouble to reach
     it.  Protestants, who look at creeds as things to be changed like coats, whenever they seem not
     to fit them, little know what we Catholic-hearted ones suffer...  If they did, they would be
     more merciful and more chary in the requirements of us, just as we are in the very throe of a
     new-born existence.  The excellent man, to whose care I have committed myself, has a wise and a
     tender heart ... he saw no harm in my concealing from my father the spiritual reason of my
     giving up my curacy (for I have given it up), and only giving the outward, but equally true
     reason, that I found it on the whole an ineligible and distressing post....   I know you will
     apply to such an act that disgusting monosyllable of which Protestants are so fond.  He felt
     with me and for me—for my horror of giving pain to my father, and for my wearied and excited
     state of mind; and strangely enough—to show how differently, according to the difference of the
     organs, the same object may appear to two people—he quoted in my favour that very verse which
     you wrest against me.  He wished me to show my father that I had only changed my heaven, and
     not my character, by becoming an Ultramontane-Catholic ... that, as far as his esteem and
     affection were founded on anything in me, the ground of it did not vanish with my conversion. 
     If I had told him at once of my altered opinions, he would have henceforth viewed every word
     and action with a perjudiced eye...  Protestants are so bigoted ... but if, after seeing me for
     a month or two the same Luke that he had ever known me, he were gradually informed that I had
     all the while held that creed which he had considered incompatible with such a life as I hope
     mine would be—you must see the effect which it ought to have... I don’t doubt that you will
     complain of all this...  All I can say is, that I cannot sympathise with that superstitious
     reverence for mere verbal truth, which is so common among Protestants... It seems to me they
     throw away the spirit of truth, in their idolatry of its letter.  For instance,—what is the use
     of informing a man of a true fact but to induce a true opinion in him?  But if, by clinging to
     the exact letter of the fact, you create a false opinion in his mind, as I should do in my
     father’s case, if by telling him at once of my change, I gave him an unjust horror of
     Catholicism,—you do not tell him the truth...  You may speak what is true to you,—but it
     becomes an error when received into his mind... . If his mind is a refracting and polarising
     medium—if the crystalline lens of his soul’s eye has been changed into tourmaline or Labrador
     spar—the only way to give him a true image of the fact, is to present it to him already
     properly altered in form, and adapted to suit the obliquity of his vision; in order that the
     very refractive power of his faculties may, instead of distorting it, correct it, and make it
     straight for him; and so a verbal wrong in fact may possess him with a right opinion...
‘You see the whole question turns on your Protestant deification of the intellect...  If you
     really believed, as you all say you do, that the nature of man, and therefore his intellect
     among the rest, was utterly corrupt, you would not be so superstitiously careful to tell the
     truth ... as you call it; because you would know that man’s heart, if not his head, would needs
     turn the truth into a lie by its own corruption...  The proper use of reasoning is to produce
     opinion,—and if the subject in which you wish to produce the opinion is diseased, you must
     adapt the medicine accordingly.’
To all which Lancelot, with several strong curses, scrawled the following answer:—
‘And this is my Cousin Luke!—Well, I shall believe henceforward that there is, after all, a
     thousand times greater moral gulf fixed between Popery and Tractarianism, than between
     Tractarianism and the extremest Protestantism.  My dear fellow,—I won’t bother you, by cutting
     up your charming ambiguous middle terms, which make reason and reasoning identical, or your
     theory that the office of reasoning is to induce opinions—(the devil take opinions, right or
     wrong—I want facts, faith in real facts!)—or about deifying the intellect—as if all sound
     intellect was not in itself divine light—a revelation to man of absolute laws independent of
     him, as the very heathens hold.  But this I will do—thank you most sincerely for the compliment
     you pay us Cismontane heretics.  We do retain some dim belief in a God—even I am beginning to
     believe in believing in Him.  And therefore, as I begin to suppose, it is, that we reverence
     facts, as the work of God, His acted words and will, which we dare not falsify; which we
     believe will tell their own story better than we can tell it for them.  If our eyes are dimmed,
     we think it safer to clear them, which do belong to us, than to bedevil, by the light of those
     very already dimmed eyes, the objects round, which do not belong to us.  Whether we
     are consistent or not about the corruptness of man, we are about the incorruptness of God; and
     therefore about that of the facts by which God teaches men: and believe, and will continue to
     believe, that the blackest of all sins, the deepest of all Atheisms, that which, above all
     things, proves no faith in God’s government of the universe, no sense of His presence, no
     understanding of His character, is—a lie.
‘One word more—Unless you tell your father within twenty-four hours after receiving this
     letter, I will.  And I, being a Protestant (if cursing Popery means Protestantism), mean what I
     say.’
As Lancelot walked up to the Priory that morning, the Reverend Panurgus O’Blareaway dashed
     out of a cottage by the roadside, and seized him unceremoniously by the shoulders.  He was a
     specimen of humanity which Lancelot could not help at once liking and despising; a quaint
     mixture of conceit and earnestness, uniting the shrewdness of a stockjobber with the frolic of
     a schoolboy broke loose.  He was rector of a place in the west of Ireland, containing some ten
     Protestants and some thousand Papists.  Being, unfortunately for himself, a red-hot Orangeman,
     he had thought fit to quarrel with the priest, in consequence of which he found himself
     deprived both of tithes and congregation; and after receiving three or four Rockite letters,
     and a charge of slugs through his hat (of which he always talked as if being shot at was the
     most pleasant and amusing feature of Irish life), he repaired to England, and there, after
     trying to set up as popular preacher in London, declaiming at Exeter Hall, and writing for all
     the third-rate magazines, found himself incumbent of Lower Whitford.  He worked there, as he
     said himself, ‘like a horse;’ spent his mornings in the schools, his afternoons in the
     cottages; preached four or five extempore sermons every week to overflowing congregations; took
     the lead, by virtue of the ‘gift of the gab,’ at all ‘religious’ meetings for ten miles round;
     and really did a great deal of good in his way.  He had an unblushing candour about his own
     worldly ambition, with a tremendous brogue; and prided himself on exaggerating deliberately
     both of these excellences.
‘The top of the morning to ye, Mr. Smith.  Ye haven’t such a thing as a cegar about ye?  I’ve
     been preaching to school-children till me throat’s as dry as the slave of a lime-burner’s
     coat.’
‘I am very sorry; but, really, I have left my case at home.’
‘Oh! ah! faix and I forgot.  Ye mustn’t be smokin’ the nasty things going up to the castle. 
     Och, Mr. Smith, but you’re the lucky man!’
‘I am much obliged to you for the compliment,’ said Lancelot, gruffly; ‘but really I don’t
     see how I deserve it.’
‘Desarve it!  Sure luck’s all, and that’s your luck, and not your deserts at all.  To have
     the handsomest girl in the county dying for love of ye’—(Panurgus had a happy knack of blurting
     out truths—when they were pleasant ones).  ‘And she just the beautifulest creature that ever
     spilte shoe-leather, barring Lady Philandria Mountflunkey, of Castle Mountflunkey, Quane’s
     County, that shall be nameless.’
‘Upon my word, O’Blareaway, you seem to be better acquainted with my matters than I am. 
     Don’t you think, on the whole, it might be better to mind your own business?’
‘Me own business!  Poker o’ Moses! and ain’t it me own business?  Haven’t ye spilte my
     tenderest hopes?  And good luck to ye in that same, for ye’re as pretty a rider as ever kicked
     coping-stones out of a wall; and poor Paddy loves a sportsman by nature.  Och! but ye’ve got a
     hand of trumps this time.  Didn’t I mate the vicar the other day, and spake my mind to
     him?’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Lancelot, with a strong expletive.
‘Faix, I told him he might as well Faugh a ballagh—make a rid road, and get out of
     that, with his bowings and his crossings, and his Popery made asy for small minds, for there
     was a gun a-field that would wipe his eye,—maning yourself, ye Prathestant.’
‘All I can say is, that you had really better mind your own business, and I’ll mind my
     own.’
‘Och,’ said the good-natured Irishman, ‘and it’s you must mind my business, and I’ll mind
     yours; and that’s all fair and aqual.  Ye’ve cut me out intirely at the Priory, ye Tory, and so
     ye’re bound to give me a lift somehow.  Couldn’t ye look me out a fine fat widow, with an
     illigant little fortune?  For what’s England made for except to find poor Paddy a wife and
     money?  Ah, ye may laugh, but I’d buy me a chapel at the West-end: me talents are thrown away
     here intirely, wasting me swateness on the desert air, as Tom Moore says’ (Panurgus used to
     attribute all quotations whatsoever to Irish geniuses); ‘and I flatter meself I’m the boy to
     shute the Gospel to the aristocracy.’
Lancelot burst into a roar of laughter, and escaped over the next gate: but the Irishman’s
     coarse hints stuck by him as they were intended to do.  ‘Dying for the love of me!’  He knew it
     was an impudent exaggeration, but, somehow, it gave him confidence; ‘there is no smoke,’ he
     thought, ‘without fire.’  And his heart beat high with new hopes, for which he laughed at
     himself all the while.  It was just the cordial which he needed.  That conversation determined
     the history of his life.
He met Argemone that morning in the library, as usual; but he soon found that she was not
     thinking of Homer.  She was moody and abstracted; and he could not help at last saying,—
‘I am afraid I and my classics are de trop this morning, Miss Lavington.’
‘Oh, no, no.  Never that.’  She turned away her head.  He fancied that it was to hide a
     tear.
Suddenly she rose, and turned to him with a clear, calm, gentle gaze.
‘Listen to me, Mr. Smith.  We must part to-day, and for ever.  This intimacy has gone on—too
     long, I am afraid, for your happiness.  And now, like all pleasant things in this miserable
     world, it must cease.  I cannot tell you why; but you will trust me.  I thank you for it—I
     thank God for it.  I have learnt things from it which I shall never forget.  I have learnt, at
     least from it, to esteem and honour you.  You have vast powers.  Nothing, nothing, I believe,
     is too high for you to attempt and succeed.  But we must part; and now, God be with you.  Oh,
     that you would but believe that these glorious talents are His loan!  That you would but be a
     true and loyal knight to him who said—“Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye
     shall find rest unto your souls!”—Ay,’ she went on, more and more passionately, for she felt
     that not she, but One mightier than herself was speaking through her, ‘then you might be great
     indeed.  Then I might watch your name from afar, rising higher and higher daily in the ranks of
     God’s own heroes.  I see it—and you have taught me to see it—that you are meant for a faith
     nobler and deeper than all doctrines and systems can give.  You must become the philosopher,
     who can discover new truths—the artist who can embody them in new forms, while poor I—And that
     is another reason why we should part.—Hush! hear me out.  I must not be a clog, to drag you
     down in your course.  Take this, and farewell; and remember that you once had a friend called
     Argemone.’
She put into his hands a little Bible.  He took it, and laid it down on the table.
For a minute he stood silent and rooted to the spot.  Disappointment, shame, rage, hatred,
     all boiled up madly within him.  The bitterest insults rose to his lips—‘Flirt, cold-hearted
     pedant, fanatic!’ but they sank again unspoken, as he looked into the celestial azure of those
     eyes, calm and pure as a soft evening sky.  A mighty struggle between good and evil shook his
     heart to the roots; and, for the first time in his life, his soul breathed out one real prayer,
     that God would help him now or never to play the man.  And in a moment the darkness passed; a
     new spirit called out all the latent strength within him; and gently and proudly he answered
     her,—
‘Yes, I will go.  I have had mad dreams, conceited and insolent, and have met with my
     deserts.  Brute and fool as I am, I have aspired even to you!  And I have gained, in the
     sunshine of your condescension, strength and purity.—Is not that enough for me?  And now I will
     show you that I love you—by obeying you.  You tell me to depart—I go for ever.’
He turned away.  Why did she almost spring after him?
‘Lancelot! one word!  Do not misunderstand me, as I know you will.  You will think me so
     cold, heartless, fickle.—Oh, you do not know—you never can know—how much I, too, have
     felt!’
He stopped, spell-bound.  In an instant his conversation with the Irishman flashed up before
     him with new force and meaning.  A thousand petty incidents, which he had driven contemptuously
     from his mind, returned as triumphant evidences; and, with an impetuous determination, he cried
     out,—
‘I see—I see it all, Argemone!  We love each other!  You are mine, never to be parted!’
What was her womanhood, that it could stand against the energy of his manly will!  The almost
     coarse simplicity of his words silenced her with a delicious violence.  She could only bury her
     face in her hands and sob out,—
‘Oh, Lancelot, Lancelot, whither are you forcing me?’
‘I am forcing you no whither.  God, the Father of spirits, is leading you!  You, who believe
     in Him, how dare you fight against Him?’
‘Lancelot, I cannot—I cannot listen to you—read that!’  And she handed him the vicar’s
     letter.  He read it, tossed it on the carpet, and crushed it with his heel.
‘Wretched pedant!  Can your intellect be deluded by such barefaced sophistries?  “God’s
     will,” forsooth!  And if your mother’s opposition is not a sign that God’s will—if it mean
     anything except your own will, or that—that man’s—is against this mad project, and not for it,
     what sign would you have?  So “celibacy is the highest state!”  And why?  Because “it is the
     safest and the easiest road to heaven?”  A pretty reason, vicar!  I should have thought that
     that was a sign of a lower state and not a higher.  Noble spirits show their nobleness by
     daring the most difficult paths.  And even if marriage was but one weed-field of temptations,
     as these miserable pedants say, who have either never tried it, or misused it to their own
     shame, it would be a greater deed to conquer its temptations than to flee from them in cowardly
     longings after ease and safety!’
She did not answer him, but kept her face buried in her hands.
‘Again, I say, Argemone, will you fight against Fate—Providence—God—call it what you will? 
     Who made us meet at the chapel?  Who made me, by my accident, a guest in your father’s house! 
     Who put it into your heart to care for my poor soul?  Who gave us this strange attraction
     towards each other, in spite of our unlikeness?  Wonderful that the very chain of circumstances
     which you seem to fancy the offspring of chance or the devil, should have first taught me to
     believe that there is a God who guides us!  Argemone! speak, tell me, if you will, to go for
     ever; but tell me first the truth—You love me!’
A strong shudder ran through her frame—the ice of artificial years cracked, and the clear
     stream of her woman’s nature welled up to the light, as pure as when she first lay on her
     mother’s bosom: she lifted up her eyes, and with one long look of passionate tenderness she
     faltered out,—
‘I love you!’
He did not stir, but watched her with clasped hands, like one who in dreams finds himself in
     some fairy palace, and fears that a movement may break the spell.
‘Now, go,’ she said; ‘go, and let me collect my thoughts.  All this has been too much for
     me.  Do not look sad—you may come again to-morrow.’
She smiled and held out her hand.  He caught it, covered it with kisses, and pressed it to
     his heart.  She half drew it back, frightened.  The sensation was new to her.  Again the
     delicious feeling of being utterly in his power came over her, and she left her hand upon his
     heart, and blushed as she felt its passionate throbbings.
He turned to go—not as before.  She followed with greedy eyes her new-found treasure; and as
     the door closed behind him, she felt as if Lancelot was the whole world, and there was nothing
     beside him, and wondered how a moment had made him all in all to her; and then she sank upon
     her knees, and folded her hands upon her bosom, and her prayers for him were like the prayers
     of a little child.
</div></body></text></TEI>