<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook, Yeast: A
      Problem</title><author>Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1851</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER IX: HARRY VERNEY HEARS HIS LAST SHOT FIRED
The day after the Lavingtons’ return, when Lancelot walked up to the Priory with a fluttering
     heart to inquire after all parties, and see one, he found the squire in a great state of
     excitement.
A large gang of poachers, who had come down from London by rail, had been devastating all the
     covers round, to stock the London markets by the first of October, and intended, as Tregarva
     had discovered, to pay Mr. Lavington’s preserves a visit that night.  They didn’t care for
     country justices, not they.  Weren’t all their fines paid by highly respectable game-dealers at
     the West end?  They owned three dog-carts among them; a parcel by railway would bring them down
     bail to any amount; they tossed their money away at the public-houses, like gentlemen; thanks
     to the Game Laws, their profits ran high, and when they had swept the country pretty clean of
     game, why, they would just finish off the season by a stray highway robbery or two, and vanish
     into Babylon and their native night.
Such was Harry Verney’s information as he strutted about the courtyard waiting for the
     squire’s orders.
‘But they’ve put their nose into a furze-bush, Muster Smith, they have.  We’ve got our
     posse-commontaturs, fourteen men, sir, as’ll play the whole vale to cricket, and whap them; and
     every one’ll fight, for they’re half poachers themselves, you see’ (and Harry winked and
     chuckled); ‘and they can’t abide no interlopers to come down and take the sport out of their
     mouths.’
‘But are you sure they’ll come to-night?’
‘That ’ere Paul says so.  Wonder how he found out—some of his underhand, colloguing,
     Methodist ways, I’ll warrant.  I seed him preaching to that ’ere Crawy, three or four times
     when he ought to have hauled him up.  He consorts with them poachers, sir, uncommon.  I hope he
     ben’t one himself, that’s all.’
‘Nonsense, Harry!’
‘Oh?  Eh?  Don’t say old Harry don’t know nothing, that’s all.  I’ve fixed his flint,
     anyhow.’
‘Ah!  Smith!’ shouted the squire out of his study window, with a cheerful and appropriate
     oath.  ‘The very man I wanted to see!  You must lead these keepers for me to-night.  They
     always fight better with a gentleman among them.  Breeding tells, you know—breeding tells.’
Lancelot felt a strong disgust at the occupation, but he was under too many obligations to
     the squire to refuse.
‘Ay, I knew you were game,’ said the old man.  ‘And you’ll find it capital fun.  I used to
     think it so, I know, when I was young.  Many a shindy have I had here in my uncle’s time, under
     the very windows, before the chase was disparked, when the fellows used to come down after the
     deer.’
Just then Lancelot turned and saw Argemone standing close to him.  He almost sprang towards
     her—and retreated, for he saw that she had overheard the conversation between him and her
     father.
‘What!  Mr. Smith!’ said she in a tone in which tenderness and contempt, pity and affected
     carelessness, were strangely mingled.  ‘So! you are going to turn gamekeeper to-night?’
Lancelot was blundering out something, when the squire interposed.
‘Let her alone, Smith.  Women will be tender-hearted, you know.  Quite right—but they don’t
     understand these things.  They fight with their tongues, and we with our fists; and then they
     fancy their weapons don’t hurt—Ha! ha! ha!’
‘Mr. Smith,’ said Argemone, in a low, determined voice, ‘if you have promised my father to go
     on this horrid business—go.  But promise me, too, that you will only look on, or I will
     never—’
Argemone had not time to finish her sentence before Lancelot had promised seven times over,
     and meant to keep his promise, as we all do.
About ten o’clock that evening Lancelot and Tregarva were walking stealthily up a ride in one
     of the home-covers, at the head of some fifteen fine young fellows, keepers, grooms, and
      not extempore ‘watchers,’ whom old Harry was marshalling and tutoring, with
     exhortations as many and as animated as if their ambition was ‘Mourir pour la
     patrie.’
‘How does this sort of work suit you, Tregarva, for I don’t like it at all!  The fighting’s
     all very well, but it’s a poor cause.’
‘Oh, sir, I have no mercy on these Londoners.  If it was these poor half-starved labourers,
     that snare the same hares that have been eating up their garden-stuff all the week, I can’t
     touch them, sir, and that’s truth; but these ruffians—And yet, sir, wouldn’t it be better for
     the parsons to preach to them, than for the keepers to break their heads?’
‘Oh?’ said Lancelot, ‘the parsons say all to them that they can.’
Tregarva shook his head.
‘I doubt that, sir.  But, no doubt, there’s a great change for the better in the parsons.  I
     remember the time, sir, that there wasn’t an earnest clergyman in the vale; and now every other
     man you meet is trying to do his best.  But those London parsons, sir, what’s the matter with
     them?  For all their societies and their schools, the devil seems to keep ahead of them sadly. 
     I doubt they haven’t found the right fly yet for publicans and sinners to rise at.’
A distant shot in the cover.
‘There they are, sir.  I thought that Crawy wouldn’t lead me false when I let him off.’
‘Well, fight away, then, and win.  I have promised Miss Lavington not to lift a hand in the
     business.’
‘Then you’re a lucky man, sir.  But the squire’s game is his own, and we must do our duty by
     our master.’
There was a rustle in the bushes, and a tramp of feet on the turf.
‘There they are, sir, sure enough.  The Lord keep us from murder this night!’  And Tregarva
     pulled off his neckcloth, and shook his huge limbs, as if to feel that they were all in their
     places, in a way that augured ill for the man who came across him.
They turned the corner of a ride, and, in an instant, found themselves face to face with five
     or six armed men, with blackened faces, who, without speaking a word, dashed at them, and the
     fight began; reinforcements came up on each side, and the engagement became general.
‘The forest-laws were sharp and stern,    The forest blood was keen, They lashed together for
     life and death    Beneath the hollies green.
‘The metal good and the walnut-wood    Did soon in splinters flee; They tossed the orts to
     south and north,    And grappled knee to knee.
‘They wrestled up, they wrestled down,    They wrestled still and sore; The herbage sweet
     beneath their feet    Was stamped to mud and gore.’
And all the while the broad still moon stared down on them grim and cold, as if with a
     saturnine sneer at the whole humbug; and the silly birds about whom all this butchery went on,
     slept quietly over their heads, every one with his head under his wing.  Oh! if pheasants had
     but understanding, how they would split their sides with chuckling and crowing at the follies
     which civilised Christian men perpetrate for their precious sake!
Had I the pen of Homer (though they say he never used one), or even that of the worthy who
     wasted precious years in writing a Homer Burlesqued, what heroic exploits might not I
     immortalise!  In every stupid serf and cunning ruffian there, there was a heart as brave as
     Ajax’s own; but then they fought with sticks instead of lances, and hammered away on fustian
     jackets instead of brazen shields; and, therefore, poor fellows, they were beneath ‘the dignity
     of poetry,’ whatever that may mean.  If one of your squeamish ‘dignity-of-poetry’ critics had
     just had his head among the gun-stocks for five minutes that night, he would have found it grim
     tragic earnest enough; not without a touch of fun though, here and there.
Lancelot leant against a tree and watched the riot with folded arms, mindful of his promise
     to Argemone, and envied Tregarva as he hurled his assailants right and left with immense
     strength, and led the van of battle royally.  Little would Argemone have valued the real proof
     of love which he was giving her as he looked on sulkily, while his fingers tingled with longing
     to be up and doing.  Strange—that mere lust of fighting, common to man and animals, whose
     traces even the lamb and the civilised child evince in their mock-fights, the earliest and most
     natural form of play.  Is it, after all, the one human propensity which is utterly evil,
     incapable of being turned to any righteous use?  Gross and animal, no doubt it is, but not the
     less really pleasant, as every Irishman and many an Englishman knows well enough.  A curious
     instance of this, by the bye, occurred in Paris during the February Revolution.  A fat English
     coachman went out, from mere curiosity, to see the fighting.  As he stood and watched, a new
     passion crept over him; he grew madder and madder as the bullets whistled past him; at last,
     when men began to drop by his side, he could stand it no longer, seized a musket, and rushed
     in, careless which side he took,—
‘To drink delight of battle with his peers.’
He was not heard of for a day or two, and then they found him stiff and cold, lying on his
     face across a barricade, with a bullet through his heart.  Sedentary persons may call him a
     sinful fool.  Be it so.  Homo sum: humani nihil à me alienum puto.
Lancelot, I verily believe, would have kept his promise, though he saw that the keepers gave
     ground, finding Cockney skill too much for their clumsy strength; but at last Harry Verney, who
     had been fighting as venomously as a wild cat, and had been once before saved from a broken
     skull by Tregarva, rolled over at his very feet with a couple of poachers on him.
‘You won’t see an old man murdered, Mr. Smith?’ cried he, imploringly.
Lancelot tore the ruffians off the old man right and left.  One of them struck him; he
     returned the blow; and, in an instant, promises and Argemone, philosophy and anti-game-law
     prejudices, were swept out of his head, and ‘he went,’ as the old romances say, ‘hurling into
     the midst of the press,’ as mere a wild animal for the moment as angry bull or boar.  An
     instant afterwards, though, he burst out laughing, in spite of himself, as ‘The Battersea
     Bantam,’ who had been ineffectually dancing round Tregarva like a gamecock spurring at a bull,
     turned off with a voice of ineffable disgust,—
‘That big cove’s a yokel; ta’nt creditable to waste science on him.  You’re my man, if you
     please, sir,’—and the little wiry lump of courage and conceit, rascality and good humour, flew
     at Lancelot, who was twice his size, ‘with a heroism worthy of a better cause,’ as respectable
     papers, when they are not too frightened, say of the French.
* * * * *
‘Do you want any more?’ asked Lancelot.
‘Quite a pleasure, sir, to meet a scientific gen’lman.  Beg your pardon, sir; stay a moment
     while I wipes my face.  Now, sir, time, if you please.’
Alas for the little man! in another moment he tumbled over and lay senseless—Lancelot thought
     he had killed him.  The gang saw their champion fall, gave ground, and limped off, leaving
     three of their party groaning on the ground, beside as many Whitford men.
As it was in the beginning, so is it to be to the end, my foolish brothers!  From the poacher
     to the prime minister—wearying yourselves for very vanity!  The soldier is not the only man in
     England who is fool enough to be shot at for a shilling a day.
But while all the rest were busy picking up the wounded men and securing the prisoners, Harry
     Verney alone held on, and as the poachers retreated slowly up the ride, he followed them,
     peering into the gloom, as if in hopes of recognising some old enemy.
‘Stand back, Harry Verney; we know you, and we’d be loth to harm an old man,’ cried a voice
     out of the darkness.
‘Eh?  Do you think old Harry’d turn back when he was once on the track of ye?  You
     soft-fisted, gin-drinking, counter-skipping Cockney rascals, that fancy you’re to carry the
     county before you, because you get your fines paid by London-tradesmen!  Eh?  What do you take
     old Harry for?’
‘Go back, you old fool!’ and a volley of oaths followed.  ‘If you follow us, we’ll fire at
     you, as sure as the moon’s in heaven!’
‘Fire away, then!  I’ll follow you to—!’ and the old man paced stealthily but firmly up to
     them.
Tregarva saw his danger and sprang forward, but it was too late.
‘What, you will have it, then?’
A sharp crack followed,—a bright flash in the darkness—every white birch-stem and jagged
     oak-leaf shone out for a moment as bright as day—and in front of the glare Lancelot saw the old
     man throw his arms wildly upward, fall forward, and disappear on the dark ground.
‘You’ve done it! off with you!’  And the rascals rushed off up the ride.
In a moment Tregarva was by the old man’s side, and lifted him tenderly up.
‘They’ve done for me, Paul.  Old Harry’s got his gruel.  He’s heard his last shot fired.  I
     knowed it ’ud come to this, and I said it.  Eh?  Didn’t I, now, Paul?’  And as the old man
     spoke, the workings of his lungs pumped great jets of blood out over the still heather-flowers
     as they slept in the moonshine, and dabbled them with smoking gore.
‘Here, men,’ shouted the colonel, ‘up with him at once, and home!  Here, put a brace of your
     guns together, muzzle and lock.  Help him to sit on them, Lancelot.  There, Harry, put your
     arms round their necks.  Tregarva, hold him up behind.  Now then, men, left legs foremost—keep
     step—march!’  And they moved off towards the Priory.
‘You seem to know everything, colonel,’ said Lancelot.
The colonel did not answer for a moment.
‘Lancelot, I learnt this dodge from the only friend I ever had in the world, or ever shall
     have; and a week after I marched him home to his deathbed in this very way.’
‘Paul—Paul Tregarva,’ whispered old Harry, ‘put your head down here: wipe my mouth, there’s a
     man; it’s wet, uncommon wet.’  It was his own life-blood.  ‘I’ve been a beast to you, Paul. 
     I’ve hated you, and envied you, and tried to ruin you.  And now you’ve saved my life once this
     night; and here you be a-nursing of me as my own son might do, if he was here, poor fellow! 
     I’ve ruined you, Paul; the Lord forgive me!’
‘Pray! pray!’ said Paul, ‘and He will forgive you.  He is all mercy.  He pardoned the thief
     on the cross—’
‘No, Paul, no thief,—not so bad as that, I hope, anyhow; never touched a feather of the
     squire’s.  But you dropped a song, Paul, a bit of writing.’
Paul turned pale.
‘And—the Lord forgive me!—I put it in the squire’s fly-book.’
‘The Lord forgive you!  Amen!’ said Paul, solemnly.
Wearily and slowly they stepped on towards the old man’s cottage.  A messenger had gone on
     before, and in a few minutes the squire, Mrs. Lavington, and the girls, were round the bed of
     their old retainer.
They sent off right and left for the doctor and the vicar; the squire was in a frenzy of rage
     and grief.
‘Don’t take on, master, don’t take on,’ said old Harry, as he lay; while the colonel and
     Honoria in vain endeavoured to stanch the wound.  ‘I knowed it would be so, sooner or later;
     ’tis all in the way of business.  They haven’t carried off a bird, squire, not a bird; we was
     too many for ’em—eh, Paul, eh?’
‘Where is that cursed doctor?’ said the squire.  ‘Save him, colonel, save him; and I’ll give
     you—’
Alas! the charge of shot at a few feet distance had entered like a bullet, tearing a great
     ragged hole.—There was no hope, and the colonel knew it; but he said nothing.
‘The second keeper,’ sighed Argemone, ‘who has been killed here!  Oh, Mr. Smith, must this
     be?  Is God’s blessing on all this?’
Lancelot said nothing.  The old man lighted up at Argemone’s voice.
‘There’s the beauty, there’s the pride of Whitford.  And sweet Miss Honor, too,—so kind to
     nurse a poor old man!  But she never would let him teach her to catch perch, would she?  She
     was always too tender-hearted.  Ah, squire, when we’re dead and gone,—dead and gone,—squire,
     they’ll be the pride of Whitford still!  And they’ll keep up the old place—won’t you, my
     darlings?  And the old name, too!  For, you know, there must always be a Lavington in Whitford
     Priors, till the Nun’s pool runs up to Ashy Down.’
‘And a curse upon the Lavingtons,’ sighed Argemone to herself in an undertone.
Lancelot heard what she said.
The vicar entered, but he was too late.  The old man’s strength was failing, and his mind
     began to wander.
‘Windy,’ he murmured to himself, ‘windy, dark and windy—birds won’t lie—not old Harry’s
     fault.  How black it grows!  We must be gone by nightfall, squire.  Where’s that young dog
     gone?  Arter the larks, the brute.’
Old Squire Lavington sobbed like a child.
‘You will soon be home, my man,’ said the vicar.  ‘Remember that you have a Saviour in
     heaven.  Cast yourself on His mercy.’
Harry shook his head.
‘Very good words, very kind,—very heavy gamebag, though.  Never get home, never any more at
     all.  Where’s my boy Tom to carry it?  Send for my boy Tom.  He was always a good boy till he
     got along with them poachers.’
‘Listen,’ he said, ‘listen!  There’s bells a-ringing—ringing in my head.  Come you here, Paul
     Tregarva.’
He pulled Tregarva’s face down to his own, and whispered,—
‘Them’s the bells a-ringing for Miss Honor’s wedding.’
Paul started and drew back.  Harry chuckled and grinned for a moment in his old foxy, peering
     way, and then wandered off again.
‘What’s that thumping and roaring?’  Alas! it was the failing pulsation of his own heart. 
     ‘It’s the weir, the weir—a-washing me away—thundering over me.—Squire, I’m drowning,—drowning
     and choking!  Oh, Lord, how deep!  Now it’s running quieter—now I can breathe again—swift and
     oily—running on, running on, down to the sea.  See how the grayling sparkle!  There’s a pike! 
     ’Tain’t my fault, squire, so help me—Don’t swear, now, squire; old men and dying maun’t swear,
     squire.  How steady the river runs down?  Lower and slower—lower and slower: now it’s quite
     still—still—still—’
His voice sank away—he was dead!
No! once more the light flashed up in the socket.  He sprang upright in the bed, and held out
     his withered paw with a kind of wild majesty, as he shouted,—
‘There ain’t such a head of hares on any manor in the county.  And them’s the last words of
     Harry Verney!’
He fell back—shuddered—a rattle in his throat—another—and all was over.
</div></body></text></TEI>