
CHAPTER IV
NEXT morning it appeared that the chauffeur had taken the car up to town to get a
    part replaced, and Margaret could not be brought from Wealdstone till the
    afternoon. It fell to me to fetch her. "At least," Kitty had said, "I might be
    spared that humiliation." Before I started I went to the pond on the hill's
    edge. It is a place where autumn lives for half the year, for even when the
    spring lights tongues of green fire in the undergrowth, and the valley shows
    sunlit between the tree-trunks, here the pond is fringed with yellow bracken and
    tinted bramble, and the water flows amber over last winter's leaves.
Through this brown gloom, darkened now by a surly sky, Chris was taking the skiff, standing in the stern and using his oar like a gondolier.
    He had come down here soon after breakfast, driven from the house by the
    strangeness of all but the outer walls, and discontented with the grounds
    because everything but this wet, intractable spot bore the marks of Kitty's
    genius. After lunch there had been another attempt to settle down, but with a
    grim glare at a knot of late Christmas roses bright in a copse that fifteen
    years ago had been dark he went back to the russet-eaved boat-house and this
    play with the skiff. It was a boy's sport, and it was dreadful to see him turn a
    middle-aged face as he brought the boat inshore.
"I'm just going down to fetch Margaret," I said.
He thanked me for it.
"But, Chris, I must tell you. I've seen Margaret. She came up here, so kind and
    sweet, to tell us you were wounded. She's the greatest dear in the world, but
        she's not as you think of her. She's old, Chris. She isn't
    beautiful any longer. She's drearily married. She's seamed and scored and
    ravaged by squalid circumstances. You can't love her when you see her."
"Didn't I tell you last night," he said, "that that doesn't matter?" He dipped
    his oar to a stroke that sent him away from me. "Bring her soon. I shall wait
    for her down here."
Wealdstone is not, in its way, a bad place; it lies in the lap of open country,
    and at the end of every street rise the green hills of Harrow and the spires of
    Harrow School. But all the streets are long and red and freely articulated with
    railway arches, and factories spoil the skyline with red, angular chimneys, and
    in front of the shops stood little women with backs ridged by cheap stays, who
    tapped their upper lips with their forefingers and made other feeble, doubtful
    gestures, as though they wanted to buy something and knew that if
    they did they would have to starve some other appetite. When we asked them the
    way they turned to us faces sour with thrift. It was a town of people who could
    not do as they liked.
And here Margaret lived in a long road of red-brick boxes, flecked here and there
    with the pink blur of almond-blossom, which debouched in a flat field where
    green grass rose up rank through clay mold blackened by coal-dust from the
    railway. Mariposa, which was the last house in the road, did not even have an
    almond-tree. In the front garden, which seemed to be imperfectly reclaimed from
    the greasy field, yellow crocus and some sodden squills just winked, and the
    back, where a man was handling a spade without mastery, presented the austere
    appearance of an allotment. And not only did Margaret live in this place; she
    also belonged to it. When she opened the door she gazed at me with
    watering eyes, and in perplexity stroked her disordered hair with a floury hand.
    Her face was sallow with heat, and beads of perspiration glittered in the deep,
    dragging line between her nostrils and the corners of her mouth. She said:
"He's home?"
I nodded.
She pulled me inside and slammed the door.
"Is he well?" she asked.
"Quite," I answered.
Her tense stare relaxed. She rubbed her hands on her overall and said:
"You'll excuse me. It's the girl's day out. If you'll step into the parlor—"
So in her parlor I sat and told her how it was with Chris and how greatly he
    desired to see her. And as I spoke of his longing I turned my eyes away from
    her, because she was sitting on a sofa, upholstered in velveteen of a sickish
        green, which was so low that her knees stuck up in front of
    her, and she had to clasp them with her seamed, floury hands. I could see that
    the skin of her face was damp. And my voice failed me as I looked round the
    room, because I saw just what Margaret had seen that evening fifteen years ago
    when she had laid her cheek to the parlor window at Monkey Island. There was the
    enlarged photograph of Margaret's mother over the mantelpiece, on the walls were
    the views of Tintern Abbey framed in red plush, between the rickety legs of the
    china cupboard was the sewing-machine, and tucked into the corner between my
    chair and the fender were a pair of carpet slippers. All her life long Margaret,
    who in her time had partaken of the supreme dignity of a requited love, had
    lived with men who wore carpet slippers in the house. I turned my eyes away
    again, and this time looked down the garden at the figure that was
    not so much digging as exhibiting his incapacity to deal with a spade. He was
    sneezing very frequently, and his sneezes made the unbuckled straps at the back
    of his waistcoat wag violently. I supposed him to be Mr. William Grey.
I had finished the statement of our sad case, and I saw that though she had not
    moved, clasping her knees in a set, hideous attitude, the tears were rolling
    down her cheeks.
"Oh, don't! Oh, don't!" I exclaimed, standing up. Her tear-stained immobility
    touched the heart. "He's not so bad; he'll get quite well."
"I know, I know," she said miserably. "I don't believe that anything bad could be
    allowed to happen to Chris for long. And I'm sure," she said kindly, "you're
    looking after him beautifully. But when a thing you had thought had ended
    fifteen years ago starts all over again, and you're very tired—" She drew a
        hand across her tears, her damp skin, her rough, bagging
    overall. "I'm hot. I've been baking. You can't get a girl nowadays that
    understands the baking." Her gaze became remote and tender, and she said in a
    manner that was at once argumentative and narrative, as though she were telling
    the whole story to a neighbor over the garden wall: "I suppose I ought to say
    that he isn't right in his head, and that I'm married, so we'd better not meet;
    but, oh," she cried, and I felt as though, after much fumbling with damp matches
    and many doubts as to whether there was any oil in the wick, I had lit the lamp
    at last, "I want to see him so! It's wrong, I know it's wrong, but I am so glad
    Chris wants to see me, too!"
"You'll do him good." I found myself raising my voice to the pitch she had
    suddenly attained as though to keep her at it. "Come now!"
She dipped suddenly to compassion.
"But the young lady?" she asked timidly. "She was upset the last time. I've often
    wondered if I did right in going. Even if Chris has forgotten, he'll want to do
    what's right. He couldn't bear to hurt her."
"That's true," I said. "You do know our Chris. He watches her out of the corner
    of his eye, even when he's feeling at his worst, to see she isn't wincing. But
    she sent me here to-day."
"Oh!" cried Margaret, glowing, "she must have a lovely nature!"
I lost suddenly the thread of the conversation. I could not talk about Kitty. She
    appeared to me at that moment a faceless figure with flounces, just as most of
    the servants at Baldry Court appear to me as faceless figures with caps and
    aprons. There were only two real people in the world, Chris and this woman whose
    personality was sounding through her squalor like a beautiful voice singing in a darkened room, and I was absorbed in a mental vision of them.
    You know how the saints and the prophets are depicted in the steel engravings in
    old Bibles; so they were standing, in flowing white robes on rocks against a
    pitch-black sky, a strong light beating on their eyes upturned in ecstasy and
    their hand outstretched to receive the spiritual blessing of which the fierce
    rays were an emanation. Into that rapt silence I desired to break, and I
    whispered irrelevantly, "Oh, nothing, nothing is too good for Chris!" while I
    said to myself, "If she really were like that, solemn and beatified!" and my
    eyes returned to look despairingly on her ugliness. But she really was like
    that. She had responded to my irrelevant murmur of adoration by just such a
    solemn and beatified appearance as I had imagined. Her grave eyes were upturned,
    her worn hands lay palm upward on her knees, as though to receive the love of
    which her radiance was an emanation. And then, at a sound in the
    kitchen, she snatched my exaltation from me by suddenly turning dull.
"I think that's Mr. Grey come in from his gardening. You'll excuse me."
Through the open door I heard a voice saying in a way which suggested that its
    production involved much agitation of a prominent Adam's apple:
"Well, dear, seeing you had a friend, I thought I'd better slip up and change my
    gardening trousers." I do not know what she said to him, but her voice was soft
    and comforting and occasionally girlish and interrupted by laughter, and I
    perceived from its sound that with characteristic gravity she had accepted it as
    her mission to keep loveliness and excitement alive in his life.
"An old friend of mine has been wounded," was the only phrase I heard; but when
    she drew him out into the garden under the window she had evidently
    explained the situation away, for he listened docilely as she said: "I've made
    some rock-cakes for your tea. And if I'm late for supper, there's a dish of
    macaroni cheese you must put in the oven and a tin of tomatoes to eat with it.
    And there is a little rhubarb and shape." She told them off on her fingers, and
    then whisked him round and buckled the wagging straps at the back of his
    waistcoat. He was a lank man, with curly gray hairs growing from every place
    where it is inadvisable that hairs should grow,—from the inside of his ears,
    from his nostrils, on the back of his hands,—but he looked pleased when she
    touched him, and he said in a devoted way:
"Very well, dear. Don't worry about me. I'll trot along after tea and have a game
    of draughts with Brown."
She answered:
"Yes, dear. And now get on with those cabbages. You're going to keep
    me in lovely cabbages, just as you did last year, won't you, darling?" She
    linked arms with him and took him back to his digging.
When she came back into the parlor again she was wearing that yellowish raincoat,
    that hat with hearse plumes nodding over its sticky straw, that gray alpaca
    skirt. I first defensively clenched my hands. It would have been such agony to
    the finger-tips to touch any part of her apparel. And then I thought of Chris,
    to whom a second before I had hoped to bring a serene comforter. I perceived
    clearly that that ecstatic woman lifting her eyes and her hands to the
    benediction of love was Margaret as she existed in eternity; but this was
    Margaret as she existed in time, as the fifteen years between Monkey Island and
    this damp day in Ladysmith Road had irreparably made her. Well, I had promised
    to bring her to him.
She said:
"I'm ready," and against that simple view of her condition I had no argument. But
    when she paused by the painted drainpipe in the hall and peered under contracted
    brows for that unveracious tortoiseshell handle, I said hastily:
"Oh, don't trouble about an umbrella."
"I'll maybe need it walking home," she pondered.
"But the car will bring you back."
"Oh, that will be lovely," she said, and laughed nervously, looking very plain.
    "Do you know, I know the way we're coming together is terrible, but I can't
    think of a meeting with Chris as anything but a kind of treat. I've got a sort
    of party feeling now."
As she held the gate open for me she looked back at the house.
"It's a horrid little house, isn't it?" she asked. She evidently desired sanction
    for a long-suppressed discontent.
"It isn't very nice," I agreed.
"They put cows sometimes into the field at the back," she went on, as if
    conscientiously counting her blessings. "I like that; but otherwise it isn't
    much."
"But it's got a very pretty name," I said, laying my hand on the raised metal
    letters that spelled "Mariposa" across the gate.
"Ah, isn't it!" she exclaimed, with the smile of the inveterate romanticist.
    "It's Spanish, you know, for butterfly."
Once we were in the automobile, she became a little sullen with shyness, because
    she felt herself so big and clumsy, her clothes so coarse, against the fine
    upholstery, the silver vase of Christmas roses, and all the deliberate delicacy
    of Kitty's car. She was afraid of the chauffeur, as the poor are always afraid
    of men-servants, and ducked her head when he got out to start the car. To recall
    her to ease and beauty I told her that though Chris had told me all
    about their meeting, he knew nothing of their parting, and that I wished very
    much to hear what had happened.
In a deep, embarrassed voice she began to tell me about Monkey Island. It was
    strange how both Chris and she spoke of it as though it were not a place, but a
    magic state which largely explained the actions performed in it. Strange, too,
    that both of them should describe meticulously the one white hawthorn that stood
    among the poplars by the ferry-side. I suppose a thing that one has looked at
    with some one one loves acquires forever after a special significance. She said
    that her father had gone there when she was fourteen. After Mrs. Arlington had
    been taken away by a swift and painful death the cheer of his Windsor hostelry
    had become intolerable to the man; he regarded the whole world as her grave, and
    the tipsy sergeants in scarlet, the carter crying for a pint of four-half, and
    even the mares dipping their mild noses to the trough in the
    courtyard seemed to be defiling it by their happy, simple appetites. So they
    went to Monkey Island, the utter difference of which was a healing, and settled
    down happily in its green silence. All the summer was lovely; quiet, kind
    people, schoolmasters who fished, men who wrote books, married couples who still
    loved solitude, used to come and stay in the bright little inn. And all the
    winter was lovely, too; her temperament could see an adventure in taking up the
    carpets because the Thames was coming into the coffee-room. That was the tale of
    her life for four years. With her head on one side, and the air of judging this
    question by the light of experience, she pronounced that she had then been
    happy.
Then one April afternoon Chris landed at the island, and by the first clean,
    quick movement of tying up his boat made her his slave. I could imagine that it
        would be so. He was wonderful when he was young; he possessed
    in great measure the loveliness of young men, which is like the loveliness of
    the spry foal or the sapling, but in him it was vexed into a serious and moving
    beauty by the inhabiting soul. When the sunlight lay on him, disclosing the gold
    hairs on his brown head, or when he was subject to any other physical pleasure,
    there was always reserve in his response to it. From his eyes, which, though
    gray, were somehow dark with speculation, one perceived that he was distracted
    by participation in some spiritual drama. To see him was to desire intimacy with
    him, so that one might intervene between this body, which was formed for
    happiness, and this soul, which cherished so deep a faith in tragedy. Well, she
    gave Chris ducks' eggs for tea. "No one ever had ducks' eggs like father did. It
    was his way of feeding them. It didn't pay, of course, but they were good."
    Before the afternoon was out he had snared them all with the silken
    net of his fine manners; he had talked to father about his poultry and had
    walked about the runs and shown an intelligent interest, and then, as on many
    succeeding days, he had laid his charm at the girl's feet. "But I thought he
    must be some one royal, and when he kept on coming, I thought it must be for the
    ducks' eggs." Then her damp, dull skin flushed suddenly to a warm glory, and she
    began to stammer.
"I know all about that," I said quickly. I was more afraid that I should feel
    envy or any base passion in the presence of this woman than I have ever been of
    anything else in my life. "I want to hear how you came to part."
"Oh," she cried, "it was the silliest quarrel! We had known how we felt for just
    a week. Such a week! Lovely weather we had, and father hadn't noticed anything.
    I didn't want him to, because I thought father might want the
    marriage soon and think any delay a slight on me, and I knew we would have to
    wait. Eh! I can remember saying to myself, 'Perhaps five years,' trying to make
    it as bad as could be so that if we could marry sooner it would be a lovely
    surprise." She repeated with soft irony, "Perhaps five years!"
"Well, then, one Thursday afternoon I'd gone on the back-water with Bert
    Batchard, nephew to Mr. Batchard who keeps the inn at Surly Hall. I was laughing
    out loud because he did row so funny! He's a town chap, and he was handling
    those oars for all the world as though they were teaspoons. The old dinghy just
    sat on the water like a hen on its chicks and didn't move, and he so sure of
    himself! I just sat and laughed and laughed. Then all of a sudden, clang!
        clang! the bell at the ferry. And there was Chris, standing up there
    among the poplars, his brows straight and black, and not a smile on
    him. I felt very bad. We picked him up in the dinghy and took him across, and
    still he didn't smile. He and I got on the island, and Bert, who saw there was
    something wrong, said, 'Well, I'll toddle off.' And there I was on the lawn with
    Chris, and he angry and somehow miles away. I remember him saying, 'Here am I
    coming to say good-by, because I must go away to-night, and I find you larking
    with that bounder.' And I said: 'O Chris, I've known Bert all my life through
    him coming to his uncle for the holidays, and we weren't larking. It was only
    that he couldn't row.' And he went on talking, and then it struck me he wasn't
    trusting me as he would trust a girl of his own class, and I told him so, and he
    went on being cruel. Oh, don't make me remember the things we said to each
    other! It doesn't help. At last I said something awful, and he said: 'Very well;
    I agree. I'll go,' and he walked over to the boy, who was chopping
    wood, and got him to take him over in the punt. As he passed me he turned away
    his face. Well, that's all."
I had got the key at last. There had been a spring at Baldry Court fifteen years
    ago that was desolate for all that there was beautiful weather. Chris had
    lingered with Uncle Ambrose in his Thames-side rectory as he had never lingered
    before, and old Mr. Baldry was filling the house with a sense of hot, apoplectic
    misery. All day he was up in town at the office, and without explanation he had
    discontinued his noontide habit of ringing up his wife. All night he used to sit
    in the library looking over his papers and ledgers; often in the mornings the
    housemaids would find him asleep across his desk, very red, yet looking dead.
    The men he brought home to dinner treated him with a kindness and consideration
    which were not the tributes that that victorious and trumpeting
    personality was accustomed to exact, and in the course of conversation with them
    he dropped braggart hints of impending ruin which he would have found it
    humiliating to address to us directly. At last there came a morning when he said
    to Mrs. Baldry across the breakfast-table: "I've sent for Chris. If the boy's
    worth his salt—" It was an appalling admission, like the groan of an old ship as
    her timbers shiver, from a man who doubted the capacity of his son, as fathers
    always doubt the capacity of the children born of their old age.
It was that evening, as I went down to see the new baby at the lodge, that I met
    Chris coming up the drive. Through the blue twilight his white face had had a
    drowned look. I remembered it well, because my surprise that he passed me
    without seeing me had made me perceive for the first time that he had never
        seen me at all save in the most cursory fashion. On the eye of
    his mind, I realized thenceforward, I had hardly impinged. That night he talked
    till late with his father, and in the morning he had started for Mexico to keep
    the mines going, to keep the firm's head above water and Baldry Court sleek and
    hospitable—to keep everything bright and splendid save only his youth, which
    ever after that was dulled by care.
Something of this I told Margaret, to which she answered, "Oh, I know all that,"
    and went on with her story. On Sunday, three days after their quarrel, Mr.
    Allington was found dead in his bed. "I wanted Chris so badly; but he never
    came, he never wrote," and she fell into a lethargic disposition to sit all day
    and watch the Thames flow by, from which she was hardly roused by finding that
    her father had left her nothing save an income of twenty pounds a year from
        unrealizable stock. She negotiated the transfer of the lease of
    the inn to a publican, and, after exacting a promise from the new hostess that
    she would forward all letters that might come, embarked upon an increasingly
    unfortunate career as a mother's help. First she fell into the hands of a noble
    Irish family in reduced circumstances, whose conduct in running away and leaving
    her in a Brighton hotel with her wages and her bill unpaid still distressed and
    perplexed her. "Why did they do it?" she asked. "I liked them so. The baby was a
    darling, and Mrs. Murphy had such a nice way of speaking. But it almost makes
    one think evil of people when they do a thing like that." After two years of
    less sensational, but still uneasy, adventures, she had come upon a large and
    needy family called Watson who lived at Chiswick, and almost immediately Mr.
    William Grey, who was Mrs. Watson's brother, had begun a courtship
    that I suspected of consisting of an incessant whining up at her protective
    instinct. "Mr. Grey," she said softly, as though stating his chief aim to
    affection, "has never been very successful." And still no letter ever came.
So, five years after she left Monkey Island, she married Mr. William Grey. Soon
    after their marriage he lost his job and was for some time out of work; later he
    developed a weak chest that needed constant attention. "But it all helped to
    pass the time," she said cheerfully and without irony. So it happened that it
    was not till two years after that she had the chance of revisiting Monkey
    Island. At first there was no money, and later there was the necessity of
    seeking the healthful breezes of Brighton or Bognor or Southend, which were the
    places in which Mr. Grey's chest oddly elected to thrive. And when these
    obstacles were removed, she was lethargic; also she had heard that the inn was not being managed as it ought to be, and she could not
    have borne to see the green home of her youth defiled. But then there had come a
    time when she had been very much upset,—she glared a little wildly at me as she
    said this, as if she would faint if I asked her any questions,—and then she had
    suddenly become obsessed with a desire to see Monkey Island once more.
"Well, when we got to the ferry, Mr. Grey says, 'But mercy, Margaret, there's
    water all round it!' and I said, 'William, that's just it.'" They found that the
    island was clean and decorous again, for it had only recently changed hands.
    "Father and daughter the new people are, just like me and dad, and Mr. Taylor's
    something of dad's cut, too, but he comes from the North. But Miss Taylor's much
    handsomer than I ever was; a really big woman she is, and such lovely golden
    hair. They were very kind when I told them who I was; gave us duck
    and green peas for lunch and I did think of dad. They were nothing like as good
    as his ducks, but then I expect they paid. And then Miss Taylor took William out
    to look at the garden. I knew he didn't like it, for he's always shy with a
    showy woman, and I was going after them when Mr. Taylor said: 'Here, stop a
    minute. I've got something here that may interest you. Just come in here. He
    took me up to the roller desk in the office, and out of the drawer he took
    twelve letters addressed to me in Chris's handwriting.
"He was a kind man. He put me into a chair and called Miss Taylor in and told her
    to keep William out in the garden as long as possible. At last I said, 'But Mrs.
    Hitchcock did say she'd send my letters on.' And he said, 'Mrs. Hitchcock hadn't
    been here three weeks before she bolted with a bookie from Bray, and after that
    Hitchcock mixed his drinks and got careless.' He said they had
    found these stuffed into the desk."
"And what was in them?"
"For a long time I did not read them; I thought it was against my duty as a wife.
    But when I got that telegram saying he was wounded, I went up-stairs and read
    those letters. Oh, those letters!"
She bowed her head and wept.
As the car swung through the gates of Baldry Court she sat up and dried her eyes.
    She looked out at the strip of turf, so bright that one would think it wet, and
    lighted here and there with snowdrops and scillas and crocuses, that runs
    between the drive and the tangle of silver birch and bramble and fern. There is
    no esthetic reason for that border; the common outside looks lovelier where it
    fringes the road with dark gorse and rough amber grasses. Its use is purely
    philosophic; it proclaims that here we esteem only controlled beauty, that the
    wild will not have its way within our gates, that it must be made
    delicate and decorated into felicity. Surely, she must see that this was no
    place for beauty that had been not mellowed, but lacerated, by time, that no one
    accustomed to live here could help wincing at such external dinginess as hers.
    But instead she said: "It's a big place. Chris must have worked hard to keep all
    this up." The pity of this woman was like a flaming sword. No one had ever
    before pitied Chris for the magnificence of Baldry Court. It had been our
    pretense that by wearing costly clothes and organizing a costly life we had been
    the servants of his desire. But she revealed the truth that, although he did
    indeed desire a magnificent house, it was a house not built with hands.
But that she was wise, that the angels would of a certainty be on her side, did
    not make her any the less physically offensive to our atmosphere. All my
        doubts as to the wisdom of my expedition revived in the little
    time we had to spend in the hall waiting for the tea which I had ordered in the
    hope that it might help Margaret to compose her distressed face. She hovered
    with her back to the oak table, fumbling with her thread gloves, winking her
    tear-red eyes, tapping with her foot on the carpet, throwing her weight from one
    leg to the other, and I constantly contrasted her appearance by some clumsiness
    with the new acquisition of Kitty's decorative genius that stood so close behind
    her on the table that I was afraid it might be upset by one of her spasmodic
    movements. This was a shallow black bowl in the center of which crouched on all
    fours a white, naked nymph, her small head intently drooped to the white flowers
    that floated on the black waters all around her. Beside the pure black of the
    bowl her rusty plumes looked horrible; beside that white nymph, eternally
    innocent of all but the contemplation of beauty, her opaque skin
    and her suffering were offensive; beside its air of being the coolly conceived
    and leisurely executed production of a hand and brain lifted by their rare
    quality to the service of the not absolutely necessary, her appearance of having
    only for the moment ceased to cope with a vexed and needy environment struck me
    as a cancerous blot on the fair world. Perhaps it was absurd to pay attention to
    this indictment of a noble woman by a potter's toy, but that toy happened to be
    also a little image of Chris's conception of women. Exquisite we were according
    to our equipment, unflushed by appetite or passion, even noble passion, our
    small heads bent intently on the white flowers of luxury floating on the black
    waters of life, he had known none other than us. With such a mental habit a man
    could not help but wince at Margaret. I drank my tea very slowly because I
        previsioned what must happen in the next five minutes. Down
    there by the pond he would turn at the sound of those heavy boots on the path,
    and with one glance he would assess the age of her, the rubbed surface of her,
    the torn fine texture, and he would show to her squalid mask just such a blank
    face as he had shown to Kitty's piteous mask the night before. Although I had a
    gift for self-pity, I knew her case would then be worse than mine; for it would
    be worse to see, as she would see, the ardor in his eyes give place to
    kindliness than never to have ardor there. He would hesitate; she would make one
    of her harassed gestures, and trail away with that wet, patient look which was
    her special line. He would go back to his boyish sport with the skiff; I hoped
    the brown waters would not seem too kind. She would go back to Mariposa, sit on
    her bed, and read those letters.
"And now," she said brightly as I put down my cup, "may I see
    Chris?" She had not a doubt of the enterprise.
I took her into the drawing-room and opened one of the French windows.
"Go past the cedars to the pond," I told her. "He is rowing there."
"That is nice," she said. "He always looks so lovely in a boat."
I called after her, trying to hint the possibility of a panic breakdown to their
    meeting:
"You'll find he's altered—"
She cried gleefully:
"Oh, I shall know him."
As I went up-stairs I became aware that I was near to a bodily collapse; I
    suppose the truth is that I was physically so jealous of Margaret that it was
    making me ill. But suddenly, like a tired person dropping a weight that they
    know to be precious, but cannot carry for another minute, my mind refused to
    consider the situation any longer and turned to the perception of
    material things. I leaned over the balustrade and looked down at the fineness of
    the hall: the deliberate figure of the nymph in her circle of black waters, the
    clear pink-and-white of Kitty's chintz, the limpid surface of the oak, the
    broken burning of all the gay reflected colors in the paneled walls. I said to
    myself, "If everything else goes, there is always this to fall back on," and I
    went on, pleased that I was wearing delicate stuffs and that I had a smooth
    skin, pleased that the walls of the corridor were so soft a twilight blue,
    pleased that through a far-off open door there came a stream of light that made
    the carpet blaze its stronger blue. And when I saw that it was the nursery door
    that was open, and that Kitty was sitting in Nanny's big chair by the window, I
    did not care about the peaked face she lifted, its fairness palely gilt by the
    March sunlight, or the tremendous implications of the fact that she
    had come to her dead child's nursery although she had not washed her hair. I
    said sternly, because she had forgotten that we lived in the impregnable fort of
    a gracious life:
"O Kitty, that poor battered thing outside!"
She stared so grimly out into the garden that my eyes followed her stare.
It was one of those draggled days, common at the end of March when a garden looks
    at its worst. The wind that was rolling up to check a show of sunshine had taken
    away the cedar's dignity of solid blue shade, had set the black firs beating
    their arms together, and had filled the sky with glaring gray clouds that dimmed
    the brilliance of the crocuses. It was to give gardens a point on days such as
    these, when the planned climax of this flower-bed and that stately tree goes for
    nothing, that the old gardeners raised statues in their lawns and walks,
        large things with a subject, mossy Tritons or nymphs with an
    urn, that held the eye. Even so in this unrestful garden one's eyes lay on the
    figure in the yellow raincoat that was standing still in the middle of the
    lawn.
How her near presence had been known by Chris I do not understand, but there he
    was, running across the lawn as night after night I had seen him in my dreams
    running across No-Man's-Land. I knew that so he would close his eyes as he ran;
    I knew that so he would pitch on his knees when he reached safety. I assumed
    naturally that at Margaret's feet lay safety even before I saw her arms brace
    him under the armpits with a gesture that was not passionate, but rather the
    movement of one carrying a wounded man from under fire. But even when she had
    raised his head to the level of her lips, the central issue was not decided. I
    covered my eyes and said aloud, "In a minute he will see her face,
    her hands." But although it was a long time before I looked again, they were
    still clinging breast to breast. It was as though her embrace fed him, he looked
    so strong as he broke away. They stood with clasped hands looking at one
    another. They looked straight, they looked delightedly! And then, as if resuming
    a conversation tiresomely interrupted by some social obligation, they drew
    together again, and passed under the tossing branches of the cedar to the wood
    beyond. I reflected, while Kitty shrilly wept, how entirely right Chris had been
    in his assertion that to lovers innumerable things do not matter.
