<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII
MARY TRIES TO LIVE HER LIFE
ONE night, about a fortnight later, Mary walked home to her lodgings in Bulstrode
     Street more than usually weary and anxious. Somehow she felt hipped; she would have liked to
     creep back, just for once, to the book-lined drawing-room in Harley Street, with its
     indefinable air of perfect taste and perfect comfort; to the little tea-table near the fire,
     with its silver kettle, its dainty china, and the hot cakes which cook used to make so well. In
     those days, Mary remembered with a pang, a well-known step would be heard ascending the stair,
     and the professor would come in, with his keen eyes, and his dear, thin face, and stand with
     his back to the fire while he sipped his tea and teased his ‘little girl.’
But instead, she entered the narrow passage of a house in Bulstrode Street, of which the
     varnished marble paper, as well as the grained staircase and stiff patterned oil-cloth were
     worn
      and stained with age, and ascended to her own domain, which
     consisted of two rooms. In the little bed-room, giving on a grimy back-yard, there was a small
     iron bed with starved-looking pillows, a washing apparatus of which every article, by a strange
     chance, was of a different pattern, two chairs, and a chest of drawers in imitation grained
     wood, with white china handles. On the walls, covered with a paper on which apples of a dingy
     yellow sprawled, in endless repetition, on a dull green ground, were several framed texts. A
     yacht in full sail, on the bluest of lithograph seas, was accompanied by the words, ‘Search the
     Scriptures;’ while opposite, encased in an Oxford oak frame, a stout, highly-coloured
     kingfisher emerging from a colony of bulrushes, faced another familiar phrase. These pictorial
     aids to piety were the only ornaments of the bedroom, and Mary often smiled when she thought of
     the delicate silver point drawings that hung on the pink walls at home. She thought, too, of
     the things that used to strike her as she read, and which she would write out and pin up in her
     pretty luxurious bed-room; the scraps of poetry in various tongues which she would scribble
     hastily on the back of some young man's visiting card,and then pin up, with a slender gilt
     tack, on to her door; especially those lines
      of James Thomson's, which, about a year after her first
     heart-ache, when all had ended in disappointment, it had given her such ironical pleasure to
     nail up in her bed-room, to the bewilderment of the new housemaid: 
      ‘The old three hundred sixty-five
Dull days to every year alive
Old toil, old care, old worthless treasures,
Old gnawing sorrows, swindling pleasures,
The cards were shuffled to and fro,
The hands may vary somewhat so,
The dirty pack's the same we know
Played with long thousand years ago;
Played with and lost with still by Man—
Fate marked them 'ere the game began.’
      Ah, she could afford to be pessimistic in those days! As Mary took off her hat and
     threw her cloak on the narrow bed, hastening her toilet for the evening because of the bitter
     cold of the room, she repeated these lines softly to herself; oddly enough, they evoked an
     image of that pretty bygone bedroom, of a tent-bed with gay draperies, a fire blazing against a
     background of Dutch tiles, on which blue ships in full sail were scudding over stiff curly
     waves, of soft mats of white fur on which it was a joy to tread with bare feet. ‘No, I can't
     afford to be pessimistic, now,’ thought the girl, as she went into the other room. The fire was
     nearly out, but
      two gas-burners, which had been lighted by the
     maid-of-all-work, and left on at full tap, had already loaded the air with the fumes of gas. It
     was now a quarter past six; she could not ask for tea, although her throat burned and her head
     ached. No, she must wait for dinner, her modest little dinner, which was served, with
     variations as to punctuality, about seven o'clock.
Mary threw herself on to the hard sofa, and her eyes travelled round the room. The furniture
     was old, shabby, and pretentious. She had an idea that there were cheap Landseer engravings on
     the wall, but Mary had made up her mind never to look at the pictures; otherwise, she said, she
     would have had to change her lodgings at once, and that she did not wish to do, as the landlady
     was an old servant of theirs, and would look after her better than a stranger. After all, the
     place would do well enough as a makeshift. It was best, she thought, not to accept invitations
     from friends, but to begin to live her own life. On days like to-day, when she was weary and
     disheartened, Mary found it necessary to repeat this phrase in her mind: ‘To live her own
     life.’ For it was all dispiriting enough. Art and artists, as exemplified in the Central
     London, were but doubtfully alluring; Mary wondered if anywhere else she might find the ‘art’
     atmosphere of which she had read so
      much. But anyhow her Academy drawing was done; it had gone in
     with a dozen others, and to-morrow she would know if she had succeeded.
She lay like a log on the hard sofa, while the gilt clock with the hovering cupid slowly
     ticked out three-quarters of an hour. On the mantel-piece a long photograph of Alison, in an
     evening gown, exhibiting a good deal of a fine arm and shoulder, was supported by a large one
     of Vincent Hemming, with his grave expression, and wearing an orchid in his button-hole.
At last came dinner, heralded by an odour of boiled potatoes and frizzling meat. But the girl
     was too tired to eat the badly-cooked food; she pushed away the steak, which was tough and
     hard, and tried to drink some of the small bottle of stout, which was flat, with a strange
     flavour. Mary rebuked herself for these fantasies of the appetite; it behoved a young woman who
     wished to make her way in the world and compete with men to indulge in no such over-niceties.
     But a very feminine backache overcame her, and presently the maid-of-all-work, in creaking
     boots, removed with much clattering the dishes, and Mary was left alone with the firelight for
     a companion.
The photographs of her two friends looked down on her from the mantelpiece; Alison, with her
     capable expression and her distinguished
      air; Vincent Hemming, with his showily intellectual forehead,
     his weak mouth, and the slight frown which he sometimes affected. What a long time it seemed
     since they had said good-bye, first on that long summer day which they had spent at Haslemere,
     and finally at Tilbury, when the great P. and 0. steamer had been swallowed up in the greyness
     of the wide river and tearful sky. Yes, a long time; but he had grown more to her in his
     absence than he had ever been, even at the last, for Mary was of the order of women who
     idealise the absent. Oddly enough, Vincent, pacing the deck of the Sutlej in his flapping ulster and his soft felt hat (he was not one of those people
     who look their best in travelling costume), had seemed more of a stranger than the man whose
     letters, arriving by the Indian mail, lay beside her plate every Monday morning. She remembered
     with a smile how fussy he had been about his luggage, and how humiliated she had felt when,
     man-like, Vincent Hemming had insisted on a last embrace, and, drawing her into his cabin, had
     shut the door in the face of the steward. She had dwelt a great deal on those last moments. He
     had seemed so passionately attached to her; the whole affair, though it had been obliged to
     remain vague, had become a solemn fact in her existence.

A letter from Vincent had arrived that morning; Mary felt in her pocket for the thin,
     crackling envelope bearing the post-mark ‘Calcutta.’ It was a peculiarity of Hemming's that
     one, and sometimes two, pages of his letters were indited in a flowing hand, while the rest of
     the paper was covered with uncertain upright hieroglyphics, which took all the reader's
     patience and good-will to decipher.
‘My dear Mary’ (it began)—‘My delightful roamings have been brought to a standstill in this
     ancient and historic spot, one so eminently suited to the special studies which I desire, in
     furtherance of my scheme, to make. You will, I am sure, be delighted to hear that on all hands
     I have had every civility and courtesy extended to me from officials of every class, and that
     my father's name alone has been a sufficient introduction for me, in those circles in which it
     is most desirable for the purpose I have in hand to move. You will also, my dear Mary, be
     rejoiced to hear that my health has vastly improved since my departure from England; the fact
     alone that I anticipate with pleasure the advent of breakfast will give you a fair idea of my
     improved state of health, and I think I may say that, considering the somewhat trying nature of
     the climatic conditions, my appearance has wonderfully improved. But enough of my-
      self. I need not say that I am delighted to hear that you are
     bravely and earnestly attacking those art studies which, with due application, will ensure you
     fame, and possibly wealth, and which will, my dearest girl, be no mean factor in our (possible)
     future happiness.’
Mary sighed as she let the letter drop, and gazed thoughtfully into the fire. It was here
     that the flowing persuasive handwriting terminated abruptly, and that the upright uncertain
     characters began.
‘Had I’ (it went on) ‘no dreams, no aspirations for the amelioration of the English race—were
     I, in short, a man to whom personal happiness is paramount—I might have spoken more decisively
     in relation to a possible future together before I left England. But I am paying you no mean
     compliment, my dear Mary, when I tell you that I have every confidence that in you, as in
     myself, questions of vast importance rise superior to mere selfish considerations, and that in
     you, above all women, I have a sympathetic sharer alike of my ambitions, dreams, and hopes. It
     is above all in studying the marvellous system of government of a vast aggregation of human
     beings of divers nationalities, of such widely-differing ethical standards as this great Indian
     Empire—’ and here the handwriting changed again to the slanting style and mean-
      dered on over three crisp pages which the girl let fall on
     her lap. Somehow she would not reconcile this lover, with his old-fashioned phrases and
     copybook platitudes, with the Vincent Hemming who had held her in his arms in the cabin of the
      Sutlej, crushing the breath out of her body in the supreme
     moment of farewell. . . . Of the fine irony which results from the clash of human passion and
     human ambition she had not, as yet, a conception. It is to be feared that Mary, with all her
     somewhat worldly training, was, as far as her affections were concerned, astonishingly naïve.
     She was only a girl after all.
And so, in the dim light of the dreary apartments, Mary sat and dreamed her little dream.
     Lonely, tired, discouraged, she clung to the thought of their marriage with curious tenacity.
     She was haunted incessantly by a vision of tender brown eyes, of a caressing hand, of a
     sympathetic voice; of a pretty interior with books, and pictures, and soft lamp-light; of a
     man's head uplifted from a desk, while she held her latest picture up for her husband to see.
     He was not a judge of pictures, she remembered with a smile; he would probably think her modest
     attempts masterpieces. Why, he had even liked the sketch she had made at Haslemere, on that
     last day they had spent in the
      country together. After all, Vincent and she together would
     have enough to live quietly on; if she succeeded in her art, he might even yet realise his
     ambition and enter on a political career. What, indeed, might not the years bring forth?
     However dismal things seemed now, there was Hope—that Will-o'-the-wisp of the young—beckoning
     her from the dim valleys of the future. To-morrow, to-morrow she would know.
Mary took up the letter again, and bending down to the fire, re-read one or two affectionate
     phrases at the last. Then she put it carefully into a locked case which contained some twenty
     epistles in thin envelopes, turned out the gas, and went into her chilly bedroom, where, in the
     process of brushing out her fluffy blond hair for the night, she told herself valiantly that
     she was a lucky little person.
</div></body></text></TEI>