<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER XV
A COMEDY IN REAL LIFE
THE first act was over, the curtain was down again. A buzzing sound was heard all
     over the theatre. Men were standing up in the stalls, raking the house with their
     opera-glasses; the critics were seen exchanging significant looks and portentous monosyllables;
     while here and there was visible the profile of a pretty woman craning her neck to be seen
     speaking to some distant celebrity. The house, viewed from above, was one compact mass of human
     beings, the clear, pale dresses of the women making gay patches among the rows of black coats,
     white shirt fronts, and slightly bald heads of the men.
It was the first night of a new comedy at a modish theatre. In the private boxes the little
     canvas doors opened continually, revealing a glimpse of the begilded corridor darkened by the
     figure of a man in evening dress. In some of the boxes, notably that of Lady Jane Ives, the
     door opened almost with the regularity of
      a machine, while a small procession of young gentlemen
     sidled in and out.
‘All mother's “boys” will be here before the evening's over,’ whispered Alison to Mary. ‘I
     don't know whether our brains will hold out.’ But Alison, for once, made no effort to entertain
     them, for hardly had the curtain fallen when Dr. Dunlop Strange, who was in the stalls, had
     taken the chair behind her, and had begun telling her of a new medical discovery in which she
     was interested.
For the moment, Mr. Bosanquet-Barry and Mr. Beaufort Flower were the other occupants of the
     back chairs.
‘Dr. Strange, you've got to personally conduct us over the Whitechapel Hospital,’ said
     Alison, turning her beautiful, intelligent eyes upon him. ‘Miss Erle wants to write something
     about a hospital, and you can explain the medical details to her.’
‘When will you come?’ said the doctor eagerly.
‘Oh, arrange it with Mary,’ said Alison, laughing, ‘these young women who write are always so
     busy. At present I'm one of the unemployed.’
‘Dear Lady Jane,’ objected Mr. Flower, patting the tuberoses in his coat, ‘you're not going
     to allow them to go over one of those nasty hospitals? Why, you don't know what they
      will catch, and I'm told the language of the patients is
     quite ornamental.’
‘Allow them!’ ejaculated Lady Jane. ‘My dear Beaufy, if you had a grown-up daughter, you'd
     find that you were “allowed” to do things or not as she chose. That's why I'm so
     young,’ said the old woman with a fat laugh. ‘It's because I go with the times. And as for that
     child Mary, I can't refuse her anything. You see Alison and I both wanted to marry her poor
     dear father. He was the most delightful creature that ever lived.’
Mary, in her little white frock, was looking radiant. The morning papers had announced the
     results of the by-election, and Vincent Hemming's name headed the poll with a majority of
     forty-seven votes. In a day or two—perhaps even now—he would be in town; he would have time for
     her. They would have leisure, perhaps, to see a great deal of each other once more. She had
     become accustomed by now to a certain vagueness about the future. But just to know that he was
     happy and successful was enough for the moment.
‘Why are you looking so pretty to-night?’ whispered Beaufy to Mary, to whom he had taken a
     perverse fancy because she generally snubbed him.
‘I never look pretty,’ said Mary calmly.

‘No? That's true. I've seen you,’ he added with engaging candour, ‘look positively ugly. And
     other times, you know, you become radiantly lovely.’
Meanwhile Lady Jane, showing a good deal of plump shoulder and bland bosom, in a gown of
     excruciating red, was gently tapping Mr. Bosanquet-Barry with a carved ivory fan, as he leaned
     over her chair.
‘Tell me who's here, you shocking creature. You know I can't see. And what are you young men
     there for except to tell us the news?’
‘Oh, yes. Everybody's here. Lots of people have come up to town on purpose. No end of smart
     people in the stalls. And who do you think is down there in the omnibus box? Lady Blaythewaite,
     of all people. C'est crâne, hein? Three days before she has
     to appear in the divorce court. They say,’ he added, dropping his voice so that only Lady Jane
     could hear, ‘they say it will be a cause célèbre. She brings
     the case, of course, but she won't get it. They're betting on it at the clubs.’
‘I see she's got that old woman, what's-her-name, who's so very proper, in the box,’ said
     Lady Jane, as she surveyed the coming heroine of the divorce court exhaustively with her
     tortoise-shell lorgnette. ‘How clever,’ she continued in an approving tone: ‘white
     muslin,
      and not a jewel. I was so fond of her poor mother. She was
     one of the first women who smoked—I mean before people. She was a sort of Mrs. Norton. Lord
     Houghton used to say she was one of the few women in society that he could ask to his literary
     breakfasts. Her daughter hasn't inherited her wits.’
‘No, or she wouldn't have committed the fatal error of being found out,’ murmured Mr.
     Bosanquet-Barry, and then he added, showing all his dazzling teeth in a fatuous smile:
‘Lady Blay's a charming woman when she lets you know her. I assure you, she's quite
     irresistible.’
‘I see all you young men are quite épris,’ replied Lady
     Jane, in her well-bred, indifferent tone. ‘Do you see much of her?’
‘One's supposed to be able to find her at five. But very often she's out.’
‘Yes,’ put in Mr. Flower, in his waspish voice, ‘she says it's so effective to be out
     occasionally. Isn't it malicious of her?’
‘My dear Beaufy, Lady Blaythewaite is quite good-looking enough to do these things. Who are
     those curious-looking persons in the next box?’
‘Aren't they quite too delicious for words?’ cried that young gentleman, with some animation.
     ‘They're my discovery. There's a
      man—a political man—in the stalls who knows. It's the mayor
     of Northborough, the mayoress of Northborough, and the heiress-apparent. They're as rich—well,
     as rich as Americans. Their name is Higgins. Aren't they nice? I never saw a provincial mayor
     before. I wonder if he is red all over, like his face? I'm sure he wears his chains of office
     under his clothes. Look at the mayoress' gown, dear Lady Jane. Do you see, it has a small V at
     the throat, and elbow sleeves, and you may swear it's high at the back! And the
      daughter—qu'elle est fagotée, mon Dieu, and with diamonds
     put in all the wrong places. It is a relief to look at Lady Blay, who's got hardly anything on
     at all.’
And so these were the Higginses; Vincent's friends, whom he had picked up in America, and who
     had got him returned to parliament. Mary gave one swift, comprehensive glance at the daughter,
     taking in her under-bred face, with its beady eyes and fretful mouth, her over-trimmed clothes
     and her uneasy attitude, and remembering Hemming's fastidious tastes, she decided, with a
     little throb of feminine exultation, that she had nothing to dread from Miss Violet
     Higgins.
‘Does anybody know what the play is about?’ asked the girl in a relieved voice, in which
     there
      was even a note of happiness. ‘It seems to me to be
     rubbish.’
‘Oh, I simply love these old-fashioned pieces, where all the poor young men turn
     out to be baronets, and all the women marry their first loves. They're so adorably untrue to
     life, don't you know?’opined Beaufy. ‘One wants that sort of thing in a
     pessimistic age. Of course Realism and that sort of thing amuses me, but I don't really care
     for it.’
‘But that's very ungrateful of you,’ said Alison, turning suddenly round. Dr. Dunlop Strange
     had caught sight of Lady Blaythewaite in the box opposite, and his eyes seemed riveted on her
     exquisite face. Somehow the fact annoyed her; Alison did not like Lady Blaythewaite.
The curtain drew up on the second act, revealing a rose-clambered cottage and a sundial. The
     play proceeded after the manner of love-stories which are enacted to lime-light. Two sets of
     lovers—one arch, one sentimental—wandered through a wicket-gate in rotation, though during the
     scene between the arch lovers—in which a watering-pot and some artificial geraniums played a
     prominent part—it was noticeable that some of the habitual theatre-goers began a mumbled
     conversation. It was unmistakable, however, that the interest of the dress-circle was aroused
     when a rising moon
      illuminated the embrace of the sentimental lovers, during
     which the ominous figure of an adventuress was seen hovering behind a hedge.
The critics, however, began to yawn, and several cheery conversations were started in private
     boxes, notably in that of Lady Blaythewaite, whose white shoulders were detached with startling
     distinctness against a phalanx of black coats.
The door of the Higgins's box down below opened, and there was visible the figure of a
     youngish man against the pale gold of the corridor. Mary could not see his face, which was
     black against the light; but in another instant the new-comer, after shaking hands all round,
     had slipped into the chair behind the younger lady, and his face was now illuminated by the
     glare of the footlights. Miss Higgins began to fan herself violently with a jerky movement, and
     fidgeted about in her chair. Mary's eyes were riveted on the face of the new arrival. Just
     where she sat he could not see her. It was Vincent Hemming.
Then she turned her eyes away—as if ashamed—and kept them fixed upon the stage. The
     sentimental lovers were now swearing eternal fidelity.... Were they the real puppets, Mary
     wondered, or she, and Vincent, and Miss Higgins, and the Blaythewaites, each pulled
      this way and that by their passions, their ambitions, their
     desires? Vincent was in town, and she had heard nothing from him! True, she had not had many
     letters of late, but then he had been, of course, immersed in his election business. She had
     not expected to hear. And yet, why should he spend his first night in town with these people?
     Vincent, too, must have got the box; it was evidently his party, for the mayor of a provincial
     town, however many times a millionaire, is not on the lists for first-nights at fashionable
     theatres in London.
On the stage Mary was conscious that the adventuress was advancing to the footlights
     murmuring the words ‘My husband!’ and that the curtain was falling on the second act.
She sat with her eyes fixed on her lap. Every nerve in her body was drawn at full tension. It
     was a relief when the canvas door opened, and one or two men came in. She leaned back in her
     chair, saying anything, so as not to have to think. Beaufy had slipped again into the chair
     behind her.
‘What do you think I heard about the Higgins heiress?’ he began. ‘I take such an interest in
     them because, you see, I was the first to discover them. You see that man down there, sitting
     in her pocket? Well, that's Hemming, the man who's just got in
      for Northborough. They say he's going to marry her.’
‘Is he?’ said Mary, and she was astonished to find how natural her voice sounded. After all,
     she told herself, she knew how it would be on the day of his return from America.
‘Yes; isn't it delicious? Why, one might as well be married to the housemaid. But they say he
     hasn't got a farthing, you know, and she'll have twelve thousand a year just to start
     housekeeping. But the best of it is, I hear the poor devil wants to get out of it, only his
     worship won't let him off. Stands over him in his chains of office and waves the municipal
     mace; says he only got him into the House as a prospective son-in-law. They say she's got a
     strong Lancashire accent,’ he concluded in his most malicious and triumphant tone.
‘Indeed,’ said Mary, raising her eyelids, and letting them drop again with a tired gesture.
     Fortunately no one in the box had heard but herself. Both Lady Jane and Alison were talking to
     new arrivals. She made an effort—an effort which completely prostrated her next day—to look
     smiling, calm, imperturbable. Why, the very fabric of society was based on that acquiescent
     feminine smile. She, like other women before her, must learn her fate with the eyes of the
     world fixed curiously upon her....
      If she could only creep away somewhere, hide her face, not
     see the hideous comedy going on in the box down there, not have to look at the yellow
     footlights, watch the foolish, inane, unreal comedy on the stage. But she could not leave the
     theatre without making a scene, having explanations. The curtain rose on the last act.
‘Vincent is going to marry Miss Higgins,’ she said to herself deliberately, as the arch pair
     of lovers entered, quarrelling, in a pretty drawing-room set. She tried to realise this new
     calamity; to understand what it meant to her, as the comic young gentleman on the stage essayed
     to appease the arch young lady's wrath by tying an errant shoe-lace. Vincent and Miss
     Higgins.... Vincent and Miss Higgins: living together, always together; husband and wife in all
     the long, long years to come.—'For better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and
     in health, till death did them part.’ It was with the blurred vision which accompanies poignant
     mental anguish that Mary saw that the happiness of the sentimental lovers on the stage was not
     to be frustrated, for the adventuress, it would seem, was a bigamist, and was already
     married.... Married! Why, merciful God! Vincent and that girl in the box down below—they, too,
     were going to be married—
‘Dear, you look dreadfully white,’ said Alison,
      catching sight of Mary's face. With a fixed, mechanical
     smile, Mary was thanking Mr. Beaufort Flower, who was playfully throwing a boa round her
     shoulders. ‘I'm afraid you're tired. The play bored one horribly, didn't it? And the theatre's
     so hot—’
‘I'm all right,’ said Mary heroically. ‘It's nothing.’
People spoke to her as she went downstairs and along the corridor, and she answered them with
     pale, mauvish lips. Such a charming, pretty piece, wasn't it? Quite an idyll, and so wholesome,
     after this disgusting talk about heredity, and so on.... It was quite a relief, they said, to
     get a thoroughly English piece with a happy ending.
And in the pushing crowd at the door her lover almost brushed her elbow as he passed her
     unwittingly with the Lancashire heiress. The girl, Mary could see, wore the triumphant
     expression of the underbred young woman who has secured a desirable husband. Mary hardly dared
     look at Vincent, though every fibre in her body yearned towards him; but as he passed out, with
     Miss Higgins leaning heavily on his arm, she had a brief vision of a harassed, sheepish, and
     uneasy face.
‘Why, he is unhappy!’ she thought, with a pang.
</div></body></text></TEI>