<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER XIV
MARY GOES OUT ON A WET DAY
‘IT'S the deuce of a wet day, dearest,’ murmured Jimmie, strolling into the
     sitting-room where Mary was writing. ‘Must you really go out?’
‘Yes, dear. Don't bother. I must go directly I have done this article on Perry Jackson,’
     answered the girl, with the irritated look of a person who is interrupted in the middle of a
     train of thought—thought which was to be paid for at the rate of threepence a line.
‘But you really don't look the thing, darling. By the by, does Sarah know I'm down? or is
     there any breakfast about?’ added Jimmie, with his newly-acquired drawl. He had shot up into a
     curiously pretty and precocious boy. It was characteristic of him that he addressed his sister
     with as much politeness as any of his numerous loves. Everybody agreed that Jimmie Erle was a
     delightful boy. Laudatory adjectives abounded when his name was mentioned. Just now, lounging
     in his cricketing blazer against the mantelpiece, he
      looked the picture of airy and irresponsible youth.
‘As it's half-past-eleven,’ said Mary, laughing, blotting her MSS., and thrusting it in an
     envelope, ‘Sarah may have some vague idea that you might be putting in an appearance soon.
‘Dear, you're not cross with me?’
‘No, boy. Sleep as long as you can. I daresay you have to get up very early at school.’
‘Oh, yes, sometimes,’ said Jimmie vaguely. But Mary had gone into her bedroom now, and was
     rapidly doing up her hair, and putting on a waterproof. As she left the room there was a brief
     vision of her brother helping himself to a third serve of marmalade. The morning paper was at
     his elbow, and there was even a surreptitious box of cigarettes on the chimney-piece.
‘I think,’ said Mary to herself as she clattered down the staircase in her flapping
     waterproof, ‘that Jimmie will always be comfortable and happy. He will never have to go out on
     a wet day.’
In the underground railway it was at any rate dry, and Mary could rest her back, tired with
     bending over a desk since nine o'clock. For a long time she had felt wretchedly weak. The
     strain of writing was intense; there were whole mornings which she spent staring at a
      sheet of white paper on her desk. The only ideas she had,
     came at night, when she ought to have been asleep, and after hours of insomnia she would get up
     and go to her desk with every nerve in her body quivering. Mary told herself severely as the
     train rattled on its way to Kensington that she could not afford to break down now. She wanted
     so much to retain her position on the Fan; if she gave it up for a month there
     would be a dozen women ready to snatch it from her. Then, too, she was getting on with her
     three-volume novel, which was to appear in Illustrations, and there was the
     Perry Jackson article for the same paper, over which she had taken a deal of trouble, and to
     finish which she was on her way to the new Associate's house. And she smiled as she thought how
     amused Vincent would be to hear that she had met Perry Jackson again, and to learn that she had
     been chosen to write an article on The Time of Roses, and the beautiful house
     and studio in which the artist was now installed. And with the clarity of mental vision which
     is one of the first signs of ripened powers, Mary contrasted the two men: Perry with his
     ridiculous manners, his good heart, his stubborn determination to get on, and his curiously
     keen knowledge of the public; Vincent with his smooth,
      charming phrases, his good looks, his vacillating
     nature.
It was pouring rain as Mary stepped out of Kensington High Street Station. A heavy, pinkish
     sky lowered overhead, and the trees of Holland House took on a strange metallic hue in the
     changing stormy light. The end of the road was swallowed up in mist and rain, and on the
     streaming pavement, which reflected everything like a mirror, she could see a vision of her own
     umbrella hurrying along through the storm. By the time she rang the bell of Mr. Perry Jackson's
     imposing house her feet were soaked through.
The door was opened by an elderly person in a bonnet profusely trimmed with lilies of the
     valley, a lady whose dark stuff gown and bibulous eye contrasted strangely enough with the
     spacious white hall, with its Persian tiles, its soft, flame-coloured carpets, and its
     delicate, turquoise-tinted embroideries. Mr. Jackson was at home, and the lilies of the valley,
     with a confidential, if somewhat mysterious, air, shuffled along the discreet, silent passages,
     and after a tentative knock at the door, ushered Mary into the studio.
The subject of her article was at work on a large canvas when she was shown in.
In the vast studio, with its vista of polished
      boards, its golden ceiling, and its tapestry-hung walls, the
     artist made a somewhat insignificant figure, as he stood on a step-ladder and reached up to put
     in a piece of background. The gorgeous colouring of the great silent room accentuated the
     paleness of his features. With his profile outlined against an alcove of golden mosaics, he
     looked more than ever like a grown-up London street-boy, who had found his way, by mistake,
     into some oriental palace fashioned by superhuman hands. The wan, veiled light of a rainy day
     crept through the great north window, and on a small outer studio of glass—destined for
     out-of-door effects—the rain pattered monotonously. Palms and azaleas in giant pots repeated
     the enchanting note of green which was visible through the glass walls of the outer studio.
The huge canvas at which he was at work represented a convent garden in the grey crepuscule
     of a summer evening. The pale, pensive faces of young nuns, faces of unnatural loveliness, with
     haunting eyes and flower-like mouths, shadowed by wide blue headdresses, were seen bending over
     beds of white lilies, while here and there a transparent hand was stretched to gather the
     passionless, immaculate flowers. This picture, destined for next year's Academy, was to be
     called ‘The Hour of Lilies.’ Mary was
      startled when she looked at it. Only a short time ago she
     had suggested the subject to him. He must have set to work at once, leaving everything else.
     The picture was already blocked in.
‘Oh, I say, this is good of you,’ cried Perry, blushing crimson.
Mary observed, with some annoyance, that he had lately taken to blushing at her advent. It
     was ridiculous, for they had to see each other so often about the article that they had become
     like old friends. And she always thought of him, moreover, as the Perry Jackson of the Central
     London School of Art—a little man with a shock head, and whose parents, moreover, sold cheap
     dining-room suites in the Hampstead Road.
‘That thing must be at the office not later than to-morrow morning,’ said Mary, sinking into
     the nearest chair and surveying her damp boots with solicitude.
‘And a fine mess they've made with that process-block of The Time of Roses,’
     said Perry, indignantly. ‘I'm blessed if you'd know they were roses. Why, they might
     be—artichokes—or anything else.’
‘Well, we can't help that now,’ said Mary doggedly. ‘What I want to-day are just the last
     touches for my article—something to make
      the thing literary, with a meaning, you see. I should be
     glad to know, for instance,’ continued Mary, glancing round the walls with a slight smile, ‘if
     you have a Message?’
‘What's that?’ asked Perry, putting a flat high light on the golden hair of a novice.
‘I have never,’ said Mary, abstractedly, ‘been quite able to ascertain. But nowadays most
     people—writers, painters, and so on—are supposed to have a Message to deliver to their
     contemporaries. And I thought,’ she continued, encouragingly, glancing at the canvasses around,
     at the feminine faces with haunting eyes and flower-like mouths, ‘I thought perhaps you meant
     to insist, in your art, on the cult of beauty, the pagan love of form, the delight, so to
     speak, in a physically perfect existence?’
Perry whistled thoughtfully.
‘Well,’ he said, after a pause, ‘I never thought about it like that. But you can put it in
     that way if you like. I don't mind what you say about me;’ and then with engaging candour he
     added: ‘All I want to do is to make the thing pay.’
‘But, dear Mr. Jackson, it evidently does pay,’ urged Mary, laughing; ‘here you are,
     “arrived,” with poor Mr. Madder's beautiful house and studio all to yourself.’
‘Yes,’ said Perry, looking at her curiously,
      with a side-ways glance, ‘all to myself. There was a lady
     here yesterday,’ he continued with a short laugh, ‘who came to interview me for an evening
     paper, and what do you think she asked me? If I was married—or going to get married.’
‘And are you?’ asked Mary, in a politely interested tone; but something in his look made her
     drop her eyes, and she turned away, asking two or three embarrassed questions about a distant
     canvas on the wall.
There was an awkward pause. Outside, the rain poured with a sibilant sound on the roof of the
     glass studio, and the great trees drooped, soaked and soddened with wet. It had grown dark in
     the big room. Perry had thrown down his palette, and was standing gazing at her with a nervous,
     agitated look. Mary began to walk round the studio, the drips from her umbrella making tiny
     pools of wet on the polished parquet floor and on the eastern rugs.
‘I really ought to go,’ she said nervously, looking down; ‘your room is much too gorgeous for
     a damp journalist.’
He hurried forward imploringly, his sharp face whiter than ever with emotion, and for years
     after she could not forget the painful scene which followed. She remembered how she had been
     intensely conscious of her damp
      boots and of the little spots of water which her dripping
     waterproof made on the polished floor, while Mr. Perry Jackson, who, in moments of intense
     excitement, had an occasional difficulty with his aspirates, proffered her his name and
     fortune, and the undisturbed possession of the Venetian drawing-room, the amber and gold
     dining-room, and a Japanese boudoir on the first floor.
In the pause that followed there was no sound but that of the pitiless rain hissing on the
     outer studio roof. Mary stood with her eyes fixed on the polished boards. How could he have
     misunderstood her so—what could she say to soften it? Didn't he know? Didn't he understand that
     it was impossible? Well, she must say something. A strange misgiving forbade her to mention the
     name of Hemming, so she spoke of vague things, of Jimmie, and of her profession.
‘Is—is—there any one else that you care for?’ stammered Perry forlornly, just as she was
     going.
‘Yes,’ she said, but she did not meet his eyes, and as the word left her lips a sharp
     foreboding seized her.
In silence Perry Jackson clasped her hand at the door. Each felt that the parting, the
     estrangement, was final.

‘Then you'll speak about that process-block to the editor?’ said Perry awkwardly, just at the
     last, as she was crossing his threshold.
‘Oh, yes, of course. No doubt it can be touched up as you suggest. And that about your ideal
     in art will make the article much stronger,’ she said in a loud, would-be cheerful voice.
Both these two young people were already thinking of their work. He saw her out, and watched
     the slim figure, in its grey waterproof, disappear down the street in the rain and mist.
He would like to have saved her from the struggle of the woman who works, the fret and fever,
     the dreary fight for existence. As he turned back down the clear white passages, with their
     soft, glowing carpets, and his eye caught the masses of transparent flowers within, the
     sumptuousness of his home struck him for the first time as ludicrously incongruous.
He strode back into his studio, and began searching among his portfolios for the sketch of a
     girl's head which he wanted for the new picture. As evening fell, he was still working.
</div></body></text></TEI>