<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER X
IN GRUB STREET
IT was a bright morning in January, with scudding, woolly clouds, showing patches of
     vivid blue. Sunshine brightened the huge gilt letters over the newspaper offices, the crowded,
     garishly coloured omnibuses, the hansoms laden with portmanteaux on their way to Waterloo
     Station, the flaxen hair and beflowered hats of the little actresses hurrying along to
     rehearsal. An ever-moving procession of people poured like a torrent up and down the street;
     journalists, country folk, office-boys, actors, betting-men, loafers—all the curious, shifting
     world of the Strand was jogging elbows on the pavement.
Mary stepped along with a certain sense of adventure. She had to see the editor of
      Illustrations, but she had no idea of the whereabouts of that popular weekly
     journal. She had in her pocket, too, a letter of introduction to The Fan. For
     her first attempt at fiction had actually appeared in print, and she was curiously anxious
      to go on. For the first few hours, when she had sat staring
     helplessly at the sheets of white paper which she had torn into loose pages, neatly folding
     down an inch border for corrections, she had imagined that the thing was impossible. Then,
     pacing up and down the room, Mary tried hard to concentrate her mind on a plot—a plot in which
     was to figure a young lady in a tulle ball-dress, reading a three-cornered note. . .. But she
     could think of nothing. It was all a blank. What had girls in ball dresses got to do with
     life—with life as it swirled and rushed by her, with its remorseless laws, its unceasing
     activities? .. . But yet she must think of something. The scene of her story must be laid at a
     ball; that, as Mr. Perry Jackson would have said, was sure to ‘fetch the public.’ Surely,
     surely she could invent a love-story? Yet nothing came. There seemed no reason, in the eternal
     fitness of things, why the hero should be dark and faithful, or blonde and fickle, or if the
     scene should be laid in the country, in town, or abroad. And there was the illustration, too,
     for which the story was to be written, and Mary, before she began, had grown to loathe the
     simpering young lady in tulle, eternally reading her love-letter. . . . But at last, after
     hours of torment, an idea came, and then the girl wrote steadily on, with the easy facility of
     the amateur. She
      had not an idea that her story was like everybody else's
     story—her way of telling it like that of hundreds of third-rate authors of fiction whom she had
     read.
After the clatter and roar of the street, the staircase which led to the editor's room at the
     office of Illustrations seemed dark and silent. The bare wooden treads were
     black with age and dirt, and were lighted only by a wan light, which flickered through a
     frosted-glass door, on which was printed, in gilt letters, the word
      Illustrations, the first letter having become effaced in the course of years.
     Underneath was to be read, in black italics: ‘Editor's Room—Private.’
It was some little time before Mary was able to overcome the scruples of the office-boy—a
     young gentleman whom she found dallying in an ante-room, pensively whistling a sprightly air
     which was just then much in favour, while he leisurely perused sundry inexpensive comic
     journals; but at length she succeeded in persuading him to take in her card. And presently a
     door was flung open, and Mary found herself in a small room, giving on Fleet Street, fronting a
     tall man with a large, melancholy face, who was bending over a desk. With some trepidation she
     remembered that the tall, melancholy man, according to Mr. Perry Jackson, had the reputation of
     being able to get people out of
      his office quicker than any other editor in London.
‘Professor Erle's daughter, I believe?’ said the editor severely, without looking up from the
     proofs he was correcting.
‘Yes.’
‘Ah! We were able to make use of your story, though it was not quite up to the mark.’
‘I'm sorry—’ began Mary.
‘The name, of course,’ went on the editor, without noticing the interruption, ‘the name
     counts for something. Your late father's name carries weight with a certain section of the
     public. And then, with practice, you may do somewhat better. With practice, you may be able to
     write stories which other young ladies like to read.’
And with not a suspicion of the ambiguity of his compliment, the editor rummaged in his desk
     for some missing object.
Mary's heart fell. Was her story as bad as all that, she wondered? She was aware that, from a
     literary point of view, such praise was worse than blame. In the pause which followed she had
     leisure to look round furtively. And so this was the office of a big weekly newspaper? The
     walls, once painted a kind of pea-green, were dim with soot, and adorned only with a map of
     London on a roller; on the floor was
      stretched a grimy, threadbare carpet. A bluish gas-fire
     hissed in a narrow, black mantelpiece, and through the encrusted grime of the window-panes
     appeared the tall brick houses of the opposite side of the Strand. A long procession of
     omnibuses rattled by continually, and she could see the tops of the hats of those who sat on
     the outside. The sole furniture of the room consisted of a bureau with pigeon-holes, and three
     chairs, covered in cracked maroon-coloured leather, whose legs partook of that especial
     curliness which was in high fashion in 1860.
Meanwhile the editor had found his cheque-book, and, tearing out a leaf, wrote: 
      ‘Pay to Miss Erle two pounds two shillings for contribu- tions during the month of
       January.’

Mary took the cheque with a heightened colour and a beating heart. It was the first money she
     had ever earned. This was the beginning.
A tinkling of the electric bell was heard, and the office-boy put in his head.
‘A gentleman to see you, sir.’
‘What for?’
‘Drorings, sir.’
‘Show him in.’
Mary rose.
‘Wait a minute, Miss Erle.’
A long, shambling youth, whose face seemed
      swollen with the toothache, shuffled in, carrying a
     portfolio of sketches.
Not a word passed. It was a strange little scene. The shambling youth stood nervously
     twisting his shabby pot-hat in his fingers as the editor rapidly ran his eye over the
     drawings.
‘Thanks,’ he said, re-tying the strings and handing back the portfolio over the desk. ‘No use
     to us. Good morning. Top handle,’ and he waved his pen towards the door. In another instant the
     aspiring artist was gone.
‘Terrible waste of time,‘ muttered the large, melancholy man. ‘Hundreds of them a week.’
‘Poor boy,’ said Mary, who had seen his disappointed face.
‘Pooh,’ rejoined the editor, frowning; ‘what we want are well-known names; the public likes a
     name,’ and apparently with an eye to that section of it which had sat at the feet of Professor
     Erle, he added abruptly, ‘We will consider anything else you may care to submit to us, Miss
     Erle.’
‘Oh, thank you,’ said Mary, ‘I should like to try again,’ and, treading on air, she made her
     way out, followed by the now admiring glance of the office-boy, who was not accustomed to see
     people detained in the editorial sanctum so long.
The girl was inordinately proud of her cheque for two guineas. How much better, after all,
      than stippling eternally at the Discobolus—for it was the
     Discobolus this time, with which she was to try her fate at the Academy schools—in the dubious
     atmosphere of the art school. The story had taken four days to write. There were three hundred
     and sixty-five days in a year, so that by writing a story or an article every four days she
     could earn something like two hundred a year! And what lots of papers there were! Fleet Street
     was full of them. They lurked up alleys and in quaint little squares at the back. Here they
     were: The Daily Telegraph, The Observer, The
      Graphic, The Illustrated London News. Why should she not walk in and
     demand some work to do? The idea was fearfully alluring. She passed a poster of
      Illustrations, with the name of her story in bright blue print, and Mary stood
     still and read it over and over again with a quickened pulse, until she was pushed aside by the
     tide of human beings eddying along the street. But at present, she recollected, she had to find
      The Fan.
After many inquiries, Mary found that the office was located in a huge building in one of the
     queer little squares out of Fleet Street, and that it was only one of many magazines and
     newspapers published by the same firm.
It proved to be a little world in itself, this vast bee-hive, for the printing, publishing,
     and
      editing of some dozen magazines and journals were all
     conducted on the premises. There was a deafening whirr of machinery which reminded the girl
     vaguely of international exhibitions, and at every turn she saw an editor's room, with the name
     of the journal printed in fat, assertive black type. She was wafted down long corridors of
     frosted glass—frosted glass, it seemed to Mary, was inseparably connected with journalism—until
     she was shown into a small room containing a bare, mahogany table, three chairs, and a framed
     lithograph of a young person in pink muslin, ogling the spectator over a diaphanous fan.
‘The editor,’ said the man in a kind of commissionaire's uniform, who accompanied her, ‘the
     editor is engaged on business, but will you kindly wait?’
And Mary waited. In the next room she could hear, in a muffled way, the voices of that
     functionary and his visitor. The business, it would seem, on which they were engaged was of a
     somewhat hilarious nature, for frequent guffaws of laughter reached her, and there was an
     unmistakable odour of cigarettes. Ten minutes, fifteen minutes, twenty minutes went slowly by.
     The murmur of voices, the baritone laughter in the next room, continued to be audible. At last,
     when Mary had
      finally made up her mind to go, the door was flung open, and
     a young man with a high colour stumbled out.
‘Ta-ta, old chap. Thanks, awfully. See you at the club to night,’ and, bestowing on Mary a
     prolonged stare, he disappeared down the long glass corridor.
‘Will you please come in?’ said a rather affected voice, and Mary, walking into the editorial
     sanctum, found herself opposite a well-dressed, supercilious-looking young man of thirty, a man
     who curiously resembled all the young men whom she used to see in the Park on fine
     mornings.
Something like a blush darkened his smooth cheeks as Mary entered, and the editor of
      The Fan raised a pious prayer to the gods that this apparently inexperienced
     girl had not heard the conversation which had been going on for the last twenty minutes.
‘I am sorry to have kept you,’ he said lamely, glancing for the first time at the card and
     letter, which had been waiting at his elbow on the table, ‘but you've no idea what a fool that
     man is. He never told me that a lady was waiting to see me.’
‘I dare say,’ replied Mary a little stiffly, ‘that you are dreadfully busy.’
‘Oh, as to that, of course, we're frightfully
      “rushed”—especially just now, at the middle of the month. We
     come out, you see, on the 23d. I'm most anxious, you see, to make The Fan a
     success. I want it to be quite the smartest thing out, and a real authority on dress and
     fashion. As to the dress part, I'm not afraid of that. I do it all myself.’
‘Indeed?’ said Mary, to whom the young man who spends his life describing petticoats was as
     yet an unknown entity. She felt vaguely uncomfortable as the supercilious editor's eye dwelt
     upon her, not feeling sure that he would approve of the shape of her sleeves, and being morally
     certain that he was by this time aware that her gown was not lined with silk.
‘I came,’ said Mary, ‘to ask—to ask if you thought there was anything I could do for
      The Fan.’
The supercilious editor pursed up his lips and looked at Mary's sleeves. Her name, it was
     obvious, carried no sort of weight in the office of The Fan magazine.
‘The fact is, we are inundated with stuff which isn't any good to us. We are refusing stuff
     every day. What we want wouldn't be in your line, I'm afraid. The only thing I
     really think of starting,’ he announced, standing on the hearthrug and twisting a neat
     moustache, ‘is a really good society article. Only about
      smart people, don't you know? We don't want what the other
     ladies' papers have got: “Mrs. Townley Tompkins gave a most successful ball at her beautiful
     house in Lancaster Gate, or any of those God-forsaken places. Lady Jane Ives, Lady
     Blaythewaite—those are the sort of people. Really smart, don't you know, and the vieile souche as well. Now, I should have liked a smartly written
     account of Lady Jane Ives's party the other night. Of course, I knew lots of people there, but
     they haven't got the cacoëthes scribendi, don't you
     know?’
‘I think I could do you that, if you thought it interesting enough,’ said Mary, ‘as I
     happened to be there.’
‘Oh, you were there?’ said the editor, with rising respect in his tone; and for the first
     time looking at the girl with any interest, he added: ‘It's possible we might arrange
     something; in fact, we might begin something this month. We might manage an article for the
     next number—something smart, you know, and just a wee bit malicious. We'll call the thing
     ‘Behind my Fan,’ and that'll give plenty of scope. Don't be afraid, Miss Erle. Any gossip that
     hasn't got into the papers, you know.’ ‘Lady Jane Ives, now, must be a very interesting
     acquaintance,’ went on the editor, in deferential tones, ‘quite one of the women of the
      day. I wonder if you could get her to be interviewed for
      The Fan?’ he added, visibly brightening.
‘I'll ask her,’ said Mary, smiling. ‘But I ought to tell you that I am not going out much
     this season.’
‘Oh! that don't matter,’ said the editor hopefully. ‘What we want is somebody who really
     knows the set. Little bits of gossip, don't you know, that the ‘lady journalist’
     can't possibly get hold of. Do you care to try?’
‘I think I will.’
‘We can do with three columns a month. The firm pays a guinea a column. When may I have the
     pleasure of seeing your first article? It would appear next month if you let us have it by the
     20th. Thanks awfully. Good-day.’
And the stuffy, jolting omnibus conveyed back to Bulstrode Street a young woman who was
     conscious neither of hunger, fatigue, nor rattling stones. This was a beginning! Her pocket, in
     which lay the cheque for two pounds two shillings, had suddenly acquired a special importance.
     She had earned that money herself; it was the output of her brain. Secretly she would like to
     telegraph to Vincent, who was now in New Zealand, but she felt the impulse was a silly one. She
     would write by the next mail.
</div></body></text></TEI>