<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
CHAPTER V
MARY'S LOVER
MR. VINCENT HEMMING was looked upon by the professor, by Jimmie, by the servants,
     and indeed by everyone except Mary herself, as her especial property. He was, in fact, one of
     the few intimate visitors who came when he liked to the Harley Street house. He had become part
     of her grown-up life, having first appeared about a year after that Sunday night parting, when
     the world had seemed very empty indeed. His little air of deference was eminently attractive to
     a young girl, who fancied that she had done for ever with emotion. As for Jimmie, he adored
     Vincent, though Jimmie generally adored new acquaintances—for the space of about six weeks.
Hemming's father had been a politician of some note, who had twice held office, and Vincent
     had pre-eminently the manners of one burdened with state secrets. His little reserves, a
     certain air of caution, of discretion, all belonged to those early experiences when his father
     was
      alive. To be sure, he had charming, rather old-fashioned
     manners, affected the speech of the mid-century, and was carried away by few of the modern
     crazes or fads. A well-shaped forehead—of the showily intellectual type—wavy hair, already
     threaded with grey, a short, pointed beard, and eyes of an innocent, penetrating brown, made up
     a personality which appealed at once to dowagers and young girls. At table he looked very well,
     although his shoulders were inclined to slope slightly, but when he stood up you saw that he
     had not the eminently British habit of planting himself firmly, squarely, and self-assertively
     on his feet. For the rest, he had a small property which brought him in about three hundred a
     year, and though already grey, was still spoken of by his elders as a ‘promising young
     man.’
Though a Conservative, he believed in the higher education, even the enfranchisement of
     women. It was a subject on which he was persuasively eloquent. It was quite pretty, ladies
     always thought, to hear him talk of his dreams, his sacrifices, and an occasional article which
     he succeeded in getting inserted on his favourite subject in the Fortnightly or
     the Contemporary was laboriously written in studied English, and with a
     persuasive pen. He had a great deal to say on the future of the race, and
      on the necessity of maintaining a high ethical standard, and
     he always waxed exceedingly wroth over the literary excesses of MM. Zola and de Goncourt, and
     thanked heaven, so to speak, that those eminent pioneers of Realism did not belong to the
     Anglo-Saxon family. ‘We are passing,’ he announced one day, when he was calling on Lady Jane
     Ives, ‘through one of the reconstructive periods of the world's history. Art, under such
     conditions, is necessarily tentative, rarely complete.’
‘Yes,’ said Alison, dryly, ‘and building, you see, always makes a mess. The smoking lime, the
     dirty puddles,the unpleasant odour of baking bricks are inevitable.’ But Lady Jane, who had
     knocked about the most depraved society in Europe for half a century, and who clung with
     amiable tenacity to her illusions, always agreed with Mr. Hemming. Lady Jane, who was a judge
     of such things, said that he was one of the few modern young men whom she could endure in her
     drawing-room for more than twenty minutes.
A day or two after Alison's visit, Mr. Vincent Hemming appeared, looking charmingly correct
     and sympathetic, in a black-and-white spotted tie and a band round his hat. He had gauged to a
     nicety his degree of intimacy with the great man who was gone.

It was a day when outlines were clearly cut, and colours glaring; everything looked crisp,
     hard, decided, inevitable. The rooms wore the unsettled, desolate look of a house that is soon
     to be empty. One or two favourite pictures had already been lifted down from off the wall,
     leaving a patch of clean paper visible; one bookcase was already a dark void, the volumes were
     piled on the floor ready to be packed. Most of the library was to be sold, and Mary now stood
     on a ladder, running a regretful eye along the next case of beloved volumes, when Vincent
     Hemming came in.
‘My poor child,’ he said, in his sympathetic voice, ‘why wouldn't you let me see you
     before?’
‘I've been very busy,’ said Mary, getting down from the ladder, and putting out a dusty hand.
     ‘There was so much to do. Father's lawyer has been here constantly, and everybody has been very
     kind. I had to think of everything, you see—of Jimmie, and all that.’
‘What are you going to do?’ he asked, after a little pause, during which his eye had
     travelled round the dismantled walls, and the cavernous shelves of the once cosy
     drawing-room.
‘Of course, we can't stay in this big house,’ she explained; ‘I've taken some lodgings in
     Bulstrode Street, near the Central London School of Art.’

‘By yourself, my dear child?’
‘I suppose so, for the present,’ she answered, knocking two volumes together in a determined
     manner to get the dust from the edges. Her mouth had got those little obstinate tucks at the
     corners now, which he knew so well. ‘Aunt Julia—mother's sister, you know—has written offering
     me a home. She is very High Church, and lives at Bournemouth in one of those dreadful little
     gabled villas.’
‘And, of course, you prefer an artistic life in London,’ he was relieved, distinctly
     relieved, when Mary announced her intention of adopting art as a profession. Painting,
     especially in watercolours, he considered an eminently lady-like occupation; it was, indeed,
     associated in his imagination with certain drawings of Welsh mountains and torrents, executed
     by his mother with the prim technique of the forties, which
     now adorned his chambers in the Temple.
‘That's so brave—and so like you,’ said Vincent, as his eye wandered round the room again.
     The tone of his voice was vague: he was evidently considering something which took up all his
     attention.
‘It isn't brave at all,’ she said, simply. ‘It's an absolute physical necessity. I should go
     mad if I sat down to think. It all seems so cruel, so terrible, so unjust. He was only
     fifty-three,
      and there was so much work for him still to do. He used to
     say that an ordinary long life could not suffice—’
‘The death of Professor Erle is a national disaster,’ replied Vincent, ‘and is not to be
     gauged all at once.’
There was a long silence, during which all that this loss meant to each of these two passed
     through their minds. They had moved to the window now, through which a light breeze fluttered
     in. The tall, brownish-grey houses were spruced up for the season with clean blinds and boxes
     of daisies and spiraea. A couple of blonde girls in pink cotton made a gay splash of colour
     against the grey-toned street as they walked buoyantly along. A hansom was drawing up at the
     pale-green door yonder, and out of it sprang a young man in a glossy hat, a gardenia, and
     patent-leather boots. Just opposite some workmen were stretching a red-and-white awning for an
     evening party. The outward aspect of affairs was unchanged.
‘I feel,’ said Mary, gazing at the striped awning, which the men had now succeeded in
     propping, ‘as if I had done with that world for always. And now I want to do
     something, to live. Oh, Mr. Hemming,’ she added, with one of her comic little frowns, ‘I don't
     want to be a “young lady”! Do you really think that,
      because I am a woman, I must sit by, and fold my hands, and
     wait?’
‘You are very modern in one thing, dear child; you have the modern craze for work.’
‘It probably saves some of us from the mad-house.’
‘Ah, but you will marry one of these days, and then where will your work be?’ replied
     Vincent, smiling a little fatuously.
Mary turned from the window abruptly.
‘Let us go carefully over the books,’ she said, with a brusqueness which she sometimes
     affected. ‘Help me to choose,’ she continued, mounting the steps, and beginning to hand down
     the volumes. ‘I want that Lamb and the Heine, the Goethe and the Jean Paul Richter. Here, catch
     the Phædo, and put it with the Marcus Aurelius and that
     little Epictetus over there on the cabinet.’
‘My poor child, you will no doubt require such consolation as the philosophers can afford,’
     said Vincent Hemming, in his old-fashioned way.
‘Here's Pippa Passes, and Musset's Proverbes, and my special
     Shelley, and the Anatomy of Melancholy. Yes, yes, all those.’
Some colour had come into the girl's cheeks as she sat on the top of the ladder and dropped
     the books into his arms, covering him, as she did so, with a light cloud of dust; but she
      looked pathetically delicate in her close-fitting, sombre
     gown, which threw up the pallor of her throat, the mauvish tinge of her lips, the dark rings
     round her eyes. Vincent Hemming, whatever he had meant to do when he entered the dismantled
     drawing-room, was fairly carried away by the spectacle of Mary's childish face and busy,
     nervous little hands re-arranging her destiny in her own decided fashion. It touched him, and,
     at the same time, irritated him, producing the feeling that, as a man, he was bound to
     interfere.
One step nearer now, and the course of a lifetime would be changed.
‘Mary, dear child,’ he said suddenly, in an imploring tone, while they were both startled by
     the emotion in his voice, ‘do you think you could—care for me a little?’
The girl turned to look at him. His penetrating brown eyes were actually suffused with tears;
     a nerve was ticking visibly in his forehead. It all seemed far-off, improbable, impossible.
     Vincent Hemming, her old friend, had turned into this imploring, visibly-suffering man. Mary
     burst into an hysterical little laugh.
‘But you—you don't care for me, do you? You're only saying that because you think I'm
     lonely—that I want some one to take care of me—aren't you?’ she asked hurriedly. ‘Why,
      we've known each other so long,’ she added, seeing that he
     was still silent. He had flipped the dust from his face and coat with easy tact, and stood,
     smiling up at her, close by her side.
‘I don't know,’ continued the girl, doubtfully, slowly twisting one of the buttons of his
     frock coat. She had come down several steps of the ladder, so that her eyes were on a level
     with his. The nerve no longer ticked in his forehead; the muscles of his mouth relaxed; there
     was already something of triumph in his look.
‘Don't smile, dear,’ she said, very gravely. ‘I can't bear you to look at me like that. Do
     you—really—want me?’
‘Dear heart, I have always wanted you,’ said a changed, thick voice in her ear, and in the
     next instant two arms encircled her, and two lips were crushed against hers. For the first
     minute a consciousness of sorrow overwhelmed her. For good, for evil, the girl knew that she
     was giving herself up to this man, whom a minute ago she had looked upon with the cool eye and
     discriminating judgment of mere friendship. All the tragic potentialities of a woman's life,
     the uncertainties and sorrows of her who gives her happiness into another's keeping, flashed
     before her.... Why, why must it be? Only a minute ago, and she had been ready to face the world
     alone, to be herself, to express
      herself, to work out her own destiny. And now it was all
     changed. Something held her against her will. This man—a minute ago her friend, and now, in
     this infinitesimal atom of time, her lover, who stood before her with red, flushed face, and
     looked with longing eyes into hers: this man had already communicated his trouble to her. His
     hands, which held her two wrists as they stood there gazing at each other, felt like links of
     iron.
In that one supreme moment, Mary Erle tasted for the first time, in all its intensity, the
     helplessness of woman, the inborn feeling of subjection to a stronger will, inherited through
     generations of submissive feminine intelligences.
‘I can't, oh, I can't,’ she said. ‘Don't ask me now. You don't—you can't understand how I
     feel. And I don't know you like that. I've always thought of you as a friend,’ she protested,
     drawing herself away, with her fine smile. ‘Besides, it's dreadful to be—love-making—when
     father—’
‘I don't ask you to think of it just now, my darling,’ said Vincent. ‘I—I—the fact is, I have
     much to do, and many plans ahead myself. I—I haven't the right to tie you definitely, Mary. I
     am thinking seriously of taking that trip to India and Australia, of which I told you.’
‘You're—going—away?’ she asked, blankly.
      Already the inexorable chain which nature forges bound her to
     this man.
‘Yes, to collect materials for my book on the Woman Question. I might come home by way of
     Canada, and if so, the thing would take me the best part of a year. Then, when I come home, I
     shall have my book to do; and I hope, if the present Government keeps in, to get a legal
     appointment. So you see, little one, you will have ample time to think about it, as well as to
     perfect your artistic studies,’ he added, with a touch of his old-fashioned manner. He was
     sitting down on the sofa now, and looked already his quiet, well-bred, rather deferential self
     again.
An hour later Vincent got up, reluctantly, to go. ‘I have to dine with a member of the
     Government at a quarter to eight,’ he explained, ‘My new article must be finished before I
     start, and I'm thinking of starting quite soon.’
‘Are you?’ said Mary, sorrowfully, turning to the window and gazing down the street. It was
     all so different now. She belonged to this man who was going away. Why had he spoken? Could it
     not be as it was? ... A few yards off a piano-organ was rattling out a cheap German valse. The
     sun was off the houses now, and the street wore its familiar, dingy look.

Vincent searched among the disarranged furniture and the piles of books for his hat. Mary
     followed him to the door. She wanted to say something nice, but she could think of nothing.
     Just at parting, he took her in his arms again, and brushed her downcast lids with his lips.
     During that embrace, she thought of nothing, except that she was sure that she had always cared
     for him. ‘Dear,’ he muttered, ‘I'm afraid that if I go away I shall leave the best part of
     myself with you.’
When he had gone, she stooped about again among the rows of books, sorting them mechanically,
     without thinking much what she was doing. Little clouds of dust rose in the twilight room. The
     tall, grim houses shut out all that remained of a daffodil-tinted sky. Tired and unstrung, the
     girl threw herself on to the sofa where she and Vincent Hemming had sat, and presently, to her
     surprise, she was conscious that two large, salt tears were coursing their way down her dusty
     cheeks.
</div></body></text></TEI>