<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
CHAPTER XXII
THE TEMPTATION
ALTHOUGH she had been thinking of Hemming for hours, the sharp, agitated pull of the
     bell startled Mary as she sat sorting papers at her desk in the little room, a third room,
     crowded with bookshelves, which she had been able to add to her domain during the last
     year.
‘Mr. Vincent Hemming,’ said the servant opening the door.
He shook hands, without a word. Mary knew instinctively that something was wrong, before he
     spoke.
‘We'll have tea, please, Sarah,’ she said, and, until the girl brought in the cups and
     saucers, they sat exchanging commonplaces a little awkwardly. There was a tight feeling in
     Mary's throat as she looked at Hemming's drawn face and averted eyes. And yet it was good to
     have him there, all to herself, sitting opposite to her, sipping his tea, on the deep sofa near
     the window, his brown eyes looking black against the light.

He got up presently, moving restlessly about the little room, examining with curious eyes the
     place which was Mary's home. He stopped in front of the old-fashioned writing-table, on which
     blotting-paper, foolscap, and worn-out pens were scattered. A great odorous bunch of waxen
     pinkish lilac stood in a jug on the table. On the shelf above the pigeon-holes there was a
     full-length, slightly-faded photograph of himself.
‘And this is where you work?’ he muttered, absently, sitting down in the swing chair, and
     leaning his elbow, with a tired gesture, on the ink-stained desk. ‘Poor little Mary! Don't you
     ever paint, now? You used to like it so much.’
‘I paint very little. I think this is almost the last open-air thing I ever did,’ she added,
     taking a wooden panel from under a pile of papers and holding it a little way off. ‘It was down
     there, you know, in that pine-y, heathery place, at Haslemere, where we went before you
     sailed—’
‘I remember,’ he said, gravely.
And then something tightened at her heart as she stood near him, holding out the sketch. It
     was the very scene she had so often pictured when she lived here waiting for him to come back.
     Here was the room, lined with book-shelves; the desk, with Vincent half-turned round, while she
     held her smudgy little painting
      up for him to see. Only the years had passed away, and he
     was another woman's husband, the father of another woman's child....
‘I remember,’ he repeated, softly, taking the little nervous hand that hung close to him, and
     looking at it intently as he held it in his.
‘Why Mary, how thin and white you are!’ he said, suddenly. ‘You can't be well. Have you seen
     Danby?’
‘Oh, it's nothing. I'm all right,’ she answered quickly, pulling away her hand. ‘I've been
     worried about Jimmie. And I've—I've been working rather hard—’
‘You can't stand it, you never could,’ he muttered. ‘In the old days you used “to get
     away—you used to travel with your father.” Good Lord!’ continued Hemming, scrutinising her face
     with a swift glance which he turned instantly on the chimney stacks opposite, ‘you'll be
     killing yourself, and for what?’
‘One works,’ said Mary, absently, ‘because one must. I'm not a person of wealth and leisure
     like yourself.’
Hemming got up and strode up and down the room, his mouth working nervously at the corners as
     he answered—
‘Heaven knows you needn't reproach me about that. If you knew what my life is, Mary,’ he
     blurted out suddenly, his face turning a dark
      red, ‘the dreariness, the vulgarity, the commonplace of
     it.’
‘You have your—your—wife, your child,’ she said slowly, her eyes fixed on the empty teacup in
     her hand, ‘and I—I have nothing.’
‘My wife!’ he said derisively. ‘Yes, I have a wife. Someone who sits opposite me at dinner,
     who pays the bills with her own cheques, who never misses an opportunity of reminding me that I
     am a failure. I know—I know I'm a failure. I haven't done what she married me for; she has
     spent her money for nothing. Mary, the egotism of a vulgar woman is something that you cannot
     even conceive of.’
‘Don't talk like that, don't, don't,’ implored Mary. ‘Oh, Vincent, I—it doesn't matter about
     me,’ she continued, ‘but I can't bear to see you unhappy.’
She had risen and was standing in front of him, her eyes wet with tears. He took her hands,
     holding them fast, and bowed his head down, so that his face lay on their joined hands. And in
     that moment of his humiliation and despair Mary had never loved Vincent Hemming so well.
‘My poor, poor dear,’ she muttered with a movement of exquisite maternal tenderness, ‘it will
     come all right by and by. You will try, won't you, to be—nicer—to her?’ she added with an
     effort. ‘It must be so easy for husband
      and wife to make it up. And there is the child—’
‘The child,’ he repeated blankly. ‘A thing three years old. And she is jealous if I even look
     at the baby. Mary, her jealousy is infernal. I can't live with her, I can't, I can't.’
And then for a moment, Mary Erle tasted the intoxication of a personal triumph. Vincent did
     not love his wife; he had come back to her, to her. The years seemed to roll away.... In the
     intimacy of that quiet room it seemed as if time were obliterated; as if nothing had happened.
     Just as before, in the empty, dusty drawing-room in Harley Street, where he had first asked her
     for her love, his passion communicated itself to her. He looked at her, and with a sudden fear
     she stepped backwards, away from him, but he had risen, and his troubled eyes were looking
     straight into hers.
And once again, just as on that bygone June afternoon, Mary was drawn, in spite of herself,
     by the mysterious, inexorable bond of the flesh. Youth, the will to live, the imperious demands
     of human passion for one moment were to have their way.
‘Vin—cent,’ she pleaded, as he held her two wrists like a vice, and then slowly, with a long
     shudder, she was conscious that his arms were enfolding her. It was good to rest there for a
      little, to forget, to run an erasing finger over the ugly
     past, the years of waiting, of disappointment, of unceasing work. To the starved woman it was
     sweet; so sweet that she stood there, her head bent down, his arms holding her fast.
‘Mary, my own little girl! Why won't you look at me? Turn up your face. Let me see your eyes.
     You belonged to me once, Mary. Look at me, dearest, say you haven't forgotten me altogether?
     Dear heart, how good it is! No, don't move, don't move, for God's sake. Give me my little bit
     of happiness,’ he muttered, as she moaned under his caresses, ‘we're not hurting anyone, not
     anyone, Mary.’
‘No,’ she cried at last, breaking away from him. She was trembling from head to foot; all the
     blood in her body seemed to have rushed to her brain. ‘You're not hurting anyone—but me! You're
     hurting me—me! You're doing your best to make me a miserable woman.’
Hemming flung himself on the sofa, with his head buried in the pillows. From the movement of
     his shoulders, Mary could see that he was sobbing, as she stood at the other end of the little
     room, supporting herself against the mantelpiece. It was so terrible to see that he, after all,
     was suffering, and through her. He was one of those men whose rather pompous
      manner surrounds them like a suit of armour; men whom it is
     difficult to picture breaking down, feeling acutely, bearing their share of the burden of human
     suffering.
‘Vincent,’ she said softly, crossing over to him, ‘try and be brave, for—for both our sakes.
     We—we can't help it now. It's all done with long ago—for you and me. Don't forget that. Don't
     torture me, for God's sake, dear.’
‘Understand me, Mary,’ he said, uncovering his face, and speaking rapidly with his eyes fixed
     on the carpet, ‘I'm not going back to her. I can't, I won't stand it. I'm going
     away—somewhere—anywhere, where I can be quiet and think. The mail train leaves at eight—I shall
     catch that, and go straight through to Paris. Mary, dear child,’ he said, drawing her suddenly
     down beside him on the sofa, ‘come with me. If you wish it, I'll give up everything; my
     position, my political career, my—my child. Won't you—can't you be to me what she has never
     been, my real wife?’
‘Your real wife!’ repeated Mary, wonderingly. For the first few seconds, she was not
     conscious of feeling shocked. For years now, this man had been so constantly in her thoughts,
     he had represented, in the time of his absence, the one poor joy, the starveling hope in her
     dreary existence, that she was no more horrified than if
      her own brain had worded the thought: ‘His real wife!’ But
     she knew, even as he spoke, that this was the end of everything; that never again, as long as
     she lived, could they ever be alone together. And all the time she was conscious of the
     fascination, the odious fascination which belongs to sin.
‘Come with me,’ he whispered, taking her thin fingers and entwining them with his. ‘Trust me,
     little one. I want to be everything to you. We—we could live somewhere in France,’ he went on,
     frowning slightly, ‘in some little place where English people don't go—’
‘Ah—some place where English people don't go!’ she repeated softly, with a shade of irony in
     her voice. She had drawn herself apart now, and was looking at him steadily as he spoke.
‘Mary,’ he went on, ‘my little girl! Dare to be yourself. Come to me, let us begin a new
     life, a real life, dear. You are above the prejudices of our false civilisation,
     you are capable of being a true woman, of giving up something for the man you love. In a little
     while I might be free, and then we could be married. Mary, Mary, don't you really care for me
     enough for that? Think of it, think of what we are missing? It would not be a selfish life we
     would lead, Mary. We would work together. You would inspire me to noble things,’ he added,
      with a touch of his old manner. ‘Other women—great
     women—have been strong enough, single-hearted enough, to do as much for the men they loved.
     Dear heart, think of the years we might spend together.’
There was a tense silence. Mary had risen and walked to the window, where she stood fidgeting
     with the tassel of the blind, and looking down into the dingy street. Those words that she was
     listening to were the last words of love which she was ever to hear. And she thought, as she
     stood there, of the irony of life. To her, love had been twice offered: the affection of Perry
     Jackson, and now the selfish passion of a man who was another woman's husband. After to-day it
     would all be a blank. And the impotence, the helplessness of woman's lot struck her with
     irresistible force. She was the plaything, the sport of destiny, and destiny always won the
     game.
She turned slowly round, and faced him, still swinging the tassel of the blind with one hand.
     Her face was quite white; she looked cold, almost indifferent.
‘Vincent,’ she said, in a grave voice, ‘I can't do it. I can't, I can't—not even for you! It
     is not that I mind what people would say—that's nothing. It isn't that I don't love you.
     I—I—why, I have always loved you. But it's the
      other woman—your wife. I can't, I won't, deliberately injure
     another woman. Think how she would suffer! Oh, the torture of women's lives—the helplessness,
     the impotence, the emptiness! And, Vincent, she is the mother of your child. Your
      child, dear,’ she went on, after a pause. ‘I could not bear that she should grow up and
     hate me. All we modern women mean to help each other now. We have a bad enough time as it is,’
     she added, with a faint smile; ‘surely we needn't make it worse by our own deliberate acts! We
     often talked it all over, Alison and I. You don't know the good she did in her life, the help,
     the sympathy she gave. You will go away a little, Vincent, and then you will go back. You will
     go back—to your little daughter?’
The next instant she was gone. He heard her shut and lock her bedroom door, but he sat on and
     on, hoping she would come back, that she would relent, that she would forgive him.... But no
     sound came from the little room. He did not know that she had silently left the house.
At last Hemming rang the bell, and the servant appeared.
‘Tell Miss Erle,’ he said, in a harsh, discordant voice, ‘that I am waiting—to say
     good-bye.’
‘Miss Mary went out nearly an hour ago, sir. Didn't you know?’

She was gone, then. It was all over; she had not trusted him. Eight o'clock struck. He felt
     wretched, sick, hungry. It was too late now to catch the evening mail, for he had no clothes,
     and he thought, with a grim smile, that a man couldn't cross the Channel, even if he had been
     defrauded of his dearest hopes, in a frock coat and a tall hat. Presently he left the house,
     and wandered along towards Regent Street. He thought he would go to a restaurant and have some
     dinner; he did not want to meet any of the men at the club.
And afterwards he had an indistinct impression of a meal at which, in his wretchedness, he
     went on ordering pints of champagne, of the corridor of a music-hall, of rustling gowns, of
     scarlet smiles, and of some one, very young and rather pretty, who leant upon his arm. It must
     have been a kind of dream, a sort of madness, he thought afterwards, when he had returned, a
     day or two later, to the decorous solemnity of his home in Queen's Gate.
</div></body></text></TEI>