<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER XX
THE GATE OF SILENCE
‘I WILL not, while I have health and strength,’ said Lady Jane severely at the
     breakfast table, when the question of a trained nurse was mooted, ‘consent to have my child
     nursed by a hireling. It is a mother's duty,’ she continued, with lofty decision, regarding
     Mary and her red, tired eyelids somewhat reproachfully. And Lady Jane, to be sure, was
     convinced that she herself had tended the sick girl through the night. Mary remembered, with
     something like a smile, that once or twice during that long vigil, her hostess, arrayed in a
     somewhat short night-dress, scantily covered by a pink dressing-gown, had stepped ponderously
     into the room, upset one or two medicine bottles, and poured some beef-tea into a glass which
     contained lemonade. Lady Jane had the best intentions, but nature had not cut her out for a
     sick nurse. She was short-sighted and easily perturbed, and her natural emotions overcame her
     so much that once
      she retreated in tears, carrying away in her distraction the
     bottle of medicine which was to be administered every hour.
‘No,’ reiterated the mother; ‘not while I have health and strength. I shall go to her myself
     immediately.’
The hours passed mournfully enough. There was no improvement during the day. Alison sat up in
     bed, propped up with pillows, while her strength lasted. Her face, which had gradually turned
     livid, was covered with a clammy perspiration. Every now and again she pushed back the damp
     strands of hair from her forehead. The fits of choking became more frequent; she had no longer
     the strength to battle with them.
‘Mary,’ she whispered once during the morning, ‘my feet look so odd. They are swelling—I
     wonder why?’ She pushed one foot from under the bed-clothes; it was quite disfigured
     already.
‘Funny it looks,’ she muttered. ‘What's his name? the French sculptor—you know—modelled my
     foot once. It would be horrid’—she stared vacantly at the little swollen foot, while Mary bent
     down and rearranged the bed-clothes—‘to have great fat feet like that. Mary, do you think they
     will get slim again when I am well?’

‘My darling, of course, of course.’
Again the sick woman fell into an uneasy doze. The doctors' visit brought small comfort. Both
     bent with anxious faces over the bed. Little could be done but to administer strong
     restoratives. The two physicians feared some cerebral complication.
‘Had the patient,’ they asked Lady Jane, ‘recently had any mental shock?’
‘Certainly not, certainly not. My poor darling,’ replied the mother, ‘was the picture of
     health and happiness. Impossible that she should have had any trouble of which I am not aware,’
     she announced, with all an old woman's fatuity.
The two doctors glanced at each other and said nothing. Mary detained the elder man
     downstairs.
‘Tell me the truth,’ she said.
‘My dear young lady, I fear there is nothing—absolutely nothing—that can be done. The patient
     is sinking rapidly. In all probability she will not live through another day. It would be well
     if you could break it to her poor mother.’
Mary stood still for a minute, leaning against the passage wall, as the two doctors closed
     the door softly. She heard the two carriages roll away—rolling away to other sick rooms, to
      pronounce, perhaps, another sentence of death before they
     reached home. It was nothing to them, she remembered; nothing, nothing, nothing. People died
     every day. Every day people were born. Some had to go, these men of science would say, to make
     way for others.
‘There seems to be no change—for the better,’ whispered Lady Jane an hour later, as they both
     stood at the bedside. ‘She is still asleep, and muttering, my poor darling. If we could only
     rouse her, now. I shall insist on Danby seeing her again,’ she added feverishly, patting her
     eyes with a lace handkerchief.
Mary looked at the slight figure in the bed.
‘Dear Lady Jane,’ she said softly, ‘I don't think we shall ever—be able to rouse her now.’ It
     struck her as curiously odd that she should be saying this to the woman near her—this woman
     that she always pictured at dinner-parties and drums, tapping people with her fan, carrying her
     bare shoulders and her little stories from drawing-room to drawing-room in the eternal monotony
     of good society. With a thing so poignant, so human, so pitiful as death, it seemed impossible
     that this charming lady could ever be associated.
The mother broke down completely, and had to be led away.
Towards four o'clock someone knocked at the
      door, bringing up letters for Mary. They had been sent round
     from the lodgings in Bulstrode Street. There were several letters: one from Jimmie, one from
     her bootmaker, and one she saw, with a curious tight feeling at her heart, was from Vincent,
     and bore a Northborough post-mark. Going to the window, she bent forward in the failing light
     and broke the seal. 
      Northborough, Dec. 3rd.
‘MY DEAR MARY,—You are perhaps aware that to-morrow is fixed for my marriage, and it is no
       exaggeration to say that I shall not feel happy when I stand at the altar in the morning
       unless I have a word of blessing from you, my oldest and most valued friend, on this most
       auspicious occasion. Although I trust that changed circumstances will not to any great extent
       separate us, yet I cannot help expressing the hope that such uncommon virtues, intellectual
       powers and remarkable perseverance [the word ‘virtues’ had been added as an after-thought,
       and was squeezed in between ‘uncommon’ and ‘intellectual’] as are happily yours, may be
       speedily and justly rewarded.’—Ever your devoted friend,
‘VINCENT HEMMING.’

Then she deliberately opened the other letters. There was a small cheque from a
      newspaper;
 a little note—very affectionate—from Jimmie, requesting the
     loan of three pounds; and lastly, a bootmaker's bill. Jimmie wanted three pounds, to be
     forwarded immediately. It was annoying—he was always asking for money, in little notes full of
     the most endearing epithets. Well, there was the present cheque. It was for three guineas—the
     price of one of her articles—so she could send him a post-office order. As for the bootmaker,
     he would have to wait. There was something absurd, incongruous about that bootmaker's bill. And
     yet after all, one had to pay one's boot bill, even if one's lover was going to be married in
     the morning.
She felt a curious tightening in her chest, a horrible feeling in her head, as if the brain
     were pressing against the skull. Something had to be done—to be done at once, she kept saying
     to herself. Yes, Vincent must be congratulated. Her pride was up in arms. It would be
     undignified to look as if she were considering the matter. Women, she bethought her with a grim
     smile, should accept their fate with a graceful acquiescence.
And at once Mary made up her mind that she would not write, although there was just time to
     catch the country post. It would be better to telegraph. She would go herself to the
      nearest office. Gathering up her letters, she crept to the
     bedside. Alison was asleep. Bending down she kissed the white wrist that lay on the
     counterpane, and then, telling the maid not to move from the sick-room, she threw on her hat
     and cloak and left the house in the gathering dusk. It was not far to the nearest post-office,
     in Baker Street, and once inside she carefully wrote out a post-office order for Jimmie. Then
     she took a telegraph form and wrote two or three different phrases with the blunt pencil tied
     to a short piece of string. Finally, when she had scratched out two or three messages, she
     handed the paper across to the clerk. ‘I wish you all possible happiness.—Mary,’ read out the
     young man in his everyday, unemotional voice, and then the girl found herself outside, walking
     rapidly down Baker Street towards the Regent's Park. ‘I must walk; I must breathe the open
     air,’ she said to herself, ‘or I shall never be able to sit up again all to-night.’
The gates of the Regent's Park were shut, but she walked on, round the outer circle, seeing
     nothing, for her brain was busy with two overpowering thoughts, the awful struggle with death,
     the protest against annihilation which was slowly being fought out in that bedroom in Portman
     Square, and the fact that henceforward she was to walk alone, to fight the battle of life
      unaided—a moral starveling, whose natural instincts were to
     be pinched, repressed, and neatly trimmed in conformity with the rules of the higher
     civilisation. And, in sooth, it was in accordance with the inexorable laws of the higher
     civilisation that so priceless a boon as a loyal love should weigh as nothing when balanced
     with a thing which had a nicely ascertained value in the money market.
Pausing on the North Gate bridge, she looked down into the dark canal water, on to which the
     last shivering autumnal leaves were slowly fluttering down. She thought of the girl—of Number
     Twenty-seven—who had tried to drown herself in those greenish, slimy waters. After all, it was
     but the Open Door of the Greek philosophers which she had tried to slip through with uncertain,
     unsuccessful feet....
The curve of the road outside was all a silvery grey. Road, sky, and pavement were clothed in
     the same neutral tint, but the street lamps made an orange sickle of fire, heightened on the
     other side by the indigo blueness of the park, etched with intricate lines of bare stems and
     branches. The scarlet of a mail-cart flashed past, and afterwards, in the solitude of the grey
     road, a shabby, belated mourning carriage. There was a flapping of dingy white scarves as the
     dyed horses, with lowered heads, moved
      dejectedly away into the growing dusk, leaving a vision of
     rusty black clothes and of vague, drab faces gazing from the carriage-window on to the sombre,
     naked trees.
Mary shuddered. ‘I must get back,’ she thought, and calling a hansom, she was, in ten
     minutes, mounting the stairs again to the sick room in Portman Square.
Mary hardly dared look when she reached the bedroom again. The sick girl, propped up on
     pillows, was battling for life with her breath. The distended jugular veins told of the fearful
     struggle; the lips were livid, the fingers clenched. The beautiful brown eyes were turned on
     her mother with the look of a tortured animal; then her head fell forward, and they laid her
     length-wise on the bed.
Alison lay long in a state of somnolence. In the silence of the large bedroom, in which the
     only other sound was that of the sprightly French clock on the mantelpiece, ticking away the
     hours, the sick woman's delirious mutterings seemed of fearful importance to the watchers round
     the bed. What was she saying—she who was never to speak any more? Long after, Mary remembered
     the last coherent words she had said: ‘Will my feet get slim again when I am well?’
The long night began. Alison still lay prone,
      but the breathing was now stertorous, with a kind of rattle
     in the throat. Dr. Danby, summoned again by Lady Jane, implored her to be calm, for the end
     could not be long. But to Mary, during the endless hours of that December night, the end seemed
     long in coming. It tortured her to see the one human being for whom she cared now in the world,
     dying that terrible death of suffocation. Towards midnight, the strain on Mary became intense.
     Alison fell into a doze, and then Mary crept, for a few moments, into the next room and threw
     open a window. The injustice of life revolted her. Her misery was too poignant for tears. When
     she was a little child she used to stiffen herself with silent rage when any one accused or
     struck her unjustly. The girl felt something of that hardened feeling now. And so Alison, too,
     was to go. The last grim, speechless battle with annihilation was slowly being fought out in
     that gay, beflowered bedroom.
It was a still winter night, and a great round moon looked over the tops of the tall houses
     opposite, like a white, surprised face. The sounds of the ponderous, buzzing city entered in at
     the window with the whiff of fresh air; the rattle of cabs and omnibuses; voices of the
     passers-by. Carriages were driving round the square; somebody, two doors off, was giving a
      dinner-party. On the steps was a little cluster of footmen.
     Presently the hall door opened, there was a rush of light, and the figures of two ladies, in
     white cloaks and laces, passed from under the portico. The click of the carriage door was
     audible, the word ‘Home!’ and the sound of retreating wheels. Presently a couple of men left,
     lighting their cigars as they went down the steps, and striding off on foot to the sounds of
     amused laughter. But presently the square was silent. Not a branch stirred. Only the great
     white moon rose higher in the heavens with her cold, triumphant air.
Mary sank on her knees at the open window, her forehead pressed against the sill.
‘Why could it not have been I?’ she moaned. ‘No one wants me, no one cares for me; while
     Alison—. O God! O God! and must I go on living—?’
And then she remembered that Death, the great destroyer, had an irony which is all his own.
     Beautiful, noble, helpful lives were crushed, destroyed, annihilated. Death made no more
     account of them than a schoolboy does of a beetle, on whom, in passing by, he tramps wantonly
     in a ditch. A minute ago they breathed, and hoped, and loved; another minute in the æons of
     time, and the insect was a mere blotch of slime, one's passionately loved idol lay
      rotting under the sod. And for a little while, if they were
     lucky, the idols were remembered, but more often their memories, too, passed away.
The burden of sex, the lust of life, the torture of the ideal, the unslaked thirst for
     immortality, had all been theirs; but always others came to take their places, to suffer the
     same agonies, to be thrilled, for a brief moment, with the same fears and pleasures. And always
     the long procession moved on, and on, and on; some fell out, but others jostled forward; the
     ranks were filled up; there was small time for tears. Yes, for ever the great army of humanity
     moved on, on its strange inexplicable march from a mother's womb to six feet of oozing
     clay.
The long hours of the night dragged slowly by. In the sick room the only sounds were the
     ticking of the French clock and the terrible, ominous rattle from the lace-trimmed pillows. It
     was nearing dawn. Restless and hysterical with grief, the mother had run out to write one more
     vain summons to the doctor. Outside, there were women's voices, sobbing on the stair-case. Mary
     sat by the bedside, waiting for the dawn, waiting for the dread inexorable moment. And then,
     just when there came creeping in behind the blind the wan, drabbish light of the December
     daybreak—of the morning which Mary remembered with a kind of stunned feeling
      ing was to be that of Vincent Hemming's marriage—a strange
     noise from the pillows made her heart stand still in her body. And suddenly she was aware that
     there was no sound at all in the sick room but the pert click of the little gilt clock on the
     mantelpiece, ticking, ticking, ticking, glibly away.
</div></body></text></TEI>