<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER XVIII
DUNLOP STRANGE MAKES A MISTAKE
IT was three minutes to eight. Round the marble mantelpiece in the great
     empty-looking drawing-room in Portman Square, a small circle of guests were gathered. Lady Jane
     was talking. She had been a wit and a beauty in her youth, and, with the garrulity of old age,
     she liked to talk of her triumphs; of her flirtation with Bulwer Lytton, whose waistcoats and
     whose romances were just then turning the heads of all the women; of the occasion when she
     snatched a celebrity from Lady Palmerston, and above all, of d'Orsay, who, up to the last, had
     continued to scintillate at her dinner-parties. To-night she was discussing a famous
     statesman's cautious affairs of the heart with a little old man, whose parchment face had
     wrinkled and whose hair had whitened in the service of his country at various minor European
     courts.
‘I always heard, you know, that she was formally engaged to him when her husband was
      still alive. He went there every day. The thing was
     accepted.’
The wrinkled old man had a senile chuckle, which not infrequently turned into a cough.
‘He, he, my dear lady. I know it for a fact. And then there was the other woman. The old lady
     that used to make appointments with him, by the great fountain at the Crystal Palace—’
‘And who left him all her money.’
‘How quite too delicious. Early Victorian scandal,’ whispered Beaufy Flower to Lady
     Blaythewaite, who, in her rôle of pretty woman, was standing
     in her favourite swaggering attitude on the hearth-rug, a radiant vision of pink and white
     flesh. ‘Don't you want to hear it?’
‘I don't know whom they're talking about,’ she said in her deliberate drawl. ‘Does one ever
     meet these people anywhere—at dinner, or at Sandown?’
‘Oh, they're all dead,’ he sniggered, patting the Parma violets in his coat.
‘Then why didn't you say so before, you little idiot?’ announced her ladyship in her rather
     high voice. She was vaguely afraid of the boy's malicious tongue, but she tolerated him about
     her because she was more afraid of the spiteful things he would say if she didn't.
‘But it's deliciously amusing, Lady Jane's
      scandal, isn't it?’ he continued with a little wriggle which
     disposed of the pretty woman's snub. ‘Can you picture an intrigue in side-spring boots, the
      coup de foudre from a spoon-bonnet and a burnous, and white,
     blue-white stockings?’
‘No, I can't. They must have looked frumps,’ replied the lady, with a complacent survey of
     her Paris frock and her somewhat obvious charms in the huge gilt mirror. It was two months now
     since the great divorce case; it was considered dull to talk about it any more. The whole
     affair had remained nebulous. Neither side had been able to obtain a verdict, but most people
     took the lady's part. Sir Horace was old, ugly, and vicious; she was young, pretty, and in a
     notably tolerant set. The husband had gone away in his steam yacht to investigate the South Sea
     Islands, and meanwhile Lady Blaythewaite made a point of being seen everywhere, especially at
     houses which she would have voted ‘frumpish’ a year ago.
The guests were arriving quickly now. Mr. Bosanquet-Barry, very boyish-looking and important,
     with something to tell Lady Jane which had to be told in a distant corner, while his hostess
     tapped him several times playfully with a small carved ivory fan; the Irish Viceroy, over on
     important business; a well-known
      beauty without her husband, who was annoyed when she found
     she was not the last, as she had wished to make an effective entry; Mary, looking somewhat pale
     and worn; a young A.D.C. from India, with a crooked line of sunburn across his forehead, and a
     naïve enthusiasm for the two London beauties; and the Attorney-General, famous for his good
     stories.
‘It is my own child,’ complained Lady Jane to the Viceroy, who had more than once advanced to
     offer his arm, under the impression that dinner had been announced, ‘who keeps me waiting for
     my dinner. Would you believe that that girl of mine spends half her time in a workman's flat,
     or poking about in those horrible smelling streets in Whitechapel?’
‘Young ladies,’ said the Viceroy, frowning, for he was very hungry, ‘have curious ideas of
     amusing themselves nowadays.’
‘In our time balls and parties were supposed to suffice. But I can't get my child to take a
     proper interest in society,’ complained Lady Jane. ‘I tell her it's absurd. Why, it's such a
     refuge for a woman in her old age. But it's always the same story. When she is young and pretty
     society cares for the woman, but when she is old and—well—repaired, it is, of course, the woman
     who cares for society.’
Just then Alison slipped in quietly. ‘Please
      forgive me, mother, for being late,’ she said, in a tired
     little voice, as she kissed Lady Jane on each plump cheek. ‘I'm dead tired. I only got home
     from the hospital at seven.’
‘Well, you're not the last,’ said her mother. ‘Our dear Dunlop Strange hasn't come yet, and
     he's to take you down.’
‘Dr. Strange?’ said Alison, her face growing white. ‘I thought he was in Brussels? It was in
     the papers that he had been sent for from Brussels.’
‘So he was; but he'll be back for my dinner to-night. I know, too, he's got an important
     consultation to-morrow. But we can't wait,’ said Lady Jane, ringing the bell.
The long procession began to move slowly to the dining-room. Alison went down alone. She ate
     her soup in silence, thankful for the empty chair beside her. Oh, if only something would keep
     him away to-night. She could not bear it. She was tired, her head ached, her throat felt dry;
     she must have caught a chill. A fine drizzle had been falling when she left the Whitechapel
     Hospital, and nowhere was there a cab to be seen. The long journey home in an omnibus, an
     omnibus for which she had waited a long time at a corner, had thoroughly tired and chilled her.
     The conventional voices of the men, the foolish, fixed smiles of the women
      all around, struck her to-night as more than usually
     puerile. How endless seemed the long procession of fishes and meats, of hocks and clarets!—what
     a foolish superabundance of food! At one moment she made up her mind she would get up and slip
     out of the room. The commonplace voice of Lady Blaythewaite, making the somewhat bald statement
     that she intended to start for Monte Carlo on the 28th of the following month, bored and
     irritated her. On her right hand two people were passionately discussing the way in which red
     mullet should be cooked. The lady, it would seem, was all for papilottes, whereas the gentleman could not endure them without being stuffed and
     served with port-wine sauce. It was the only moment of the dinner at which the conversation on
     her right hand had approached any sort of enthusiasm. The wrinkled diplomat, who sat on her
     mother's left hand, was resuscitating some details of Lola Montez in '48 for her special
     delectation. The Viceroy was solemnly consuming his dinner. Through the tall flower-stands
     Alison could hear Mr. Bosanquet-Barry, under the soothing influence of Lady Jane's excellent
     champagne, airily inciting Mary to write art criticisms for The Comet; a fact
     which Alison was certain he would forget the very next morning. The odour of hot-house flowers,
     the smell of the meats, the
      very bouquet of the wines, seemed to overpower her. She had
     made up her mind to go, when the chair next to her was pulled out, and Dunlop Strange sat down
     beside her.
It was too late now. She could not leave the room without all London knowing that—
‘I'm so sorry; the boat was late getting into Dover, and I've only just got here,’ said
     Strange.
‘Then I'll let you eat your dinner, doctor,’ said Alison, making a civil effort, ‘you must be
     tired and hungry.’
‘No, no fish or soup. I'll have what's going,’ said the doctor to the obsequious butler, who
     regarded him already as the son-in-law of the house.
‘You're a wicked man,’ cried Lady Jane down the table. ‘Why didn't you come before? My cook
     won't forgive you, even if I do.’
And Dunlop Strange, as he drank off a glass of champagne and looked round the table, felt
     tenderly disposed to all the world. He felt, rather than saw, the beautiful profile at his
     side. He was always intensely conscious of Alison's presence; he knew when she was in a room
     even before he had seen her. No woman that he had ever met had ever attracted him like this
     one. And in gracefully artificial moments like these Dunlop Strange was happy. The factitious
     and fleeting emotions which he experienced
      perienced in society delighted him—emotions heightened by a
     rare vintage, made memorable by an elaborate dish, accentuated by a fine feminine smile. The
     half chaffing, half caressing tone in which his patients addressed him (for Dunlop Strange was
     popular with great ladies); the rôle, three-parts confessor
     and one-fourth adorer, which he played with these beautiful victims of the vapours and the
     megrims, appealed directly to his vanity. He had around him continually in his consulting-room
     of a morning, during his afternoons spent rapidly driving from one enervating boudoir to
     another, and at night in society, a voluptuous feminine atmosphere, an atmosphere which had
     become part of his life, and which he could no more dispense with now than the fine burgundy he
     was wont to drink at his dinner, the special havannah which assisted the process of digestion
     afterwards. And there, close beside him, his arm almost touching hers at the crowded
     dinner-table, sat the woman who was more to him than any other feminine personality—the woman
     who was to make him one of the most envied men in London.
Alison was speaking now to her neighbour on the right, but Strange was struck, when she
     turned round, with the hard look on her face. There was an expression in the girl's eyes
     to-night
      night which he had never seen there, and which he could not
     quite understand, unless—
‘You look tired,’ he said, in his soft professional voice. ‘What have you been doing
     to-day?’
‘I? Oh, I have been at the Whitechapel Hospital. I have been there several times since that
     day we went with you,’ she added quietly.
‘I wish to Heaven you would not run any such risk! We doctors are hardened, you know, but
     there is always the fear of infection for delicate women.’
‘I did not,’ said Alison, ‘go near the fever ward. I went to see—Sister Charlotte.’
Just then Lady Blaythewaite, who was on Strange's left, turned her rather prominent eyes upon
     him, and for a quarter of an hour Dr. Dunlop Strange was not suffered to waver in his
     dinner-table devotion, though he was tortured with doubts about Alison—about the girl in the
     hospital. It was absurd, it was melodramatic, that the girl should have turned up again.... But
     with this ugly fact knocking at his brain, he had to lend an attentive ear to his neighbour's
     confidences about the Cambridgeshire, and how much ‘ready cash’ she expected to ‘land’ by her
     somewhat elaborate transactions. Vaguely, as in a dream, the doctor heard about the favourite—a
     certain ‘Miss Gwendolen
      dolen’—who had just been ‘scratched,’ and some foreign
     admirer, who, it appeared, ‘put’ Lady Blaythewaite on to various ‘good things.’ On his other
     side an animated discussion on the subject of liqueurs was in hand, in which Miss Ives was
     politely pretending to take an interest. The merits of Kirsch, of Benedictine, of Elixir de
     Spa, were contended for with some spirit and success, while Lady Blaythewaite, joining in,
     declared herself entirely in favour of green Chartreuse. The subject was beginning to show
     signs of wear when the doctor turned to Alison—
‘And so you went to see Sister Charlotte again? A capital woman. Plenty of common sense—no
     nonsense about her. The sort of person you can trust.’
‘I am glad of that,’ replied Alison quietly, ‘for she gave me a great deal of information on
     a subject I am intensely interested in.’
‘And what,’ said Strange, with a somewhat uneasy smile, ‘and what, may I ask, is that?’
‘I am interested, doctor, in poor creatures like Number Twenty-seven—’
‘Ah!’ sighed Strange, frowning slightly, as he reached out his hand to the glass of Château
     Lafite which the butler had just poured carefully out, holding the bottle in its wicker cage
     like a very treasure, lest one drop of the dregs should reach the glass.

‘Dear Miss Alison, those are terrible cases. They are cankerous evils, eating away the very
     life of our social system.’
Alison looked at him, and there was a royal scorn in her glance. What, he was going to brazen
     it out, then; to pretend that she was nothing to him?
‘My dear doctor,’ she said, very slowly and softly, ‘you forget that Mr. Lecky maintains
     that, on the contrary, Number Twenty-seven is the martyr of civilisation.’
‘It is a subject,’ murmured Strange, with a slight movement of the shoulders, ‘which I must
     admit I find painful to discuss with young ladies.’
‘Ah!’ said Alison, in her quiet, serious voice, ‘but then I am not a “young lady.” I am only
     a woman, taking a great deal of interest in others of my own sex. The girl, at any rate, seems
     to be what we are now agreed to call a ‘morally deficient person’—one, in fact, who has urgent
     claims on all men's honour, on all women's pity. Properly trained and protected, she might have
     been well, happy, and a tolerably useful member of society. Think of it! That woman was younger
     than I am. If I had only known her earlier, who knows? I might have been her friend; I might
     have saved her from—’
‘Possibly,’ replied the doctor, coolly, ‘but meanwhile—’

‘Meanwhile the girl has succumbed. She died to-day.’
There was a burst of laughter from each side of the table. The Attorney-General had just told
     his newest story. Dr. Dunlop Strange was carefully peeling a fine pear as she spoke. In the
     pause that followed he continued to separate the fruit from its perfumed skin, bending a
     little, in his short-sighted way, over his Sèvres plate. All his future life, he knew, was
     involved in her next few words.
‘My dear Miss Ives,’ he said, with something of his consulting-room manner, ‘pray, don't
     judge hastily. You have probably only heard half her story. Do you, now, really
      know anything about her?’
‘Yes,’ said Alison, abruptly. And, as she looked him straight in the eyes, he knew that she
     was aware of the whole sordid story. ‘I'm not particularly sentimental, as you know,’ she
     added; ‘but I've made up my mind that that poor creature shall be decently buried in the little
     country churchyard in Sussex, in the village where she used to live. I should like her to rest
     now—for good. Shall I make the necessary arrangements, or will you,’ she added with a shade of
     irony, ‘prefer, perhaps, to do so—?’
They were standing up now, for the ladies, gathering up their fans and gloves, were about
      to leave the room. He looked at her humbly, imploringly, but
     the beautiful candid eyes were quite hard.
‘I—I—perhaps it would be better, on the whole, if you allowed me to see to it.’
Nothing more was said. He sat down again when she was gone, staring blankly at the
     fruit-strewn plates and half-drained glasses, at the tall flower-stands and flickering candles.
     Her crumpled napkin fell across his knee, and, as it fell, he saw, with a shudder, a vision of
     a stiff, silent figure in the hospital mortuary. He could hear the rustle of silk dresses, and
     the sound of feminine voices as the ladies trailed upstairs. And he knew as he heard them go
     that it was all over. Yes, it was all over, for she, at any rate, was not one of those girls
     who have infinite complaisances for a possible husband.
A man drew up his chair, asked for a light, and began to talk of a bit of scandal that was
     then enjoying high favour at the clubs. Strange stared at him with haggard eyes, got up, made
     some excuse, and left the house.
</div></body></text></TEI>