<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daisy Chain</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1856</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER IV.

'They may not mar the deep repose
   Of that immortal flower;
Though only broken hearts are found
   To watch her cradle by,
No blight is on her slumbers found,
   No touch of harmful eye.'Lyra Innocentium.
Such a strange sad Sunday! No going to Church, but all the poor children moving in
      awe and oppression about the house, speaking under their breath, as they gathered in the
      drawing-room. Into the study, they might not go, and when Blanche would have asked why, Tom
      pressed her hand and shuddered.
Etheldred was allowed to come and look at Margaret, and even to sit in the room for a little
      while, to take the place of Miss Winter; but she was not sensible of sufficient usefulness to
      relieve the burden of fear and bewilderment in the presence of that still, pale form; and,
      what was almost worse, the sight of the familiar objects, the chair by the fire, the sofa, the
      books, the work-basket, the letter-case, the dressing things, all these were too oppressive.
      She sat crouched up, with her face hidden in her hands, and the instant she was released,
      hastened back to Norman. She was to tell him that he might go into the room, but he did not
      move, and Mary alone went in and out with message.
Dr. May was not to be visited, for he was in the same half-conscious state, apparently
      sensible only of bodily suffering, though
       he answered when addressed, and no one was trusted to speak to him but Flora and
      Alan Ernescliffe.
The rest wore through the day as best they might. Harry slept a good deal, Ethel read to
      herself, and tried to get Norman to look at passages which she liked, Mary kept the little
      ones from being troublesome, and at last took them to peep behind the school-room blinds for
      Richard's coming.
There was a simultaneous shout when, at four o'clock, they caught sight of him, and though,
      at Ethel's exclamation of wonder, Mary and Tom hung their heads at having forgotten
      themselves, the association of gladness in seeing Richard was refreshing; the sense of being
      desolate and forsaken was relieved, and they knew that now they had one to rely on and to
      comfort them.
Harry hastened to open the front-door, and Richard, with his small trim figure, and fresh,
      fair young face, flushed, though not otherwise agitated, was among them, almost devoured by
      the younger ones, and dealing out quiet caresses to them, as he caught from the words and
      looks of the others, that at least his father and sister were no worse. Mr. Wilmot had come
      with him, but only staid to hear the tidings.
'Can I see papa?' were Richard's first audible words—all the rest had been almost dumb
      show.
Ethel thought not, but took him to Margaret's room, where he stood for many minutes without
      speaking; then whispered to Flora that he must go to the others, she should call him if—and
      went down, followed by Ethel.
Tom and Blanche had fallen into teazing tricks, a sort of melancholy play to relieve the
      tedium. They grew cross. Norman was roused to reprove sharply, and Blanche was beginning to
      cry. But Richard's entrance set all at peace—he sat down among them, and, with soft voice and
      arm round Blanche, as she leaned against him, made her good in a moment; and she listened
      while he talked over with Norman and Ethel all they could bear to speak of.
Late in the day, Flora came into her father's room, and stood gazing at him, as he lay with
      eyes closed, breathing heavily, and his brows contracted by pain. She watched him with piteous
      looks, as if imploring him to return to his children. Poor girl, to-day's quiet, after the
      last evening's bustle, was hard to bear. She had then been distracted from thought by the
      necessity of exertion, but it now repayed itself, and she knew not how to submit to do nothing
      but wait and watch.
'No change?' enquired Alan Ernescliffe; looking kindly in her face.
'No,' replied she in a low, mournful tone. 'She only once said, thank you.'

A voice which she did not expect, asked inquiringly, 'Margaret?' and her heart beat as if it
      would take away her breath, as she saw her father's eyes intently fixed on her. 'Did you speak
      of her?' he repeated.
'Yes, dear papa,' said Flora, not losing presence of mind, though in extreme fear of what
      the next question might be. 'She is quiet and comfortable, so don't be uneasy, pray.'
'Let me hear,' he said, and his whole voice and air showed him to be entirely roused. 'There
      is injury? What is it—'
He continued his inquiries till Flora was obliged fully to explain her sister's condition,
      and then he dismayed her by saying he would get up and go to see her. Much distressed, she
      begged him not to think of it, and appealed to Alan, who added his entreaties that he would at
      least wait for Mr. Ward; but the Doctor would not relinquish his purpose, and sent her to give
      notice that he was coming.
Mr. Ernescliffe followed her out of the room, and tried to console her, as she looked at him
      in despair.
'You see he is quite himself, quite collected,' he said; 'you heard how clear and coherent
      his questions were.'
'Can't it be helped? Do try to stop him till I can send to Mr. Ward.'
'I will try, but I think he is in a state to judge for himself. I do, upon my word; and I
      believe trying to prevent him would be more likely to do him harm than letting him satisfy
      himself. I really think you need not be alarmed.'
'But you know,' said Flora, coming nearer, and almost gasping as she whispered and signed
      towards the door, 'she is there—it is mamma's room, that will tell all.'
'I believe he knows,' said Alan. 'It was that which made him faint after the
      accident, for he had his perceptions fully at first. I have suspected all day that he was more
      himself than he seemed, but I think he could not bear to awaken his mind to understand it, and
      that he was afraid to hear about her—your sister, so that our mention of her was a great
      relief, and did him good. I am convinced he knows the rest. Only go on, be calm, as you have
      been, and we shall do very well.'
Flora went to prepare. Ethel eagerly undertook to send to Mr. Ward, and hastened from the
      room, as if in a sort of terror, shrinking perhaps from what might lead to an outburst of
      grief. She longed to have seen her father, but was frightened at the chance of
      meeting him. When she had sent her message, and told her brothers what was passing, she went
      and lingered on the stairs and in the passage for tidings. After what seemed a long time,
      Flora came out, and hastened to the nursery, giving her intelligence on the way.

'Better than could be hoped, he walked alone into the room, and was quite calm and composed.
      Oh! if this will not hurt him, if the seeing baby was but over!'
'Does he want her?'
'Yes, he would have come up here himself, but I would not let him—Nurse, do you hear? Papa
      wants baby, let me have her.'
'Bless me, Miss Flora, you can't hold her while you are all of a tremble! And he has been to
      Miss Margaret?'
'Yes, nurse, and he was only rather stiff and lame.'
'Did Margaret seem to know him?' said Ethel.
'She just answered in that dreamy way when he spoke to her. He says he thinks it is as Mr.
      Ward believes, and that she will soon come to herself. He is quite able to consider—'
'And he knows all?'
'I am sure he does. He desired to see baby, and he wants you, nurse. Only mind you command
      yourself—don't say a word you can help—do nothing to agitate him.'
Nurse promised, but the tears came so fast, and sobs with them, as she approached her
      master's room, that Flora saw no composure could be expected from her; and taking the infant
      from her, carried it in, leaving the door open for her to follow when wanted. Ethel stood by
      listening. There was silence at first, then some sounds from the baby, and her father's voice
      soothing it, in his wonted caressing phrases and tones, so familiar that they seemed to break
      the spell, drive away her vague terrors, and restore her father. Her heart bounded, and a
      sudden impulse carried her to the bedside, at once forgetting all dread of seeing him, and
      chance of doing him harm. He lay, holding the babe close to him, and his face was not altered,
      so that there was nothing in the sight to impress her with the need of caution, and, to the
      consternation of the anxious Flora, she exclaimed, abruptly and vehemently, 'Papa! should not
      she be Christened?'
Dr. May looked up at Ethel, then at the infant; 'Yes,' he said, 'at once.' Then added feebly
      and languidly, 'Some one must see to it.'
There was a pause, while Flora looked reproachfully at her sister, and Ethel became
      conscious of her imprudence, but in a few moments Dr. May spoke again, first to the baby, and
      then asking, 'Is Richard here?'
'Yes, papa.'
'Send him up presently. Where's nurse?'
Ethel retreated, much alarmed at her rash measure, and when she related it, she saw that
      Richard and Mr. Ernescliffe both thought it had been a great hazard.

'Papa wants you,' was a welcome sound to the ears of Richard, and brought a pink glow into
      his face. He was never one who readily showed his feelings, and there was no danger of his
      failing in self-command, though grievously down-cast, not only at the loss of the tender
      mother, who had always stood between him and his father's impatience, but by the dread that he
      was too dull and insignificant to afford any help or comfort in his father's dire
      affliction.
Yet there was something in the gentle sad look that met him, and in the low tone of the 'How
      d'ye do, Ritchie?' that drove off all thought of not being loved; and when Dr. May further
      added, 'You'll see about it all—I am glad you are come,' he knew he was of use, and was
      encouraged and cheered. That his father had full confidence and reliance in him, and that his
      presence was a satisfaction and relief, he could no longer doubt; and this was a drop of balm
      beyond all his hopes; for loving and admiring his father intensely, and with depressed spirits
      and a low estimate of himself, he had begun to fancy himself incapable of being anything but a
      vexation and burthen.
He sat with his father nearly all the evening, and was to remain with him at night. The rest
      were comforted by the assurance that Dr. May was still calm, and did not seem to have been
      injured by what had passed. Indeed, it seemed as if the violence and suddenness of the shock,
      together with his state of suffering, had deadened his sensations; for there was far less
      agitation about him than could have been thought possible in a man of such strong, warm
      affections and sensitive temperament.
Ethel and Norman went up arm-in-arm at bed-time.
'I am going to ask if I may wish papa good night,' said Ethel. 'Shall I say anything about
      your coming?'
Norman hesitated, but his cheeks blanched; he shuddered, shook his head without speaking,
      ran up after Harry, and waved her back when she would have followed.
Richard told her that she might come in, and, as she slowly advanced, she thought she had
      never seen anything so ineffably mournful as the affectionate look on her father's face. She
      held his hand and ventured—for it was with difficulty she spoke—to hope he was not in
      pain.
'Better than it was, thank you, my dear,' he said, in a soft weak tone; then, as she bent
      down to kiss his brow, 'You must take care of the little ones.'
'Yes, papa,' she could hardly answer, and a large drop gathered slowly in each eye, long in
      coming, as if the heart ached too much for them to flow freely.
'Are they all well?'
'Yes, papa.'

'And good?' He held her hand, as if lengthening the interview.
'Yes, very good all day.'
A long deep sigh. Ethel's two tears stood on her cheeks.
'My love to them all. I hope I shall see them to morrow. God bless you, my dear, good
      night.'
Ethel went up-stairs, saddened and yet soothed. The calm silent sorrow, too deep for outward
      tokens, was so unlike her father's usually demonstrative habits, as to impress her all the
      more, yet those two tears were followed by no more; there was much strangeness and confusion
      in her mind in the newness of grief.
She found poor Flora, spent with exertion, under the reaction of all she had undergone,
      lying on her bed, sobbing as if her heart would break, calling in gasps of irrepressible agony
      on mamma! mamma! yet with her face pressed down on the pillow that she might not be heard.
      Ethel, terrified and distressed, timidly implored her to be comforted, but it seemed as if she
      were not even heard; she would have fetched some one, but whom? Alas! alas! it brought back
      the sense that no mother would ever soothe them—Margaret, papa, both so ill, nurse engaged
      with Margaret! Ethel stood helpless and despairing, and Flora sobbed on, so that Mary awakened
      to burst out in a loud frightened fit of crying; but in a few moments a step was at the door,
      a knock, and Richard asked, 'Is anything the matter?'
He was in the room in a moment, caressing and saying affectionate things with gentleness and
      fondling care, like his mother, and which recalled the days when he had been proud to be left
      for a little while the small nurse and guardian of the lesser ones. Mary was hushed in a
      moment, and Flora's exhausted weeping was gradually soothed, when she was able to recollect
      that she was keeping him from her father; with kind good nights, he left Ethel to read to her
      till she could sleep. Long did Ethel read, after both her sisters were slumbering soundly; she
      went on in a sort of dreamy grief, almost devoid of pain, as if all this was too terrible to
      be true; and she had imagined herself into a story, which would give place at dawn to her
      ordinary life.
At last she went to bed, and slept till wakened by the return of Flora, who had crept down
      in her dressing-grown to see how matters were going. Margaret was in the same state, papa was
      asleep, after a restless distressing night, with much pain and some fever; and whenever
      Richard had begun to hope from his tranquillity, that he was falling asleep, he was undeceived
      by hearing an almost unconsciously uttered sigh of 'Maggie, my Maggie!' and then the head
      turned wearily on the pillow, as if worn out with the misery from which there was no escape.
      Towards morning, the pain had lessened,
       and, as he slept, he seemed much less feverish than they could have ventured to
      expect.
Norman looked man and wretched, and could taste no breakfast; indeed Hary reported that he
      had been starting and talking in his sleep half the night, and had proceeded to groaning and
      crying out till, when it could be borne no longer, Harry waked him, and finished his night's
      rest in peace.
The children were kept in the drawing room that morning, and there were strange steps in the
      house; but only Richard and Mr. Ernescliffe knew the reason. Happily there had been witnesses
      enough of the overturn to spare any reference to Dr. May—the violent start of the horses had
      been seen, and Adams and Mr. Ernescliffe agreed, under their breath, that the new black one
      was not fit to drive, while the whole town was so used to Dr. May's headlong driving, that
      every one was recollecting their own predictions of accidents. There needed little to account
      for the disaster—the only wonder was, that it had not happened sooner.
'I say,' announced Harry, soon after they were released again, 'I've been in to papa. His
      door was open, and he heard me, and called me. He says he should like any of us to come in and
      see him. Hadn't you better go, Norman?'
Norman started up, and walked hastily out of the room, but his hand shook so, that he could
      hardly open the door; and Ethel, seeing how it was with him, followed him quickly, as he
      dashed, at full speed, up the stairs. At the top, however, he was forced to cling to the rail,
      gasping for breath, while the moisture started on his forehead.
'Dear Norman,' she said, 'there's nothing to mind. He looks just as usual. You would not
      know there was anything the matter.' But he rested his head on his hand, and looked as if he
      could not stir. 'I see it won't do,' said Ethel—'don't try—you will be better by-and-by, and
      he has not asked for you in particular.'
'I won't be beat by such stuff,' said Norman, stepping hastily forwards, and opening the
      door suddenly. He got through the greeting pretty well, there was no need for him to speak, he
      only gave his hand and looked away, unable to bring himself to turn his eyes on his father,
      and afraid of letting his own face be seen. Almost at the same moment, nurse came to say
      something about Margaret, and he seized the opportunity of withdrawing his hand, and hurrying
      away, in good time, for he was pale as death, and was obliged to sit down on the head of the
      stairs, and lean his head against Etheldred.
'What does make me so ridiculous?' he exclaimed faintly, but very indignantly.

The first cure was the being forced to clear out of Mr. Ward's way, which he could not
      effect without being seen; and Ethel, though she knew that he would be annoyed, was not sorry
      to be obliged to remain, and tell what was the matter with him. 'Oh,' said Mr. Ward, turning
      and proceeding to the dining-room, 'I'll set that to rights in a minute, if you will ask for a
      tumbler of hotwater, Miss Ethel.'
And armed with the cordial he had prepared, Ethel hunted up her brother, and persuaded him,
      after scolding her a little, to swallow it, and take a turn in the garden; after which he made
      a more successful attempt at visiting his father.
There was another room whither both Norman and Etheldred wished to go, though they dared not
      hint at their desire. At last, Richard came to them, as they were wandering in the garden,
      and, with his usual stillness of manner, shaded with additional seriousness, said, 'Would you
      like to come into the study?'
Etheldred put one hand into his, Norman took the other, and soon they stood in that calm
      presence. Fair, cold, white, and intensely still—that face brought home to them the full
      certainty that the warm brightening look would never beam on them, the soft blue eyes never
      guide, check, and watch them, the smile never approve or welcome them. To see her unconscious
      of their presence was too strange and sad, and all were silent, till, as they left the room,
      Ethel looked out at Blanche and Aubrey in the garden. 'They will never remember her! Oh! why
      should it be?'
Richard would fain have moralized and comforted, but she felt as if she knew it all before,
      and heard with languid attention. She had rather read than talk, and he sat down to write
      letters.
There were no near relations to be sent for. Dr. May was an only son, and his wife's sister,
      Mrs. Arnott, was in New Zealand; her brother had long been dead, and his widow, who lived in
      Edinburgh, was scarcely known to the May family. Of friends there were many, fast bound by
      affection and gratitude, and notes, inquiries, condolences, and offers of service came in
      thickly, and gave much occupation to Flora, Richard, and Alan Ernescliffe, in turn. No one
      from without could do anything for them—they had all the help they wanted in Miss Winter and
      in Alan, who was invaluable in sharing with Richard the care of the Doctor, as well as in
      giving him the benefit of his few additional years' experience, and relieving him of some of
      his tasks. He was indeed like one of themselves, and a most valuable help and comforter. Mr.
      Wilmot gave them all the time he could, and on this day saw the Doctor, who seemed to find
      some solace in his visit, though saying very little.
On this day the baby was to be baptized. The usual Stoneborough
       fashion was to collect all the Christenings for the month into one Sunday, except
      those for such persons as thought themselves too refined to see their children Christened
      before the congregation, and who preferred an empty Church and a week-day. The little one had
      waited till she was nearly six weeks old for 'a Christening Sunday,' and since that had been
      missed, she could not be kept unbaptized for another month; so, late in the day, she was
      carried to Church.
Richard had extremely gratified old nurse, by asking her to represent poor Margaret, Mrs.
      Hoxton stood for the other godmother, and Alan Ernescliffe was desired to consider himself
      absolutely her sponsor, not merely a proxy. The younger children alone were to go with them:
      it was too far off, and the way lay too much through the town for it to be thought proper for
      the others to go. Ethel wished it very much, and thought it nonsense to care whether people
      looked at her; and in spite of Miss Winter's seeming shocked at her proposing it, had a great
      mind to persist. She would even have appealed to her papa, if Flora had not stopped her,
      exclaiming, 'Really, Ethel, I think there never was a person so entirely without consideration
      as you are.'
Much abashed, Ethel humbly promised that if she might go into papa's room, she would not say
      one word about the Christening, unless he should begin, and, to her great satisfaction, he
      presently asked her to read the service to him. Flora came to the door-way of Margaret's room,
      and listened; when she had finished, all were silent.
'How shall we, how can we virtuously bring up our motherless little sister?' was the thought
      with each of the girls. The answers were, in one mind, 'I trust we shall do well by her, dear
      little thing. I see, on an emergency, that I know how to act. I never thought I was capable of
      being of so much use, thanks to dear, dear mamma's training. I shall manage, I am sure, and so
      they will all depend on me, and look up to me. How nice it was to hear dear papa say what he
      did about the comfort of my being able to look after Margaret.'
In the other, 'Poor darling, it is saddest of all for her, because she knows nothing, and
      will never remember her mamma! But if Margaret is but better, she will take care of her, and
      oh! how we ought to try—and I, such a naughty wild thing—if I should hurt the dear little ones
      by carelessness, or by my bad example! Oh! what shall I do, for want of some one to keep me in
      order? If I should vex papa by any of my wrong ways!'
They heard the return of the others, and the sisters both sprang up, 'May we bring her to
      you?' said Flora.
'Yes, do, my dears.'

The sisters all came down together with the little one, and Flora put her down within the
      arm her father stretched out for her. He gazed into the baby face, which, in its
      expressionless placidity, almost recalled her mother's tranquil sweetness.
'Gertrude Margaret,' said Flora, and with a look that had more of tenderness than grief, he
      murmured, 'My Daisy blossom, my little Maggie.'
'Might we?' said Ethel, when Flora took her again, 'might we take her to her godmother to
      see if she would notice her?'
He looked as if he wished it; but said, 'No, I think not, better not rouse her,' and sighed
      heavily; then, as they stood round his bed, unwilling to go, he added 'Girls, we must learn
      carefulness and thoughtfulness. We have no one to take thought for us now.'
Flora pressed the babe in her arms, Ethel's two reluctant tears stood on her cheeks, Mary
      exclaimed, 'I'll try not to be naughty;' and Blanche climbed up to kiss him, saying, 'I will
      be always good, papa.'
'Daisy—papa's Daisy—your vows are made,' whispered Ethel, gaining sole possession of the
      babe for a minute. 'You have promised to be good and holy. We have the keeping of you, mamma's
      precious flower, her pearl of truth! Oh, may God guard you to be an unstained jewel, till you
      come back to her again—and a blooming flower, till you are gathered into the wreath that never
      fades—my own sweet poor little motherless Daisy!'
</div></body></text></TEI>