<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daisy Chain</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1856</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER XVIII.

'Saw ye never in the meadows,
   Where your little feet did pass,
Down below, the sweet white daisies
   Growing in the long green grass?
Saw you never lilac blossoms,
   Or acacia white and red,
Waving brightly in the sunshine,
   On the tall trees over head!'Hymns for Children, C. F. A.
My dear child, what a storm you have had! how wet you must be!' exclaimed Mrs.
      Larpent, as Meta Rivers came bounding up the broad staircase at Abbotstoke Grange.
'Oh, no; I am quite dry; feel.'
'Are you sure?' said Mrs. Larpent, drawing her darling into a luxurious bed-room, lighted up
      by a glowing fire, and full of pretty things. 'Here, come and take off your wet things, my
      dear, and Bellairs shall bring you some tea.'
'I'm dry; I'm warm,' said Meta, tossing off her plumy hat, as she established herself, with
      her feet on the fender. 'But where do you think I have been? You have so much to hear; but
      first— three guesses where we were in the rain?'
'In the Stoneborough Cloisters, that you wanted to see? My dear, you did not keep your papa
      in the cold there?'
'No, no; we never got there at all; guess again.'
'At Mr. Edward Wilmot's?'
'No!'
'Could it have been at Dr. May's? Really, then, you must tell me.'
'There! you deserve a good long story; beginning at the beginning,' said Meta, clapping her
      hands, 'wasn't it curious? as we were coming up the last hill, we met some girls in deep
      mourning,
       with a lady, who looked like their governess. I wondered whether they could be
      Dr. May's daughters, and so it turned out they were. Presently there began to fall little
      square lumps, neither hail, nor snow, nor rain; it grew very cold, and rain came on. It would
      have been great fun, if I had not been afraid papa would catch cold, and he said we would
      canter on to the inn. But, luckily, there was Dr. May walking up the street, and he begged us
      to come into his house. I was so glad! We were tolerably wet, and Dr. May said something about
      hoping the girls were at home; well, when he opened the drawing-room door, there was the poor
      daughter lying on the sofa.'
'Poor girl! tell me of her.'
'Oh! you must go and see her; you won't look at her without losing your heart. Papa liked
      her so much—see if he does not talk of her all the evening. She looks the picture of goodness
      and sweetness. Only think of her having some of the Maidenhair and Cape Jessamine still in
      water, that we sent her so long ago. She shall have some flowers every three days. Well, Dr.
      May said, "There is one at least, that is sure to be at home." She felt my habit, and said I
      must go and change it, and she called to a little thing of six, telling her to show me the way
      to Flora. She smiled, and said she wished she could go herself, but Flora would take care of
      me. Little Blanche came and took hold of my hand, chattering away, up we went, up two
      staircases, and at the top of the last stood a girl about seventeen, so pretty! such deep blue
      eyes, and such a complexion! "That's Flora," little Blanche said; "Flora, this is Miss Rivers,
      and she's wet, and Margaret says you are to take care of her."'
'So that was your introduction?'
'Yes; we got acquainted in a minute. She took me into her room—such a room! I believe
      Bellairs would be angry if she had such an one; all up in the roof, no fire, no carpet, except
      little strips by the beds; there were three beds. Flora used to sleep there till Miss May was
      ill, and now she dresses there. Yet I am sure they are as much ladies as I am.'
'You are an only daughter, my dear, and a petted one,' said Mrs. Larpent, smiling. 'There
      are too many of them to make much of, as we do of our Meta.'
'I suppose so; but I did not know gentlewomen lived in such a way,' said Meta. 'There were
      nice things about, a beautiful inlaid work-box of Flora's, and a rosewood desk, and plenty of
      books, and a Greek book and dictionary were spread open. I asked Flora if they were hers, and
      she laughed and said no; and that Ethel would be much discomposed that I had seen them. Ethel
      keeps up
       with her brother Norman—only fancy! and he at the head of the school. How clever
      she must be!'
'But, my dear, were you standing in your wet things all this time!'
'No; I was trying on their frocks, but they trailed on the ground upon me, so she asked if I
      would come and sit by the nursery fire till my habit was dry; and there was the dear little
      good-humoured baby, so fair and pretty. She is not a bit shy, will go to anybody, but, they
      say, she likes no one so well as her brother Norman.'
'So you had a regular treat of baby nursing.'
'That I had; I could not part with her, the darling. Flora thought we might take her down,
      and I liked playing with her in the drawing-room and talking to Miss May, till the fly came to
      take us home. I wanted to have seen Ethel; but, only think, papa has asked Dr. May to bring
      Flora some day; how I hope he will!'
Little Meta having told her story, and received plenty of sympathy, proceeded to dress, and,
      while her maid braided her hair, a musing fit fell upon her. 'I have seen something of life
      to-day,' thought she. 'I had thought of the great difference between us and the poor, but I
      did not know ladies lived in such different ways. I should be very miserable without Bellairs,
      or without a fire in my room. I don't know what I should do if I had to live in that cold,
      shabby den, and do my own hair, yet they think nothing of it, and they are cultivated and
      lady-like! Is it all fancy, and being brought up to it? I wonder if it is right? Yet dear papa
      likes me to have these things, and can afford them. I never knew I was luxurious before, and
      yet I think I must be! One thing I do wish, and that is, that I was of as much use as those
      girls. I ought to be. I am a motherless girl like them, and I ought to be everything to papa,
      just as Miss May is, even lying on the sofa there, and only two years older than I am. I don't
      think I am of any use at all; he is fond of me, of course, dear papa; and if I died, I don't
      know what would become of him, but that's only because I am his daughter—he has only George
      besides to care for. But, really and truly, he would get on as well without me. I never do
      anything for him, but now and then playing to him in the evening, and that not always, I am
      afraid, when I want to be about anything else. He is always petting me, and giving me all I
      want, but I never do anything but my lessons, and going to the school, and the poor people,
      and that is all pleasure. I have so much that I never miss what I give away. I wonder whether
      it is all right. Leonora and Agatha have not so much money to do as they please with—they are
      not so idolized. George said, when he was angry, that papa idolizes me; but they have all
      these comforts and luxuries, and never think of anything but doing what they like. They never
      made me consider
       as these Mays do. I should like to know them more. I do so much want a friend of
      my own age. It is the only want I have. I have tried to make a friend of Leonora, but I
      cannot; she never cares for what I do. If she saw these Mays she would look down on them. Dear
      Mrs. Larpent is better than anyone, but then she is so much older. Flora May shall be my
      friend. I'll make her call me Meta as soon as she comes. When will it be? They day after
      to-morrow?'
But little Meta watched in vain. Dr. May always came with either Richard or the groom, to
      drive him, and if Meta met him and hoped he would bring Flora next time, he only answered that
      Flora would like it very much, and he hoped soon to do so.
The truth was, it was no such every day matter as Meta imagined. The larger carriage had
      been broken, and the only vehicle held only the doctor—his charioteer—and in a very minute
      appendage behind, a small son of the gardener, to open gates, and hold the horse.
The proposal had been one of those general invitations to be fulfilled at any time, and
      therefore easily set aside; and Dr. May, though continually thinking he should like to take
      his girls to Abbotstoke, never saw the definite time for so doing; and Flora herself, though
      charmed with Miss Rivers, and delighted with the prospect of visiting her, only viewed it as a
      distant prospect.
There was plenty of immediate interest to occupy them at home, to say nothing of the
      increasing employment that Cocksmoor gave to thoughts, legs, and needles. There was the
      commencement of the half-year, when Tom's school-boy life was to begin, and when it would be
      proved whether Norman were able to retain his elevation.
Margaret had much anxiety respecting the little boy about to be sent into a scene of
      temptation. Her great confidence was in Richard, who told her that boys did many more wrong
      things than were known at home, and yet turned out very well, and that Tom would be sure to
      right himself in the end. Richard had been blameless in his whole school course, but though
      never partaking of the other boy's evil practices, he could not form an independent estimate
      of character, and his tone had been a little hurt, by sharing the school public opinion of
      morality. He thought Stoneborough, and its temptations, inevitable, and only wished to make
      the best of it. Margaret was afraid to harass her father, by laying the case before him. All
      her brothers had gone safely through the school, and it never occurred to her that it was
      possible that, if her father knew the bias of Tom's disposition, he might choose, for the
      present; at least, some other mode of education.
She talked earnestly to Tom, and he listened impatiently. There is an age when boys rebel
      against female rule, and are not yet
       softened by the chivalry of manhood, and Tom was at this time of life. He did
      not like to be lectured by a sister, secretly disputed her right, and, proud of becoming a
      schoolboy, had not the generous deference for her weakness felt by his elder brothers; he was
      all the time peeling a stick, as if to show that he was not attending, and he raised up his
      shoulder pettishly whenever she came to a mention of the religious duty of sincerity. She did
      not long continue her advice, and, much disappointed and concerned, tried to console herself
      with hoping that he might have heeded more than he seemed to do.
He was placed tolerably high in the school, and Norman, who had the first choice of fags,
      took him instead of Hector Ernescliffe, who had just passed beyond the part of the school
      liable to be fagged. He said he liked school, looked bright when he came home in the evenings,
      and the sisters hoped all was right.
Everyone was just now anxiously watching Norman, especially his father, who strove in vain
      to keep back all manifestation of his earnest desire to see him retain his post. Resolutely
      did the Doctor refrain from asking any questions when the boys came in, but he could not keep
      his eyes from studying the face, to see whether it bore marks of mental fatigue, and from
      following him about the room, to discover whether he found it necessary, as he had done last
      autumn, to spend the evening in study. It was no small pleasure to see him come in with his
      hand full of horse-chesnut and hazel-buds, and proceed to fetch the microscope and botany
      books, throwing himself eagerly into the study of the wonders of their infant forms, searching
      deeply into them with Margaret, and talking them over with his father, who was very glad to
      promote the pursuit—one in which he had always taken great interest.
Another night Dr. May was for a moment disturbed by seeing the school-books put out, but
      Norman had only some notes to compare, and while he did so, he was remarking on Flora's music,
      and joining in the conversation so freely as to prove it was no labour to him. In truth, he
      was evidently quite recovered, entirely himself again, except that he was less boyish. He had
      been very lively and full of merry nonsense; but his ardour for play had gone off with his
      high spirits, and there was a manliness of manner, and tone of mind, that made him appear
      above his real age.
At the end of a fortnight he volunteered to tell his father that all was right. 'I am not
      afraid of not keeping my place,' he said; 'you were quite right, papa. I am more up to my work
      than I was ever before, and it comes to me quite fresh and pleasant. I don't promise to get
      the Randall scholarship, if Forder and Cheviot stay on, but I can quite keep up to the mark in
      school work.'

'That's right,' said Dr. May, much rejoiced. 'Are you sure you do it with ease, and without
      its haunting you at night?'
'Oh, yes; quite sure. I can't think what has made Dr. Hoxton set us on in such easy things
      this time. It is very lucky for me, for one gets so much less time to oneself as dux.'
'What! with keeping order?'
'Aye,' said Norman. 'I fancy they think they may take liberties because I am new and young.
      I must have my eye in all corners of the hall at once, and do my own work by snatches, as I
      can.'
'Can you make them attend to you?'
'Why, yes, pretty well, when it comes to the point—"will you, or will you not." Cheviot is a
      great help, too, and has all the weight of being the eldest fellow amongst us.'
'But still you find it harder work than learning? You had rather have to master the dead
      language than the live tongues?'
'A pretty deal,' said Norman; then added, 'one knows what to be at with the dead, better
      than with the living; they don't make parties against one. I don't wonder at it. It was very
      hard on some of those great fellows to have me set before them, but I do not think it is fair
      to visit it by putting up the little boys to all sorts of mischief.'
'Shameful!' said the doctor, warmly; 'but never mind, Norman, keep your temper, and do your
      own duty, and you are man enough to put down such petty spite.'
'I hope I shall manage rightly,' said Norman; 'but I shall be glad if I can get the Randall
      and get away to Oxford; school is not what it used to be, and if you don't think me too
      young—'
'No, I don't; certainly not. Trouble has made a man of you, Norman, and you are fitter to be
      with men than boys. In the meantime, if you can be patient with these fellows, you'll be of
      great use where you are. If there had been anyone like you at the head of the school in my
      time, it would have kept me out of no end of scrapes. How does Tom get on? he is not likely to
      fall into this set I trust.'
'I am not sure,' said Norman; 'he does pretty well on the whole. Some of them began by
      bullying him, and that made him cling to Cheviot and Ernescliffe, and the better party; but
      lately I have thought Anderson, junior, rather making up to him, and I don't know whether they
      don't think that tempting him over to them, would be the surest way of vexing me. I have an
      eye over him, and I hope he may get settled into the steadier sort before next half.'
After a silence, Norman said; 'papa, there is a thing I can't settle in my own mind. Suppose
      there had been wrong things done when older boys, and excellent ones too, were at the head of
       the school, yet they never interfered, do you think I ought to let it go
      on?'
'Certainly not, or why is power given to you?'
'So I thought,' said Norman; 'I can't see it otherwise. I wish I could, for it will be
      horrid to set about it, and they'll think it a regular shame in me to meddle.—O! I know what I
      came into the study for; I want you to be so kind as to lend me your pocket Greek Testament. I
      gave Harry my little one.'
'You are very welcome. What do you want it for?'
Norman coloured. 'I met with a sermon the other day that recommended reading a bit of it
      every day, and I thought I should like to try, now the Confirmation is coming. One can always
      have some quiet by getting away into the cloister.'
'Bless you, my boy! while you go on in this way, I have not much fear but that you'll know
      how to manage.'
Norman's rapid progress affected another of the household in an unexpected way.
'Margaret, my dear, I wish to speak to you,' said Miss Winter, re-appearing when Margaret
      thought everyone was gone out walking. She would have said, 'I am very sorry for it'—so
      ominous was the commencement—and her expectations were fulfilled when Miss Winter had solemnly
      seated herself, and taken out her netting. 'I wished to speak to you about deal Ethel,' said
      the governess; 'you know how unwilling I always am to make any complaint, but I cannot be
      satisfied with her present way of going on.'
'Indeed,' said Margaret. 'I am much grieved to hear this. I thought she had been taking
      great pains to improve.'
'So she was at one time. I would not by any means wish to deny it, and it is not of her
      learning that I speak, but of a hurried, careless way of doing everything, and an irritability
      at being interfered with.'
Margaret knew how Miss Winter often tried Ethel's temper, and was inclined to take her
      sister's part. 'Ethel's time is so fully occupied,' she said.
'That is the very thing that I was going to observe, my dear. Her time is too much occupied,
      and my conviction is, that it is hurtful to a girl of her age.'
This was a new idea to Margaret, who was silent, longing to prove Miss Winter wrong, and not
      have to see poor Ethel pained by having to relinquish any of her cherished pursuits.
'You see there is that Cocksmoor,' said Miss Winter. 'You do not know how far off it is, my
      dear; much too great a distance for a young girl to be walking continually in all
      weathers.'
'That's a question for papa,' thought Margaret.

'Besides,' continued Miss Winter, 'those children engross almost all her time and thoughts.
      She is working for them, preparing lessons, running after them continually. It takes off her
      whole mind from her proper occupations, unsettles her, and I do think it is beyond what befits
      a young lady of her age.'
Margaret was silent.
'In addition,' said Miss Winter, 'she is at every spare moment busy with Latin and Greek,
      and I cannot think that to keep pace with a boy of Norman's age and ability can be desirable
      for her.'
'It is a great deal,' said Margaret, 'but—'
'I am convinced that she does more than is right,' continued Miss Winter. 'She may not feel
      any ill effects at present, but you may depend upon it, it will tell on her by-and-by.
      Besides, she does not attend to anything properly. At one time she was improving in neatness
      and orderly habits. Now, you surely must have seen how much less tidy her hair and dress have
      been.'
'I have thought her hair looking rather rough,' said Margaret, disconsolately.
'No wonder,' said Miss Winter, 'for Flora and Mary tell me she hardly spends five minutes
      over it in the morning, and with a book before her the whole time. If I send her up to make it
      fit to be seen, I meet with looks of annoyance. She leaves her books in all parts of the
      school-room for Marry to put away, and her table drawer is one mass of confusion. Her lessons
      she does well enough, I own, though what I should call much too fast; but have you looked at
      her work lately?'
'She does not work very well,' said Margaret, who was at that moment, though Miss Winter did
      not know it, re-gathering a poor child's frock that Ethel had gallopped through with more
      haste than good speed.
'She works a great deal worse than little Blanche,' said Miss Winter, 'and though it may not
      be the fashion to say so in these days, I consider good needlework far more important than
      accomplishments. Well, then, Margaret, I should wish you only just to look at her
      writing.'
And Miss Winter opened a French exercise book, certainly containing anything but elegant
      specimens of penmanship. Ethel's best writing was an upright, disjointed, niggle, looking more
      like Greek than anything else, except where here and there it made insane efforts to become
      running-hand, and thereby lost its sole previous good quality of legibility, while the lines
      waved about the sheet in almost any direction but the horizontal. The necessity she believed
      herself under of doing what Harry called writing with the end of her nose, and her always
      holding her pen with her
       fingers almost in the ink, added considerably to the difficulty of the
      performance. This being at her best, the worst may be supposed to be indescribable, when
      dashed off in a violent hurry, and considerably garnished with blots. Margaret thought she had
      seen the worst, and was sighing at being able to say nothing for it, when Miss Winter
      confounded her by turning a leaf, and showing it was possible to make a still wilder
      combination of scramble, niggle, scratch, and crookedness—and this was supposed to be an
      amended edition! Miss Winter explained that Ethel had, in an extremely short time, performed
      an exercise in which no fault could be detected except the writing, which was pronounced to be
      too atrocious to be shown up to M. Ballompre. On being desired to write it over again, she had
      obeyed with a very bad grace, and some murmurs about Cocksmoor, and produced the second
      specimen, which, in addition to other defects, had some elisions from arrant carelessness,
      depriving it of its predecessor's merits of being good French.
Miss Winter had been so provoked, that she believed this to be an effect of ill temper, and
      declared that she should certainly have kept Ethel at home to write it over again, if it had
      not so happened that Dr. May had proposed to walk part of the way with her and Richard, and
      the governess was unwilling to bring her into disgrace with him. Margaret was so grateful to
      her for this forbearance, that it disposed her to listen the more patiently to the same
      representations put in, what Miss Winter fancied, different forms. Margaret was much
      perplexed. She could not but see much truth in what Miss Winter said, and yet she could not
      bear to thwart Ethel, whom she admired with her whole heart; and that dry experience, and
      prejudiced preciseness, did not seem capable of entering into her sister's thirst for learning
      and action. When Miss Winter said Ethel would grow up odd, eccentric, and blue, Margaret was
      ready to answer that she would be superior to everyone; and when the governess urged her to
      insist on Cocksmoor being given up, she felt impatient of that utter want of sympathy for the
      good work.
All that evening Margaret longed for a quiet time to reflect, but it never came till she was
      in bed; and when she had made up her mind how to speak to Ethel, it was five times harder to
      secure her alone. Even when Margaret had her in the room by herself, she looked wild and
      eager, and said she could not stay, she had some Thucydides, to do.
'Won't you stay with me a little while, quietly?' said Margaret; 'we hardly ever have one of
      our talks.'
'I didn't mean to vex you, dear Margaret, I like nothing so well, only we are never alone,
      and I've no time.'

'Pray do spare me a minute, Ethel, for I have something that I must say to you, and I am
      afraid you won't like it—so do listen kindly.'
'Oh!' said Ethel, 'Miss Winter has been talking to you. I know she said she would tell you
      that she wants me to give up Cocksmoor. You aren't dreaming of it, Margaret!'
'Indeed, dear Ethel, I should be very sorry, but one thing I am sure of, that there is
      something amiss in your way of going on.'
'Did she show you that horrid exercise?'
'Yes.'
'Well, I know it was baddish writing, but just listen, Margaret. We promised six of the
      children to print them each a verse of a hymn on a card to learn. Ritchie did three, and then
      could not go on, for the book, that the others were in, was lost till last evening, and then
      he was writing for papa. So I thought I would do them before we went to Cocksmoor, and that I
      should squeeze time out of the morning; but I got a bit of Sophocles that was so horridly
      hard, it ate up all my time, and I don't understand it properly now; I must get Norman to tell
      me. And that ran in my head, and made me make a mistake in my sum, and have to begin it again.
      Then, just as I thought I had saved time over the exercise, comes Miss Winter and tells me I
      must do it over again, and scolds me, besides, about the ink on my fingers. She would send me
      up at once to get it off, and I could not find murse and her bottle of stuff for it, so that
      wasted ever so much more time, and I was so vexed that, really and truly, my hand shook, and I
      could not write any better.'
'No, I thought it looked as if you had been in one of your agonies.'
'And she thought I did it on purpose, and that made me angry, and so we got into a dispute,
      and away went all the little moment I might have had, and I was forced to go to Cocksmoor as a
      promise breaker!'
'Don't you think you had better have taken pains at first?'
'Well, so I did with the sense, but I hadn't time to look at the writing much.'
'You would have made better speed if you had.'
'Oh! yes, I know I was wrong, but it is a great plague altogether. Really, Margaret, I
      shan't get Thucydides done.'
'You must wait a little longer, please, Ethel, for I want to say to you that I am afraid you
      are doing too much, and that prevents you from doing things well, as you were trying to do
      last autumn.'
'You are not thinking of my not going to Cocksmoor!' cried Ethel, vehemently.

'I want you to consider what is to be done, dear Ethel. You thought, last autumn, a great
      deal of curing your careless habits, now you seem not to have time to attend. You can do a
      great deal very fast, I know, but isn't it a pity to be always in a hurry?'
'It isn't Cocksmoor that is the reason,' said Ethel.
'No: you did pretty well when you began, but you know that was in the holidays, when you had
      no Latin and Greek to do.'
'O but, Margaret, they won't take so much time when I have once got over the difficulties,
      and see my way, but just now they have put Norman into such a frightfully difficult play, that
      I can hardly get on at all with it, and there's a new kind of Greek verses, too, and I don't
      make out from the book how to manage them. Norman showed me on Saturday, but mine won't be
      right. When I've got over that, I shan't be so hurried.'
'But Norman will go on to something harder, I suppose.'
'I dare say I shall be able to do it.'
'Perhaps you might, but I want you to consider if you are not working beyond what can be
      good for anybody. You see Norman is much cleverer than most boys, and you are a year younger;
      and besides doing all his work at the head of the school, his whole business of the day, you
      have Cocksmoor to attend to, and your own lessons, besides reading all the books that come
      into the house. Now isn't that more than is reasonable to expect any head and hands to do
      properly?'
'But if I can do it?'
'But can you, dear Ethel? Aren't you always racing from one thing to another, doing them by
      halves, feeling haunted, and then growing vexed?'
'I know I have been cross lately,' said Ethel, 'but it's the being so bothered.'
'And why are you bothered? Isn't it that you undertake too much?'
'What would you have me do?' said Ethel, in an injured, unconvinced voice. 'Not give up my
      children?'
'No,' said Margaret; 'but don't think me very unkind if I say, suppose you left off trying
      to keep up with Norman.'
'Oh! Margaret! Margaret!' and her eyes filled with tears. 'We have hardly missed doing the
      same every day since the first Latin grammar was put into his hands!'
'I know it would be very hard,' said Margaret, but Ethel continued, in a piteous tone, a
      little sentimental: 'From hic hæc hoc up to Alcaics and beta Thukididou we
      have gone on together, and I can't bear to give it up. I'm sure I can—'
'Stop, Ethel, I really doubt whether you can. Do you know that
       Norman was telling papa, the other day, that it was very odd Dr. Hoxton gave
      them such easy lessons.'
Ethel looked very much mortified.
'You see,' said Margaret, kindly, 'we all know that men have more power than women, and I
      suppose the time has come for Norman to pass beyond you. He would not be cleverer than anyone,
      if he could not do more than a girl at home.'
'He has so much more time for it,' said Ethel.
'That's the very thing. Now consider, Ethel. His work, after he goes to Oxford, will be
      doing his very utmost—and you know what an utmost that is. If you could keep up with him at
      all, you must give your whole time and thoughts to it, and when you had done so— if you could
      get all the honours in the University—what would it come to? You can't take a
      first-class.'
'I don't want one,' said Ethel; 'I only can't bear not to do as Norman does, and I like
      Greek so much.'
'And for that would you give up being a useful, steady daughter and sister at home? The sort
      of woman that dear mamma wished to make you, and a comfort to papa.'
Ethel was silent, and large tears were gathering.
'You own, that that is the first thing?'
'Yes,' said Ethel, faintly.
'And that it is what you fail in most?'
'Yes.'
'Then, Ethel dearest, when you made up your mind to Cocksmoor, you knew those things could
      not be done without a sacrifice?'
'Yes, but I didn't think it would be this.'
Margaret was wise enough not to press her, and she sat down and sighed pitifully. Presently
      she said, 'Margaret, if you would only let me leave off that stupid old French, and horrid
      dull reading with Miss Winter, I should have plenty of time for everything; and what does one
      learn by hearing Mary read poetry, she can't understand?'
'You work, don't you? But indeed, Ethel, don't say that I can let you leave off anything. I
      don't feel as if I had that authority. If it be done at all, it must be by papa's consent, and
      if you wish me to ask him about it, I will, only I think it would vex Miss Winter; and I don't
      think dear mamma would have liked Greek and Cocksmoor to swallow up all the little common
      lady-like things.'
Ethel made two or three great gulps: 'Margaret, must I give up everything, and forget all my
      Latin and Greek?'
'I should think that would be a great pity,' said Margaret. 'If you were to give up the
      verse-making, and the trying to do as much
       as Norman, and fix some time in the day—half-an-hour, perhaps, for your Greek—I
      think it might do very well.'
'Thank you,' said Ethel, much relieved; 'I'm glad you don't want me to leave it all off. I
      hope Norman won't be vexed,' she added, looking a little melancholy.
But Norman had not by any means the sort of sentiment on the subject that she had: 'Of
      course, you know, Ethel,' said he, 'it must have come to this some time or other, and if you
      find those verses too hard, and that they take up too much of your time, you had better give
      them up.'
Ethel did not like anything to be said to be too hard for her, and was very near pleading
      she only wanted time, but some recollection came across her, and presently she said, 'I
      suppose it is a wrong sort of ambition to want to learn more, in one's own way, when one is
      told it is not good for one. I was just going to say I hated being a woman, and having these
      tiresome little trifles—my duty—instead of learning, which is yours, Norman.'
'I'm glad you did not,' said Norman, 'for it would have been very silly of you; and I assure
      you, Ethel, it is really time for you to stop, or you would get into a regular learned lady,
      and be good for nothing. I don't mean that knowing more than other people would make you so,
      but minding nothing else would.'
This argument from Norman himself, did much to reconcile Ethel's mind to the sacrifice she
      had made; and when she went to bed, she tried to work out the question in her own mind,
      whether her eagerness for classical learning was a wrong sort of ambition, to know what other
      girls did not, and whether it was right to crave for more knowledge than was thought advisable
      for her. She only bewildered herself, and went to sleep before she had settled anything, but
      that she knew she must make all give way to papa first, and, secondly, to Cocksmoor.
Meanwhile Margaret had told her father what had passed. He was only surprised to hear that
      Ethel had kept up so long with Norman, and thought that it was quite right that she should not
      undertake so much, agreeing more entirely than Margaret had expected with Miss Winter's view,
      that it would be hurtful to body as well as mind.
'It is perfectly ridiculous to think of her attempting it!' he said. 'I am glad you have put
      a stop to it.'
'I am glad I have,' said Margaret; 'and dear Ethel behaved so very well. If she had
      resisted, it would have puzzled me very much, I must have asked you to settle it. But it is
      very odd, papa, Ethel is the one of them all who treats me most as if I had real
       authority over her; she lets me scold her, asks my leave, never seems to
      recollect for a moment how little older I am, and how much cleverer she is. I am sure I never
      should have submitted so readily. And that always makes it more difficult to me to direct her;
      I don't like to take upon me with her, because it seems wrong to have her obeying me, as if
      she were a mere child.'
'She is a fine creature,' said Dr. May, emphatically. 'It just shows the fact, the higher
      the mind, the readier the submission. But you don't mean that you have any difficulty with the
      others?'
'O no, no. Flora never could need any interference, especially from me, and Mary is a
      thorough good girl. I only meant that Ethel lays herself out to be ruled in quite a remarkable
      way. I am sure, though she does love learning, her real love is for goodness, and for you,
      papa.'
Ethel would have thought her sacrifice well paid for, had she seen her father's look of
      mournful pleasure.
</div></body></text></TEI>