<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daisy Chain</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1856</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III.

'Wee modest crimson-tipped flower,
Thou'st met me in an evil hour,
For I maun crush among the stoure
      Thy slender stem.
To spare thee now is past my power,
                                          Thou bonnie gem.'— Burns.
'Is this all the walking party?' exclaimed Mr. Ernescliffe, as Miss Winter, Flora,
      and Norman gathered in the hall.
'Harry won't go because of Ethel's spectacles,' answered Flora; 'and Mary and he are
      inseparable, so they are gone with Hector to have a shipwreck in the field.'
'And your other sisters?'
'Margaret has ratted—she is going to drive out with mamma,' said Norman; 'as to Etheldred
      the Unready, I'll run up and hurry her.'
In a moment he was at her door. 'Oh! Norman, come in. Is it time?'
'I should think so! You're keeping every one waiting.'
'Oh dear! go on; only just tell me the past participle of offero , and I'll catch
      you up.'
'Oblatus .'
'O, yes, how stupid. The a long or short? Then that's right. I had such a line in
      my head, I was forced to write it down. Is not it a capital subject this time?'
'The devotion of Decius? Capital. Let me see?' said Norman, taking up a paper scribbled in
      pencil, with Latin verses. 'O, you have taken up quite a different line from mine. I began
      with Mount Vesuvius spouting lava like anything.'
'But Mount Vesuvius didn't spout till it overthrew Pompeii.'
'Murder!' cried Norman, I forgot! It's lucky you put me in mind. I must make a fresh
      beginning. There go my six best lines! However, it was an uncanny place, fit for hob-goblins,
      and shades, and funny customers, which will do as well for my purpose. Ha! that's grand about
      its being so much better than the ' vana gloria triumphalis —only take care of the
      scanning there—'

'If it was but English. Something like this:— For what is equal to the fame Of forgetting
      self in the aim? That's not right, but—'
'Ethel, Norman, what are you about?' cried Flora. 'Do you mean to go to Cocksmoor
      to-day?'
'Oh yes!' cried Ethel, flying into vehement activity; 'only I've lost my blue-edged
      handkerchief—Flora, have you seen it?'
'No; but here is your red scarf.'
'Thank you, there is a good Flora. And oh! I finished a frock all but two stitches. Where is
      it gone? Go on, all of you, I'll overtake you— Purer than breath of earthly fame, Is losing
      self in a glorious aim. Is that better, Norman?'
'You'll drive us out of patience,' said Flora, tying the handkerchief round Ethel's throat,
      and pulling out the fingers of her gloves, which of course were inside out; 'are you
      ready?'
'Oh, my frock! my frock! There 'tis—three stitches—go on, and I'll come,' said Ethel,
      seizing a needle, and sewing vehemently at a little pink frock. 'Go on, Miss Winter goes
      slowly up the hill, and I'll overtake you.'
'Come, Norman, then; it is the only way to make her come at all.'
'I shall wait for her,' said Norman. 'Go on, Flora, we shall catch you up in no time;' and,
      as Flora went, he continued, 'Never mind your aims and fames and trumpery English rhymes. Your
      verses will be much the best, Ethel; I only went on a little about Mount Vesuvius and the
      landscape, as Alan described it the other day, and Decius taking a last look, knowing he was
      to die. I made him beg his horse's pardon, and say how they will both be remembered, and their
      self-devotion would inspire Romans to all posterity, and shout with a noble voice!' said
      Norman, repeating some of his lines, correcting them as he proceeded.
'Oh! yes; but oh! dear, I've done. Come along,' said Ethel, crumpling her work into a
      bundle, and snatching up her gloves— then, as they ran down stairs, and emerged into the
      street, 'it is a famous subject.'
'Yes, you have made a capital beginning. If you won't break down somewhere, as you always
      do, with some frightful false quantity, that you would get an imposition for, if you were a
      boy. I wish you were. I should like to see old Hoxton's face, if you were to show him up some
      of these verses.'
'I'll tell you what, Norman, if I was you, I would not make
       Decius flatter himself with the fame he was to get—it is too like the stuff every
      one talks in stupid books. I want him to say— Rome—my country—the eagles—must win, if they
      do—never mind what becomes of me.'
'But why should he not like to get the credit of it, as he did? Fame and glory—they are the
      spirit of life, the reward of such a death.'
'O no, no,' said Ethel. 'Fame is coarse and vulgar—blinder than ever they draw Love or
      Fortune—she is only a personified newspaper, trumpeting out all that is extraordinary, without
      minding whether it is good or bad. She misses the delicate and lovely—I wished they would give
      us a theme to write about her. I should like to abuse her well.'
'It would make a very good theme, in a new line,' said Norman; 'but I don't give into it,
      altogether. It is the hope and the thought of fame, that has made men great, from first to
      last. It is in every one that is not good for nothing, and always will be! The moving spirit
      of man's greatness!'
'I'm not sure,' said Ethel; 'I think looking for fame is like wanting a reward at once. I
      had rather people forgot themselves. Do you think Arnold von Winkelried thought about fame,
      when he threw himself on the spears?'
'He got it,' said Norman.
'Yes; he got it for the good of other people, not to please himself. Fame does those that
      admire it good, not those that win it.'
'But!' said Norman, and both were silent for some short interval, as they left the last
      buildings of the town, and began to mount a steep hill. Presently Norman slackened his space,
      and driving his stick vehemently against a stone, exclaimed, 'It is no use talking, Ethel, it
      is all a fight and a race. One is always to try to be foremost. That's the spirit of the
      things—that's what the great, from first to last, have struggled, and fought, and lived, and
      died for.
'I know it is a battle, I know it is a race. The Bible says so replied Ethel; 'but is not
      there the difference, that here all may win—not only one? One may do one's best, not care
      whether one is first or last. That's what our reading to-day said.'
'That was against trumpery vanity—false elevation—not what one has earned for oneself, but
      getting into other people's places that one never deserved. That every one despises!'
'Of course! That they do. I say, Norman, didn't you mean Harvey Anderson?'
Instead of answering, Norman exclaimed, 'It is pretension that is hateful—true excelling is
      what one's life is for. No, no, I'll never
       be beat, Ethel—I never have been beat by any one, except by you, when you take
      pains,' he added, looking exultingly at his sister, 'and I never will be.'
'O Norman!'
'I mean, of course, while I have senses. I would not be like Richard for all the world.'
'O no, no, poor Richard!'
'He is an excellent fellow in everything else,' said Norman; 'I could sometimes wish I was
      more like him—but how he can be so amazingly slow, I can't imagine. That examination paper he
      broke down in—I could have done it as easily as possible.'
'I did it all but one question,' said Ethel, 'but so did he, you know, and we can't tell
      whether we should have it done well enough.'
'I know I must do something respectable when first I go to Oxford, if I don't with to be
      known as the man whose brother was plucked,' said Norman.
'Yes,' said Ethel; 'if papa will but let you try for the Randall scholarship next year, but
      he says it is not good to go to Oxford so young.'
'And I believe I had better not be there with Richard,' added Norman. 'I don't like coming
      into contrast with him, and I don't think he can like it, poor fellow, and it isn't his fault.
      I had rather stay another year here, get one of the open scholarships, and leave the
      Stoneborough ones for those who can do no better.'
In justice to Norman, we must observe that this was by no means said as a boast. He would
      scarcely have thus spoken to any one but Etheldred, to whom, as well as to himself, it seemed
      mere matter-of-fact. The others had in the meantime halted at the top of the hill, and were
      looking back at the town—the great old Minster, raising its twin towers and long roof, close
      to the river, where rich green meadows spread over the valley, and the town rising irregularly
      on the slope above, plentifully interspersed with trees and gardens, and one green space on
      the banks of the river, speckled over with a flock of little black dots in rapid motion.
'Here you are!' exclaimed Flora. 'I told them it was of no use to wait when you and Norman
      had begun a dissertation.'
'Now, Mr. Ernescliffe, I should like you to say,' cried Ethel, 'which do you think is the
      best, the name of it, or the thing?' Her eloquence always broke down with any auditor but her
      brother, or, perhaps, Margaret.
'Ethell' said Norman, 'how is any one to understand you? The argument is this: Ethel wants
      people to do great deeds, and be
       utterly careless of the fame of them; I say, that love of glory is a mighty
      spring.'
'A mighty one!' said Alan; 'but I think, as far as I understand the question, that Ethel has
      the best of it.'
'I don't mean that people should not serve the cause first of all,' said Norman, 'but let
      them have their right place and due honour.'
'They had better make up their minds to do without it,' said Alan. 'Remember "The world
      knows nothing of its greatest men." 
'Then it is a great shame,' said Norman.
'But do you think it right,' said Ethel, 'to care for distinction? It is a great thing to
      earn it, but I don't think one should care for the outer glory.'
'I believe it is a great temptation,' said Alan. 'The being over elated or over depressed by
      success or failure in the eyes of the world, independently of the exertion we have used—'
'You call it a temptation?' said Ethel.
'Decidedly so.'
'But one can't live or get on without it,' said Norman.
There they were cut short. There was a plantation to be crossed, with a gate that would not
      open, and that seemed an effectual barrier against both Miss Winter and the donkey, until by
      persuasive eloquence and great gallantry, Mr. Ernescliffe performed the wonderful feat of
      getting the former over the tall fence, while Norman conducted the donkey a long way round,
      undertaking to meet them at the other side of the plantation.
The talk became desultory, as they proceeded for at least a mile along a cart-track, through
      soft tufted grass and heath, and young fir trees. It ended in a broad open moor, stony and
      full of damp boggy hollows, forlorn and desolate under the autumn sky. Here they met Norman
      again, and walked on along a very rough and dirty road, the ground growing more decidedly into
      hills and valleys as they advanced, till they found themselves before a small, but very steep
      hillock, one side of which was cut away into a slate quarry. Round this stood a colony of
      roughly-built huts, of mud, turf, or large blocks of the slate. Many workmen were engaged in
      splitting up the slates, or loading waggons with them, rude wild-looking men, at the sight of
      whom the ladies shrank up to their protectors, but who seemed too busy even to spare time for
      staring at them.
They were directed to John Taylor's house, a low mud cottage, very wretched looking, and
      apparently so smoky, that Mr. Ernescliffe and Norman were glad to remain outside and survey
      the quarry, while the ladies entered.
Inside they found more cleanliness and neatness than they had
       expected, but there was a sad appearance of poverty, insufficient furniture, and
      the cups and broken tea-pot on the table, holding nothing but toast and water, as a substitute
      for their proper contents. The poor woman was sitting by the fire with one twin on her lap,
      and the other on a chair by her side, and a larger child was in the corner by the fire,
      looking heavy and ill, while others of different ages lounged about listlessly. She was not
      untidy, but very pale, and she spoke in a meek, subdued way, as if the ills of life were so
      heavy on her that she had no spirit even to complain. She thanked them for their gifts but
      languidly, and did not visibly brighten when told that her husband was better.
Flora asked when the babes would be Christened.
'I can't hardly tell, Miss—'tis so far to go.'
'I suppose none of the children can go to school. I don't know their faces there,' said
      Flora, looking at a nice tall, smooth-haired girl, of thirteen or fourteen.
'No, Miss—'tis so far. I am sorry they should not, for they always was used to it where we
      lived before, and my oldest girl, she can work very nicely. I wish I could get a little place
      for her.'
'You would hardly know what to do without her,' said Miss Winter.
'No, ma'am; but she wants better food than I can give her, and it is a bad wild place for a
      girl to grow up. It is not like what I was used to, ma'am; I was always used to keep to my
      school and to my Church—but it is a bad place to live in here.'
No one could deny it, and the party left the cottage gravely. Alan and Norman joined them,
      having heard a grievous history of the lawlessness of the people, from a foreman with whom
      they had met. There seemed to be no visible means of improvement. The parish Church was
      Stoneborough, and there the living was very poor, the tithes having been appropriated to the
      old Monastery, and since its dissolution having fallen into possession of a Body that never
      did anything for the town. The incumbent, Mr. Ramsden, had small means, and was not a high
      stamp of Clergyman, seldom exerting himself, and leaving most of his parish work to the two
      under masters of the school, Mr. Wilmot and Mr. Harrison, who did all they had time and
      strength for, and more too, within the town itself. There was no hope for Cocksmoor!
'There would be a worthy ambition!' said Etheldred, as they turned their steps homeward.
      'Let us propose that aim to ourselves, to build a Church on Cocksmoor!'
'How many years do you give us to do it in?' said Norman.
'Few or many, I don't care. I'll never leave off thinking about it till it is done.'

'It need not be long,' said Flora, 'if one could get up a subscription.'
'A penny subscription?' said Norman. 'I'd rather have it my own doing.'
'You agree then,' said Ethel, 'do you, Mr. Ernescliffe?'
'I may safely do so,' he answered, smiling.
Miss Winter looked at Etheldred reprovingly, and she shrank into herself, drew apart, and
      indulged in a reverie. She had heard in books, of girls writing poetry, romance,
      history—gaining fifties and hundreds. Could not some of the myriads of fancies floating in her
      mind thus be made available? She would compose, publish, earn money—some day call papa, show
      him her hoard, beg him to take it, and, never owning whence it came, raise the building. Spire
      and chancel—pinnacle and buttress rose before her eyes—and she and Norman were standing in the
      porch, with an orderly, religious population, blessing the unknown benefactor, who had caused
      the news of salvation to be heard among them.
They were almost at home, when the sight of a crowd in the main street checked them. Norman
      and Mr. Ernescliffe went forward to discover the cause, and spoke to some one on the
      outskirts—then Mr. Ernescliffe hurried back to the ladies. 'There's been an accident,' he
      said, hastily—'you had better go down the lane, and in by the garden.'
He was gone in an instant, and they obeyed in silence. Whence came Ethel's certainty that
      the accident concerned themselves? In an agony of apprehension, though without one outward
      sign of it, she walked home. They were in the garden—all was apparently as usual, but no one
      was in sight. Ethel had been first, but she held back, and let Miss Winter go forward into the
      house. The front door was open—servants were standing about in confusion, and one of the
      maids, looking dreadfully frightened, gave a cry, 'Oh! Miss— Miss—have you heard?'
'No—what? What has happened? Not Mrs. May—' exclaimed Miss Winter.
'Oh! ma'am! it is all of them. The carriage is over-turned, and—'
'Who's hurt? Mamma! papa! Oh! tell me!' cried Flora.
'There's nurse,' and Ethel flew up to her. 'What is it? Oh! nurse!
'My poor, poor children,' said old nurse, passionately kissing Ethel. Harry and Mary were on
      the stairs behind her, clinging together.
A stranger looked into the house, followed by Adams, the stableman. 'They are going to bring
      Miss May in,' some one said.
Ethel could bear it no longer. As if she could escape, she fled up-stairs, into her room,
      and, falling on her knees, hid her face on her bed.

There were heavy steps in the house, then a sound of hasty feet coming up to her. Norman
      dashed into the room, and threw himself on a chair. He was ghastly pale, and shuddered all
      over.
'Oh! Norman, Norman, speak. What is it?'
He groaned, but could not speak; he rested his head against her, and gasped. She was
      terribly frightened. 'I'll call—' and she would have gone, but he held her. 'No—no—thye
      can't!' He was prevented from saying more, by chattering teeth and deadly faintness. She tried
      to support him, but could only guide him as he sank, till he lay at full length on the floor,
      where she put a pillow under his head, and gave him some water. 'Is it—oh! tell me. Are they
      much hurt? Oh, try to say.'
'They say Margaret is alive,' said Norman, in gasps; 'but— And papa—he stood
      up—sat—walked—was better—'
'Is he hurt—much hurt?'
'His arm—' and the tremor and fainting stopped him again.
'Mamma?' whispered Ethel; but Norman only pressed his face into the pillow.
She was so bewildered as to be more alive to the present distress of his condition, than to
      the vague horrors down-stairs. Some minutes passed in silence, Norman lying still, excepting a
      nervous trembling that agitated his whole frame. Again was heard the strange tread, doors
      opening and shutting, and suppressed voices, and he turned his face upwards, and listened with
      his hand pressed to his forehead, as if to keep himself still enough to listen.
'Oh! what is the matter? What is it?' cried Ethel, startled and recalled to the sense of
      what was passing. 'Oh! Norman!' then springing up, with a sudden thought, 'Mr. Ward! Oh! is he
      there?'
'Yes,' said Norman, in a low hopeless tone, 'he was at the place. He said it—'
'What?'
Again Norman's face was out of sight.
'Mamma?' Ethel's understanding perceived, but her mind refused to grasp the extent of the
      calamity. There was no answer, save a convulsive squeezing of her hand.
Fresh sounds below recalled her to speech and action. 'Where is she? What are they doing for
      her? What—'
'There's nothing to be done. She—when they lifted her up, she was—'
'Dead?'
'Dead.'
The boy lay with his face hidden, the girl sat by him on the floor, too much crushed for
      even the sensations belonging to grief, neither
       moving nor looking. After an interval Norman spoke again, 'The carriage turned
      right over—her head struck on the kerb stone—'
'Did you see?' said Ethel, presently.
'I saw them lift her up.' He spoke at intervals, as he could get breath, and bear to utter
      the words. 'And papa—he was stunned—but soon he sat up, said he would go to her—he looked at
      her—felt her pulse, and then—sank down over her!'
'And did you say, I can't remember—was he hurt?'
The shuddering came again, 'His arm—all twisted—broken,' and his voice sank into a faint
      whisper; Ethel was obliged to sprinkle him again with water. 'But he won't die?' said she, in
      a tone calm from its bewilderment.
'Oh! no, no, no—'
'And Margaret?'
'They were bringing her home. I'll go and see. Oh! what's the meaning of this?' exclaimed
      he, scolding himself, as, sitting up, he was forced to rest his head on his shaking hand.
'You are still faint, dear Norman; you had better lie still, and I'll go and see.'
'Faint—stuff—how horridly stupid!' but he was obliged to lay his head down again; and Ethel,
      scarcely less trembling, crept carefully towards the stairs, but a dread of what she might
      meet came over her, and she turned towards the nursery.
The younger ones sat there in a frightened huddle. Mary was on a low chair by the infant's
      cot, Blanche in her lap, Tom and Harry leaning against her, and Aubrey almost asleep. Mary
      held up her finger as Ethel entered, and whispered, 'Hush! don't wake baby for anything!'
The first true pang of grief shot through Ethel like a dart, stabbing and taking away her
      breath, 'Where are they?' she said; 'how is papa? who is with him?'
'Mr. Ward and Alan Ernescliffe,' said Harry. 'Nurse came up just now, and said they were
      setting his arm.'
'Where is he?'
'On the bed in his dressing-room,' said Harry.
'Has he come to himself—is he better?'
They did not seem to know, and Ethel asked where to find Flora. 'With Margaret,' she was
      told, and she was thinking whether she could venture to seek her, when she herself came fast
      up the stairs. Ethel and Harry both darted out. 'Don't stop me,' said Flora—'they want some
      handkerchiefs.'
'What, is not she in her own room?'
'No,' said Harry, 'in mamma's;' and then his face quivered all over, and he turned away.
      Ethel ran after her sister, and pulling
       out drawers without knowing what she sought, begged to hear how papa and Margaret
      were.
'We can't judge of Margaret—she has moved, and made a little moaning—there are no limbs
      broken, but we are afraid for her head. Oh! if papa could but—'
'And papa?'
'Mr. Ward is with him now—his arm is terribly hurt.'
'But oh! Flora—one moment—is he sensible?'
'Hardly; he does not take any notice—but don't keep me.'
'Can I do anything?' following her to the head of the stairs.
'No; I don't see what you can do. Miss Winter and I are with Margaret; there's nothing to do
      for her.'
It was a relief. Etheldred shrank from what she might have to behold, and Flora hastened
      down, too busy and too useful to have time to think. Harry had gone back to his refuge in the
      nursery, and Ethel returned to Norman. There they remained for a long time, both unwilling to
      speak or stir, or even to observe to each other on the noises that came in to them, as their
      door was left ajar, though in those sounds they were so absorbed, that they did not notice the
      cold of a frosty October evening, or the darkness that closed in on them.
They heard the poor babe crying, one of the children going down to call nurse, and nurse
      coming up; then Harry, at the door of the room where the boys slept, calling Norman in a low
      voice. Norman, now nearly recovered, went and brought him into his sister's room, and his
      tidings were, that their father's arm had been broken in two places, and the elbow frightfully
      injured, having been crushed and twisted by the wheel. He was also a good deal bruised, and
      though Mr. Ward trusted there was no positive harm to the head, he was in an unconscious
      state, from which the severe pain of the operation had only roused him, so far as to evince a
      few signs of suffering. Margaret was still insensible.
The piteous sound of the baby's wailing almost broke their hearts. Norman walked about the
      room in the dark, and said he should go down, he could not bear it; but he could not make up
      his mind to go, and after about a quarter of an hour, to their great relief, it ceased.
Next Mary opened the door, saying, 'Norman, here's Mr. Wilmot come to ask if he can do
      anything—Miss Winter sent word that you had better go to him.'
'How is baby?' asked Harry.
'Nurse has fed her, and is putting her to bed; she is quiet now,' said Mary; 'will you go
      down, Norman?'
'Where is he?'

'In the drawing-room.'
Norman paused to ask what he was to say. 'Nothing,' said Mary, 'nobody can do anything. Make
      haste. Don't you want a candle?'
'No, thank you, I had rather be in the dark. Come up as soon as you have seen him,' said
      Etheldred.
Norman went slowly down, with failing knees, hardly able to conquer the shudder that came
      over him, as he passed those rooms. There were voices in the drawing-room, and he found a sort
      of council there, Alan Ernescliffe, the surgeon, and Mr. Wilmot. They turned as he came in,
      and Mr. Wilmot held out his hand with a look of affection and kindness that went to his heart,
      making room for him on the sofa, while going on with what he was saying. 'Then you think it
      would be better for me not to sit up with him.'
'I should decidedly say so,' replied Mr. Ward. 'He has recognised Mr. Ernescliffe, and any
      change might excite him, and lead him to ask questions. The moment of his full consciousness
      is especially to be dreaded.'
'But you do not call him insensible?'
'No, but he seems stunned—stupified by the shock, and by pain. He spoke to Miss Flora when
      she brought him some tea.'
'And admirably she managed,' said Alan Ernescliffe. 'I was much afraid of some answer that
      would rouse him, but she kept her self-possession beautifully, and seemed to compose him in a
      moment.'
'She is valuable indeed—so much judgment and activity,' said Mr. Ward. 'I don't know what we
      should have done without her. But we ought to have Mr. Richard—has no one sent to him?'
Alan Ernescliffe and Norman looked at each other.
'Is he at Oxford, or at his tutor's?' asked Mr. Wilmot.
'At Oxford; he was to be there to-day, was he not, Norman?'
'What o'clock is it? Is the post gone—seven—no; it is all safe,' said Mr. Ward.
Poor Norman! he knew he was the one who ought to write, but his icy trembling hand seemed to
      shake more helplessly than ever, and a piteous glance fell upon Mr. Wilmot.
'The best plan would be,' said Mr. Wilmot, 'for me to go to him at once, and bring him home.
      If I go by the mail-train, I shall get to him sooner than a letter could.'
'And it will be better for him,' said Mr. Ward. 'He will feel it dreadfully, poor boy. But
      we shall all do better when we have him. You can get back to-morrow evening.'
'Sunday,' said Mr. Wilmot, 'I believe there is a train at four.'
'Oh! thank you, sir,' said Norman.
'Since that is settled, perhaps I had better go up to the Doctor,'
       said Alan; 'I don't like leaving Flora alone with him,' and he was gone.
'How fortunate that that youth is here,' said Mr. Wilmot—'he seems to be quite taking
      Richard's place.'
'And to feel it as much,' said Mr. Ward. 'He has been invaluable with his sailor's resources
      and handiness.'
'Well, what shall I tell poor Richard?' asked Mr. Wilmot.
'Tell him there is no reason his father should not do very well, if we can keep him from
      agitation—but there's the point. He is of so excitable a constitution, that his faculties
      being so far confused, is the best thing, perhaps, that could be. Mr. Ernescliffe manages him
      very well—used to illness on that African coast, and the Doctor is very fond of him. As to
      Miss May, one can't tell what to say about her yet—there's no fracture, at least—it must be a
      work of time to judge.'
Flora at that moment half-opened the door, and called Mr. Ward, stopping for a moment to say
      it was for nothing of any consequence. Mr. Wilmot and Norman were left together. Norman put
      his hands over his face and groaned—his master looked at him with kind anxiety, but did not
      feel as if it were yet time to speak of consolation.
'God bless and support you, and turn this to your good, my dear boy,' said he
      affectionately, as he pressed his hand; 'I hope to bring your brother to-morrow.'
'Thank you, sir,' was all Norman could say; and as Mr. Wilmot went out by the front door, he
      slowly went up again, and lingering on the landing-place, was met by Mr. Ward, who told him to
      his relief—for the mere thinking of it renewed the faint sensation—that he had better not go
      to his father's room.
There was nothing to be done but to return to Ethel and Harry, and tell them all; with some
      humiliation at being helpless, where Flora was doing so much, and to leave their father to be
      watched by a stranger. If he had been wanted, Norman might have made the effort, but being
      told that he would be worse than useless, there was nothing for him but to give way.
They sat together in Ethel's room, till somewhere between eight and nine o'clock, when good
      old nurse, having put her younger ones to bed, came in search of them. 'Dear, dear! poor
      darlings,' said she, as she found them sitting in the dark; she felt their cold hands, and
      made them all come into the nursery, where Mary was already, and, fondling them, one by one,
      as they passively obeyed her, she set them down on their little old stools round the fire,
      took away the high fender, and gave them each a cup of tea. Harry and Mary ate enough to
      satisfy her, from a weary craving feeling, and for want of
       employment; Norman sat with his elbow on his knee, and a very aching head resting
      on his hand, glad of drink, but unable to eat; Ethel could be persuaded to do neither, till
      she found old nurse would let her have no peace.
The nurse sent them all to bed, taking the two girls to their own room, undressing them, and
      never leaving them until Mary was in a fair way of crying herself to sleep—for saying her
      prayers had brought the tears; while Ethel lay so wide awake that it was of no use to wait for
      her, and then she went to the boys, tucked them each in, as when they were little children,
      and saying, 'Bless your dear hearts!' bestowed on each of them a kiss which came gratefully to
      Norman's burning brow, and which even Harry's boyish manliness could not resist.
Flora was in Margaret's room, too useful to be spared.
So ended that dreadful Saturday.
</div></body></text></TEI>