<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daisy Chain</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1856</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="56">
CHAPTER XXVI.

'At length I got unto the gladsome hill,
                     Where lay my hope;
   Where lay my heart; and, climbing still,
   When I had gained the brow and top,
A lake of brackish waters on the ground,
                     Was all I found.'George Herbert.
Late in the evening of the same snowy 24th of December, a little daughter awoke to
      life at Abbotstoke Grange, and, not long after, Mrs. Arnott came to summon Dr. May from the
      anxious vigil in the sitting room.
'Come and see if you can do anything to soothe her,' she said, with much alarm. 'The first
      sight of the baby has put her into such a state of agitation, that we do not know what to do
      with her.'
It was so, when he came to her bedside; that fixed stony look of despair was gone; the
      source of tears, so long dried up, had opened again; and there she lay, weeping quietly
      indeed, but profusely, and with deep heaving sobs. To speak, or to leave her alone, seemed
      equally perilous, but he chose the first—he kissed and blessed her, and gave her joy. She
      looked up at him as if his blessing once more brought peace, and said, faintly, 'Now it is
      pardon—now I can die!'
'The cloud is gone! Thanks for that above all!' said Dr. May, fervently. 'Now, my dear, rest
      in thankful gladness—you are too weak to talk or think.'
'I am weak—I am tired of it all,' said Flora. 'I am glad to be going while I am so
      happy—there are Margaret—my own darling— rest—peace—'
'You are not going, dearest,' said her father; 'at least, I trust not, if you will not give
      way—here is a darling given to you, instead of the first, who needs you more.'
He would have taken the infant from the nurse and held her to her mother, but, recollecting
      how little Leonora had drawn her last breath in his arms, he feared the association, and
      signed to Mrs. Arnott to shew her the child; but she seemed as yet only able to feel that
       it was not Leonora, and the long sealed-up grief would have its way. The tears
      burst out again. 'Tell Ethel she will be the best mother to her. Name her Margaret—make her a
      Daisy of your own—don't call her after me,' she said, with such passionate caresses, that Mrs.
      Arnott was glad to take the babe away.
Dr. May's next expedient was to speak to her of her husband, who needed her more than all,
      and to call him in. There seemed to be something tranquillizing in his wistful manner of
      repeating, 'Don't cry, Flora;' and she was at last reduced, by her extreme exhaustion, to
      stillness; but there were still many fears for her.
Dr. May's prediction was accomplished—that she would suffer for having over-exerted herself.
      Her constitution had been severely tried by the grief and despondency that she had so long
      endured in silence, and the fresh sorrow for her favorite sister, coming at such a crisis.
      There was a weariness of life, and an unwillingness to resume her ordinary routine, that made
      her almost welcome her weakness and sinking; and now that the black terror had cleared away
      from the future, she seemed to long to follow Margaret at once, and to yearn after her lost
      child; while appeals to the affection that surrounded her, often seemed to oppress her, as if
      there were nothing but weariness and toil in store.
The state of her mind made her father very anxious, though it was but too well accounted
      for. Poor Flora had voluntarily assumed the trammels that galled her; worldly motives had
      prompted her marriage, and though she faithfully loved her husband, he was a heavy weight on
      her hands, and she had made it more onerous by thrusting him into a position for which he was
      not calculated, and inspriring him with a self-consequence that would not recede from it. The
      shock of her child's death had taken away the zest and energy which had rejoiced in her chosen
      way of life, and opened her eyes to see what Master she had been serving; and the perception
      of the hollowness of all that had been apparently good in her, had filled her with remorse and
      despair. Her sufferings had been the more bitter because she had not parted with her proud
      reserve. She had refused council, and denied her confidence to those who could have guided her
      repentance. Her natural good sense, and the sound principle in which she had been brought up,
      had taught her to distrust her gloomy feelings as possibly morbid; and she had prayed, keeping
      her hold of faith in the Infinite Mercy, though she could not feel her own part in it; and
      thus that faith was beginning at last to clear her path.
It was the harder to deal with her, because her hysterical agitation was so easily excited,
      that her father hardly dared to let a word be
       spoken to her; and she was allowed to see no one else except her aunt and the
      dear old nurse, whose tears for her child Margaret had been checked by the urgent requirements
      of another of her nurslings; and whom George Rivers would have paid with her weight in gold,
      for taking care of his new daughter, regarding her as the only woman in the world that could
      be trusted.
Those were heavy days with everyone, though each brought some shade of improvement. They
      were harder to bear than the peaceful days that had immediately followed the loss of Margaret;
      and Ethel was especially unhappy and forlorn under the new anxiety, where she could be of no
      service; and with her precious occupation gone; her father absent, instead of resting upon
      her; and her room deserted. She was grieved with herself, because her feelings were unable to
      soar at the Christmas feast, as erst on St. Andrew's day; and she was bewildered and
      distressed by the fear that she had then been only uplifted by vanity and elation.
She told Richard so, and he said, kindly, that he thought a good deal of what she complained
      of arose from bodily weariness.
This hurt her a little; but when he said, 'I think that the blessings of St. Andrew's day
      helped us through what was to follow,' she owned that it had indeed been so, and added, 'I am
      going to work again! Tell me what will be most useful to you at Cocksmoor.'
Sick at heart as she was, she bravely set herself to appropriate the hours now left vacant;
      and manfully walked with Richard and Harry to Church at Cocksmoor, on St. Stephen's day; but
      the Church brought back the sense of contrast. Next, she insisted on fulfilling their
      intention of coming home by Abbotstoke to hear how Flora was, when the unfavorable account
      only added lead to the burthen that weighted her down. Though they were sent home in the
      carriage, she was so completely spent, that the effect of returning home to her room, without
      its dear inhabitant, was quite overwhelming, and she sat on her bed for half-an-hour,
      struggling with repinings. She came down-stairs without having gained the victory, and was so
      physically overcome with lassitude, that Richard insisted on her lying on the sofa, and
      leaving everything to him and Mary.
Richard seemed to make her his object in life, and was an unspeakable help and comforter to
      her, not only by taking every care for her for her sake, but by turning to her as his
      own friend and confidante, the best able to replace what they had lost. There were many plans
      to be put in operation for Cocksmoor, on which much consultation was needed, though every word
      reminded them sadly of Margaret's ever ready interest in those schemes. It was
       very unlike Ethel's vision of the first weeks of St. Andrew's Church; but it
      might be safer for her than that aught should tempt her to say, 'See what my perseverance has
      wrought!' Perhaps her Margaret had begun to admire her too much to be her safest confidante—at
      any rate, it was good still to sow in tears, rather than on earth to reap in confident
      joy.
Norman was as brotherly and kind as possible; but it was one of the dreary feelings of those
      days, that Ethel then first became aware of the difference that his engagement had made, and
      saw that he resorted elsewhere for sympathy. She was not jealous, and acquiesced submissively
      and resolutely; but they had been so much to each other, that it was a trial, especially at
      such a time as this, when freshly deprived of Margaret.
Norman's own prospect was not cheerful. He had received a letter from New Zealand, begging
      him to hasten his coming out, as there was educational work much wanting him, and, according
      to his original wish, he could be ordained there in the autumnal Ember week.
He was in much perplexity, since, according to this request, he ought to sail with his aunt
      in the last week of February, and he knew not how to reconcile the conflicting claims.
Meta was not long in finding out the whole of his trouble, as they paced up and down the
      terrace together, on a frosty afternoon.
'You will go!' was her first exclamation.
'I ought,' said Norman, 'I believe I ought, and if it had only been at any other time, it
      would have been easy. My aunt's company would have been such a comfort for you.'
'It cannot be helped,' said Meta.
'Considering the circumstances,' began Norman, with lingering looks at the little
      humming-bird on his arm, 'I believe I should be justified in waiting till such time as you
      could go with me. I could see what Mr. Wilmot thinks.'
'You don't think so yourself,' said Meta. 'Nobody else can give a judgment. In a thing like
      this; asking is, what you once called, seeking opinions as Balaam enquired.'
'Turning my words against me?' said Norman, smiling. 'Still, Meta, perhaps older heads would
      be fitter to judge what would be right for a little person not far off.'
'She can be the best judge of that herself,' said Meta. 'Norman,' and her dark eyes were
      stedfastly fixed, 'I always resolved that, with God's help, I would not be a stumbling-block
      in the way of your call to your work. I will not. Go out now—perhaps you will be freer for it
      without me, and I suppose I have a longer
       apprenticeship to serve to all sorts of things, before I come to help you.'
'Oh! Meta, you are a rebuke to me!'
'What? when I am going to stay by my own fireside?' said Meta, trying to laugh, but not very
      successfully. 'Seriously, I have much to do here. When poor Flora gets well, she must be
      spared all exertion for a long time to come; and I flatter myself that they want me at
      Stoneborough sometimes. If your father can bear to spare you, there is no doubt that you ought
      to go.'
'My father is as unselfish as you are, Meta— But I cannot speak to him until he is more easy
      about Flora. We always think the required sacrifice the hardest, but I must own that I could
      not grieve if he laid his commands on me to wait till the autumn.'
'Oh! that would make it a duty and all easy,' said Meta, smiling; 'but I don't think he
      will, and aunt Flora will be only too glad to carry you out without encumbrance.'
'Has not aunt Flora come to her senses about you?'
'I believe she would rather I belonged to any of her nephews but you. She is such a dear,
      sincere, kindhearted person, and we are so comfortable together, that it will be quite like
      home to come out to her! I mean there , to convince her that I can be of something
      like use.'
Meta talked so as to brighten and invigorate Norman when they were together, but they both
      grew low-spirited when apart. The humming-bird had hardly ever been so downcast as at
      present—that is, whenever she was not engaged in waiting on her brother, or in cheering up Dr.
      May, or in any of the many gentle offices that she was ever fulfilling. She was greatly
      disappointed, and full of fears for Norman, and dread of the separation, but she would not
      give way; and only now and then, when off her guard, would the sadness reign on her face
      without an effort. Alone, she fought and prayed for resignation for herself, and protection
      and strength for him, and chid herself for the foolish feeling that he would be safer with
      her.
She told aunt Flora how it was one evening, as they sat over the fire together, speaking
      with a would-be-tone of congratulation.
'Indeed! exclaimed Mrs. Arnott.' 'But that is a great pity!'
Meta looked quite brightened by her saying so— 'I thought you would be glad,' she
      rejoined.
'Did you think me so hard-hearted?'
'I thought you believed he would be better without me.'
'My dear, we have not kept house and nursed together for a month for nothing,' said Mrs.
      Arnott, smiling.

'Thank you,' said Meta, trying to answer the smile. 'You have taken a load off me!'
'I don't like it at all,' said Mrs. Arnott. 'It is a very uncomfortable plan for everyone—
      And yet when I know how great is the want of him out there, I can say nothing against it
      without high treason. Well, my dear, I'll take all the care I can of Norman, and when you
      come—I shall be almost as glad as if we were coming home for good. Poor Flora, she is one
      person who will not regret the arrangement.'
'Poor Flora—you think her really better this evening.'
'Much better, indeed—if we could only raise her spirits, I think she would recover very
      well, but she is so sadly depressed. I must try to talk to Ethel—she may better understand
      her.'
'I have never understood Flora,' said Meta. 'She has been as kind to me as possible, and I
      very soon came to a certain point with her, but I never have known her thoroughly. I doubt
      whether anyone did but dear Margaret.'
Flora was, however, much softened and less reserved than she had been. She found great
      repose in her aunt's attendance, retracing, as it did her mother's presence, and she responded
      to her tenderness with increasing reliance and comfort; while as her strength began to revive,
      and there was more disposition to talk, she became gradually drawn into greater
      confidence.
The seeing of Ethel was one of the difficult questions. Flora had begun to wish it very
      much, and yet the bare idea threw her into a nervous tremor, that caused it to be put off
      again and again. Her aunt found her one day almost faint with agitation—she had heard Ethel's
      voice in the next room, and had been winding up her expectations, and now was as much grieved
      as relieved, to find that she had been there seeing the baby, but was now gone.
'How does the dear Ethel look?' asked Flora, presently.
'She is looking better to-day; she has looked very worn and harassed, but I thought her
      brighter to-day. She walked over by Aubrey on his pony, and I think it did her good.'
'Dear old Ethel! Aunt, it is a thing that no one has told me yet. Can you tell me how she
      bore the news of Norman Ogilvie's engagement?'
'Do you mean—' and Mrs. Arnott stopped short in her interrogation.
'Yes,' said Flora, answering the pause.
'But I thought young Ogilvie a most unexceptionable person.'
'So he is,' said Flora. 'I was much annoyed at the time, but she was resolute."

'In rejecting him?'
'In running away as soon as she found what was likely to happen;' and Flora, in a few words,
      told what had passed at Oxford.
'Then it was entirely out of devotion to your father.'
'Entirely,' said Flora. 'No one could look at her without seeing that she liked him. I had
      left her to be the only effective one at home, and she sacrificed herself.'
'I am glad that I have seen her,' said Mrs. Arnott. 'I should never have understood her by
      description. I always said that I must come home to set my correspondence going rightly.'
'Aunt Flora,' said her niece, 'do you remember my dear mother's unfinished letter to
      you?'
'To be sure I do, my dear.'
'Nothing ever was more true,' said Flora. 'I read it over some little time ago, when I set
      my papers in order, and understood it then. I never did before. I used to think it very good
      for the others.'
'It is what one generally does with good advice.'
'Do you recollect the comparison between Norman, Ethel, and me? It is so curious. Norman,
      who was ambitious and loved praise, but now dreads nothing so much; Ethel, who never cared for
      anything of the kind, but went straight on her own brave way; and, oh! aunt Flora—me—'
'Indeed, my dear, I should have thought you had her most full approbation.'
'Ah! don't you see the tone, as if she were not fully satisfied, as if she only could not
      see surface faults in me,' said Flora; 'and how she said she dreaded my love of praise, and of
      being liked. I wonder how it would have been if she had lived. I have looked back so often in
      the past year, and I think the hollowness began from that time. It might have been there
      before, but I am not so sure. You see, at that dreadful time, after the accident, I was the
      eldest who was able to be efficient, and much more useful than poor Ethel. I think the credit
      I gained made me think myself perfection, and I never did anything afterwards but seek my own
      honour.'
Mrs. Arnott began better to understand Flora's continued depression, but she thought her
      self-reproach exaggerated, and said something at once soothing and calculated to encourage her
      to undraw the curtain of reserve.
'You do not know,' continued Flora, 'how greedy I was of credit and affection. It made me
      jealous of Ethel herself, as long as we were in the same sphere; and when I felt that she was
      more to papa than I could be, I looked beyond home for praise. I don't think the things I did
      were bad in themselves—brought up as I have been, they could hardly be so. I knew what merits
      praise and
       blame too well for that—but oh! the motive. I do believe I cared very much for
      Cocksmoor. I thought it would be a grand thing to bring about, but, you see, as it has turned
      out, all I thought I had done for it was in vain; and Ethel has been the real person and does
      not know it. I used to think Ethel so inferior to me. I left her all my work at home. If it
      had not been for that, she might have been happy with Norman Ogilvie—for never were two people
      better matched, and now she has done what I never thought to have left to another—watched over
      our own Margaret. Oh! how shall I ever bear to see her?'
'My dear, I am sure nothing can be more affectionate than Ethel. She does not think these
      things.'
'She does,' said Flora. 'She always knew me better than I did myself. Her straightforward
      words should often have been rebukes to me. I shall see in every look and tone the opinion I
      have deserved. I have shrunk from her steadfast looks ever since I myself learnt what I was. I
      could not bear them now—and yet— oh! aunt! you must bring her. Ethel! my dear, dear old King—
      my darling's godmother—the last who was with Margaret!'
She had fallen into one of those fits of weeping when it was impossible to attempt anything
      but soothing her; but, though she was so much exhausted that Mrs. Arnott expected to be in
      great disgrace with Dr. May for having let her talk herself into this condition, she found
      that he was satisfied to find that she had so far relieved her mind, and declared that she
      would be better now.
The effect of the conversation was, that the next day, the last of the twelve Christmas
      days, when Ethel, whose yearning after her sister was almost equally divided between dread and
      eagerness— eagerness for her embrace, and dread of the chill of her reserve, came once again
      in hopes of an interview. Dr. May called her at once—'I shall take you in without any
      preparation,' he said, 'that she may not have time to be flurried. Only, be quiet and
      natural.'
Did he know what a mountain there was in her throat when he seemed to think it so easy to be
      natural?
She found him leading her into a darkened room, and heard his cheerful tones saying, 'I have
      brought Ethel to you!'
'Ethel! oh!' said a low, weak voice, with a sound as of expecting a treat, and Ethel was
      within a curtain, where she began, in the dimness, to see something white moving, and her
      hands were clasped by two long thin ones. 'There!' said Dr. May, 'now, if you will be good, I
      will leave you alone. Nurse is by, to look after you, and you know she always separates
      naughty children.'
Either the recurrence to nursery language, or the mere sisterly touch after long separation,
      seemed to annihilate all the imaginary
       mutual dread, and, as Ethel bent lower and lower, and Flora's arms were round
      her, the only feeling was of being together again, and both at once made the childish gesture
      of affection, and murmured the old pet names of 'Flossy,' and 'King,' that belonged to almost
      forgotten days, when they were baby sisters, then kissed each other again.
'I can't see you,' said Ethel, drawing herself up a little. 'Why, Flora, you look like a
      little white shadow!'
'I have had such weak eyes,' said Flora, 'and this dim light is comfortable. I see your old
      sharp face quite plain.'
'But what can you do here?'
'Do? Oh! dear Ethel, I have not had much of doing . Papa says I have three years
      rest to make up.'
'Poor Flora!' said Ethel, 'but I should have thought it tiresome, especially for you.'
'I have only now been able to think again,' said Flora; 'and you will say I am taking to
      quoting poetry. Do you remember some lines in that drama that Norman admired so much?'
'Philip von Artevelde?'
'Yes. I can't recollect them now , though they used to be always running in my
      head—something about time to mend and time to mourn.'
'These?' said Ethel— 'He that lacks time to mourn, lacks time to mend. Eternity mourns
      that.' 
'I never had time before for either,' said Flora. 'You cannot think how I used to be haunted
      by those, when I was chased from one thing to another, all these long, long eighteen months. I
      am in no haste to take up work again.'
'Mending as well as mourning,' said Ethel, thoughtfully.
Flora sighed.
'And now you have that dear little Christmas gift to—' Ethel paused.
'She is not nearly so fine and healthy as her sister was,' said Flora, 'poor little dear.
      You know, Ethel, even now, I shall have very little time with her in that London life. Her
      papa wants me so much, and I must leave her to—to the nurses.' Flora's voice trembled
      again.
'Our own dear old nurse,' said Ethel.
'Oh! I wanted to thank you all for sparing her to us,' said Flora. 'George wished it so
      much. But how does poor little Daisy bear it?'
'Very magnanimously,' said Ethel, smiling. 'In fact, nurse has
       had but little to do with Daisy of late, and would have been very forlorn at
      home. It is better for Aubrey and for her, not to return to be babies to comfort poor nurse. I
      have been breaking up the nursery, and taking Gertrude to live with me.'
'Have you gone back there again?'
'It would not have been better for waiting,' said Ethel; 'and Gertrude was so proud to come
      to me. I could not have done it without her, but papa must not have vacancy next to him.'
'It has been hard on you for me to engross him,' said Flora; 'but, oh, Ethel, I could not
      spare him. I don't think even you can tell what papa is.'
'You have found it out,' said Ethel, in an odd, dry manner; which, in sound, though not in
      feeling, was a contrast to the soft, whispering, tearful murmurs of her sister.
'And my aunt!' continued Flora—'that I should have taken up such a great piece of her short
      visit!'
'Ah! it is coming to an end very fast,' said Ethel, sighing; 'but you had the best right to
      her, and she and Meta have seen so much of each other. She tells me she is quite satisfied
      about Meta now.'
'I am sorry to see Meta looking out of spirits,' said Flora. 'I almost made her cry by
      saying something about Norman. Is there anything going wrong?'
Ethel, as usual, blundered into the subject. 'Only about Norman's going out.'
Flora asked further questions, and she was obliged to explain. It roused Flora's energies at
      once.
'This will never do!' she said. 'They must marry, and go with my aunt.'
Ethel was aghast. 'They would not hear of it now!'
'They must. It is the only reasonable thing. Why, Norman would be miserable, and, as to
      Meta—Imagine his going out and returning—a year's work, such an expense and loss of time,
      besides the missing aunt Flora.'
'If it were not wrong—'
'The waste would be the wrong thing. Besides—' and she told of Margaret's wishes.
'But, Flora, think—the last week in February—and you so ill!'
'I am not to marry them,' said Flora, smiling. 'If it could be in a fortnight, they could go
      and get their outfit afterwards, and come back to us when I am stronger. Let me see—there need
      be no fuss about settlements—Mr. Rivers's will arranges everything for her.'
'It would be a good thing to get rid of a fine wedding,' said Ethel; 'but they will never
      consent!'

'Yes they will, and be grateful.'
'Papa would be happier about Norman,' said Ethel; 'but I cannot fancy his liking it. And
      you—you can't spare Meta, for aunt Flora must go to the Arnott's in a week or two more.'
'Suppose papa was to let me have you,' said Flora. 'If he wants you, he must come after
      you.'
Ethel gasped at the thought that her occupation at home was gone, but she said—'If I am not
      too awkward for you, dear Flora. You will miss Meta terribly.'
'I can't keep the humming-bird caged, with her heart far away,' said Flora.
Dr. May came in to break up the conversation, and Ethel quickly guessed from his manner that
      Norman had been talking to him. Flora told him that she had been agreeing with Ethel that Meta
      had much better not miss this opportunity. He was far less startled than Ethel had expected;
      indeed, the proposal was rather a relief to his mind, and his chief objection was the fear
      that Flora would be fatigued by the extra bustle, but she promised not to trouble herself
      about it, otherwise than that if Norman could not persuade Meta, she would. The sisters
      parted, much more comfortable than before. Ethel felt as if she had found something like a dim
      reflection of Margaret, and Flora's fear of Ethel had fled away from the mere force of
      sisterhood.
As to Norman, he declared that he had not the audacity to make the proposal to Meta, though
      he was only too grateful—so his father carried it to the humming-bird; and, as soon as she
      found that it was not improper, nor would hurt anyone's feelings, she gave ready consent—only
      begging that it might be as best suited everyone, especially Flora; and ending by a whisper to
      her dear fatherly friend, owning that she was 'very glad—she meant she was very glad there
      would be nobody there.'
So Norman and Meta settled their plans as they walked home together from evening service,
      after listening to the prophecies of the blessings to be spread into the waste and desolate
      places, which should yet become the heritage of the Chosen, and with the evening star shining
      on them, like a faint reflex of the Star of the East, Who came to be a Light to lighten the
      Gentiles.

</div></body></text></TEI>