<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daisy Chain</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1856</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII.

''Tis not enough that Greek or Roman page
At stated hours, his freakish thoughts engage,
Even in his pastimes he requires a friend
To warn and teach him safely to unbend,
O'er all his pleasures gently to preside,
Watch his emotions, and control their tide.'Cowper.
The misfortunes of that day disheartened and disconcerted Etheldred. To do mischief
      where she most wished to do good, to grieve where she longed to comfort, seemed to be her
      fate; it was vain to attempt any thing for any one's good, while all her warm feelings and
      high aspirations were thwarted by the awkward ungainly hands, and heedless eyes that Nature
      had given her. Nor did the following
       day, Saturday, do much for her comfort, by giving her the company of her
      brothers. That it was Norman's sixteenth birth-day seemed only to make it worse. Their father
      had apparently forgotten it, and Norman stopped Blanche, when she was going to put him in mind
      of it; stopped her by such a look as the child never forgot, though there was no anger in it.
      In reply to Ethel's inquiry what he was going to do that morning, he gave a yawn and stretch,
      and said, dejectedly, that he had got some Euripides to look over, and some verses to
      finish.
'I am sorry; this is the first time you ever have not managed so as to make a real holiday
      of your Saturday!'
'I could not help it, and there's nothing to do,' said Norman, wearily.
'I promised to go and read to Margaret, while Flora does her music,' said Ethel; 'I shall
      come after that and do my Latin and Greek with you.'
Margaret would not keep her long, saying she liked her to be with Norman, but she found him
      with his head sunk on his open book, fast asleep. At dinner-time, Harry and Tom, rushing in,
      awoke him with a violent start.
'Halloo! Norman, that was a jump!' said Harry, as his brother stretched and pinched himself.
      'You'll jump out of your skin some of these days, if you don't take care!'
'It's enough to startle any one to be waked up with such a noise,' said Ethel.
'Then he ought to sleep at proper times,' said Harry, 'and not be waking me up with tumbling
      about, and hallooing out, and talking in his sleep half the night.'
'Talking in his sleep; why, just now, you said he did not sleep,' said Ethel.
'Harry knows nothing about it,' said Norman.
'Don't I? well, I only know, if you slept in school, and were a junior, you would get a
      proper good licking for going on as you do at night.'
'And I think you might chance to get a proper good licking for not holding your tongue,'
      said Norman, which hint reduced Harry to silence.
Dr. May was not come home; he had gone with Richard far into the country, and was to return
      to tea. He was thought to be desirous of avoiding the family dinners that used to be so
      delightful. Harry was impatient to depart, and when Mary and Tom ran after him, he ordered
      them back.
'Where can he be going?' said Mary, as she looked wistfully after him.
'I know,' said Tom.

'Where? Do tell me.'
'Only don't tell papa. I went down with him to the play-ground this morning, and there they
      settled it. The Andersons, and Axworthy, and he, are going to hire a gun, and shoot pee-wits
      on Cocksmoor.'
'But they ought not; should they?' said Mary. 'Papa would be very angry.'
'Anderson said there was no harm in it, but Harry told me not to tell. Indeed, Anderson
      would have boxed my ears for hearing, when I could not help it.'
'But Harry would not let him?'
'Aye. Harry is quite a match for Harvey Anderson, though he is so much younger; and he said
      he would not have me bullied.'
'That's a good Harry! But I wish he would not go out shooting!' said Mary.
'Mind, you don't tell.'
'And where's Hector Ernescliffe? Would not he go?'
'No. I like Hector. He did not choose to go, though Anderson teazed him, and said he was a
      poor Scot, and his brother didn't allow him tin enough to buy powder and shot. If Harry would
      have stayed at home, he would have come up here, and we might have had some fun in the
      garden.'
'I wish he would. We never have any fun now,' said Mary; 'but oh! there he is;' as she spied
      Hector peeping over the gate which led, from the field, into the garden. It was the first time
      that he had been to Dr. May's since his brother's departure, and he was rather shy, but the
      joyful welcome of Mary and Tom took off all reluctance, and they claimed him for a good game
      at play in the wood house. Mary ran up-stairs to beg to be excused the formal walk, and,
      luckily for her, Miss Winter was in Margaret's room. Margaret asked if it was very wet and
      dirty, and hearing 'not very,' gave gracious permission, and off went Mary and Blanche to
      construct some curious specimens of pottery, under the superintendence of Hector and Tom.
      There was a certain ditch where yellow mud was attainable, whereof the happy children
      concocted marbles and vases, which underwent a preparatory baking in the boys' pockets, that
      they might not crack in the nursery fire. Margaret only stipulated that her sisters should be
      well fenced in brown holland, and when Miss Winter looked grave, said, 'Poor things, a little
      thorough play will do them a great deal of good.'
Miss Winter could not see the good of groping in the dirt; and Margaret perceived that it
      would be one of her difficulties to know how to follow out her mother's views for the
      children, without vexing the good governess by not deferring to her.

In the meantime, Norman had disconsolately returned to his Euripides, and Ethel, who wanted
      to stay with him and look out his words, was ordered out by Miss Winter, because she had spent
      all yesterday in-doors. Miss Winter was going to stay with Margaret, and Ethel and Flora
      coaxed Norman to come with them, 'just one mile on the turnpike road and back again; he would
      be much fresher for his Greek afterwards.'
He came, but he did not enliven his sisters. The three plodded on, taking a diligent
      constitutional walk, exchanging very few words, and those chiefly between the girls. Flora
      gathered some hoary clematis, and red berries, and sought in the hedge-sides for some crimson
      'fairy baths' to carry home; and, at the sight of the amusement Margaret derived from the
      placing the beauteous little Pezizas in a saucer of damp green moss, so as to hide the brown
      sticks on which they grew, Ethel took shame to herself for want of perception of little
      attentions. When she told Norman so, he answered, 'There's no one who does see what is the
      right thing. How horrid the room looks! Every thing is no how!' added he, looking round at the
      ornaments and things on the tables, which had lost their air of comfort and good taste. It was
      not disorder, and Ethel could not see what he meant. 'What's wrong?' said she.
'O never mind—you can't do it. Don't try—you'll only make it worse. It will never be the
      same as long as we live.'
'I wish you would not be so unhappy!' said Ethel.
'Never mind,' again said Norman, but he put his arm round her.
'Have you done your Euripides? Can I help you? Will you construe it with me, or shall I look
      out your words?'
'Thank you, I don't mind that. It is the verses! I want some sense!' said Norman, running
      his fingers through his hair till it stood on end. ''Tis such a horrid subject, Coral Islands!
      As if there was any thing to be said about them.'
'Dear me, Norman, I could say ten thousand things, only I must not tell you what mine are,
      as yours are not done.'
'No, don't,' said, Norman, decidedly.
'Did you read the description of them in the Quarterly? I am sure you might get some ideas
      there. Shall I find it for you? It is in an old number.'
'Well, do; thank you—'
He rested listlessly on the sofa while his sister rummaged in a chiffoniere. At last she
      found the article, and eagerly read him the description of the strange forms of the coral
      animals, and the beauties of their flower-like feelers and branching fabrics. It would once
      have delighted him, but his first comment was, 'Nasty little brutes!' However, the next minute
      he thanked her, took the book, and said
       he could hammer something out of it, though it was too bad to give such an
      unclassical subject. At dusk he left off, saying he should get it done at night, his senses
      would come then, and he should be glad to sit up.
'Only three weeks to the holidays,' said Ethel, trying to be cheerful; but his assent was
      depressing, and she began to fear that Christmas would only make them more sad.
Mary did not keep Tom's secret so inviolably, but that, while they were dressing for tea,
      she revealed to Ethel where Harry was gone. He was not yet returned, though his father and
      Richard were come in, and the sisters were at once in some anxiety on his account, and doubt
      whether they ought to let papa know of his disobedience.
Flora and Ethel, who were the first in the drawing-room, had a consultation.
'I should have told mamma directly,' said Flora.
'He never did so,' sighed Ethel, 'things never went wrong then.'
'O yes, they did; don't you remember how naughty Harry was about climbing the wall, and
      making faces at Mrs. Richardson's servants?'
'And how ill I behaved the first day of last Christmas holidays?'
'She knew, but I don't think she told papa.'
'Not that we knew of, but I believe she did tell him everything, and I think, Flora, he
      ought to know everything, especially now, I never could bear the way the Mackenzies used to
      have of thinking their parents must be like enemies, and keeping secrets from them.'
'They were always threatening each other, "I'll. tell mamma,"' said Flora, 'and calling us
      tell-tales because we told our own dear mamma everything. But it is not like that now—I
      neither like to worry papa, nor to bring Harry into disgrace—besides, Tom and Mary meant it
      for a secret.'
'Papa would not be angry with him if we told him it was a secret,' said Ethel; 'I wish Harry
      would come in. There's the door—oh! it is only you.'
'Whom did you expect?' said Richard, entering.
The sisters looked at each other, and Ethel, after an interval, explained their doubts about
      Harry.
'He is come in,' said Richard; 'I saw him running up to his own room, very muddy.'
'O, I'm glad! But do you think papa ought to hear it? I don't know what's to be done. 'Tis
      the children's secret,' said Flora.
'It will never do to have him going out with those boys continually,' said Ethel—'Harvey
      Anderson close by all the holidays!'

'I'll try what I can do with him,' said Richard. 'Papa had better not hear it now, at any
      rate. He is very tired and sad this evening! and his arm is painful again, so we must not
      worry him with histories of naughtiness among the children.'
'No,' said Ethel, decidedly, 'I am glad you were there, Ritchie; I never should have thought
      of one time being better than another.'
'Just like Ethel!' said Flora, smiling.
'Why should not you learn?' said Richard gently.
'I can't,' said Ethel, in a desponding way.
'Why not? You are much sharper than most people, and, if you tried, you would know those
      things as much better than I do, as you know how to learn history.'
'It is quite a different sort of cleverness,' said Flora. 'Recollect Sir Isaac Newton, or
      Archimedes.'
'Then you must have both sorts,' said Ethel, 'for you can do things nicely, and yet you
      learn very fast.'
'Take care, Ethel, you are singeing your frock! Well, I really don't think you can help
      those things!' said Flora. 'Your short sight is the reason of it, and it is of no use to try
      to mend it.'
'Don't tell her so,' said Richard. 'It can't be all short sight— it is the not thinking. I
      do believe that if Ethel would think, no one would do things so well. Don't you remember the
      beautiful perspective drawing she made of this room, for me to take to Oxford? That was very
      difficult, and wanted a great deal of neatness and accuracy, so why should she not be neat and
      accurate in other things? And I know you can read faces, Ethel—why don't you look there before
      you speak?'
'Ah! before instead of after, when I only see I have said something mal-à-propos ,
      said Ethel.
'I must go and see about the children,' said Flora; 'if the tea comes while I am gone, will
      you make it, Ritchie?'
'Flora despairs of me,' said Ethel.
'I don't' said Richard. 'Have you forgotten how to put in a pin yet?'
'No; I hope not.'
'Well, then, see if you can't learn to make tea; and, by-the-by, Ethel, which is the next
      Christening Sunday?'
'The one after next, surely. The first of December is Monday —yes, to-morrow week is the
      next.'
'Then I have thought of something; it would cost eighteen-pence to hire Joliffe's
      spring-cart, and we might have Mrs. Taylor and the twins brought to Church in it. Should you
      like to walk to Cocksmoor and settle it?'

'O yes, very much indeed. What a capital thought. Margaret said you would know how to
      manage.'
'Then we will go the first fine day papa does not want me.'
'I wonder if I could finish my purple frocks. But here's the tea. Now, Richard, don't tell
      me to make it. I shall do something wrong, and Flora will never forgive you.'
Richard would not let her off. He stood over her, counted her shovelsfull of tea, and
      watched the water into the tea-pot—he superintended her warming the cups, and putting a drop
      into each saucer. 'Ah!' said Ethel, with a concluding sigh, 'it makes one hotter than double
      equations!'
It was all right, as Flora allowed with a slightly superior smile. She thought Richard would
      never succeed in making a notable or elegant woman of Ethel, and it was best that the two
      sisters should take different lines. Flora knew that, though clever and with more
      accomplishments, she could not surpass Ethel in intellectual attainments, but she was
      certainly far more valuable in the house, and had been proved to have just the qualities in
      which her sister was most deficient. She did not relish hearing that Ethel wanted nothing but
      attention to be more than her equal, and she thought Richard mistaken. Flora's remembrance of
      their time of distress was less unmixedly wretched than it was with the others, for she knew
      she had done wonders.
The next day Norman told Ethel that he had got on very well with the verses, and finished
      them off late at night. He showed them to her before taking them to school on Monday morning,
      and Ethel thought they were the best he had ever written. There was too much spirit and
      poetical beauty, for a mere school-boy task, and she begged for the foul copy, to show it to
      her father. 'I have not got it,' said Norman. 'The foul copy was not like these; but when I
      was writing them out quite late, it was all, I don't know how. Flora's music was in my ears,
      and the room seemed to get larger, and like an ocean cave; and when the candle flickered,
      'twas like the green glowing light of the sun through the waves.'
'As it says here,' said Ethel.
'And the words all came to me of themselves in beautiful flowing Latin, just right, as if it
      was any body but myself doing it, and they ran off my pen in red and blue and gold, and all
      sorts of colours; and fine branching zig-zagging stars, like what the book described, only
      stranger, came dancing and radiating round my pen and the candle. I could hardly believe the
      verses would scan by daylight, but I can't find a mistake. Do you try them again.'
Ethel scanned. 'I see nothing wrong,' she said, 'but it seems
       a shame to begin scanning Undine's verses, they are too pretty. I wish I could
      copy them. It must have been half a dream.'
'I believe it was; they don't seem like my own.'
'Did you dream afterwards?'
He shivered. 'They had got into my head too much; my ears sang like the roaring of the sea,
      and I thought my feet were frozen on to an iceberg: then came darkness, and sea monsters, and
      drowning— it was too horrid!' and his face expressed all, and more than all, he said. 'But
      'tis a quarter to seven—we must go,' said he, with a long yawn, and rubbing his eyes. 'You are
      sure they are right, Ethel? Harry, come along.'
Ethel thought those verses ought to make a sensation, but all that came of them was a
       Quam optimè , and when she asked Norman if no special notice had been taken of them,
      he said, in his languid way, 'No; only Dr. Hoxton said they were better than usual.'
Ethel did not even have the satisfaction of hearing that Mr. Wilmot, happening to meet Dr.
      May, said to him, 'Your boy has more of a poet in him than any that has come in my way. He
      really sometimes makes very striking verses.'
Richard watched for an opportunity of speaking to Harry, which did not at once occur, as the
      boy spent very little of his time at home, and, as if by tacit consent, he and Norman came in
      later every evening. At last, on Thursday, in the additional two hours' leisure allowed to the
      boys, when the studious prepared their tasks, and the idle had some special diversion, Richard
      encountered him running up to his own room to fetch a newly-invented instrument for projecting
      stones.
'I'll walk back to school with you,' said Richard.
'I mean to run,' returned Harry.
'Is there so much hurry?' said Richard. 'I am sorry for it, for I wanted to speak to you,
      Harry; I have something to show you.'
His manner conveyed that it related to their mother, and the sobering effect was
      instantaneous. 'Very well,' said he, forgetting his haste. 'I'll come into your room.'
The awe-struck, shy, yet sorrowful look on his rosy face, showed preparation enough, and
      Richard's only preface was to say, 'It is a bit of a letter that she was in course of
      writing to aunt Flora, a description of us all. The letter itself is gone, but here is a copy
      of it. I thought you would like to read what relates to yourself.'
Richard laid before him the sheet of note paper on which this portion of the letter was
      written, and left him alone with it, while he set out on the promised walk with Ethel.
They found the old woman, Granny Hall, looking like another
       creature, smoke-dried and withered indeed, but all briskness and animation.
'Well! be it you, Sir, and the young lady?'
'Yes; here we are come to see you again,' said Richard. I hope you are not disappointed that
      I've brought my sister this time instead of the Doctor.'
'No, no, Sir; I've done with the Doctor for this while,' said the old woman, to Ethel's
      great amusement. 'He have done me a power of good, and thank him for it heartily; but the
      young lady is right welcome here—but 'tis a dirty walk for her.'
'Never mind that,' said Ethel, a little shyly, 'I came—where are your grandchildren?'
'O somewhere out among the blocks. They gets out with the other children; I can't be always
      after them.'
'I wanted to know if these would fit them,' said Ethel, beginning to undo her basket.
'Well, 'pon my word! If ever I see! Here!' stepping out to the door, 'Polly—Jenny! come in,
      I say, this moment! Come in, ye bad girls, or I'll give you the stick; I'll break every bone
      of you, that I will!' all which threats were bawled out in such a good-natured, natured,
      triumphant voice, and with such a delighted air, that Richard and Ethel could not help
      laughing.
After a few moments, Polly and Jenny made their appearance, extremely rough and ragged, but
      compelled by their grandmother to duck down, by way of courtesies, and, with finger in mouth,
      they stood, too shy to show their delight, as the garments were unfolded; Granny talking so
      fast that Ethel would never have brought in the stipulation, that the frocks should be worn to
      school and Church, if Richard, in his mild, but steady way, had not brought the old woman to
      listen to it. She was full of asseverations that they should go; she took them to Church
      sometimes herself, when it was fine weather and they had clothes, and they could say their
      catechiz as well anybody already; yes, they should come, that they should, and next Sunday.
      Ethel promised to be there to introduce them to the chief lady, the president of the
      Committee, Mrs. Ledwich, and, with a profusion of thanks, they took leave.
They found John Taylor, just come out of the hospital, looking weak and ill, as he smoked
      his pipe over the fire, his wife bustling about at a great rate, and one of the infants
      crying. It seemed to be a great relief that they were not come to complain of Lucy, and there
      were many looks of surprise on hearing what their business really was. Mrs. Taylor thanked,
      and appeared not to know whether she was glad or sorry; and her husband, pipe in hand, gazed
      at the
       young gentleman as if he did not comprehend the species, since he could not be
      old enough to be a Clergyman.
Richard hoped they would find sponsors by that time; and there Mrs. Taylor gave little hope;
      it was a bad lot—there was no one she liked to ask to stand, she said, in a dismal voice; but
      there her husband put in, 'I'll find some one, if that's all; my missus always thinks nobody
      can't do nothing.'
'To be sure,' said the lamentable Mrs. Taylor, 'all the elder ones was took to Church, and
      I'm loth the little ones shouldn't; but you see, Sir, we are poor people, and it's a long way,
      and they was set down in the gentleman's register book.'
'But you know that is not the same, Mrs. Taylor. Surely Lucy could have told you that, when
      she went to school.'
'No, sir, 'tis not the same—I knows that; but this is a bad place to live in—'
'Always the old song, Missus!' exclaimed her husband. 'Thank you, kindly, Sir—you have been
      a good friend to us, and so was Dr. May, when I was up to the hospital, through the thick of
      his own troubles. I believe you are in the right of it, Sir, and thank you. The children shall
      be ready, and little Jack too, and I'll find gossips, and let 'em be Christened on
      Sunday.'
'I believe you will be glad of it,' said Richard; and he went on to speak of the elder
      children coming to school, on Sunday, thus causing another whining from the wife about
      distance and bad weather, and no one else going that way. He said the little Halls were
      coming, but Mrs. Taylor began saying she disliked their company for the children—granny let
      them get about so much, and they said bad words. The father again interfered. Perhaps Mr.
      Wilmot, who acted as chaplain at the hospital, had been talking to him, for he declared at
      once that they should come; and Richard suggested that he might see them home when he came
      from Church; then, turning to the boy and girl, told them they would meet their sister Lucy,
      and asked them if they would not like that.
On the whole, the beginning was not inauspicious, though there might be a doubt whether old
      Mrs. Hall would keep all her promises. Ethel was so much diverted and pleased as to be
      convinced she would; Richard was a little doubtful as to her power over the wild girls. There
      could not be any doubt that John Taylor was in earnest, and had been worked upon just at the
      right moment; but there was danger that the impression would not last. 'And his wife is such a
      horrible whining dawdle!' said Ethel—'there will be no good to be done if it depends on
      her.'
Richard made no answer, and Ethel presently felt remorseful for
       her harsh speech about a poor ignorant woman, overwhelmed with poverty, children,
      and weak health.
'I have been thinking a great deal about what you said last time we took this walk,' said
      Richard, after a considerable interval.
'O have you!' cried Ethel, eagerly; and the black peaty pond she was looking at, seemed to
      sparkle with sunlight.
'Do you really mean it?' said Richard, deliberately.
'Yes, to be sure;' she said, with some indignation.
'Because I think I see a way to make a beginning, but you must make up you mind to a great
      deal of trouble, and dirty walks, and you must really learn not to draggle your frock.'
'Well, well; but tell me.'
'This is what I was thinking. I don't think I can go back to Oxford after Christmas. It is
      not fit to leave you while papa is so disabled.'
'O no, he could not get on at all. I heard him tell Mr. Wilmot the other day that you were
      his right hand.'
Ethel was glad she had repeated this, for there was a deepening colour and smiling glow of
      pleasure on her brother's face, such as she had seldom seen on his delicate, but somewhat
      impassive features.
'He is very kind!' he said, warmly. 'No, I am sure I cannot be spared till he is better able
      to use his arm, and I don't see any chance of that just yet. Then if I stay at home, Friday is
      always at my own disposal, while papa is at the hospital meeting.'
'Yes, yes, and we could go to Cocksmoor, and set up a school. How delightful!'
'I don't think you would find it quite as delightful as you fancy,' said Richard; 'the
      children will be very wild and ignorant, and you don't like that at the National School.'
'O but they are in such need, besides there will be no Mrs. Ledwich over me. It is just
      right,—I shan't mind anything. You are a capital Ritchie, for having thought of it!'
'I don't think—if I am ever to be what I wish, that is, if I can get through at Oxford—I
      don't think it can be wrong to begin this, if Mr. Ramsden does not object.'
'O Mr. Ramsden never objects to anything.'
'And if Mr. Wilmot will come and set us off. You know we cannot begin without that, or
      without my father's fully liking it.'
'Oh! there can be no doubt of that!'
'This one thing, Ethel, I must stipulate. Don't you go and tell it all out at once to him. I
      cannot have him worried about our concerns.'
'But how—no one can question that this is right. I am sure he won't object.'

'Stop, Ethel, don't you see, it can't be done for nothing? If we undertake it, we must go on
      with it, and when I am away, it will fall on you and Flora. Well, then, it ought to be
      considered whether you are old enough and steady enough; and if it can be managed for you to
      go continually all this way, in this wild place. There will be expense too.'
Ethel looked wild with impatience, but could not gainsay these scruples, otherwise than by
      declaring they ought not to weigh against the good of Cocksmoor.
'It will worry him to have to consider all this,' said Richard, 'and it must not be pressed
      upon him.'
'No,' said Ethel, sorrowfully; 'but you don't mean to give it up.'
'You are always in extremes, Ethel. All I want is to find a good time for proposing it.'
She fidgetted and gave a long sigh.
'Mind,' said Richard, stopping short, 'I'll have nothing to do with it except on condition
      you are patient, and hold your tongue about it.'
'I think I can, if I may talk to Margaret.'
'O yes, to Margaret of course. We could not settle anything without her help.'
'And I know what she will say,' said Ethel. 'O I am so glad,' and she jumped over three
      puddles in succession.
'And, Ethel, you must learn to keep your frock out of the dirt.'
'I'll do anything, if you'll help me at Cocksmoor.'
</div></body></text></TEI>