
CHAPTER XX.
A LOVE-LETTER.
TWO days after Bernardine had left Petershof, the snows began to melt. Nothing could be
      drearier than that process: nothing more desolate than the outlook.
The Disagreeable Man sat in his bedroom trying to read Carpenter's Anatomy. It failed to
      hold him. Then he looked out of the window, and listened to the dripping of the icicles. At
      last he took a pen, and wrote as follows:
"LITTLE COMRADE, LITTLE PLAYMATE."
"I could not believe that you were really going. When you first said that you would soon be
      leaving, I listened with unconcern, because it did not seem possible that the time could come
      when we should not be together; that the days would come and go, and that I should not know
      how you were; whether you were better, and more hopeful about your life and your work, or
      whether the old misery of indifference and ill-health was still clinging to you; whether your
      voice was strong as of one who had slept well and felt refreshed, or whether it was weak like
      that of one who had watched through the long night.
"It did not seem possible that such a time could come. Many cruel things have happened to
      me, as to scores of others, but this is the most cruel of all. Against my wish and against my
      knowledge, you have crept into my life as a necessity, and now I have to give you up. You are
      better, God bless you, and you go back to a fuller life, and to carry on your work, and to put
      to account those talents which no one realises more than I do; and as for myself, God help me,
      I am left to wither away.
"You little one, you dear little one, I never wished to love you. I had never loved any one,
      never drawn near to any one. I have lived lonely all my young life; for I am only a young man
      yet. I said to myself time after time: 'I will not love her. It will not do me any good, nor
      her any good.' And then in my state of health, what right had I to think of marriage, and
      making a home for myself? Of course that was out of the question. And then I thought, that
      because I was a doomed man, cut off from the pleasures which make a lovely thing of life, it
      did not follow that I might not love you in my own quiet way, hugging my secret to myself,
      until the love became all the greater because it was my secret. I reasoned about it too: it
      could not harm you that I loved you. No one could be the worse for being loved. So little by
      little I yielded myself this luxury; and my heart once so dried up, began to flower again;
      yes, little one, you will smile when I tell you that my heart broke out into flower.
"When I think of it all now, I am not sorry that I let myself go. At least I have learnt
      what I knew nothing of before: now I understand what people mean when they say that love adds
      a dignity to life which nothing else can give. That dignity is mine now, nothing can take it
      from me; it is my own. You are my very own; I love everything about you. From the beginning I
      recognized that you were clever and capable. Though I often made fun of what you said, that
      was simply a way I had; and when I saw you did not mind, I continued in that way, hoping
      always to vex you; your good temper provoked me, because I knew that you made allowances for
      me being a Petershof invalid. You would never have suffered a strong man to criticize you as I
      did; you would have flown at him, for you are a feverish little child: not a quiet woolly
      lamb. At first I was wild that you should make allowances for me. And then I gave in, as weak
      men are obliged. When you came, I saw that your troubles and sufferings would make you bitter.
      Do you know who helped to cure you? It was I. I have seen that often before. That is
      the one little bit of good I have done in the world: I have helped to cure cynicism. You were
      shocked at the things I said, and you were saved. I did not save you intentionally, so I am
      not posing as a philanthropist. I merely mention that you came here hard, and you went back
      tender. That was partly because you have lived in the City of Suffering. Some people live
      there and learn nothing. But you would learn to feel only too much. I wish that your capacity
      for feeling were less; but then you would not be yourself, your present self I mean, for you
      have changed even since I have known you. Every week you seemed to become more gentle. You
      thought me rough and gruff at parting, little comrade: I meant to be so. If you had only
      known, there was a whole world of tenderness for you in my heart. I could not trust myself to
      be tender to you; you would have guessed my secret. And I wanted you to go away undisturbed.
      You do not feel things lightly, and it was best for you that you should harden your heart
      against me.
"If you could harden your heart against me. But I am not sure about that. I believe that . .
      . . Ah, well, I'm a foolish fellow; but some day, dear, I'll tell you what I think . . . . I
      have treasured many of your sayings in my memory. I can never be as though I had never known
      you. Many of your words I have repeated to myself afterwards until they seemed to represent my
      own thoughts. I specially remember what you said about God having made us lonely, so that we
      might be obliged to turn to him. For we are all lonely, though some of us not quite so much as
      others. You yourself spoke often of being lonely. Oh, my own little one! Your loneliness is
      nothing compared to mine. How often I could have told you that.
"I have never seen any of your work, but I think you have now something to say to others,
      and that you will say it well. And if you have the courage to be simple when it comes to the
      point, you will succeed. And I believe you will have the courage, I believe everything of
      you.
"But whatever you do or do not, you will always be the same to me: my own little one, my
      very own. I have been waiting all my life for you; and I have given you my heart entire. If
      you only knew that, you could not call yourself lonely any more. If any one was ever loved, it
      is you, dear heart.
"Do you remember how those peasants at the Gasthaus thought we were betrothed? I thought
      that might annoy you; and though I was relieved at the time, still, later on, I wished you had
      been annoyed. That would have shown that you were not indifferent. From that time my love for
      you grew apace. You must not mind me telling you so often; I must go on telling you. Just
      think, dear, this is the first love-letter I have ever written: and every word of love is a
      whole world of love. I shall never call my life a failure now. I may have failed in everything
      else, but not in loving. Oh, little one, it can't be that I am not to be with you, and not to
      have you for my own! And yet how can that be? It is not I who may hold you in my arms. Some
      strong man must love and wrap you round with tenderness and softness. You little independent
      child, in spite of all your wonderful views and theories, you will soon be glad to lean on
      some one for comfort and sympathy. And then perhaps that troubled little spirit of yours may
      find its rest. Would to God I were that strong man!
"But because I love you, my own little darling, I will not spoil your life. I won't ask you
      to give me even one thought. But if I believed that it were of any good to say a prayer, I
      should pray that you may soon find that strong man; for it is not well for any of us to stand
      alone. There comes a time when the loneliness is more than we can bear.
"There is one thing I want you to know: indeed I am not the gruff fellow I have so often
      seemed. Do believe that. Do you remember how I told you that I dreamed of losing you? And now
      the dream has come true. I am always looking for you, and cannot find you.
"You have been very good to me; so patient, and genial, and frank. No one before has ever
      been so good. Even if I did not love you, I should say that.
"But I do love you, no one can take that from me: it is my own dignity, the crown of my
      life. Such a poor life . . . no, no, I won't say that now. I cannot pity myself now . . . no,
      I cannot . . . ."
The Disagreeable Man stopped writing, and the pen dropped on the table.
He buried his tear-stained face in his hands. He cried his heart out, this Disagreeable
      Man.
Then he took the letter which he had just been writing, and he tore it into fragments.
END OF PART I.
