<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">
CHAPTER III.
 “Strangers must withdraw.”
 “Division: clear the gallery. Withdraw.”
 “Nonsense; no; it’s quite ridiculous; quite absurd. Some fellow must get up. Send to the
       Carlton; send to the Reform; send to Brookes’s. Are your men ready? No; are your’s? I am sure
       I can’t say. What does it mean? Most absurd! Are there many fellows in the library? The
       smoking-room is quite full. All our men are paired till half-past eleven. It wants five
       minutes to the halfhour. What do you think of Trenchard’s speech? I don’t care for ourselves;
       I am sorry for him. Well that is very charitable. Withdraw, withdraw; you must withdraw.”
 “Where are you going, Fitztheron?” said a Conservative whipling.
 “I must go; I am paired till half-past eleven, and it wants some minutes, and my man is
       not here.”
 “Confound it!”
 “How will it go?”
 “Gad, I don’t know.”
 “Fishy eh?”
 “Deuced!” said the under-whip in an under-tone, pale and speaking behind his teeth.
 The division bell was still ringing; peers and diplomatists and strangers were turned out;
       members came rushing in from library and smoking-room; some desperate cabs just arrived in
       time to land their passengers in the waiting-room. The doors were locked.
 The mysteries of the Lobby are only for the initiated. Three quarters of an hour after the
       division was called, the result was known to the exoteric world. Majority for Ministers
       thirty-seven! Never had the opposition made such a bad division, and this too on their trial
       of strength for the session. Everything went wrong. Lord Milford was away
       without a pair. Mr Ormsby, who had paired with Mr Berners, never came, and let his man poll;
       for which he was infinitely accursed, particularly by the expectant twelve hundred a-yearers,
       but not wanting anything himself, and having an income of forty thousand pounds paid
       quarterly, Mr Ormsby bore their reported indignation like a lamb.
 There were several other similar or analogous mischances; the whigs contrived to poll Lord
       Grubminster in a wheeled chair; he was unconscious but had heard as much of the debate as a
       good many. Colonel Fantomme on the other hand could not come to time; the mesmerist had
       thrown him into a trance from which it was fated he should never awake: but the crash of the
       night was a speech made against the opposition by one of their own men, Mr Trenchard, who
       voted with the government.
 “The rest may be accounted for,” said Lady St Julians to Lady Deloraine the morning after;
       “it is simply vexatious; it was a surprise and will be a lesson: but this affair
       of this Mr Trenchard—and they tell me that William Loraine was absolutely cheering him the
       whole time—what does it mean? Do you know the man?”
 “I have heard Charles speak of him, and I think much in his favour,” said Lady Deloraine;
       “if he were here, he would tell us more about it. I wonder he does not come: he never misses
       looking in after a great division and giving me all the news.”
 “Do you know, my dear friend,” said Lady St Julians with an air of some solemnity, “I am
       half meditating a great stroke? This is not a time for trifling. It is all very well for
       these people to boast of their division of last night, but it was a surprise, and as great to
       them as to us. I know there is dissension in the camp; ever since that Finality speech of
       Lord John, there has been a smouldering sedition. Mr Tadpole knows all about it; he has
       liaisons with the frondeurs. This affair of Trenchard may do us the greatest possible injury.
       When it comes to a fair fight, the government have not more than twelve or so.
       If this Mr Trenchard and three or four others choose to make themselves of importance—you
       see? The danger is imminent, it must be met with decision.”
 “And what do you propose doing?”
 “Has he a wife?”
 “I really do not know. I wish Charles would come, perhaps he could tell us.”
 “I have no doubt he has,” said Lady St Julians. “One would have met him, somehow or other
       in the course of two years, if he had not been married. Well, married or unmarried, with his
       wife, or without his wife,—I shall send him a card for Wednesday.” And Lady St Julians
       paused, overwhelmed as it were by the commensurate vastness of her idea and her
       sacrifice.
 “Do not you think it would be rather sudden?” said Lady Deloraine.
 “What does that signify? He will understand it; he will have gained his object; and all
       will be right.”
 “But are you sure it is his object? We do not know the man.”
 “What else can be his object?” said Lady St Julians. “People get into Parliament to get
       on; their aims are indefinite. If they have indulged in hallucinations about place before
       they enter the House, they are soon freed from such distempered fancies; they find they have
       no more talent than other people, and if they had, they learn that power, patronage and pay
       are reserved for us and our friends. Well then like practical men, they look to some result,
       and they get it. They are asked out to dinner more than they would be; they move rigmarole
       resolutions at nonsensical public meetings; and they get invited with their women to
       assemblies at their leader’s where they see stars and blue ribbons, and above all, us, whom
       they little think in appearing on such occasions, make the greatest conceivable sacrifice.
       Well then, of course such people are entirely in one’s power, if one only had time and
       inclination to notice them. You can do anything with them. Ask them to a ball, and they will
       give you their votes; invite them to dinner and if necessary they will rescind
       them; but cultivate them, remember their wives at assemblies and call their daughters, if
       possible, by their right names; and they will not only change their principles or desert
       their party for you; but subscribe their fortunes if necessary and lay down their lives in
       your service.”
 “You paint them to the life, my dear Lady St Julians,” said Lady Deloraine laughing; “but
       with such knowledge and such powers, why did you not save our boroughs?”
 “We had lost our heads, then, I must confess,” said Lady St Julians. “What with the dear
       King and the dear Duke, we really had brought ourselves to believe that we lived in the days
       of Versailles or nearly; and I must admit I think we had become a little too exclusive. Out
       of the cottage circle, there was really no world, and after all we were lost not by insulting
       the people but by snubbing the aristocracy.”
 The servant announced Lady Firebrace. “Oh! my dear Lady Deloraine. Oh! my dear Lady St
       Julians!” and she shook her head.

 “You have no news, I suppose,” said Lady St Julians.
 “Only about that dreadful Mr Trenchard; you know the reason why he ratted?”
 “No, indeed,” said Lady St Julians with a sigh.
 “An invitation to Lansdowne House, for himself and his wife!”
 “Oh! he is married then?”
 “Yes; she is at the bottom of it all. Terms regularly settled beforehand. I have a note
       here—all the facts.” And Lady Firebrace twirled in her hand a bulletin from Mr Tadpole.
 “Lansdowne House is destined to cross me,” said Lady St Julians with bitterness.
 “Well it is very provoking,” said Lady Deloraine, “when you had made up your mind to ask
       them for Wednesday.”
 “Yes, that alone is a sacrifice,” said Lady St Julians.
 “Talking over the division I suppose,” said Egremont as he entered.
 “Ah! Mr Egremont,” said Lady St Julians. “What a hachis you made of it.”

 Lady Firebrace shook her head, as it were reproachfully.
 “Charles,” said Lady Deloraine, “we were talking of this Mr Trenchard. Did I not once hear
       you say you knew something of him?”
 “Why, he is one of my intimate acquaintance.”
 “Heavens! what a man for a friend!” said Lady St Julians.
 “Heavens!” echoed Lady Firebrace raising her hands.
 “And why did you not present him to me, Charles,” said Lady Deloraine.
 “I did; at Lady Peel’s.”
 “And why did you not ask him here?”
 “I did several times; but he would not come.”
 “He is going to Lansdowne House, though,” said Lady Firebrace.
 “I suppose you wrote the leading article in the Standard which I have just read,” said
       Egremont smiling. “It announces in large type the secret reasons of Mr Trenchard’s vote.”

 “It is a fact,” said Lady Firebrace.
 “That Trenchard is going to Lansdowne House to-night; very likely. I have met him at
       Lansdowne House half-a-dozen times. He is very intimate with the family and lives in the same
       county.”
 “But his wife,” said Lady Firebrace; “that’s the point: he never could get his wife there
       before.”
 “He has none,” said Egremont very quietly.
 “Then we may regain him,” said Lady St Julians with energy. “You shall make a little
       dinner to Greenwich, Mr Egremont, and I will sit next to him.”
 “Fortunate Trenchard!” said Egremont. “But do you know I fear he is hardly worthy of his
       lot. He has a horror of fine ladies; and there is nothing in the world he more avoids than
       what you call society. At home, as this morning when I breakfasted with him, or in a circle
       of his intimates, he is the best company in the world; no one so well informed, fuller of
       rich humour, and more sincerely amiable. He is popular with all who know him—except Taper,
       Lady St Julians, and Tadpole, Lady Firebrace.”
 “Well, I think I will ask him still for Wednesday,” said Lady St Julians; “and I will
       write him a little note. If society is not his object, what is?”
 “Ay!” said Egremont, “there is a great question for you and Lady Firebrace to ponder over.
       This is a lesson for you fine ladies, who think you can govern the world by what you call
       your social influences: asking people once or twice a-year to an inconvenient crowd in your
       house; now haughtily smirking, and now impertinently staring, at them; and flattering
       yourselves all this time, that to have the occasional privilege of entering your saloons and
       the periodical experience of your insolent recognition, is to be a reward for great
       exertions, or if necessary an inducement to infamous tergiversation.”
</div></body></text></TEI>