<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
CHAPTER VII.
 In a commercial country like England, every half century developes some new and vast source
      of public wealth, which brings into national notice a new and powerful class. A couple of
      centuries ago, a Turkey merchant was the great creator of wealth; the West Indian Planter
      followed him. In the middle of the last century appeared the Nabob. These characters in their
      zenith in turn merged in the land, and became English aristocrats; while the Levant decaying,
      the West Indies exhausted, and Hindostan plundered, the breeds died away, and now exist only
      in our English comedies from Wycherly and Congreve to Cumberland and Morton. The
      expenditure of the revolutionary war produced the Loanmonger, who succeeded the Nabob; and the
      application of science to industry developed the Manufacturer, who in turn aspires to be
      “large-acred,” and always will, as long as we have a territorial constitution; a better
      security for the preponderance of the landed interest than any corn law, fixed or
      fluctuating.
 Of all these characters, the one that on the whole made the largest fortunes in the most
      rapid manner,—and we do not forget the marvels of the Waterloo loan, or the miracles of
      Manchester during the continental blockade—was the Anglo-East Indian about the time that
      Hastings was first appointed to the great viceroyalty. It was not unusual for men in positions
      so obscure that their names had never reached the public in this country, and who yet had not
      been absent from their native land for a longer period than the siege of Troy, to return with
      their million.
 One of the most fortunate of this class of obscure adventurers was a certain John Warren.
       A very few years before the breaking out of the American war, he was a waiter at
      a celebrated club in St James’s Street: a quick yet steady young fellow; assiduous, discreet,
      and very civil. In this capacity, he pleased a gentleman who was just appointed to the
      government of Madras, and who wanted a valet. Warren, though prudent, was adventurous; and
      accepted the opening which he believed fortune offered him. He was prescient. The voyage in
      those days was an affair of six months. During this period, Warren still more ingratiated
      himself with his master. He wrote a good hand, and his master a very bad one. He had a natural
      talent for accounts; a kind of information which was useful to his employer. He arrived at
      Madras, no longer a valet, but a private secretary.
 His master went out to make a fortune; but he was indolent, and had indeed none of the
      qualities for success, except his great position. Warren had every quality but that. The basis
      of the confederacy therefore was intelligible; it was founded on mutual interests and cemented
       by reciprocal assistance. The governor granted monopolies to the secretary, who
      apportioned a due share to his sleeping partner. There appeared one of those dearths not
      unusual in Hindostan; the population of the famished province cried out for rice; the stores
      of which, diminished by nature, had for months mysteriously disappeared. A provident
      administration it seems had invested the public revenue in its benevolent purchase; the misery
      was so excessive that even pestilence was anticipated, when the great forestallers came to the
      rescue of the people over whose destinies they presided; and at the same time fed and pocketed
      millions.
 This was the great stroke of the financial genius of Warren. He was satisfied. He longed
      once more to see St James’s Street, and to become a member of the club, where he had once been
      a waiter. But he was the spoiled child of fortune, who would not so easily spare him. The
      governor died, and had appointed his secretary his sole executor. Not that his excellency
      particularly trusted his agent, but he dared not confide the knowledge of his
      affairs to any other individual. The estate was so complicated, that Warren offered the heirs
      a good round sum for his quittance, and to take the settlement upon himself. India so distant,
      and Chancery so near—the heirs accepted the proposition. Winding up this estate, Warren
      avenged the cause of plundered provinces; and the House of Commons itself, with Burke and
      Francis at its head, could scarcely have mulcted the late governor more severely.
 A Mr Warren, of whom no one had ever heard except that he was a nabob, had recently
      returned from India and purchased a large estate in the north of England, was returned to
      Parliament one of the representatives of a close borough which he had purchased: a quiet,
      gentlemanlike, middle-aged man, with no decided political opinions; and, as parties were then
      getting very equal, of course very much courted. The throes of Lord North’s administration
      were commencing. The minister asked the new member to dine with him, and found the new member
      singularly free from all party prejudices. Mr Warren was one of those members who announced
       their determination to listen to the debates and to be governed by the
      arguments. All complimented him, all spoke to him. Mr Fox declared that he was a most superior
      man; Mr Burke said that these were the men who could alone save the country. Mrs Crewe asked
      him to supper; he was caressed by the most brilliant of duchesses.
 At length there arrived one of those fierce trials of strength, which precede the fall of a
      minister, but which sometimes from peculiar circumstances, as in the instances of Walpole and
      Lord North, are not immediate in their results. How would Warren vote? was the great question.
      He would listen to the arguments. Burke was full of confidence that he should catch Warren.
      The day before the debate there was a levee, which Mr Warren attended. The sovereign stopped
      him, spoke to him, smiled on him, asked him many questions: about himself, the House of
      Commons, how he liked it, how he liked England. There was a flutter in the circle; a new
      favourite at court.
 The debate came off, the division took place. Mr Warren voted for the minister. Burke
      denounced him; the king made him a baronet.
 Sir John Warren made a great alliance, at least for him; he married the daughter of an
      Irish earl; became one of the king’s friends; supported Lord Shelburne, threw over Lord
      Shelburne, had the tact early to discover that Mr Pitt was the man to stick to, stuck to him.
      Sir John Warren bought another estate, and picked up another borough. He was fast becoming a
      personage. Throughout the Indian debates he kept himself extremely quiet; once indeed in
      vindication of Mr Hastings, whom he greatly admired, he ventured to correct Mr Francis on a
      point of fact with which he was personally acquainted. He thought that it was safe, but he
      never spoke again. He knew not the resources of vindictive genius or the powers of a malignant
      imagination. Burke owed the Nabob a turn for the vote which had gained him a baronetcy. The
      orator seized the opportunity and alarmed the secret conscience of the Indian adventurer by
      his dark allusions, and his fatal familiarity with the subject.
 Another estate however and another borough were some consolation for this little
      misadventure; and in time the French Revolution, to Sir John’s great relief, turned the public
      attention for ever from Indian affairs. The Nabob from the faithful adherent of Mr Pitt had
      become even his personal friend. The wits indeed had discovered that he had been a waiter; and
      endless were the epigrams of Fitzpatrick and the jokes of Hare; but Mr Pitt cared nothing
      about the origin of his supporters. On the contrary, Sir John was exactly the individual from
      whom the minister meant to carve out his plebeian aristocracy; and using his friend as a
      feeler before he ventured on his greater operations, the Nabob one morning was transformed
      into an Irish baron.
 The new Baron figured in his patent as Lord Fitz-Warene, his Norman origin and descent from
      the old barons of this name having been discovered at Herald’s college. This was a rich
      harvest for Fitzpatrick and Hare; but the public gets accustomed to everything,
      and has an easy habit of faith. The new Baron cared nothing for ridicule, for he was working
      for posterity. He was compensated for every annoyance by the remembrance that the St James’s
      Street waiter was ennobled, and by his determination that his children should rank still
      higher in the proud peerage of his country. So he obtained the royal permission to resume the
      surname and arms of his ancestors, as well as their title.
 There was an ill-natured story set afloat, that Sir John owed this promotion to having lent
      money to the minister; but this was a calumny. Mr Pitt never borrowed money of his friends.
      Once indeed, to save his library, he took a thousand pounds from an individual on whom he had
      conferred high rank and immense promotion: and this individual, who had the minister’s bond
      when Mr Pitt died, insisted on his right, and actually extracted the 1,000 l. from the
      insolvent estate of his magnificent patron. But Mr Pitt always preferred an usurer to a friend; and to the last day of his life borrowed money at fifty per cent.
 The Nabob departed this life before the Minister, but he lived long enough to realize his
      most aspiring dream. Two years before his death the Irish baron was quietly converted into an
      English peer; and without exciting any attention, all the squibs of Fitzpatrick, all the jokes
      of Hare, quite forgotten, the waiter of the St James’s Street club took his seat in the most
      natural manner possible in the House of Lords.
 The great estate of the late Lord Fitz-Warene was situated at Mowbray, a village which
      principally belonged to him, and near which he had raised a gothic castle, worthy of his
      Norman name and ancestry. Mowbray was one of those places which during the long war had
      expanded from an almost unknown village to a large and flourishing manufacturing town; a
      circumstance, which, as Lady Marney observed, might have somewhat deteriorated the atmosphere
      of the splendid castle, but which had nevertheless doubled the vast rental of its lord. He who had succeeded to his father was Altamont Belvidere (named after his mother’s
      family) Fitz-Warene, Lord Fitz-Warene. He was not deficient in abilities, though he had not
      his father’s talents, but he was over-educated for his intellect; a common misfortune. The new
      Lord Fitz-Warene was the most aristocratic of breathing beings. He most fully, entirely, and
      absolutely believed in his pedigree; his coat of arms was emblazoned on every window,
      embroidered on every chair, carved in every corner. Shortly after his father’s death he was
      united to the daughter of a ducal house, by whom he had a son and two daughters, chrisened by
      names which the ancient records of the Fitz-Warenes authorised. His son, who gave promise of
      abilities which might have rendered the family really distinguished, was Valence; his
      daughters, Joan and Maud. All that seemed wanting to the glory of the house was a great
      distinction of which a rich peer, with six seats in the House of Commons, could not ultimately
      despair. Lord Fitz-Warene aspired to rank among the earls of England. But the successors of Mr
      Pitt were strong; they thought the Fitz-Warenes had already been too rapidly advanced; it was
      whispered that the king did not like the new man; that his majesty thought him pompous, full
      of pretence, in short, a fool. But though the successors of Mr Pitt managed to govern the
      country for twenty years and were generally very strong, in such an interval of time however
      good their management or great their luck, there were inevitably occasions when they found
      themselves in difficulties, when it was necessary to conciliate the lukewarm or to reward the
      devoted. Lord Fitz-Warene well understood how to avail himself of these occasions; it was
      astonishing how conscientious and scrupulous he became during Walcheren expeditions,
      Manchester massacres, Queen’s trials. Every scrape of the government was a step in the ladder
      to the great borough-monger. The old king too had disappeared from the stage; and the tawdry
      grandeur of the great Norman peer rather suited George the Fourth. He was rather a favourite
      at the Cottage; they wanted his six votes for Canning; he made his terms; and one
      of the means by which we got a man of genius for a minister, was elevating Lord Fitz-Warene in
      the peerage, by the style and title of Earl de Mowbray of Mowbray Castle.
</div></body></text></TEI>