<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="40">
CHAPTER VIII.
 We left Sybil and Egremont just at the moment that Gerard arrived at the very threshold
       which they had themselves reached.
 “Ah! my father,” exclaimed Sybil, and then with a faint blush of which she was perhaps
       unconscious, she added, as if apprehensive Gerard would not recall his old companion, “you
       remember Mr Franklin?”
 “This gentleman and myself had the pleasure of meeting yesterday,” said Gerard
       embarrassed, while Egremont himself changed colour and was infinitely confused. Sybil felt
       surprised that her father should have met Mr Franklin and not have mentioned a circumstance
        naturally interesting to her. Egremont was about to speak when the street-door
       was opened. And were they to part again, and no explanation? And was Sybil to be left with
       her father, who was evidently in no haste, perhaps had no great tendency, to give that
       explanation? Every feeling of an ingenuous spirit urged Egremont personally to terminate this
       prolonged misconception.
 “You will permit me, I hope,” he said, appealing as much to Gerard as to his daughter, “to
       enter with you for a few moments.”
 It was not possible to resist such a request, yet it was conceded on the part of Gerard
       with no cordiality. So they entered the large gloomy hail of the house, and towards the end
       of a long passage Gerard opened a door, and they all went into a spacious melancholy room,
       situate at the back of the house, and looking upon a small square plot of dank grass, in the
       midst of which rose a very weather-stained Cupid, with one arm broken, and the other raised
       in the air with a long shell to its mouth. It seemed that in old days it might have been a fountain. At the end of the plot the blind side of a house offered a high wall
       which had once been painted in fresco. Though much of the coloured plaster had cracked and
       peeled away, and all that remained was stained and faded, still some traces of the original
       design might yet be detected: festive wreaths, the colonnades and perspective of a
       palace.
 The wails of the room itself were waincsotted in pannels of dark-stained wood; the
       window-curtains were of coarse green worsted, and encrusted with dust so ancient and
       irremovable, that it presented almost a lava-like appearance; the carpet that had once been
       bright and showy, was entirely threadbare, and had become grey with age. There were several
       heavy mahogany arm-chairs in the room, a Pembroke table, and an immense unwieldy sideboard,
       garnished with a few wine-glasses of a deep blue colour. Over the lofty uncouth mantel was a
       portrait of the Marquis of Granby, which might have been a sign, and opposite to him, over
       the sideboard, was a large tawdry-coloured print, by Bunbury, of Ranelagh in its most festive hour. The general appearance of the room however though dingy, was not
       squalid: and what with its spaciousness, its extreme repose, and the associations raised by
       such few images as it did suggest, the impression on the mind of the spectator was far from
       unpleasing, partaking indeed of that vague melancholy which springs from the contemplation of
       the past, and which at all times softens the spirit.
 Gerard walked to the window and looked at the grass-plot; Sybil seating herself, invited
       their guest to follow her example; Egremont, not without agitation, seemed suddenly to make
       an effort to collect himself, and then, in a voice not distinguished by its accustomed
       clearness, he said, “I explained yesterday to one who I hope I may still call my friend, why
       I assumed a name to which I have no right.”
 Sybil started a little, slightly stared, but did not speak.
 “I should be happy if you also would give me credit, in taking that step, at least for
       motives of which I need not be ashamed; even,” he added in a hesitating voice, “even if you
       deemed my conduct indiscreet.”
 Their eyes met: astonishment was imprinted on the countenance of Sybil, but she uttered
       not a word; and her father, whose back was turned to them, did not move.
 “I was told,” continued Egremont, “that an impassable gulf divided the Rich from the Poor;
       I was told that the Privileged and the People formed Two Nations, governed by different laws,
       influenced by different manners, with no thoughts or sympathies in common; with an innate
       inability of mutual comprehension. I believed that if this were indeed the case, the ruin of
       our common country was at hand; I would have endeavoured, feebly perchance, but not without
       zeal, to resist such a catastrophe; I possessed a station which entailed on me some portion
       of its responsibility: to obtain that knowledge which could alone qualify me for beneficial
       action, I resolved to live without suspicion among my fellow-subjects who were estranged from
       me; even void of all celebrity as I am, I could not have done that without
       suspicion, had I been known; they would have recoiled from my class and my name, as you
       yourself recoiled, Sybil, when they were once accidentally mentioned before you. These are
       the reasons, these the feelings, which impelled, I will not say justified, me to pass your
       threshold under a feigned name. I entreat you to judge kindly of my conduct; to pardon me:
       and not to make me feel the bitterness that I have forfeited the good opinion of one for
       whom, under all circumstances and in all situations, I must ever feel the highest conceivable
       respect,—I would say a reverential regard.”
 His tones of passionate emotion ceased. Sybil, with a countenance beautiful and disturbed,
       gazed at him for an instant, and seemed about to speak, but her trembling lips refused the
       office; then with an effort, turning to Gerard, she said, “My father, I am amazed; tell me,
       then, who is this gentleman who addresses me?”
 “The brother of Lord Marney, Sybil,” said Gerard, turning to her.

 “The brother of Lord Marney!” repeated Sybil, with an air almost of stupor.
 “Yes,” said Egremont: “a member of that family of sacrilege, of those oppressors of the
       people, whom you have denounced to me with such withering scorn.”
 The elbow of Sybil rested on the arm of her chair, and her cheek upon her hand; as
       Egremont said these words she shaded her face, which was thus entirely unseen: for some
       moments there was silence. Then looking up with an expression grave but serene, and as if she
       had just emerged from some deep thinking, Sybil said, “I am sorry for my words; sorry for the
       pain I unconsciously gave you; sorry indeed for all that has past: and that my father has
       lost a pleasant friend.”
 “And why should he be lost?” said Egremont mournfully, and yet with tenderness. “Why
       should we not still befriends?”
 “Oh, sir!” said Sybil, haughtily; “I am one of those who believe the gulf is impassable.
       Yes,” she added, slightly but with singular grace waving her hands, and somewhat turning away
       her head, “utterly impassable.”

 There are tumults of the mind when like the great convulsions of nature all seems anarchy
       and returning chaos, yet often in those moments of vast disturbance, as in the material
       strife itself, some new principle of order, or some new impulse of conduct, develops itself,
       and controls and regulates and brings to an harmonious consequence, passions and elements
       which seemed only to threaten despair and subversion. So it was with Egremont. He looked for
       a moment in despair upon this maiden walled out from sympathy by prejudices and convictions
       more impassable than all the mere consequences of class. He looked for a moment, but only for
       a moment, in despair. He found in his tortured spirit energies that responded to the exigency
       of the occasion. Even the otherwise embarrassing presence of Gerard would not have
       prevented—but just at this moment the door opened, and Morley and another person entered the
       room.
</div></body></text></TEI>