<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="64">
CHAPTER VI.
 The reader may not have altogether forgotten Mr Nixon and his comates, the miners and
       colliers of that district not very remote from Mowbray, which Morley had visited at the
       commencement of this history, in order to make fruitless researches after a gentleman whom he
       subsequently so unexpectedly stumbled upon. Affairs were as little flourishing in that region
       as at Mowbray itself, and the distress fell upon a population less accustomed to suffering
       and whose spirit was not daunted by the recent discomfiture and punishment of their
       leaders.
 “It can’t last,” said Master Nixon as he took his pipe from his mouth at the Rising
       Sun.

 He was responded to by a general groan. “It comes to this,” he continued, “Natur has her
       laws, and this is one; a fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work.”
 “I wish you may get it,” said Juggins, “with a harder stint every week and a shilling a
       day knocked off.”
 “And what’s to come to-morrow?” said Waghorn. “The butty has given notice to quit in
       Parker’s field this day se’nnight. Simmons won’t drop wages, but works half time.”
 “The boys will be at play afore long,” said a collier.
 “Hush!” said Master Nixon with a reproving glance, “play is a very serious word. The boys
       are not to go to play as they used to do without by your leave or with your leave. We must
       appoint a committee to consider the question and we must communicate with the other
       trades.”
 “You’re the man, Master Nixon, to choose for churchwarden,” replied the reproved miner
       with a glance of admiration.
 “What is Diggs doing?” said Master Nixon in a solemn tone.
 “A-dropping wages and a-raising tommy like fun,” said Master Waghorn.
 “There is a great stir in Hell-house yard,” said a miner who entered the tap room at this
       moment, much excited. “They say that all the workshops will be shut to-morrow; not an order
       for a month past. They have got a top-sawyer from London there who addresses them every
       evening, and says that we have a right to four shillings a day wages, eight hours’ work and
       two pots of ale.”
 “A fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work,” said Master Nixon. “I would not stickle about
       hours, but the money and the drink are very just.”
 “If Hell-house yard is astir,” said Waghorn, “there will be a good deal to be seen
       yet.”
 “It’s grave,” said Master Nixon. “What think you of a deputation there? It might come to
       good.”
 “I should like to hear the top-sawyer from London,” said Juggins. “We had a Chartist here the other day, but he did not understand our case at all.”
 “I heard him,” said Master Nixon, “but what’s his Five Points to us? Why he ayn’t got
       tommy among them.”
 “Nor long stints,” said Waghorn.
 “Nor butties,” said Juggins.
 “He’s a pretty fellow to come and talk to us,” said a collier. “He had never been down a
       pit in all his life.”
 The evening passed away in the tap room of the Rising Sun in reflections on the present
       critical state of affairs and in consultations as to the most expedient course for the
       future. The rate of wages which for several years in this district had undergone a continuous
       depression, had just received another downward impulse and was threatened with still further
       reduction, for the price of iron became every day lower in the market, and the article itself
       so little in demand that few but the great capitalists who could afford to accumulate their
       produce were able to maintain their furnaces in action. The little men who still continued
       their speculations could only do so partially, by diminishing the days of
       service and increasing their stints or toil and by decreasing the rate of wages as well as
       paying them entirely in goods, of which they had a great stock and of which they thus
       relieved themselves at a high profit. Add to all these causes of suffering and discontent
       among the workmen the apprehension of still greater evils and the tyranny of the butties or
       middlemen, and it will with little difficulty be felt that the public mind of this district
       was well-prepared for the excitement of the political agitator, especially if he were
       discreet enough rather to descant on their physical sufferings and personal injuries than to
       attempt the propagation of abstract political principles, with which it was impossible for
       them to sympathise with the impulse and facility of the inhabitants of manufacturing towns,
       members of literary and scientific institutes, habitual readers of political journals and
       accustomed to habits of discussion of all public questions. It generally happens however that
       where a mere physical impulse urges the people to insurrection, though it is
       often an influence of slow growth and movement, the effects are more violent and sometimes
       more obstinate than when they move under the blended authority of moral and physical
       necessity, and mix up together the rights and the wants of Man.
 However this may be, on the morning after the conversation at the Rising Sun which we have
       just noticed, the population having as usual gone to their work, having penetrated the pit
       and descended the shaft, the furnaces all blazing, the chimneys all smoking,—suddenly there
       rose a rumour even in the bowels of the earth, that the hour and the man had at length
       arrived; the hour that was to bring them relief and the man that was to bear them
       redress.
 “My missus told it me at the pit-head when she brought me my breakfast,” said a pikeman to
       his comrade, and he struck a vigorous blow at the broadseam on which he was working.
 “It is not ten mile,” said his companion. “They’ll be here by noon.”
 “There is a good deal to do in their way,” said the first pikeman. “All men at work after
       notice to be ducked, they say, and every engine to be stopped forthwith.”
 “Will the police meet them before they reach this?”
 “There is none: my missus says that not a man John of them is to be seen. The Hell-cats as
       they call themselves halt at every town and offer fifty pounds for a live policeman.”
 “I’ll tell you what,” said the second pikeman. “I’ll stop my stint and go up the shaft. My
       heart’s all of a flutter, I can’t work no more. We’ll have a fair day’s wage for a fair day’s
       work yet.”
 “Come along, I’m your man; if the doggy stop us, we’ll knock him down. The People must
       have their rights; we’re driven to this, but if one shilling a day is dropped, why not
       two?”
 “Very true; the People must have their rights, and eight hours’ work is quite enough.”
 In the light of day, the two miners soon learnt in more detail the news which the wife of
       one of them earlier in the morning had given as a rumour. There seemed now no
       doubt that the people of Wodgate, commonly called the Hell-cats, headed by their Bishop, had
       invaded in great force the surrounding district, stopped all the engines, turned all the
       potters out of the manufactories, met with no resistance from the authorities, and issued a
       decree that labour was to cease until the Charter was the law of the land.
 This last edict was not the least surprising part of the whole affair; for no one could
       have imagined that the Bishop or any of his subjects had ever even heard of the Charter, much
       less that they could by any circumstances comprehend its nature, or by any means be induced
       to believe that its operation would further their interests or redress their grievances. But
       all this had been brought about, as most of the great events of history, by the unexpected
       and unobserved influence of individual character.
 A Chartist leader had been residing for some time at Wodgate, ever since the distress had
       become severe, and had obtained great influence and popularity by assuring a suffering and half-starving population, that they were entitled to four shillings a day and
       two pots of ale, and only eight hours’ work. He was a man of abilities and of popular
       eloquence, and his representations produced an effect; their reception invested him with
       influence, and as he addressed a population who required excitement, being very slightly
       employed and with few resources for their vacant hours, the Chartist who was careful never to
       speak of the Charter became an important personage at Wodgate, and was much patronized by
       Bishop Hatton and his Lady, whose good offices he was sedulous to conciliate. At the right
       moment, everything being ripe and well prepared, the Bishop being very drunk and harassed by
       the complaints of his subjects, the Chartist revealed to him the mysteries of the Charter,
       and persuaded him not only that the Five Points would cure everything, but that he was the
       only man who could carry the Five Points. The Bishop had nothing to do; he was making a lock
       merely for amusement; he required action; he embraced the Charter, without
       having a definite idea what it meant, but he embraced it fervently, and he determined to
       march into the country at the head of the population of Wodgate, and establish the faith.
       Since the conversion of Constantine, a more important adoption had never occurred. The whole
       of the north of England, and a great part of the midland counties were in a state of
       disaffection; the entire country was suffering; hope had deserted the labouring classes; they
       had no confidence in any future of the existing system. Their organisation, independent of
       the political system of the Chartists, was complete. Every trade had its union, and every
       union its lodge in every town, and its central committee in every district. All that was
       required was the first move, and the Chartist emissary had long fixed upon Wodgate as the
       spring of the explosion, when the news of the strike in Lancashire determined him to
       precipitate the event.
 The march of Bishop Hatton at the head of the Hell-cats into the mining districts was
       perhaps the most striking popular movement since the Pilgrimage of Grace.
       Mounted on a white mule, wall-eyed and of hideous form, the Bishop brandished a huge hammer
       with which he had announced he would destroy the enemies of the people: all butties, doggies,
       dealers in truck and tommy, middle masters and main masters. Some thousand Hell-cats followed
       him brandishing bludgeons, or armed with bars of iron, pickhandles, and hammers. On each side
       of the Bishop, on a donkey, was one of his little sons, as demure and earnest as if he were
       handling his file. A flowing standard of silk inscribed with the Charter, and which had been
       presented to him by the delegate, was borne before him like the oriflamme. Never was such a
       gaunt, grim crew. As they advanced their numbers continually increased, for they arrested all
       labour in their progress. Every engine was stopped, the plug was driven out of every boiler,
       every fire was extinguished, every man was turned out. The decree went forth that labour was
       to cease until the Charter was the law of the land: the mine and the mill, the foundry and
       the loom-shop were until that consummation to be idle: nor was the mighty pause
       to be confined to these great enterprises. Every trade of every kind and description was to
       be stopped: tailor and cobbler, brushmaker and sweep, tinker and carter, mason and builder,
       all, all; for all an enormous Sabbath that was to compensate for any incidental suffering
       that it induced by the increased means and the elevated condition it ultimately would
       insure—that paradise of artizans, that Utopia of Toil, embalmed in those ringing words,
       sounds cheerful to the Saxon race—“A fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work.”
</div></body></text></TEI>