<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
CHAPTER X.
 Time passes with a measured and memorable wing during the first period of a sojourn in a
       new place, among new characters and new manners. Every person, every incident, every feeling,
       touches and stirs the imagination. The restless mind creates and observes at the same time.
       Indeed there is scarcely any popular tenet more erroneous than that which holds that when
       time is slow, life is dull. It is very often and very much the reverse. If we look back on
       those passages of our life which dwell most upon the memory, they are brief periods full of
       action and novel sensation. Egremont found this so during the first days of his new residence in Mowedale. The first week, an epoch in his life, seemed an age; at the
       end of the first month, he began to deplore the swiftness of time and almost to moralize over
       the brevity of existence. He found that he was leading a life of perfect happiness, but of
       remarkable simplicity; he wished it might never end, but felt difficulty in comprehending how
       in the first days of his experience of it, it had seemed so strange; almost as strange as it
       was sweet. The day that commenced early, was past in reading—books lent him often too by
       Sybil Gerard—sometimes in a ramble with her and Morley, who had time much at his command, to
       some memorable spot in the neighbourhood, or in the sport which the river and the rod secured
       Egremont. In the evening, he invariably repaired to the cottage of Gerard, beneath whose
       humble roof he found every female charm that can fascinate, and conversation that stimulated
       his intelligence. Gerard was ever the same; hearty, simple, with a depth of feeling and
       native thought on the subjects on which they touched, and with a certain grandeur of sentiment and conception which contrasted with his social position, but which
       became his idiosyncracy. Sybil spoke little, but hung upon the accents of her father; yet
       ever and anon her rich tones conveyed to the charmed ear of Egremont some deep conviction,
       the earnestness of her intellect as remarkable as the almost sacred repose of her mien and
       manner. Of Morley, at first Egremont saw a great deal: he lent our friend books, opened with
       unreserve and with great richness of speculative and illustrative power, on the questions
       which ever engaged him, and which were new and highly interesting to his companion. But as
       time advanced, whether it were that the occupations of Morley increased, and the calls on his
       hours left him fewer occasions for the indulgence of social intercourse, Egremont saw him
       seldom, except at Gerard’s cottage, where generally he might be found in the course of the
       week, and their rambles together had entirely ceased.
 Alone, Egremont mused much over the daughter of Gerard, but shrinking from the precise and the definite, his dreams were delightful, but vague. All that he asked was,
       that his present life should go on for ever; he wished for no change, and at length almost
       persuaded himself that no change could arrive; as men who are basking in a summer sun,
       surrounded by bright and beautiful objects, cannot comprehend how the seasons can ever alter;
       that the sparkling foliage should shrivel and fall away, the foaming waters become icebound,
       and the blue serene, a dark and howling space.
 In this train of mind, the early days of October having already stolen on him, an incident
       occurred which startled him in his retirement, and rendered it necessary that he should
       instantly quit it. Egremont had entrusted the secret of his residence to a faithful servant
       who communicated with him when necessary, under his assumed name. Through these means he
       received a letter from his mother, written from London, where she had unexpectedly arrived,
       entreating him, in urgent terms, to repair to her without a moment’s delay, on a matter of
        equal interest and importance to herself and him. Such an appeal from such a
       quarter, from the parent that had ever been kind, and the friend that had been ever faithful,
       was not for a moment to be neglected. Already a period had elapsed since its transmission,
       which Egremont regretted. He resolved at once to quit Mowedale, nor could he console himself
       with the prospect of an immediate return. Parliament was to assemble in the ensuing month,
       and independent of the unknown cause which summoned him immediately to town, he was well
       aware that much disagreeable business awaited him which could no longer be postponed. He had
       determined not to take his seat unless the expenses of his contest were previously
       discharged, and despairing of his brother’s aid, and shrinking from trespassing any further
       on his mother’s resources, the future looked gloomy enough: indeed nothing but the frequent
       presence and the constant influence of Sybil had driven from his mind the ignoble melancholy
       which, relieved by no pensive fancy, is the invariable attendant of pecuniary
       embarrassment.

 And now he was to leave her. The event, rather the catastrophe, which under any
       circumstances, could not be long postponed, was to be precipitated. He strolled up to the
       cottage to bid her farewell and to leave kind words for her father. Sybil was not there. The
       old dame who kept their home informed him that Sybil was at the convent, but would return in
       the evening. It was impossible to quit Mowedale without seeing Sybil; equally impossible to
       postpone his departure. But by travelling through the night, the lost hours might be
       regained. And Egremont made his arrangements, and awaited with anxiety and impatience the
       last evening.
 The evening, like his heart, was not serene. The soft air that had lingered so long with
       them, a summer visitant in an autumnal sky and loth to part, was no more present. A cold
       harsh wind, gradually rising, chilled the system and grated on the nerves. There was misery
       in its blast and depression in its moan. Egremont felt infinitely dispirited. The landscape
       around him that he had so often looked upon with love and joy, was dull and
       hard; the trees dingy, the leaden waters motionless, the distant hills rough and austere.
       Where was that translucent sky, once brilliant as his enamoured fancy; those bowery groves of
       aromatic fervor wherein he had loved to roam and muse; that river of swift and sparkling
       light that flowed and flashed like the current of his enchanted hours? All vanished—as his
       dreams.
 He stood before the cottage of Gerard; he recalled the eve that he had first gazed upon
       its moonlit garden. What wild and delicious thoughts were then his! They were gone like the
       illumined hour. Nature and fortune had alike changed. Prescient of sorrow, almost prophetic
       of evil, he opened the cottage door, and the first person his eye encountered was Morley.
 Egremont had not met him for some time, and his cordial greeting of Egremont to-night
       contrasted with the coldness, not to say estrangement, which to the regret and sometimes the
       perplexity of Egremont had gradually grown up between them. Yet on no occasion
       was his presence less desired by our friend. Morley was talking as Egremont entered with
       great animation; in his hand a newspaper, on a paragraph contained in which he was
       commenting. The name of Marney caught the ear of Egremont who turned rather pale at the
       sound, and hesitated on the threshold. The unembarrassed welcome of his friends however
       re-assured him, and in a moment he even ventured to enquire the subject of their
       conversation. Morley immediately referring to the newspaper said, “This is what I have just
       read—
 “EXTRAORDINARY SPORT AT THE EARL OF MARNEY’S.
 On Wednesday, in a small cover called the Horns, near Marney Abbey, his grace the Duke of
       Fitz-Aquitaine, the Earl of Marney, Colonel Rippe and Captain Grouse, with only four hours
       shooting, bagged the extraordinary number of seven hundred and thirty head of game, namely
       hares three hundred and thirty-nine; pheasants two hundred and twenty-one; partridges
       thirty-four; rabbits eighty-seven; and the following day upwards of fifty hares, pheasants,
       etc., (wounded the previous day) were picked up. Out of the four hours’ shooting two of
       the party were absent an hour and a-half, namely the Earl of Marney and Captain Grouse,
       attending an agricultural meeting in the neighbourhood; the noble earl with his usual
       considerate condescension having kindly consented personally to distribute the various prizes
       to the labourers whose good conduct entitled them to the distinction.”
 “What do you think of that, Franklin?” said Morley. “That is our worthy friend of Marney
       Abbey, where we first met. You do not know this part of the country, or you would smile at
       the considerate condescension of the worst landlord in England; and who was, it seems, thus
       employed the day or so after his battue, as they call it.” And Morley turning the paper read
       another paragraph:—
 “At a Petty Sessions holden at the Green Dragon Inn, Marney, Friday, October—, 1837.
 “Magistrates present: The Earl of Marney, the Rev. Felix Flimsey, and Captain Grouse.

 “Information against Robert Hind for a trespass in pursuit of game in Blackrock Wood, the
       property of Sir Vavasour Firebrace, Bart. The case was distinctly proved; several wires being
       found in the pocket of the defendant. Defendant was fined in the full penalty of forty
       shillings and costs twenty-seven; the Bench being of opinion there was no excuse for him,
       Hind being in regular employ as a farm labourer and gaining his seven shillings a-week.
       Defendant being unable to pay the penalty, was sent for two months to Marham Gaol.”
 “What a pity,” said Morley, “that Robert Hind, instead of meditating the snaring of a
       hare, had not been fortunate enough to pick up a maimed one crawling about the fields the day
       after the battue. It would certainly have been better for himself; and if he has a wife and
       family, better for the parish.”
 “Oh!” said Gerard, “I doubt not they were all picked up by the poulterer who has the
       contract: even the Normans did not sell their game.”
 “The question is,” said Morley, “would you rather be barbarous or mean; that
       is the alternative presented by the real and the pseudo Norman nobility of England. Where I
       have been lately, there is a Bishopsgate Street merchant who has been made for no
       conceiveable public reason a baron bold. Bigod and Bohun could not enforce the forest laws
       with such severity as this dealer in cotton and indigo.”
 “It is a difficult question to deal with—this affair of the game laws,” said Egremont;
       “how will you reach the evil? Would you do away with the offence of trespass? And if so, what
       is your protection for property?”
 “It comes to a simple point though,” said Morley, “the Territorialists must at length
       understand that they cannot at the same time have the profits of a farm and the pleasures of
       a chase.”
 At this moment entered Sybil. At the sight of her, the remembrance that they were about to
       part, nearly overwhelmed Egremont. Her supremacy over his spirit was revealed to him, and
       nothing but the presence of other persons could have prevented him avowing his entire subjection. His hand trembled as he touched her’s, and his eye, searching yet
       agitated, would have penetrated her serene soul. Gerard and Morley, somewhat withdrawn,
       pursued their conversation; while Egremont hanging over Sybil, attempted to summon courage to
       express to her his sad adieu. It was in vain. Alone, perhaps he might have poured forth a
       passionate farewell. But constrained he became embarrassed; and his conduct was at the same
       time tender and perplexing. He asked and repeated questions which had already been answered.
       His thoughts wandered from their conversation but not from her with whom he should have
       conversed. Once their eyes met, and Sybil observed his suffused with tears. Once he looked
       round and caught the glance of Morley, instantly withdrawn, but not easy to be forgotten.
 Shortly after this and earlier than his wont, Morley rose and wished them good night. He
       shook hands with Egremont and bade him farewell with some abruptness. Harold who seemed half
       asleep suddenly sprang from the side of his mistress and gave an agitated bark.
       Harold was never very friendly to Morley, who now tried to soothe him, but in vain. The dog
       looked fiercely at him and barked again, but the moment Morley had disappeared, Harold
       resumed his usual air of proud high-bred gentleness, and thrust his nose into the hand of
       Egremont, who patted him with fondness.
 The departure of Morley was a great relief to Egremont, though the task that was left was
       still a painful effort. He rose and walked for a moment up and down the room, commenced an
       unfinished sentence, approached the hearth and leant over the mantel; and then at length
       extending his hand to Gerard he exclaimed, in a trembling voice, “Best of friends, I must
       leave Mowedale.”
 “I am very sorry,” said Gerard; “and when?”
 “Now,” said Egremont.
 “Now!” said Sybil.
 “Yes; this instant. My summons is urgent. I ought to have left this morning. I came here
       then to bid you farewell,” he said looking at Sybil, “to express to you how deeply I was
       indebted to you for all your goodness—how dearly I shall cherish the memory of these happy
       days—the happiest I have ever known;” and his voice faltered. “I came also to leave a kind
       message for you, my friend, a hope that we might meet again and soon—but your daughter was
       absent, and I could not leave Mowedale without seeing either of you. So I must contrive to
       get on through the night.”
 “Well we lose a very pleasant neighbour,” said Gerard; “we shall miss you, I doubt not,
       eh, Sybil?”
 But Sybil had turned away her head; she was leaning over and seemed to be caressing Harold
       and was silent.
 How much Egremont would have liked to have offered or invited correspondence; to have
       proffered his services when the occasion permitted; to have said or proposed many things that
       might have cherished their acquaintance or friendship; but embarrassed by his incognito and
       all its consequent deception, he could do nothing but tenderly express his regret at parting,
        and speak vaguely and almost mysteriously of their soon again meeting. He held
       out again his hand to Gerard who shook it heartily: then approaching Sybil, Egremont said,
       “you have shewn me a thousand kindnesses, which I cherish,” he added in a lower tone, “above
       all human circumstances. Would you deign to let this volume lie upon your table,” and he
       offered Sybil an English translation of Thomas a Kempis, illustrated by some masterpieces. In
       its first page was written “Sybil, from a faithful friend.”
 “I accept it,” said Sybil with a trembling voice and rather pale, “in remembrance of a
       friend.” She held forth her hand to Egremont, who retained it for an instant, and then
       bending very low, pressed it to his lips. As with an agitated heart, he hastily crossed the
       threshold of the cottage, something seemed to hold him back. He turned round. The bloodhound
       had seized him by the coat and looked up to him with an expression of affectionate
       remonstrance against his departure. Egremont bent down, caressed Harold and released himself
       from his grasp.

 When Egremont left the cottage, he found the country enveloped in a thick white mist, so
       that had it not been for some huge black shadows which he recognized as the crests of trees,
       it would have been very difficult to discriminate the earth from the sky, and the mist
       thickening as he advanced, even these fallacious landmarks threatened to disappear. He had to
       walk to Mowbray to catch a night train for London. Every moment was valuable, but the
       unexpected and increasing obscurity rendered his progress slow and even perilous. The
       contiguity to the river made every step important. He had according to his calculations
       proceeded nearly as far as his old residence, and notwithstanding the careless courage of
       youth and the annoyance of relinquishing a project, intolerable at that season of life, was
       meditating the expediency of renouncing that night the attempt on Mowbray and of gaining his
       former quarters for shelter. He stopped, as he had stopped several times before, to calculate
       rather than to observe. The mist was so thick that he could not see his own extended hand.
        It was not the first time that it had occurred to him that some one or
       something was hovering about his course.
 “Who is there?” exclaimed Egremont. But no one answered.
 He moved on a little, but very slowly. He felt assured that his ear caught a contiguous
       step. He repeated his interrogatory in a louder tone, but it obtained no response. Again he
       stopped. Suddenly he was seized; an iron grasp assailed his throat, a hand of steel griped
       his arm. The unexpected onset hurried him on. The sound of waters assured him that he was
       approaching the precipitous bank of that part of the river which, from a ledge of pointed
       rocks, here formed rapids. Vigorous and desperate, Egremont plunged like some strong animal
       on whom a beast of prey had made a fatal spring. His feet clung to the earth as if they were
       held by some magnetic power. With his disengaged arm he grappled with his mysterious and
       unseen foe.
 At this moment he heard the deep bay of a hound.

 “Harold!” he exclaimed. The dog, invisible, sprang forward and seized upon his assailant.
       So violent was the impulse that Egremont staggered and fell, but he fell freed from his dark
       enemy. Stunned and exhausted, some moments elapsed before he was entirely himself. The wind
       had suddenly changed; a violent gust had partially dispelled the mist; the outline of the
       landscape was in many places visible. Beneath him were the rapids of the Mowe, over which a
       watery moon threw a faint, flickering light. Egremont was lying on its precipitous bank; and
       Harold panting was leaning over him and looking in his face, and sometimes licking him with
       that tongue which, though not gifted with speech, had spoken so seasonably in the moment of
       danger.
 END OF THE THIRD BOOK
</div></body></text></TEI>