<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="71">
CHAPTER XIII.
 It was the Spring of last year, and Lady Bardolf was making a morning visit to Lady St
       Julians.
 “I heard they were to be at Lady Palmerston’s last night,” said Lady St Julians.
 “No,” said Lady Bardolf shaking his head, “they make their first appearance at Deloraine
       House. We meet there on Thursday I know.”
 “Well, I must say,” said Lady St Julians, “that I am curious to see her.”
 “Lord Valentine met them last year at Naples.”
 “And what does he say of her.”

 “Oh! he raves!”
 “What a romantic history! And what a fortunate man is Lord Marney. If one could only have
       foreseen events!” exclaimed Lady St Julians. “He was always a favourite of mine though. But
       still I thought his brother was the very last person who ever would die. He was so very
       hard!”
 “I fear Lord Marney is entirely lost to us,” said Lady Bardolf looking very solemn.
 “Ah! he always had a twist,” said Lady St Julians, “and used to breakfast with that horrid
       Mr Trenchard, and do those sort of things. But still with his immense fortune, I should think
       he would become rational.”
 “You may well say immense,” said Lady Bardolf. “Mr Ormsby, and there is no better judge of
       another man’s income, says there are not three peers in the kingdom who have so much a year
       clear.”
 “They say the Mowbray estate is forty thousand a year,” said Lady St Julians. “Poor Lady
       de Mowbray! I understand that Mr Mountchesney has resolved not to appeal against the
       verdict.”

 “You know he has not a shadow of a chance,” said Lady Bardolf. “Ah! what changes we have
       seen in that family! They say the writ of right killed poor Lord de Mowbray, but to my mind
       he never recovered the burning of the Castle. We went over to them directly, and I never saw
       a man so cut up. We wanted them to come to us at Firebrace, but he said he should leave the
       county immediately. I remember Lord Bardolf mentioning to me, that he looked like a dying
       man.”
 “Well I must say,” said Lady St Julians rallying as it were from a fit of abstraction,
       “that I am most curious to see Lady Marney.”
 The reader will infer from this conversation that Dandy Mick, in spite of his stunning
       fall, and all dangers which awaited him on his recovery, had contrived in spite of fire and
       flame, sabre and carbine, trampling troopers and plundering mobs, to reach the Convent of
       Mowbray with the box of papers. There he enquired for Sybil, in whose hands, and whose hands
       alone he was enjoined to deposit them. She was still absent, but faithful to his
       instructions, Mick would deliver his charge to none other, and exhausted by the fatigues of
       the terrible day, he remained in the court-yard of the Convent, lying down with the box for
       his pillow until Sybil under the protection of Egremont herself returned. Then he fulfilled
       his mission. Sybil was too agitated at the moment to perceive all its import, but she
       delivered the box into the custody of Egremont, who desiring Mick to follow him to his hotel
       bade farewell to Sybil, who equally with himself, was then ignorant of the fatal encounter on
       Mowbray Moor.
 We must drop a veil over the anguish which its inevitable and speedy revelation brought to
       the daughter of Gerard. Her love for her father was one of those profound emotions which
       seemed to form a constituent part of her existence. She remained for a long period in
       helpless woe, soothed only by the sacred cares of Ursula. There was another mourner in this
       season of sorrow who must not be forgotten; and that was Lady Marney. All that tenderness and
       the most considerate thought could devise to soften sorrow and reconcile her to
       a change of life which at the first has in it something depressing were extended by Egremont
       to Arabella. He supplied in an instant every arrangement which had been neglected by his
       brother, but which could secure her convenience and tend to her happiness. Between Marney
       Abbey where he insisted for the present that Arabella should reside and Mowbray, Egremont
       passed his life for many months, until by some management which we need not trace or analyse,
       Lady Marney came over one day to the Convent at Mowbray and carried back Sybil to Marney
       Abbey, never again to quit it until on her bridal day, when the Earl and Countess of Marney
       departed for Italy where they passed nearly a year, and from which they had just returned at
       the commencement of this chapter.
 During the previous period however many important events had occurred. Lord Marney had
       placed himself in communication with Mr Hatton, who had soon become acquainted with all that
       had occurred in the muniment room of Mowbray Castle. The result was not what he
       had once anticipated; but for him it was not without some compensatory circumstances. True
       another, and an unexpected rival, had stepped on the stage with whom it was vain to cope, but
       the idea that he had deprived Sybil of her inheritance, had ever, since he had became
       acquainted with her, been the plague-spot of Hatton’s life, and there was nothing that he
       desired more ardently than to see her restored to her rights, and to be instrumental in that
       restoration. How successful he was in pursuing her claim, the reader has already learnt.
 Dandy Mick was rewarded for all the dangers he had encountered in the service of Sybil,
       and what he conceived was the vindication of popular rights. Lord Marney established him in
       business, and Mick took Devilsdust for a partner. Devilsdust having thus obtained a position
       in society and become a capitalist, thought it but a due homage to the social decencies to
       assume a decorous appellation, and he called himself by the name of the town where he was born. The firm of Radley, Mowbray, and Co., is a rising one; and will probably
       furnish in time a crop of members of Parliament and Peers of the realm. Devilsdust married
       Caroline, and Mrs Mowbray became a great favorite. She was always perhaps a little too fond
       of junketting but she had a sweet temper and a gay spirit, and sustained her husband in the
       agonies of a great speculation, or the despair of glutted markets. Julia became Mrs Radley,
       and was much esteemed: no one could behave better. She was more orderly than Caroline, and
       exactly suited Mick, who wanted a person near him of decision and method. As for Harriet, she
       is not yet married. Though pretty and clever, she is selfish and a screw. She has saved a
       good deal and has a considerable sum in the Savings’ Bank, but like many heiresses she cannot
       bring her mind to share her money with another. The great measures of Sir Robert Peel, which
       produced three good harvests, have entirely revived trade at Mowbray. The Temple is again
       open. newly-painted, and re-burnished, and Chaffing Jack has of course “rallied”
       while good Mrs Carey still gossips with her neighbours round her well-stored stall, and tells
       wonderful stories of the great stick-out and riots of ‘42.
 And thus I conclude the last page of a work, which though its form be light and
       unpretending, would yet aspire to suggest to its readers some considerations of a very
       opposite character. A year ago. I presumed to offer to the public some volumes that aimed to
       call their attention to the state of our political parties; their origin, their history,
       their present position. In an age of political infidelity, of mean passions and petty
       thoughts, I would have impressed upon the rising race not to despair, but to seek in a right
       understanding of the history of their country and in the energies of heroic youth—the
       elements of national welfare. The present work advances another step in the same emprise.
       From the state of Parties it now would draw public thought to the state of the People whom
       those parties for two centuries have governed. The comprehension and the cure of
       this greater theme depend upon the same agencies as the first: it is the past alone that can
       explain the present, and it is youth that alone can mould the remedial future. The written
       history of our country for the last ten reigns has been a mere phantasma; giving to the
       origin and consequence of public transactions a character and colour in every respect
       dissimilar with their natural form and hue. In this mighty mystery all thoughts and things
       have assumed an aspect and title contrary to their real quality and style: Oligarchy has been
       called Liberty; an exclusive Priesthood has been christened a National Church; Sovereignty
       has been the title of something that has had no dominion, while absolute power has been
       wielded by those who profess themselves the servants of the People. In the selfish strife of
       factions two great existences have been blotted out of the history of England—the Monarch and
       the Multitude; as the power of the Crown has diminished, the privileges of the People have
       disappeared; till at length the sceptre has become a pageant, and its subject
       has degenerated again into a serf.
 It is nearly fourteen years ago, in the popular frenzy of a mean and selfish revolution
       which neither emancipated the Crown nor the People, that I first took the occasion to
       intimate and then to develop to the first assembly of my countrymen that I ever had the
       honour to address, these convictions. They have been misunderstood as is ever for a season
       the fate of Truth, and they have obtained for their promulgator much misrepresentation as
       must ever be the lot of those who will not follow the beaten track of a fallacious custom.
       But Time that brings all things has brought also to the mind of England some suspicion that
       the idols they have so long worshipped and the oracles that have so long deluded them are not
       the true ones. There is a whisper rising in this country that Loyalty is not a phrase. Faith
       not a delusion, and Popular Liberty something more diffusive and substantial than the profane
       exercise of the sacred rights of sovereignty by political classes.

 That we may live to see England once more possess a free Monarchy and a privileged and
       prosperous People, is my prayer; that these great consequences can only be brought about by
       the energy and devotion of our Youth is my persuasion. We live in an age when to be young and
       to be indifferent can be no longer synonymous. We must prepare for the coming hour. The
       claims of the Future are represented by suffering millions; and the Youth of a Nation are the
       trustees of Posterity.
</div></body></text></TEI>