<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="60">
CHAPTER II.
 Two days after this conversation in Downing Street, a special messenger arrived at Marney
       Abbey from the Lord Lieutenant of the county, the Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine. Immediately after
       reading the despatch of which he was the bearer, there was a great bustle in the house; Lady
       Marney was sent for to her husband’s library and there enjoined immediately to write various
       letters which were to prevent certain expected visitors from arriving; Captain Grouse was in
       and out the same library every five minutes, receiving orders and counter orders, and finally
       mounting his horse was flying about the neighbourhood with messages and commands. All this
       stir signified that the Marney regiment of Yeomanry were to be called out directly.
 Lord Marney who had succeeded in obtaining a place in the Household and was
       consequently devoted to the institutions of the country, was full of determination to uphold
       them; but at the same time with characteristic prudence was equally resolved that the
       property principally protected should be his own, and that the order of his own district
       should chiefly engage his solicitude.
 “I do not know what the Duke means by marching into the disturbed districts,” said Lord
       Marney to Captain Grouse. “These are disturbed districts. There have been three fires in one
       week, and I want to know what disturbance can be worse than that? In my opinion this is a
       mere anti-corn-law riot to frighten the government; and suppose they do stop the mills—what
       then? I wish they were all stopped, and then one might live like a gentleman again?”
 Egremont, between whom and his brother a sort of bad-tempered good understanding had of
       late years to a certain degree flourished, in spite of Lord Marney remaining childless, which
       made him hate Egremont with double distilled virulence, and chiefly by the
       affectionate manoeuvres of their mother, but whose annual visits to Marney had generally been
       limited to the yeomanry week, arrived from London the same day as the letter of the Lord
       Lieutenant, as he had learnt that his brother’s regiment, in which he commanded a troop, as
       well as the other yeomanry corps in the North of England, must immediately take the
       field.
 Five years had elapsed since the commencement of our history, and they had brought
       apparently much change to the character of the brother of Lord Marney. He had become,
       especially during the last two or three years, silent and reserved; he rarely entered
       society; even the company of those who were once his intimates had ceased to attract him; he
       was really a melancholy man. The change in his demeanour was observed by all; his mother and
       his sister-in-law were the only persons who endeavoured to penetrate its cause, and sighed
       over the failure of their sagacity. Quit the world and the world forgets you; and Egremont
       would have soon been a name no longer mentioned in those brilliant saloons which
       he once adorned, had not occasionally a sensation, produced by an effective speech in the
       House of Commons, recalled his name to his old associates, who then remembered the pleasant
       hours passed in his society and wondered why he never went anywhere now.
 “I suppose he finds society a bore,” said Lord Eugene de Vere; “I am sure I do; but then
       what is a fellow to do? I am not in Parliament like Egremont. I believe, after all, that’s
       the thing; for I have tried everything else and everything else is a bore.”
 “I think one should marry like Alfred Mountchesney,” said Lord Milford.
 “But what is the use of marrying if you do not marry a rich woman—and the heiresses of the
       present age will not marry. What can be more unnatural! It alone ought to produce a
       revolution. Why, Alfred is the only fellow who has made a coup; and then he has not got it
       down.”
 “She behaved in a most unprincipled manner to me—that Fitz-Warene,” said Lord Milford,
       “always took my bouquets and once made me write some verses.”
 “By Jove!” said Lord Eugene, “I should like to see them. What a bore it must have been to
       write verses.”
 “I only copied them out of Mina Blake’s album: but I sent them in my own handwriting.”
 Baffled sympathy was the cause of Egremont’s gloom. It is the secret spring of most
       melancholy. He loved and loved in vain. The conviction that his passion, though hopeless, was
       not looked upon with disfavour, only made him the more wretched, for the disappointment is
       more acute in proportion as the chance is better. He had never seen Sybil since the morning
       he quitted her in Smith’s Square, immediately before her departure for the North. The trial
       of Gerard had taken place at the assizes of that year: he had been found guilty and sentenced
       to eighteen months imprisonment in York Castle; the interference of Egremont both in the
       House of Commons and with the government saved him from the felon confinement
       with which he was at first threatened, and from which assuredly state prisoners should be
       exempt. During this effort some correspondence had taken place between Egremont and Sybil,
       which he would willingly have encouraged and maintained; but it ceased nevertheless with its
       subject. Sybil, through the influential interference of Ursula Trafford, lived at the convent
       at York during the imprisonment of her father, and visited him daily.
 The anxiety to take the veil which had once characterised Sybil had certainly waned.
       Perhaps her experience of life had impressed her with the importance of fulfilling vital
       duties. Her father, though he had never opposed her wish, had never encouraged it; and he had
       now increased and interesting claims on her devotion. He had endured great trials, and had
       fallen on adverse fortunes. Sybil would look at him, and though his noble frame was still
       erect and his countenance still displayed that mixture of frankness and decision which had distinguished it of yore, she could not conceal from herself that there were
       ravages which time could not have produced. A year and a half of imprisonment had shaken to
       its centre a frame born for action, and shrinking at all times from the resources of
       sedentary life. The disappointment of high hopes had jarred and tangled even the sweetness of
       his noble disposition. He needed solicitude and solace: and Sybil resolved that if vigilance
       and sympathy could soothe an existence that would otherwise be embittered, these guardian
       angels should at least hover over the life of her father.
 When the term of his imprisonment had ceased, Gerard had returned with his daughter to
       Mowbray. Had he deigned to accept the offers of his friends, he need not have been anxious as
       to his future. A public subscription for his service had been collected: Morley, who was well
       to do in the world, for the circulation of the Mowbray Phalanx daily increased with the
       increasing sufferings of the people, offered his friend to share his house and
       purse: Hatton was munificent; there was no limit either to his offers or his proffered
       services. But all were declined; Gerard would live by labour. The post he had occupied at Mr
       Trafford’s was not vacant even if that gentleman had thought fit again to receive him; but
       his reputation as a first-rate artizan soon obtained him good employment, though on this
       occasion in the town of Mowbray, which for the sake of his daughter he regretted. He had no
       pleasant home now for Sybil, but he had the prospect of one, and until he obtained possession
       of it, Sybil sought a refuge, which had been offered to her from the first, with her kindest
       and dearest friend; so that at this period of our history, she was again an inmate of the
       convent at Mowbray, whither her father and Morley had attended her the eve of the day she had
       first visited the ruins of Marney Abbey.
</div></body></text></TEI>