
  CHAPTER XXXI.
It was late one fine evening towards the end of August, when, though the rooms at the Granby
     had been brilliantly lighted, several windows were open to admit the soft radiance of
     moonlight, and the whole miscellaneous party of ladies and gentlemen resident at the great
     hotel had assembled, full of gay excitement, in the public saloon, where the buzz and laughter
     of many merry voices might be heard on every side. Various agreeable excursions had taken place
     throughout the morning. Pic-nics had flourished at Studley, Ripon, Bolton Abbey, and Harewood
     House, while even Plumpton rocks, very little higher than the cut for a railway, had not been
     without admirers who called them sublime, and the petrifying well at Knaresborough had
     petrified many with admiration.
A day of amusement seemed likely now to end, as such days too commonly do, in weariness and
     ennui. Several very old gentlemen sat down to cards,—those who still made any attempts at being
     juvenile, flirted with the more elderly misses, and Agnes, seated between Lord Doncaster and
     the Abbe, seemed industriously exerting herself to fascinate them both, while, though generally
     careful of her smiles, she now lavished them on each side with apparently heedless
     profusion.
The scarcity of beaux, so often remarked and lamented in most
     societies, could hardly be a legitimate cause of complaint on this occasion, but, as Sir
     Patrick remarked to Marion, "in every family there is but one eldest son, while there are at
     least three-and-twenty daughters, each educated and prepared to take her place at the head of a
     brilliant establishment; therefore, seeing in this room sixty-five young ladies, every one of
     whom expects to marry on at least £2000 a-year, it would require £130,000 per annum to satisfy
     them and their expectant mammas!"
Lord Wigton's fortune alone might have been sufficient, if divided into suitable portions,
     for at least ten such happy couples; but his whole heart seemed bent on bestowing it, with
     himself, on Marion, who found that she was pursued with assiduity so persevering, not only by
     him, but also by Captain De Crespigny, who had now openly abandoned Agnes for her, that,
     annoyed and perplexed how to act, rather than become repulsive and forbidding, which was always
     repulsive to her nature, she silently retreated with Sir Arthur to the quiet domestic fireside
     of the Granvilles, where she enjoyed the peaceful reality of happiness, instead of that noisy
     and glittering imitation of it which she had so gladly forsaken.
In the public saloon, Mrs. O'Donoghoe, a superannuated jeune femme of
     about thirty, more or less, in a dress as bright and red as a blacksmith's forge, hammered on a
     decayed piano-forte a sort of tune, which might be an Irish jig or a Scotch strathspey, while
     several mournful-looking gentlemen had been persuaded to dance with three or four very
     affected, over-dressed partners, giggling young ladies, most of whom were on the shady side of
     five-and-twenty, dressed in stiff muslin frocks a l'enfant, bare
     shoulders, rouge, and very pink stockings.
Mrs. O'Donoghoe's marriage, ten years before, had been a true Harrowgate match—a mutual
     take-in—the lady being a reputed heiress, without a shilling, and the gentleman endowed with an
     imaginary estate, which turned out to be situated in the moon. Since her widowhood, she had
     affected extreme youth, excessive wealth, and extraordinary vivacity, being of opinion that
     liveliness is the most universally popular of all qualities in the gay world, and that those
     who are not gifted by nature with light and joyous spirits, should assume them, though, if the
     exact degree of any person's happiness were distinctly marked by a thermometer on their
     foreheads, the reality might seldom coincide with the external appearance, and the pre-eminence
     would seldom be awarded to those who are blazing the brightest in a crowd. The most malevolent
     persons could scarcely wish their worst enemy to lead that life of anxiety, mortification, and
     misery, the inevitable doom of ladies who will not consent with a good grace to grow old—who
     desire to seem what they are not, and never can be again—who, instead of cheerfully advancing
     to meet advancing years, attempt to rajeunir leur beaute passee, and
     who, vainly endeavoring to stem the tide of time, catch at every straw which affords a hope of
     impeding their career into oblivion. If it be indeed true, as all who have experienced it
     acknowledge, that a worldly career, decked with all the glare and glitter of success, is yet a
     weariness to the spirit, what must such a life be to those for whom it does not even assume the
     tinsel of deceit.
Mrs. O'Donoghoe had appeared during nine successive seasons at Harrowgate, where she shone
     like a moving rainbow, dressing of course younger as she became older, and being considered now
     quite a part and parcel of the Granby establishment. Though it had been remarked that she
     always appeared about the same day as Lord Doncaster, yet her usual place of habitation and
     means of existence were perfectly unknown; but as, on her arrival, she generally entered the
     public room about the same hour as the post bag, it became shrewdly conjectured that she might
     perhaps condescend to travel per mail, while, nevertheless, she boasted long and loudly of her
     enormous jointure.
Sir Patrick alleged, that on a former occasion, when the house was crowded, Mrs. O'Donoghoe
     ordered a bed to be made up for her on the billiard table, and that now she had bespoken one,
     after the dancing was over, in the orchestra, while she gladly dispensed with a sitting-room,
     as the deficiency formed an adequate pretext for constantly frequenting the public room, which
     she greatly preferred, alleging at the same time, in the most emphatic terms, that saving six
     shillings a-day for the hire of a parlor was not of the slightest consequence to her, money
     being "no object," as poor Mr. O'Donoghoe had left her more than she could ever hope to
     spend.
Mrs. O'Donoghoe's name appeared regularly in the weekly printed list of company at
     Harrowgate, and she was certainly by no means a dead letter in the brilliant circle. She sang a
     little, played a little, and talked a great deal, while no topic of conversation ever came
     amiss to her. The gay widow floundered through anything or everything, making a thousand
     blunders, and adapting herself to each individual who conversed with her in succession, being
     ready and anxious for the admiration of all. She seemed willing to compensate for the want of
     silver in her purse, by having plenty on her tongue, and apparently thought, if she thought at
     all, that conversation resembled a game at whist, where each individual should implicitly
     follow his partner's lead.
In every carriage going to races, balls, pigeon matches, or steeple chases, Mrs. O'Donoghoe
     generally manœuvred to get herself a place, either inside or outside, she seemed by no means
     particular which; and whenever the master of the ceremonies became perplexed at balls, by an
     application for a partner from some heavy elderly gentleman in yellow gloves, who desired to
     risk his tendon of Achilles by dancing, he was sure to be rapturously welcomed by Mrs.
     O'Donoghoe. She had been always hitherto the favorite flirt of Lord Doncaster; and her bold
     bravura manner amused Captain De Crespigny, who called her "Fountain's Abbey," on account of
     her being so picturesque a ruin on so very large a scale. Though not quite so "wither'd, auld,
     and droll," as he and some refractory officers had alleged, when entreated by the master of the
     ceremonies to dance with her, yet Mrs. O'Donoghoe's best friends allowed she was thirty—her
     enemies protested she was forty—and the truth lay, as usual, between both extremes. Forced
     almost to acknowledge at last that she had arrived on the debatable ground between youth and
     that uninteresting period, middle age, too old for dancing, too young for cards, and not quite
     beyond the excitement of love-hunting, she still eagerly hoped to forget, in a brilliant
     establishment, the blighted hopes of former years. No unmarried man was too elderly or too
     juvenile for Mrs. O'Donoghoe to try her well-practised fascinations on; and whether they were
     majors or minor, Lord Wigton, Captain De Crespigny, Sir Patrick, or the Marquis, she yet
     continued to hope for their admiration. Still she retained a firm conviction that every
     gentleman arrived at Harrowgate with the full intention of marrying within a month or two—that
     happy couples, at the end of every season, were to be paired off like pairs of gloves or
     shoes—and that every gentleman among her numerous assortment of intimate acquaintances, would
     at last make his own selection; but the most sanguine hope of her sanguine mind was, that the
     attentions shown to her during many a successive season by Lord Doncaster, which had gone so
     far as even to excite some scandal, might at last ripen into an offer of his coronet; in which
     very ardent expectation she had recently suspended her dancing propensities, and diligently
     exercised on the Marquis her talents for listening, when his society could be had, or in his
     absence, she even tolerated his shadow, the Abbe.
"Mrs. O'Donoghoe," exclaimed Captain De Crespigny, throwing himself into a seat beside the
     piano during the interval of a quadrille, "only look at your old superannuated admirer and Miss
     Dunbar. People laugh at the susceptibility of seventeen, but that is nothing to the
     susceptibility of seventy. Your ears have generally been the best of listeners to Lord
     Doncaster's prosing, but you are fairly outdone to-night. How all you young ladies must be
     tormented by that old fellow's button-holding propensities."
"Quite the contrary! His conversation, though not always perfectly correct, is, it must be
     confessed, very amusing. Men in general are a queer set, but I like Lord Doncaster's
     old-fashioned compliments—quite of the vieille cour—one might fancy he
     had lived some centuries ago!"
"I heartily wish he had! I could back old Doncaster against the world, for being the dullest
     proser in the United Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, with the Colonies besides. He will
     die talking, for he talks everybody else to death! The Abbe, too, has no more mind than a
     sparrow. His conversation should be filtered every evening to purify it from bad taste of every
     kind. He picks up half a dozen stories every morning at the ordinary, and retails them to any
     wearied victim who can be forced to listen at night; when these are done so is he—his barrel
     organ has run down—and you may know when the Abbe has come to an end, by observing the hurry he
     is in to be off."
"You are an habitual hater, Captain De Crespigny, and have put on your black cap to condemn
     us all this evening; but I will not have our good Abbe hissed off the stage in this way."
"Good! Look out that word, Mrs. O'Donoghoe, in the dictionary to-morrow, for you cannot know
     its real meaning!"
"Your criticisms on his conversation are like a shower of sleet this cold night, but I assure
     you the Abbe started a perfected new story yesterday, and I have sometimes heard him say very
     good things!"
"Then you have the advantage of everybody else, for I have known him since the time of
     William the Conqueror, and who ever heard of his saying or doing a single good thing? He cannot
     even understand one. The whole pattern of his conversation is egotism in all its branches, and
     you must positively permit me to enjoy my detestation of the Abbe in peace."
"I allow that he is in bad taste occasionally," whispered Mrs. O'Donoghoe, confidentially.
     "The Abbe can say very shocking things without causing one to feel shocked. If he has any
     hypocrisy, it is in trying to appear worse than he is."
"Could any one be worse? That seems to me impossible. No human being would think of calling
     me strict, but of all the odious, revolting sights I know, none can go beyond an irreligious
     clergy-man. The Abbe always looks to me like a person who had something very heavy upon his
     conscience—a guilty, suspicious expression of countenance. I have occasionally wondered, Mrs.
     O'Donoghoe, to see you out-laugh him at some of his own abortive attempts to be witty; but you
     can do many things that no other person can, and that is one of them."
"Captain De Crespigny, we must now and then laugh at other people's jokes besides our
     own!"
"I never laugh! I am the gravest man in Europe. I do sometimes give a bewitching smile, but
     never more."
"Did you ever try an ineffable look?"
"Perhaps I may some evening, when anxious to cut out old Doncaster! Miss Dunbar must find her
     two hours' conversation with him a serious grievance; but what would a life-time be! The ideas
     which proceed from the inside of my uncle's wig are certainly not of the most original and
     amusing. Fancy him day after day toujours Doncaster! Dunbar says he
     would dismiss the best servant he ever had, if the fellow so much as admitted him to a morning
     visit. If I had an ill-will at you, Mrs. O'Donoghoe, which is luckily not the case, I should
     certainly wish you were married to my uncle! Ladies and gentlemen may laugh; but I can assure
     them it would be no laughing matter!"
"Well, say what you will; but I may perhaps think my rose-colored satin has done its duty if
     I have an offer from the Marquis of Doncaster, old as he is!"
"Ah, Mrs. O'Donoghoe! If you had worn that red satin when we were first acquainted, there is
     no saying what might have happened. Another day of it now, and I should be perfectly done for!
     With a train, you would be fit to appear at St. James's! You alone, in the whole world, never
     alter! You must have been born a century old, and become younger every day!"
Though Mr. Granville and Marion, with the good-humored connivance of Sir Arthur, now spent
     many delightful hours in rational and animated intercourse, their happiness became gradually
     clouded with anxiety respecting the lovely but fragile Clara, who evidently drooped and faded.
     Her mind was stronger than her body; while resigned and gentle, she never caused a moment's
     distress to others that could be avoided, though the bright eye, and brighter cheek, which
     might have been mistaken for the glow of health, were but too evidently caused by fever; and
     her brother's heart occasionally misgave him, on observing that a vivid flush, and a deadly
     paleness, chased each other on her countenance when she spoke. There was a nervous tremor in
     her manner, and a deep sensibility in her smile, which saddened the eye that looked on that
     form of almost ethereal delicacy, while she tried, but tried in vain, to conquer the wasting
     sorrow with which she thought the vices and follies of Sir Patrick had forever divided
     them.
Several transient rencontres with the young Baronet, accidental on her part, but preconcerted
     on his, had renewed the conflict of her feelings, and unable to sustain the nearly frantic
     reproaches of one whom she loved only too well, Clara became now almost entirely a prisoner in
     her own apartments. It was the power of principle over feeling which caused her to reject, with
     gentle sorrow, the expression of attachment once so precious, and the fascination of Sir
     Patrick's manner to her was such, that his very errors she could not utterly hate, though day
     after day, she schooled her heart afresh with the remembrance how unjustifiably her own best
     hopes of lasting peace would be endangered by trusting her affections to the keeping of one who
     had betrayed others, and who would have but too baneful an influence over her own mind were
     they united, as he could so little sympathize in the emotions, occupations, and duties of the
     Christian life. While she might have said, like the poet, "I but know that I love thee whatever
     thou art," Clara felt that if her life were to be the sacrifice, he must be rejected;
     therefore, day after day, with pious resignation and fortitude, she endured the slow but
     agonizing martyrdom of extinguishing from her memory one whom she had so deeply loved. Sir
     Patrick contrived to testify by a thousand indescribable assiduities, only too gratifying to
     her nature, how constantly she was the object of his solicitude. Every morning Clara's sitting
     room was adorned with flowers from an unknown hand, which she felt and knew must be sent by Sir
     Patrick, though it was an attention he had never shown to any other; and the rarest fruit was
     frequently produced at her solitary dinner, though the waiter neither could nor would give any
     clear account of whence it came, while not a day passed that Clara did not see Sir Patrick's
     graceful figure lounging beneath her windows, conversing in an animated tone, with everybody
     except herself, or throwing himself on horseback, and galloping almost madly out of sight.
Every evening Mr. Granville urged upon his sister the importance of her being speedily
     conveyed to the continent; but every morning Clara postponed their preparations, feeling too
     much enfeebled for the journey, and unwilling to lose the delightful fascination of Marion's
     society, who sat beside her couch all day, and every day, making hours seem like moments while
     they conversed together. Clara knew nothing of ennui, and never had occasion to kill time, for
     she valued it as time ought to be valued, at an inestimable price. She had no weariness to
     dissipate, as every hour was occupied in improving her own mind and heart, while she exerted
     herself for the happiness of others, and never laid her head on the pillow at night without an
     anxious examination whether she had done all in her power for the real advantage of herself and
     others. It was the opinion of Mr. Granville, frequently expressed, that the very essence of
     earthly happiness is found in exertion,—that "while a right discharge of religious duty is in
     itself the greatest of all exertions, even the trifles or the essentials of life must all be
     gained by making existence one great struggle against nature. Study, integrity, good-humor,
     benevolence, early rising, and moderation are all exertions that must be made upon principle,—a
     principle of Christian obedience; and, as difficulty is the condition of success, our frame is
     strengthened by exertion, our skill by practice, our reasoning powers by opposition, and he who
     wrestles most will wrestle best."
end of volume second
