
  CHAPTER XXXV.
Marion had frequently sketched in her own mind a faint outline of what she should say to
     Agnes on the subject of her unaccountable intimacy with Lord Doncaster, who seemed to delight
     in making a parade of her preference for his society, especially in the presence of his nephew;
     but when Marion found herself at length alone one day with her sister, she felt her heart sink
     with apprehension, yet, being resolved to conquer nature, and do her duty, if possible, she
     approached the table where Agnes was seated. A large, foreign-looking book, with gold clasps,
     lay conspicuously before her, which Marion discovered at once to be a missal, bound in antique
     boards of beautifully inlaid wood, with massy gilt ornaments, and illuminated by designs in the
     style of Albert Durer.
To hide her confusion, and begin the subject with advantage, Marion placed her hand on the
     shoulder of Agnes for some moments, and leaned forward, examining those splendid paintings, the
     singular beauty of which she admired, while expressing considerable amazement at the strange,
     distorted designs on the border, where animals with five heads and their faces all nose, were
     varied with fish mounted on legs, and birds exhibiting human countenances.
"These eccentric creatures resemble the figures in some horrible dream!" observed Marion;
     "but they are not a greater distortion from the truth of nature, than the Popish superstitions
     which they illustrate are from the truth of revelation. Nothing seems left in either, of the
     perfect symmetry with which all things come from a Divine Creator."
"I am no controversialist," said Agnes, indifferently. "I take matters as I find them."
"That is not the safest of all plans, unless you are very careful from whom your ideas are
     received. I have heard that there are writers in the Roman Catholic Church, such as Massillon,
     Pascal, and Fenelon, who were nearly as pure in Christian doctrine as ourselves, resting their
     hope on no merits except those of our Divine Saviour; but I should think, for instance, that no
     Protestant could gain anything from associating with such a man as the Abbe Mordaunt, who would
     disgrace any church. Dear Agnes, allow me for this once the privilege of a sister; not merely
     to love you with my whole heart, as I always do, but also to prove my affection by saying for
     your sake what is most painful to me, and may probably be annoying to you. It is with the
     greatest anxiety and surprise that I have lately been watching you——"
"Watching me!" exclaimed Agnes, starting round with angry asperity, and fixing her flashing
     eyes on Marion. "What right have you—or what right has any living being to watch me?"
"The right of affection and kindness," replied Marion, with emotion, while a large tear
     glittered in her deep blue eyes. "We are motherless girls, Agnes, and therefore we owe each
     other the greater solicitude. There are many eyes upon you, less friendly, I fear, than those
     of a sister. If others were not placing a sinister construction on all they see, I might not
     perhaps have ventured to begin the subject; but as it is, I have no choice except to discuss it
     with either Patrick or yourself. Our kind uncle must not be agitated, on any consideration;
     otherwise I have sometimes thought of asking him to take us at once away from this place."
"And pray, what has your mean 'watching' of my conduct,—your police investigation,
     discovered, which might render so desperate a measure necessary?" asked Agnes, with a
     flickering color in her cheek, and in a bitter tone of suppressed anger. "Wisdom will die with
     you, Marion! I ought to be duly sensible of my good fortune, in having such a sister! Perhaps
     you intend obligingly to favor me with a few hints for the regulation of my conduct,—to honor
     me with a little of that valuable advice which I have not been sufficiently alert in
     asking."
"Agnes! I know myself to be in a most unsuitable position, when criticising anything in your
     conduct; but if I had died, and returned from another world with permission to speak, I could
     not be more entirely free from any personal motive. If I give pain to you, I give greater pain
     to myself; but every one combines in saying, that this old Roman Catholic peer, and his Abbe,
     are most profligate men; that they scarcely deserve to be well received by ladies of character;
     that the very glance of their eye is contamination, and that you alone, of all the ladies in
     this house, are singled out to be, not distinguished, but insulted by their attentions. Surely,
     Agnes, it is time for me to speak. Our reputation is all we have on earth—more precious to any
     woman than the wealth of the world, and more precious, if possible, to us, than to others,
     because we have no other dependence. Patrick is every day on the brink of ruin, and must leave
     us before long. Our uncle—but I cannot speak of that—when he is gone, we shall be alone
     indeed."
"When that day comes, I shall be as sorry as yourself; but there is nothing to fear at
     present. Captain De Crespigny says, all old uncles or aunts who wish to be lamented by their
     young nieces, should die in the midst of a gay season, to interrupt the parties and balls; but
     good, worthy Sir Arthur is more considerate than to incommode any one. When we do lose the
     Admiral, however, be under no apprehension of my remaining alone! I have made up my great mind
     upon that subject, and you will see that circumstances do not always continue the same."
"Nor people either, Agnes! I have long feared that you trust too implicitly in the constancy
     of Captain De Crespigny."
"Trust! Do you suppose that I any longer trust him!" exclaimed Agnes—her color rising, and
     her large eyes glittering with a strange expression of indignant contempt. "No, Marion! He has
     been represented to me now, as he is, a heartless, vain, unfeeling coquette. All men are
     monsters, but he is the worst! I can be revenged, however! Even he, cold and indifferent as he
     is, shall repent! I shall blight his hopes, as he has blighted mine. I shall cross his views,
     humble and disappoint him. To inflict on him all that he has so wantonly and cruelly inflicted
     on me; to destroy his insolent triumph, and bring down the pride of his success, I would—yes,
     Marion, I would, and I shall sacrifice the happiness of my whole life!"
"Dear Agnes! do not say so! Do not even think so for a moment! What can you mean! Revenge
     would be a wretched satisfaction, at best! If he has treated you ill——"
"If he has!" interrupted Agnes, with startling vehemence. "Marion! the Abbe thinks he could
     never have married me, even had he wished it. That Captain De Crespigny became entangled, from
     the time he was a boy, in one of those horrid Scotch affairs, half a marriage, or a whole one,
     just as he pleases, and Lord Doncaster told me one day in confidence——"
"In confidence, Agnes! What confidence should ever exist between you and such a man as Lord
     Doncaster? an old roue! You ought to despise and avoid him!"
"I am apt to think you are quite mistaken," replied Agnes, with a sudden assumption of
     haughtiness, while she shot an angry glance at Marion. "The last Lord Doncaster but ten, may
     have been a roue, or what you please, but I know nothing, and will hear
     nothing against the present."
"That is the very point on which I must speak!" answered Marion, hurriedly, her features
     working with agitation, while the blood rushed back to her heart. "In a case like this, where
     love or marriage are completely out of the question, our friends are all astonished that you,
     Agnes, who make no secret of liking admiration, should waste so much time in deep conversation
     with that really disreputable old Peer. Believe me, it gives rise to much animadversion, and
     even calumny, especially when connected with that new ornament you wear; and I begin seriously
     to fear you may be persuaded into taking the veil."
"Only a bridal veil," replied Agnes, arranging her ringlets. "I am not quite so mad as you
     think. I certainly have adopted this badge! At Rome I shall do as Rome does. Now, Marion, as
     young Rapid says in the comedy, 'I shall take it a personal favor if you will not faint;' but
     the Romish faith suits me best, and I consider it religion in full dress, instead of religion
     in deshabille. I admire the almost theatrical magnificence of its ritual; the splendid
     processions, the consecrated dresses, the superb music, the dazzling lights, the clouds of
     burning incense, the romantic convents, and the magnificent cathedrals."
Marion looked aghast with consternation and sorrow, while she listened in silence; but at
     length, in a tone of subdued and mournful indignation, she replied, "Is this, then, possible!
     that without one serious thought, you would forsake our holy faith, for a mere external mockery
     of religion! a solemn pantomime? Attracted by rosaries, crucifixes, tinkling bells, and empty
     symbols, you would forget the lessons of our childhood, the church in which we worshipped with
     our father, the Bible which he taught us to revere. Surely, Agnes, you will consult a clergyman
     of our own persuasion, before taking rashly the most important step which a mortal can possibly
     contemplate,—which our parents would rather you had never been born, than that you took."
"Excuse me, for interrupting your sermon. It is against all rule, but it may save you a great
     deal of trouble," said Agnes, arranging her rings, and re-tying her bouquet; "my sole intention
     is to be of a similar religion to the man I marry."
"Do you still expect," said Marion, with a look of surprise, "to be Mrs. De
     Crespigny?"
"Or Marchioness of Doncaster!"
"Yes, in due course of time, when Captain De Crespigny succeeds!"
"He never shall succeed," replied Agnes, setting her teeth, and speaking with stern
     determination, while her face became rigid as stone. "Captain De Crespigny has deceived me,
     cheated me of my youth, hopes, and happiness. I have been fooled, trifled with, basely
     ill-treated. My heart is seared against any real attachment to another; but I shall be amply
     revenged on him. I shall destroy his happiness, as he has destroyed mine. Without his
     long-expected wealth and title, he will find that the butterfly is but a grub.—I mean to marry
     his uncle!——"
A dead silence followed these words. Marion made no exclamation, and did not even look at
     Agnes, but buried her face in her hands, with a feeling of unutterable shame and consternation.
     The very idea had never before occurred to her imagination, that her young and blooming sister
     could contemplate so degrading a sacrifice; but when, at length, she looked up, there was
     something in the proud, stern expression of that beautiful countenance, which forced upon her
     the unwelcome and extraordinary conviction that all had been said in earnest.
"Agnes!" cried she, gasping with astonishment; "that dissipated, horrid, dreadful man!
     Impossible! The miserable wreck of an ill-spent life! A superannuated roue. Are you in jest? or are you mad?"
"Mad! or at least delirious! Marion, we have lived long together, and yet you do not know me!
     I am not one to sit tamely down, as you would do, and wash my heart away with tears! My sorrows
     are not to be closeted in silent desolation, but I must act. If hope and happiness are crushed
     for ever, he who turned my feelings to stone shall suffer for it! He shall no longer wind me
     on, and wind me off, according to his own caprice! It is like death itself to love in secret,
     but worse than death when it is known, and he does know all! He knows, believes, and rejoices
     to believe, that I have waited, suffered, hoped, and feared for him, and for him only; but I am
     not one to die of scorned love. Now every spark of my regard for him is crushed out. His vanity
     shall not have another moment's triumph over me," said Agnes, her eyes becoming frightfully
     brilliant. "My heart feels as if it were buried in a snow-drift, and nothing warms it but the
     hope of vengeance."
"Agnes! who in her senses would think of being consigned to misery and contempt both here and
     hereafter, merely to punish one who ought to be despised! If Captain De Crespigny be vain,
     foolish, and unprincipled, is that a sufficient reason for you to become degraded, and, I must
     say, infamous!" said Marion, in a tone of undisguised disgust, though her voice made no more
     impression than the gentle wave on the hard and unbending cliff. "Such a step as this would
     separate you for ever from those you have most reason to love."
"I am one of the Positive Club, Marion, who never change their minds about anything! and my
     resolution is unalterable. ''Tis best repenting in a coach and six.'"
"Think, Agnes, not of the short triumph over Captain De Crespigny, but of the long years that
     must follow,—of the living death you must endure, linked to vice, decrepitude, and immorality,
     lowered in your own eyes, and contemptible in those of others."
"Mistaken as usual, Marion! a life of mediocrity would be a life of misery to me, and few
     people think the worse of any young lady for becoming a Marchioness. Lord Doncaster can give me
     every thing except happiness, and I must find the best substitute for that in my power. A
     blight is on my heart! my pride has been mortally wounded; but I cannot undertake a cold,
     insipid, colorless existence, devoid of motive and of hope. It would be ennui drowned in
     wretchedness, if I return jilted, mortified, and disappointed, to our uncle's dog-hole of a
     villa at Portobello?"
A red spot burned on Marion's cheek, and indignant tears, occupying the place of words,
     glittered on her eye-lashes, while her thoughts reverted to their generous, kind-hearted, and
     high-spirited uncle, whose affection was so undervalued by Agnes, and whose better feelings
     were about to be so outraged by the announcement of a preposterous and really disgraceful
     project.
Agnes now assumed the dignity of a peeress in expectancy, looking cold, resolute, and
     haughty, till at length Marion, overcome with emotion, threw her arms round the neck of her
     sister, and burst into tears, saying, in accents of incoherent affection,—
"Agnes,—dear Agnes! take pity upon yourself. Lay open your heart to a kind Providence,—pray
     for peace, but do not barter yourself for revenge. Do not become utterly lost, as well as
     unhappy! For my sake, for everybody's sake, let us go home as we came! Life is only precious
     for the eternal hopes and the domestic affections it bestows. Would you rashly throw away both,
     bringing on a lifetime of unpitied remorse?"
Marion looked up with anxious solicitude, but scarcely had she ceased to speak before Agnes
     glided out of the room, leaving behind her the splendid missal adorned with Lord Doncaster's
     arms in gold upon the white parchment binding. Beside it lay the envelope of a letter, with a
     marquis' coronet on the seal, and underneath was engraved, to her astonishment, the exact date
     of Agnes' birthday. Marion started when she saw this absurd piece of gallantry, and covered her
     face with her hands, as if she never could show it again.

She did not know how hate could burn,
In hearts once changed from soft to stern;
Nor all the false and fatal zeal,
The convert of revenge can feel.

