<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Living Alone, by Stella
      Benson.</title><author>Benson, Stella (1892-1933)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1919</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">

CHAPTER II
THE COMMITTEE COMES TO MAGIC


I don't suppose for a moment that you know Mitten Island: it is a difficult place
     to get to; you have to change 'buses seven times, going from Kensington, and you have to cross
     the river by means of a ferry. On Mitten Island there is a model village, consisting of several
     hundred houses, two churches, and one shop.
It was the sixth member who discovered, after the committee meeting, that the address on the
     forsaken broomstick's collar was: Number 100 Beautiful Way, Mitten Island, London.
The sixth member, although she was a member of committees, was neither a real expert in, nor
     a real lover of, Doing Good. In Doing Good, I think, we have got into bad habits. We try in
     groups to do good to the individual, whereas, if good is to be done, it would seem more likely,
     and more consonant with precedent, that the
     individual might do it to the group. Without the smile of a Treasurer we cannot
     unloose our purse-strings; without the sanction of a Chairman we have no courage; without
     Minutes we have no memory. There is hardly one of us who would dare to give a flannelette
     nightgown to a Factory Girl who had Stepped Aside, without a committee to lay the blame on,
     should the Factory Girl, fortified by the flannelette nightgown, take Further Steps Aside.
The sixth member was only too apt to put her trust in committees. Herself she did not trust
     at all, though she thought herself quite a good creature, as selves go. She had come to London
     two years ago, with a little trunk and a lot of good intentions as her only possessions, and
     she had paid the inevitable penalty for her earnestness. It is a sad thing to see any one of
     naturally healthy and rebellious tendency stray into the flat path of Charity. Gay heedless
     young people set their unwary feet between the flowery borders of that path, the thin air of
     resigned thanks breathed by the deserving poor mounts to their heads
     like wine; committees lie in wait for them on every side; hostels and settlements
     entice them fatally to break their journey at every mile; they run rejoicing to their doom, and
     I think shall eventually find themselves without escape, elected eternal life-members of the
     Committee that sits around the glassy sea.
The sixth member was saved by a merciful inefficiency of temperament from attaining the
     vortex of her whirlpool of charity. To be in the vortex is, I believe, almost always to see
     less. The bull's eye is generally blind.
The sixth member was a person who, where Social Work was concerned, did more or less as she
     was told, without doing it particularly well. The result, very properly, was that all the work
     which a committee euphemistically calls "organising work" was left to her. Organising work
     consists of sitting in 'buses bound for remote quarters of London, and ringing the bells of
     people who are almost always found to be away for a fortnight. The sixth member had been
     ordered to organise the return of the broomstick to its owner.
     
Perhaps it would be more practical to call the sixth member Sarah Brown.
The bereaved owner of the broomstick was washing her hair at Number 100 Beautiful Way, Mitten
     Island. She was washing it behind the counter of her shop. She was the manageress of the only
     shop on Mitten Island. It was a general shop, but made a speciality of such goods as Happiness
     and Magic. Unfortunately Happiness is rather difficult to get in war-time. Sometimes there was
     quite a queue outside the shop when it opened, and sometimes there was a card outside, saying
     politely: "Sorry, it's no use waiting. I haven't any." Of course the shop also sold Sunlight
     Soap, and it was with Sunlight Soap that the shop-lady was washing her hair, because it was
     Sunday, and this was a comparatively cheap amusement. She had no money. She had meant to go
     down to the offices of her employer after breakfast, to borrow some of the salary that would be
     due to her next week. But then she found that she had left her broomstick somewhere. As a rule
     Harold — for that was the broomstick's
     name — was fairly independent, and could find his way home alone, but when he got
     mislaid and left in strange hands, and particularly when kindly finders took him to Scotland
     Yard, he often lost his head. You, in your innocence, are suggesting that his owner might have
     borrowed another broomstick from stock. But you have no idea what arduous work it is, breaking
     in a wild broomstick to the saddle. It sometimes takes days, and is not really suitable work
     for a woman, even in war-time. Often the brutes are savage, and always they are obstinate. The
     shop-lady could not afford to go to the City by Tube, not to mention the ferry fare, which was
     rather expensive and erratic, not being L.C.C. Of course a flash of lightning is generally
     available for magic people. But it is considered not only unpatriotic but bad form to use
     lightning in war-time.
The shop was not expecting customers on Sunday, but its manageress had hardly got her head
     well into the basin when somebody entered. She stood up dripping.
"Is Miss Thelma Bennett Watkins at
     home?" asked Sarah Brown, after a pause, during which she made her characteristic
     effort to remember what she had come for.
"No," said the other. "But do take a seat. We met last night, you may remember. Perhaps you
     wouldn't mind lending me one-and-twopence to buy two chops for our luncheon. I've got an extra
     coupon. There's tinned salmon in stock, but I don't advise it."
"I've only got sevenpence, just enough to take me home," answered Sarah Brown. "But I can
     pawn my ear-rings."
I dare say you have never been in a position to notice that there is no pawn-shop on Mitten
     Island. The inhabitants of model villages always have assured incomes and pose as lilies of the
     field. Sarah Brown and her hostess sat down on the counter without regret to a luncheon
     consisting of one orange, found by the guest in her bag and divided, and two thin captain
     biscuits from stock. They were both used to dissolving visions of impossible chops, both were
     cheerfully familiar with the feeling of light tragedy which invades you towards six
     o'clock P.M., if you have not been able to afford a meal since breakfast.
"Now look here," said Sarah Brown, as she plunged her pocket-knife into the orange. "Would
     you mind telling me — are you a fairy, or a third-floor-back, or anything of that sort? I won't
     register it, or put it on the case-paper, I promise, though if you are superhuman in any way I
     shall be seriously tempted."
"I am a Witch," said the witch.
Now witches and wizards, as you perhaps know, are people who are born for the first time. I
     suppose we have all passed through this fair experience, we must all have had our chance of
     making magic. But to most of us it came in the boring beginning of time, and we wasted our best
     spells on plesiosauri, and protoplasms, and angels with flaming swords, all of whom knew magic
     too, and were not impressed. Witches and wizards are now rare, though not so rare as you think.
     Remembering nothing, they know nothing, and are not bored. They have to learn everything from
     the very beginning, except magic, which is the
     only really original sin. To the magic eye, magic alone is commonplace, everything
     else is unknown, unguessed, and undespised. Magic people are always obvious — so obvious that
     we veteran souls can rarely understand them, — they are never subtle, and though they are new,
     they are never Modern. You may tell them in your cynical way that to-day is the only real day,
     and that there is nothing more unmentionable than yesterday except the day before. They will
     admire your cleverness very much, but the next moment you will find the witch sobbing over
     Tennyson, or the wizard smiling at the quaint fancies of Sir Edwin Landseer. You cannot really
     stir up magic people with ordinary human people. You and I have climbed over our thousand lives
     to a too dreadfully subtle eminence. In our day — in our many days — we have adored everything
     conceivable, and now we have to fall back on the inconceivable. We stand our idols on their
     heads, it is newer to do so, and we think we prefer them upside down. Talking constantly, we
     reel blindfold through eternity, and perhaps if
     we are lucky, once or twice in a score of lives, the blindfolding handkerchief
     slips, and we wriggle one eye free, and see gods like trees walking. By Jove, that gives us
     enough to talk about for two or three lives! Witches and wizards are not blinded by having a
     Point of View. They just look, and are very much surprised and interested.
All witches and wizards are born strangely and die violently. They are descended always from
     old mysterious breeds, from women who wrought domestic magic and perished for its sake, and
     from men who wrought other magic among lost causes and wars without gain, and fell and died,
     still surprised, still interested, with their faces among flowers. All men who die so are not
     wizards, nor are all martyred and adventuring women witches, but all such bring a potential
     strain of magic into their line.
"A witch," said Sarah Brown. "Of course. I have been trying to remember what broomsticks
     reminded me of. A witch, of course. I have always wished to be friends with a witch."
     
The witch was unaware that the proper answer to this was: "Oh, my Dear, do let's. Do
     you know I had quite a crush on you from the first minute." She did not answer at all,
     and Sarah Brown, who was tired of proper answers, was not sorry. Nevertheless the pause seemed
     a little empty, so she filled it herself, saying pedantically: "Of course I don't believe
     friendship is an end in itself. Only a means to an end."
"I don't know what you mean," said the witch, after wrestling conscientiously with this
     remark for a minute. "Do tell me — do you know yourself, or are you just saying it to see what
     it means?"
Sarah Brown was obviously damped by this, and the witch added kindly: "I bet you twopence you
     don't know what this place is."
"A shop," said Sarah Brown, who was sitting on the counter.
"It is a sort of convent and monastery mixed," replied the witch. "I am connected with it
     officially. I undertook to manage it, yet I forget what the proper word for me is. Not
     undertaker, is it?"
     
"Superintendent or secretary," suggested Sarah Brown moodily.
"Superintendent, I think," said the witch. "At least I know Peony calls me Soup. Do you live
     alone?"
"Yes."
"Then you ought to live here. This is the only place in the world of its kind. The name of
     this house is Living Alone. I'll read you the prospectus."
She fell suddenly upon her knees and began fighting with a drawer. The drawer was evidently
     one of the many descendants of the Sword Excalibur — none but the appointed hand could draw it
     forth. The witch, after a struggle, passed this test, and produced a parchment covered with
     large childish printing in red ink.
"My employer made up this," said the witch. "And the ferryman wrote it out for us."
This is the prospectus:

The name of this house is Living Alone.
It is meant to provide for the needs of those who dislike hotels, clubs, settlements,
      hostels, boarding-houses, and lodgings only less than their own
      homes; who detest landladies, waiters, husbands and wives, charwomen, and all
      forms of lookers after. This house is a monastery and a convent for monks and nuns dedicated
      to unknown gods. Men and women who are tired of being laboriously kind to their bodies, who
      like to be a little uncomfortable and quite uncared for, who love to live from week to week
      without speaking, except to confide their destinations to 'bus-conductors, who are weary of
      woolly decorations, aspidistras, and the eternal two generations of roses which riot among
      blue ribbons on hireling wall-papers, who are ignorant of the science of tipping and thanking,
      who do not know how to cook yet hate to be cooked for, will here find the thing they have
      desired, and something else as well.
There are six cells in this house, and no common sitting-room. Guests wishing to address
      each other must do so on the stairs, or in the shop. Each cell has whitewashed walls, and
      contains a small deal table, one wooden chair, a hard bed, a tin bath, and a little
      inconvenient fireplace. No guest may bring into the house more than can be carried out again
      in one large suit-case. Carpets, rugs, mirrors, and any single garment costing more than three
      guineas, are prohibited. Any guest proved to have made use of a taxi, or to have travelled
      anywhere first class, or to have bought cigarettes or sweets costing more than
      three shillings a hundred or eighteenpence a pound respectively, or to have paid
      more than three and sixpence (war-tax included) for a seat in any place of entertainment, will
      be instantly expelled. Dogs, cats, goldfish, and other superhuman companions are
      encouraged.
Working guests are preferred, but if not at work, guests must spend at least eighteen hours
      out of the twenty-four entirely alone. No guest may entertain or be entertained except under
      special license obtainable from the Superintendent.
There is a pump in the back yard. There is no telephone, no electric light, no hot water
      system, no attendance, and no modern comfort whatever. Tradesmen are forbidden to call. There
      is no charge for residence in this house.

"It certainly sounds an unusual place," admitted Sarah Brown. "Is the house always full?"
"Never," said the witch. "A lot of people can swallow everything but the last clause. We have
     at present one guest, called Peony."
She replaced the prospectus in the drawer, which she then tried to shut. While she was
     engaged in this thundering endeavour, Sarah Brown noticed that the drawer was
     full of the little paper packets which she had seen the day before in the witch's
     possession.
"What do you do with your magic?" she asked.
"Oh, many things. Chiefly I use it as an ingredient for happiness, sometimes to remind
     people, and sometimes to make them forget. It seems to me that some people take happiness
     rather tragically."
"I find," said Sarah Brown, rather sententiously, "that I always owe my happiness to earth,
     never to heaven."
"How d'you mean heaven?" said the witch. "I know nothing about heaven. When I used to work in
     the City, I bought a little book about heaven to read in the Tube every morning. I thought I
     should grow daily better. But I couldn't see that I did."
Sarah Brown was naturally astonished to meet any one who did not know all about heaven. But
     she continued the pursuit of her ideas on happiness. Sarah Brown meant to write a book some
     day, if she could find a really inspiring exercise-book to start
     in. She thought herself rather good at ideas — poor Sarah Brown, she simply had to
     be confident about something. She was only inwardly articulate, I think, not outwardly at all,
     but sometimes she could talk about herself.
"Heaven has given me wretched health, but never gave me youth enough to make the wretchedness
     adventurous," she went on. "Heaven gave me a thin skin, but never gave me the natural and
     comforting affections. Heaven probably meant to make a noble woman of me by encrusting me in
     disabilities, but it left out the necessary nobility at the last moment; it left out, in fact,
     all the compensations. But luckily I have found the compensations for myself; I just had to
     find something. Men and women have given me everything that such as I could expect. I have
     never met with reasonless enmity, never met with meanness, never met with anything more
     unbearable than natural indifference, from any man or woman. I have been, I may say, a burden
     and a bore all over the world; I have been an ill and fretful stranger within all men's
     gates; I have asked much and given nothing; I have never been a friend. Nobody has
     ever expected any return from me, yet nothing was grudged. Landladies, policemen, chorus girls,
     social bounders, prostitutes, the natural enemies, one would say, of such as I, have given me
     kindness, and often much that they could not easily spare, and always amusement and
     distraction...."
"Ah, how you interest and excite me," said the witch, whose attention had been frankly
     wandering. "You are exactly the sort of person we want in this house."
"But — ill?" said Sarah Brown pessimistically. "Oh, witch, I have been so wearisome to every
     one, so constantly ill. The first thing I get to know about a new hostess or a landlady is
     always the colour of her dressing-gown by candlelight, or whether she has one."
"Illnesses are never bad here," said the witch. "I bet you twopence I've got something in the
     shop that would make you well. Three fingers of happiness, neat and hot, at night — "
"But, witch — oh, witch — this is the worst
     of all. My ears are failing me — I think I am going deaf...."
"You can hear what I say," said the witch.
"Yes, I can hear what you say, but when most people talk I am like a prisoner locked up; and
     every day there are more and more locked doors between me and the world. You do not know how
     horrible it is."
"Oh, well," said the witch, "as long as you can hear magic you will not lack a key to your
     prison. Sometimes it's better not to hear the other things. You are the ideal guest for the
     House of Living Alone."
"I'll go and fetch David my Dog and Humphrey my Suit-case," said Sarah Brown.
At that moment a taxi was heard to arrive at the other side of the ferry, and the ferryman's
     voice was heard shouting: "All right, all right, I'll be there in half a tick."
"I hope this isn't Peony in a taxi," said the witch. "I get so tired of expelling guests.
     She's been drawing her money, which may have been tempting."
They listened.
They heard someone alight from the
     ferry-boat, and the voice of Miss Meta Mostyn Ford asking the ferryman: "Do you
     know anything about a young woman of the name of Watkins, living at Number 100 Beautiful Way —
     — "
"No, he doesn't," shouted the witch, opening the shop door. "But do step in. We met
     yesterday, you may remember. I'll ask the ferryman to get half-a-dozen halfpenny buns for tea,
     if you will be so kind as to lend me threepence. We don't bake ourselves."
"I have had tea, thank you," said Miss Ford. "I have just come from a little gathering of
     friends on the other side of the river, and I thought I would call here on my way home. I had
     noted your address — — "
She started as she came in and saw Sarah Brown, and added in her committee voice: "I had
     noted your address, because I never mind how much trouble I take in following up a promising
     case."
Sarah Brown, on first hearing that trenchant voice, had lost her head and begun to hide under
     the counter. But the biscuit-
     tins refused to make room, so she drew herself up and smiled politely.
"How good of you to go to a little gathering of friends," said the witch, obviously trying to
     behave like a real human person. "I never do, except now and then by mistake. And even then I
     only stay when there are grassy sandwiches to eat. Once there were grassy sandwiches mixed with
     bits of hard-boiled egg, and then I stayed to supper. You didn't have such luck, I see, or you
     would look happier."
"I don't go to my friends for their food, but for their ideas," said Miss Ford.
Sarah Brown was gliding towards the door.
"Oh, don't go," said the witch, who did not recognise tact when she met it. "I have sent
     Harold the Broomstick for your Dog David and your Suit-case Humphrey. He is an excellent packer
     and very clean in his person and work. Please, please, don't go. Do you know, I live in
     constant dread of being left alone with a clever person."
"I must apologise for my intrusion, in that case," said Miss Ford, with dignity.
      "I repeat, I only came because I saw yours was an exceptional case."
There was a very long silence in the growing dusk. The moon could already be seen through the
     glass door, rising, pushing vigorously aside the thickets of the crowded sky. A crack across
     the corner of the glass was lighted up, and looked like a little sprig of lightning, plucked
     from a passing storm and preserved in the glass.
Miss Ford suddenly began to talk in a very quick and confused way. Any sane hearer would have
     known that she was talking by mistake, that she was possessed by some distressingly Anti-Ford
     spirit, and that nothing she might say in parenthesis like this ought to be remembered against
     her.
"Oh, God," said Miss Ford, "I have come because I am hungry, hungry for what you spoke of
     last night, in the dark.... You spoke of an April sea — clashing of cymbals was the expression
     you used, wasn't it? You spoke of a shore of brown diamonds flat to the ruffled sea ... and
     white sandhills under a thin veil of grass ... and tamarisks all blown one
     way...."
"Well?" said the witch.
"Well," faltered Miss Ford. "I think I came to ask you ... whether you knew of nice lodgings
     there ... plain wholesome bath ... respectable cooking, hot and cold ..."
Her voice faded away pathetically.
There was a sudden shattering, as the door burst open, and a dog and a suit-case were swept
     in by a brisk broomstick.
"I am so sorry, Miss Watkins," said Miss Ford stiffly. Her face was scarlet — neat and formal
     again now, but scarlet. — "I am so sorry if I have talked nonsense. I am rather run down, I
     think, too much work, four important meetings yesterday. I sometimes think I shall break down.
     I have such alarming nerve-storms."
She looked nervously at Sarah Brown. It is always tiresome to meet fellow-members of
     committees in private life, especially if one is in a mood for having nerve-storms. People may
     be excellent in a philanthropic way, of course, and yet impossible socially.
     
But Sarah Brown had heard very little. She always found Miss Ford's voice difficult. She was
     on her knees asking her dog David what it had felt like, coming. But David was still too much
     dazed to say much.
"You must not think," said Miss Ford, "that because I am a practical worker I have no
     understanding of Inner Meanings. On the contrary, I have perhaps wasted too much of my time on
     spiritual matters. That is why I take quite a personal and special interest in your case. I had
     a great friend, now in the trenches, alas, who possessed Power. He used to come to my
     Wednesdays — at least I used to invite him to come, but he was dreamy like you and constantly
     mistook the date. He helped me enormously, and I miss him.... Well, the truest charity should
     be anything but formal, I think, and I saw at a glance that your case was exceptional, and that
     you also were Occult — — "
"How d'you mean — occult?" asked the witch. "Do you mean just knowing magic?"
"A strange mixture," mused Miss Ford
     self-consciously. It is impossible to muse aloud without self-consciousness. "A
     strange and rather interesting mixture of naïveté and power. The question is — power to what
     extent? Miss Watkins, I want you to come to one of my Wednesdays to meet one or two people who
     might possibly help you to a job — lecturing, you know. Lectures on hypnotism or spiritualism,
     with experiments, are always popular. You certainly have Power, you only want a little
     advertisement to be a real help to many people."
"How d'you mean — advertisement?" asked the witch. "This new advertisement stunt is one of
     the problems that tire my head. I am awfully worried by problems. The world seems to be ruled
     by posters now. People look to the hoardings for information about their duty. Why don't we
     paste up the ten commandments on all the walls and all the 'buses, and be done with it?"
"Now listen, Miss Watkins," persisted Miss Ford. "I want you to meet Bernard Tovey, the
     painter, and Ivy MacBee, who founded the Aspiration Club, and Frere, the editor of I
      Wonder, and several other
     regular Wednesday friends of mine, all interested in the Occult. It would be a real
     opportunity for you."
"I am afraid you will be very angry with me," said the witch presently in a hollow voice. "If
     I was occult last night — I'm awfully sorry, but it must have been a fluke. I seem to have said
     so much last night without knowing it. I'm afraid I was showing off a little."
The painful tears of confession were in her eyes, but she added, changing the subject: "Do
     you live alone?"
"Yes, absolutely," said Miss Ford. "My friends call me a perfect hermit. I hardly ever have
     visitors in my spare room, it makes so much work for my three maids."
"I suppose you wouldn't care to divorce your three maids and come and live here," suggested
     the witch. "I could of course cure you of the nerve-storms you speak of. Or rather I could help
     you to have nerve-storms all the time, without any stagnant grown-upness in between. Then you
     wouldn't notice the nerve-storms. This
     house is a sort of nursing home and college combined. I'll read you the
     prospectus."
"Very amusing," said Miss Ford, after waiting a minute to see if there was any more of the
     prospectus. She had quite recovered herself, and was wearing the brisk acute expression that
     deceived her into claiming a sense of humour. "But why all those uncomfortable rules? And why
     that discouragement of social intercourse? I am afraid the average person of the class you
     cater for does not recognise the duty of social intercourse."
"This house," replied the witch, "caters for people who are outside averages. The ferryman
     says that people who are content to be average are lowering the general standard. I wish you
     could have met Peony, the only guest up to now, but she is out, and may be a teeny bit drunk
     when she comes in. She has gone to draw her money."
"What sort of money?" asked Miss Ford, who was always interested in the sources of income of
     the Poor.
     
"Soldier's allotment. Unmarried wife."
The expression of Miss Ford's face tactfully wiped away this bald unfortunate statement from
     the surface of the conversation. "And how do you make your boarding-house pay," she asked, "if
     there is no charge for residence?"
"How d'you mean — pay?" asked the witch. "Pay whom? And what with? Look here, if you will
     come and live here you shall have a little Wednesday every week on the stairs, under license
     from me. Harold the Broomstick is apt to shirk cleaning the stairs, but as it happens, he is
     keeping company with an O-Cedar Mop in Kentish Town, and I've no doubt she would come over and
     do the stairs thoroughly every Tuesday night. Besides, we have overalls in stock at only two
     and eleven three — — "
"Oh, I like your merry mood," said Miss Ford, laughing heartily. "You must remember to talk
     like that when you come to my Wednesdays. Most of my friends are utter Socialists, and believe
     in bridging as far as possible the gulf between
     one class and another, so you needn't feel shy or awkward."
The splashing of the ferry-boat was once more heard, and then the shop quaked a little as a
     heavy foot alighted on the landing-stage. The ferryman was heard saying: "I don't know any
     party of that name, but I believe the young woman at the shop can help you."
Lady Arabel Higgins entered the shop.
"What, Meta, you here? And Sarah Brown? What a too dretfully funny coincidence. Well, Angela
     dear, I made a note of your address yesterday, and then lost the note — too dretfully like me.
     So I rang up the Mayor, and he said he also had made a note, and he would come and show me the
     way. But I didn't wait for him. I wanted to talk to you about — — "
"Well, I must truly be going," interrupted Sarah Brown. "I'll just nip across to the Brown
     Borough and find a pawn-shop, being hungry."
"There is no need for any one to move on my account," said Lady Arabel. "You all heard what
     Angela said last night in her
     little address to the committee in the dark. I don't know why she addressed her
     remarks particularly at me, but as she did so, there is no secret in the matter. Of course,
     just at first, it seemed dretful to me that any one should know or speak about it. I cannot
     understand how you knew, Angela; I am trying not to understand...."
She took up a thin captain biscuit and bit it absent-mindedly. It trembled in her hand like a
     leaf.
"Yes, it is true that Rrchud isn't like other women's boys. You know it, Meta. Angela
     evidently knows it, and — at least since yesterday — I know that I know it. His not being able
     to read or write — I always knew in my heart that my old worn-out tag — 'We can't all be
     literary geniuses' — didn't meet the case. His way of disappearing and never explaining.... Do
     you know, I have only once seen him with other boys, doing the same as other boys, and that was
     when I saw him marching with hundreds of real boys ... in 1914.... It was the happiest day I
     ever had, I thought after all that I had borne a real boy. Well,
     then, as you know, he couldn't get a commission, couldn't even get his stripe, poor
     darling. He deserted twice — pure absence of mind — it was always the same from a child — 'I
     wanted to see further,' he'd say, and of course worse in the trenches. Why, you know it all,
     Angela dear — at least, perhaps not quite all. I should like to tell you — because you said
     that about the splendour of being the mother of Rrchud....
"Pinehurst — my husband, he is a doctor, you know — had that same passion for seeing further.
     He was often ill in London. I said it was asthma, but he said it was not being able to see far
     enough. We were in America for Rrchud's birth, and Pinehurst insisted on going West. I took the
     precaution of having a good nurse with me. Pinehurst said the East was full of little
     obstacles, and people's eyes had sucked all the secrets out of the horizon, he said. I like
     Cape Cod, but he said there was always a wall of sea round those flat wet places. We stayed in
     a blacksmith's spare room on the desert of Wyoming, but even that
     horizon seemed a little higher than we, and one clear day, in a pink sunrise, we
     saw something that might have been a dream, my dears, and might have been the Rockies.
     Pinehurst couldn't stand that, we pushed west — so tahsome. We climbed a little narrow track up
     a mountain, in a light buggy that a goldminer lent us. Oh, of course, you'll think us mad,
     Meta, but, do you know, we actually found the world's edge, a place with no horizon; we looked
     between ragged pine trees, and saw over the shoulders of great old violet mountains — we saw
     right down into the stars for ever.... There was a tower of rocks — rose-red rocks in sloping
     layers — sunny hot by day, my dears, and a great shelter by night. You know, the little dark
     clouds walk alone upon the mountain tops at sunset — as you said, Angela — they are like trees,
     and sometimes like faces, and sometimes like the shadows of little bent gipsies.... I used to
     look at the mountains and think: 'What am I about, to be so worried and so small, in sight of
     such an enormous storm of mountains under a gold sky?' I think
     of those rocks often at night, standing just as we left them, all by themselves,
     under that unnatural moon, — it was an unnatural moon on the edge of the world there, — all by
     themselves, with no watching eyes to spoil them, as Pinehurst used to say, not even one's own
     eyes.... You'll say that adventure — my one adventure — was impossible, Meta. Yes, it was.
     Rrchud was an impossible boy, born on an impossible day, in an impossible place. Ah, my poor
     Rrchud.... My dears, I am talking dretful nonsense. We were mad. You'd have to know Pinehurst,
     really, to understand it. Ah, we can never find our mountain again. I can never forgive
     Pinehurst...."
"You can never repay Pinehurst," said the witch.
Lady Arabel did not seem to hear. For a long time there was nothing to be heard but Sarah
     Brown, murmuring to her Dog David. You must excuse her, and remember that she lived most
     utterly alone. She was locked inside herself, and the solitary barred window in her prison wall
     commanded only a view of the Dog David.
     
Rrchud's mother said at last: "I really came to tell you that Rrchud came back on leave
     unexpectedly last night. Of course you must meet him — "
"Rrchud home!" exclaimed Miss Ford. "How odd! I was just telling Miss Watkins about his
     Power, and how strongly she reminded me of him. Do tell him to keep Wednesday afternoon
     free."
Lady Arabel, ignoring Miss Ford by mistake, said to the witch: "Will you come on Tuesday to
     tea or supper?"
"Supper, please," said the witch instantly. Tact, I repeat, was a stranger to her, so she
     added: "I will bring Sarah Brown too. I bet you twopence she hasn't had a decent meal for
     days."
And then the Mayor arrived. The witch saw at once that there was some secret understanding
     between him and her that she did not understand. Her magic escapades often left her in this
     position. However, she winked back hopefully. But she was not a skilled winker. Everybody —
     even the Dog David — saw her doing it, and Miss Ford looked a little offended.
     
</div></body></text></TEI>