
 III.
One evening as they sat in the inner portion of the cave, watching through the opening the
      paling of the sky and the darkening of the leaves, and counting the budding stars, Dhoya
      suddenly saw stand before him the dark outline of him he fought on the lake sand, and heard at
      the same instant his companion sigh.
The stranger approached a little, and said, “Dhoya we have fought heretofore, and now I have
      come to play chess against thee, for well thou knowest, dear to the perfect warrior after war
      is chess.”
“I know it,” answered Dhoya.

 “And when we have played, Dhoya, we will name the stake.”
“Do not play,” whispered his companion at his side.
But Dhoya, being filled with his anger fit at the sight of his enemy, answered, “I will
      play, and I know well the stake you mean, and I name this for mine, that I may again have my
      knee on your chest and my hands on your throat, and that you will not again change into a
      bundle of wet reeds.” His companion lay down on a skin and began to cry a little.
Dhoya felt sure of winning. He had often played in his boyhood, before the time of his anger
      fits, with his masters of the galley; and besides, he could always return to his hands and his
      weapons once more.
Now the floor of the cave was of smooth, white sand, brought from the sea-shore in his great
      Fomorian pitcher, to make it soft for his beloved to walk upon; before it had been, as it now
      is,
       of rough clay. On this sand the red-capped stranger marked out with his
      spear-point a chess-board, and marked with rushes, crossed and recrossed each alternate
      square, fixing each end of the rush in the sand, until a complete board was finished of white
      and green squares, and then drew from a bag large chess-men of mingled wood and silver. Two or
      three would have made an armful for a child. Standing each at his end they began to play. The
      game did not last long. No matter how carefully Dhoya played, each move went against him. At
      last, leaping back from the board he cried, “I have lost!” The two spirits were standing
      together at the entrance. Dhoya seized his spear, but slowly the figures began to fade, first
      a star and then the leaves showed through their forms. Soon all had vanished away.
Then, realizing his loss, he threw himself on the ground,
       and rolling hither and thither, roared like a wild beast. All night long he lay
      on the ground, and all the next day till nightfall. He had crumbled his staff unconsciously
      between his fingers into small pieces, and now, full of dull rage, arose and went forth
      westward. In a ravine of the northern mountain he came on the tracks of wild horses. Soon one
      passed him fearlessly, knowing nothing of man. The pointed end of his staff he still carried.
      He drove it deep in the flank, making a long wound, sending the horse rushing with short
      screams down the mountain. Other horses passed him one by one, driven southward by a cold wind
      laden with mist, arisen in the night-time. Towards the end of the ravine stood one black and
      huge, the leader of the herd. Dhoya leaped on his back with a loud cry that sent a raven
      circling from the neighbouring cliff, and the horse, after vainly seeking to throw him, rushed
      off
       towards the north-west, over the heights of the mountains where the mists
      floated. The moon, clear sometimes of the flying clouds, from low down in the south-east, cast
      a pale and mutable light, making their shadow rise before them on the mists, as though they
      pursued some colossal demon, sombre on his black charger. Then leaving the heights they rushed
      wildly down that valley where, in far later times, Dermot hid in a deep cavern his Grania, and
      passed the stream where Muadhan, their savage servant, caught fish for them on a hook baited
      with a quicken berry. On over the plains, on northward, mile after mile, the wild gigantic
      horse leaping cliff and chasm in his terrible race; on until the mountains of what is now
      Donegal rose before them—over these among the clouds, driving rain blowing in their faces from
      the sea, Dhoya knowing not whither he went, or why he rode. On—the
       stones loosened by the hoofs rumbling down into the valleys—till far in the
      distance he saw the sea, a thousand feet below him; then, fixing his eyes thereon, and using
      the spear-point as a goad, he roused his black horse into redoubled speed, and with a wild
      leap horse and rider plunged headlong into the Western Sea.
Sometimes the cotters on the mountains of Donegal hear on windy nights a sudden sound of
      horses’ hoofs, and say to each other, “There goes Dhoya.” And at the same hour men say if any
      be abroad in the valleys they see a huge shadow rushing along the mountain.
THE END.
