
V.
The next afternoon Howard found Miss Leland sitting, reading in an alcove in her
      drawing-room, between a stuffed paroquet and a blue De Morgan jar. As he was shown in he
      noticed, with a momentary shock, that her features were quite commonplace. Then she saw him,
      and at once seemed to vanish wrapped in an exulting flame of life. She stood up, flinging the
      book on to the seat with some violence.
“I have been reading that sweet ‘Imitation of Christ,’ and was just feeling that I should
      have to become a theosophist or a socialist, or go and join the
       Catholic Church, or do something. How delightful it is to see you again! How is
      my savage getting on? It is so good of you to try and help me to reform him.”
They talked on about Sherman, and Howard did his best to console her for his shortcomings.
      Time would certainly improve her savage. Several times she gazed at him with those large dark
      eyes of hers, of which the pupils to-day seemed larger than usual. They made him feel dizzy
      and clutch tightly the arm of his chair. Then she began to talk about her life since
      childhood—how they got to the subject he never knew—and made a number of those confidences
      which are so dangerous because so flattering. To love—there is nothing else worth living for;
      but then men are so shallow. She had never found a nature deep as her own. She would not
      pretend that she had not often been in love, but never had any heart rung back to her the true
      note. As she
       spoke her face quivered with excitement. The exulting flame of life seemed
      spreading from her to the other things in the room. To Howard’s eyes it seemed as though the
      bright pots and stuffed birds and plush curtains began to glow with a light not of this
      world—to glimmer like the strange and chaotic colours the mystic Blake imagined upon the
      scaled serpent of Eden. The light seemed gradually to dim his past and future, and to make
      pale his good resolves. Was it not in itself that which all men are seeking, and for which all
      else exists?
He leant forward and took her hand, timidly and doubtingly. She did not draw it away. He
      leant nearer and kissed her on the forehead. She gave a joyful cry, and, casting her arms
      round his neck, burst out, “Ah! you—and I. We were made for each other. I hate Sherman. He is
      an egotist. He is a beast. He is selfish and foolish.” Releasing
       one of her arms she struck the seat with her hand, excitedly, and went on, “How
      angry he will be! But it serves him right! How badly he is dressing. He does not know anything
      about anything. But you—you—I knew you were meant for me the moment I saw you.”
That evening Howard flung himself into a chair in the empty smoking-room. He lighted a
      cigarette; it went out. Again he lighted it; again it went out. “I am a traitor—and that good,
      stupid fellow, Sherman, never to be jealous!” he thought. “But then, how could I help it? And,
      besides, it cannot be a bad action to save her from a man she is so much above in refinement
      and feeling.” He was getting into good-humour with himself. He got up and went over and looked
      at the photograph of Raphael’s Madonna, which he had hung over the mantlepiece. “How like
      Margaret’s are her big eyes!”
