
III.
The letter reached the Rev. William Howard at the right moment, arriving as it did in the
      midst of a crisis in his fortunes. In the course of a short life he had lost many parishes. He
      considered himself a martyr, but was considered by his enemies a clerical coxcomb. He had a
      habit of getting his mind possessed with some strange opinion, or what seemed so to his
      parishioners, and of preaching it while the notion lasted in the most startling way. The
      sermon on unbaptized children was an instance. It was not so much that he thought it true as
      that it possessed
       him for a day. It was not so much the thought as his own relation to it that
      allured him. Then, too, he loved what appeared to his parishioners to be the most unusual and
      dangerous practices. He put candles on the altar and crosses in unexpected places. He
      delighted in the intricacies of High Church costume, and was known to recommend confession and
      prayers for the dead.
Gradually the anger of his parishioners would increase. The rector, the washerwoman, the
      labourers, the squire, the doctor, the school teachers, the shoemakers, the butchers, the
      seamstresses, the local journalist, the master of the hounds, the innkeeper, the veterinary
      surgeon, the magistrate, the children making mud pies, all would be filled with one
      dread—popery. Then he would fly for consolation to his little circle of the faithful, the
      younger ladies, who still repeated his fine sentiments and
       saw him in their imaginations standing perpetually before a wall covered with
      tapestry and holding a crucifix in some constrained and ancient attitude. At last he would
      have to go, feeling for his parishioners a gay and lofty disdain, and for himself that
      reverend approbation one gives to the captains who lead the crusade of ideas against those who
      merely sleep and eat. An efficient crusader he certainly was—too efficient, indeed, for his
      efficiency gave to all his thoughts a certain over-completeness and isolation, and a kind of
      hardness to his mind. His intellect was like a musician’s instrument with no sounding-board.
      He could think carefully and cleverly, and even with originality, but never in such a way as
      to make his thoughts an allusion to something deeper than themselves. In this he was the
      reverse of poetical, for poetry is essentially a touch from behind a curtain.
This conformation of his mind
       helped to lead him into all manner of needless contests and to the loss of this
      last parish among much else. Did not the world exist for the sake of these hard, crystalline
      thoughts, with which he played as with so many bone spilikins, delighting in his own
      skill? and were not all who disliked them merely—the many?
In this way it came about that Sherman’s letter reached Howard at the right moment. Now,
      next to a new parish, he loved a new friend. A visit to London meant many. He had found he
      was, on the whole, a success at the beginning of friendships.
He at once wrote an acceptance in his small and beautiful handwriting, and arrived shortly
      after his letter. Sherman, on receiving him, glanced at his neat and shining boots, the little
      medal at the watch-chain and the well-brushed hat, and nodded as though in answer to an inner
      query. He smiled approval at the slight, elegant figure in its black clothes,
       at the satiny hair, and at the face, mobile as moving waters.
For several days the Shermans saw little of their guest. He had friends everywhere to turn
      into enemies and acquaintances to turn into friends. His days passed in visiting, visiting,
      visiting. Then there were theatres and churches to see, and new clothes to be bought, over
      which he was as anxious as a woman. Finally he settled down.
He passed his mornings in the smoking-room. He asked Sherman’s leave to hang on the walls
      one or two religious pictures, without which he was not happy, and to place over the
      mantlepiece, under the pipe-rack, an ebony crucifix. In one corner of the room he laid a rug
      neatly folded for covering his knees on chilly days, and on the table a small collection of
      favourite books—a curious and carefully-chosen collection, in which Cardinal Newman and
      Bourget, St. Chrysostom and Flaubert,
       lived together in perfect friendship.
Early in his visit Sherman brought him to the Lelands. He was a success. The three—Margaret,
      Sherman, and Howard—played tennis in the Square. Howard was a good player, and seemed to
      admire Margaret. On the way home Sherman once or twice laughed to himself. It was like the
      clucking of a hen with a brood of chickens. He told Howard, too, how wealthy Margaret was said
      to be.
After this Howard always joined Sherman and Margaret at the tennis. Sometimes, too, after a
      little, on days when the study seemed dull and lonely, and the unfinished essay on St.
      Chrysostom more than usually laborious, he would saunter towards the Square before his
      friend’s arrival, to find Margaret now alone, now with an acquaintance or two. About this time
      also press of work, an unusual thing with him, began to delay Sherman in town
       half an hour after his usual time. In the evenings they often talked of
      Margaret—Sherman frankly and carefully, as though in all anxiety to describe her as she was;
      and Howard with some enthusiasm: “She has a religious vocation,” he said once, with a slight
      sigh.
Sometimes they played chess—a game that Sherman had recently become devoted to, for he found
      it drew him out of himself more than anything else.
Howard now began to notice a curious thing. Sherman grew shabbier and shabbier, and at the
      same time more and more cheerful. This puzzled him, for he had noticed that he himself was not
      cheerful when shabby, and did not even feel upright and clever when his hat was getting old.
      He also noticed that when Sherman was talking to him he seemed to be keeping some thought to
      himself. When he first came to know him long ago in Ballah he had noticed occasionally
       the same thing, and set it down to a kind of suspiciousness and over-caution,
      natural to one who lived in such an out-of-the-way place. It seemed more persistent now,
      however. “He is not well trained,” he thought; “he is half a peasant. He has not the brilliant
      candour of the man of the world.”
All this while the mind of Sherman was clucking continually over its brood of thoughts.
      Ballah was being constantly suggested to him. The grey corner of a cloud slanting its rain
      upon Cheapside called to mind by some remote suggestion the clouds rushing and falling in
      cloven surf on the seaward steep of a mountain north of Ballah. A certain street corner made
      him remember an angle of the Ballah fish-market. At night a lantern, marking where the road
      was fenced off for mending, made him think of a tinker’s cart, with its swing can of burning
      coals, that used to stop on market days at
       the corner of Peter’s Lane at Ballah. Delayed by a crush in the Strand, he heard
      a faint trickling of water near by; it came from a shop window where a little water-jet
      balanced a wooden ball upon its point. The sound suggested a cataract with a long Gaelic name,
      that leaped crying into the Gate of the Winds at Ballah. Wandering among these memories a
      footstep went to and fro continually and the figure of Mary Carton moved among them like a
      phantom. He was set dreaming a whole day by walking down one Sunday morning to the border of
      the Thames—a few hundred yards from his house—and looking at the osier-covered Chiswick eyot.
      It made him remember an old day-dream of his. The source of the river that passed his garden
      at home was a certain wood-bordered and islanded lake, whither in childhood he had often gone
      blackberry-gathering. At the further end was a little islet
       called Inniscrewin. Its rocky centre, covered with many bushes, rose some forty
      feet above the lake. Often when life and its difficulties had seemed to him like the lessons
      of some elder boy given to a younger by mistake, it had seemed good to dream of going away to
      that islet and building a wooden hut there and burning a few years out, rowing to and fro,
      fishing, or lying on the island slopes by day, and listening at night to the ripple of the
      water and the quivering of the bushes—full always of unknown creatures—and going out at
      morning to see the island’s edge marked by the feet of birds.
These pictures became so vivid to him that the world about him—that Howard, Margaret, his
      mother even—began to seem far off. He hardly seemed aware of anything they were thinking and
      feeling. The light that dazzled him flowed from the vague and refracting regions of
       hope and memory; the light that made Howard’s feet unsteady was ever the too
      glaring lustre of life itself.
