
IV.
The road under his feet felt gritty and barren. He hurried away from the town. It was late
      afternoon. Trees cast bands of shadow across the road. He walked rapidly as if pursued. About
      a mile to the south of the town he came on a large wood bordering the road and surrounding a
      deserted house. Some local rich man once lived there, now it was given over to a caretaker who
      lived in two rooms in the back part. Men were at work cutting down trees in two or three parts
      of the wood. Many places were quite bare. A mass of ruins—a covered well, and the wreckage of
      castle wall—that
       that had been roofed with green for centuries lifted themselves up, bare as
      anatomies. The sight intensified, by some strange sympathy, his sorrow, and he hurried away as
      from a thing accursed of God.
The road led to the foot of a mountain, topped by a cairn supposed in popular belief to be
      the grave of Maeve, Mab of the fairies, and considered by antiquarians to mark the place where
      certain prisoners were executed in legendary times as sacrifices to the moon.
He began to climb the mountain. The sun was on the rim of the sea. It stayed there without
      moving, for as he ascended he saw an ever-widening circle of water.
He threw himself down upon the cairn. The sun sank under the sea. The Donegal headlands
      mixed with the surrounding blue. The stars grew out of heaven.
Sometimes he got up and walked to and fro. Hours passed.
       The stars, the streams down in the valley, the wind moving among the boulders,
      the various unknown creatures rustling in the silence—all these were contained within
      themselves, fulfilling their law, content to be alone, content to be with others, having the
      peace of God or the peace of the birds of prey. He only did not fulfil his law; something that
      was not he, that was not nature, that was not God, had made him and her he loved its tools.
      Hope, memory, tradition, conformity, had been laying waste their lives. As he thought this the
      night seemed to crush him with its purple foot. Hour followed hour. At midnight he started up,
      hearing a faint murmur of clocks striking the hour in the distant town. His face and hands
      were wet with tears, his clothes saturated with dew.
He turned homeward, hurriedly flying from the terrible firmament. What had this glimmering
      and silence to do with him—this luxurious
       present? He belonged to the past and the future. With pace somewhat slackened,
      because of the furze, he came down into the valley. Along the northern horizon moved a
      perpetual dawn, travelling eastward as the night advanced. Once, as he passed a marsh near a
      lime-kiln, a number of small birds rose chirruping from where they had been clinging among the
      reeds. Once, standing still for a moment where two roads crossed on a hill-side, he looked out
      over the dark fields. A white stone rose in the middle of a field, a score of yards in front
      of him. He knew the place well; it was an ancient burying-ground. He looked at the stone, and
      suddenly filled by that terror of the darkness children feel, began again his hurried
      walk.
He re-entered Ballah by the southern side. In passing he looked at the rectory. To his
      surprise a light burned in the drawing-room. He stood still. The dawn was brightening towards
       the east, but all round him was darkness, seeming the more intense to his eyes
      for their being fresh from the unshaded fields. In the midst of this darkness shone the
      lighted window. He went over to the gate and looked in. The room was empty. He was about to
      turn away when he noticed a white figure standing close to the gate. The latch creaked and the
      gate moved slowly on its hinges.
“John,” said a trembling voice, “I have been praying, and a light has come to me. I wished
      you to be ambitious—to go away and do something in the world. You did badly, and my poor pride
      was wounded. You do not know how much I had hoped from you; but it was all pride—all pride and
      foolishness. You love me. I ask no more. We need each other; the rest is with God.”
She took his hand in hers, and began caressing it. “We have been shipwrecked. Our goods have
      been cast into the sea.”
       Something in her voice told of the emotion that divides the love of woman from
      the love of man. She looked upon him whom she loved as full of a helplessness that needed
      protection, a reverberation of the feeling of the mother for the child at the breast.
