
VI.
The next day when Sherman came home from his office he saw an envelope lying on the
      smoking-room table. It contained a letter from Howard, saying that he had gone away, and that
      he hoped Sherman would forgive his treachery, but that he was hopelessly in love with Miss
      Leland, and that she returned his love.
Sherman went downstairs. His mother was helping the servant to set the table.
“You will never guess what has happened,” he said. “My affair with Margaret is over.”
“I cannot pretend to be sorry, John,” she replied. She had
       long considered Miss Leland among accepted things, like the chimney-pots on the
      roof, and submitted, as we do, to any unalterable fact, but had never praised her or expressed
      liking in any way. “She puts belladonna in her eyes, and is a vixen and a flirt, and I dare
      say her wealth is all talk. But how did it happen?”
Her son was, however, too excited to listen.
He went upstairs and wrote the following note—

“My dear Margaret:
“I congratulate you on a new conquest. There is no end to your victories. As for me, I bow
       myself out with many sincere wishes for your happiness, and remain,
“Your friend,
“John Sherman.”

Having posted this letter he sat down with Howard’s note spread out before him, and wondered
       whether there was anything mean and small-minded in neatness—he himself was
      somewhat untidy. He had often thought so before, for their strong friendship was founded in a
      great measure on mutual contempt, but now immediately added, being in good-humour with the
      world, “He is much cleverer than I am. He must have been very industrious at school.”
A week went by. He made up his mind to put an end to his London life. He broke to his mother
      his resolve to return to Ballah. She was delighted, and at once began to pack. Her old home
      had long seemed to her a kind of lost Eden, wherewith she was accustomed to contrast the
      present. When, in time, this present had grown into the past it became an Eden in turn. She
      was always ready for a change, if the change came to her in the form of a return to something
      old. Others place their ideals in the future; she laid hers in the past.

 The only one this momentous resolution seemed to surprise was the old and deaf
      servant. She waited with ever-growing impatience. She would sit by the hour wool-gathering on
      the corner of a chair with a look of bewildered delight. As the hour of departure came near
      she sang continually in a cracked voice.
Sherman, a few days before leaving, was returning for the last time from his office when he
      saw, to his surprise, Howard and Miss Leland carrying each a brown paper bundle. He nodded
      good-humouredly, meaning to pass on.
“John,” she said, “look at this brooch William gave me—a ladder leaning against the moon and
      a butterfly climbing up it. Is it not sweet? We are going to visit the poor.”
“And I,” he said, “am going to catch eels. I am leaving town.”
He made his excuses, saying he had no time to wait, and
       hurried off. She looked after him with a mournful glance, strange in anybody who
      had exchanged one lover for another more favoured.
“Poor fellow,” murmured Howard, “he is broken-hearted.”
“Nonsense,” answered Miss Leland, somewhat snappishly.
