
CHAPTER XXI. THE QUARTER SESSIONS.
“Is it so nominated in the bond?”—Merchant of Venice.
Malgre her disinclination, Rachel had reached the point of recovery in which the fresh air
     and change of scene of the drive to Avoncester could not fail to act as restoratives, and the
     first evening with the Dean and his gentle old sister was refreshing and comfortable to her
     spirits.
It was in the afternoon of the ensuing day that Mr. Grey came to tell her that her presence
     would soon be required, and both her mother and sister drove to the court with her. Poor Mrs.
     Curtis, too anxious to go away, yet too nervous to go into court, chose, in spite of all Mr.
     Grey’s advice, to remain in the carriage with the blinds closed, far too miserable for Grace to
     leave her.
Rachel, though very white, called up a heroic smile, and declared that she should get on very
     well. Her spirit had risen to the occasion, so as to brace her nerves to go becomingly through
     what was inevitable; and she replied with a ready “yes,” to Mr. Grey’s repetition of the advice
     for ever dinned into her ears, not to say a word more than needful, feeling indeed little
     disposed to utter anything that she could avoid.
She emerged from the dark passage into full view of faces which were far more familiar than
     she could have wished. She would have greatly preferred appearing before a judge, robed,
     wigged, and a stranger, to coming thus before a country gentleman, slightly known to herself,
     but an old friend of her father, and looking only like his ordinary self.
All the world indeed was curious to see the encounter between Rachel Curtis and her impostor,
     and every one who had contributed so much as a dozen stamps to the F. U. E. E. felt as if under
     a personal wrong and grievance, while many hoped to detect other elements of excitement, so
     that though all did not overtly stare at the witness, not even the most considerate could
     resist the impulse to glance at her reception of the bow with which he greeted her
     entrance.
She bent her head instinctively, but there was no change of colour on her cheek. Her
     faculties were concentrated, and her resolute will had closed all avenues to sensations that
     might impair her powers; she would not give way either to shame and remorse for herself, or to
     pity or indignation against the prisoner; she would attend only to the accuracy of the
     testimony that was required of her as an expiation of her credulous incaution; but such was the
     tension of her nerves, that, impassive as she looked, she heard every cough, every rustle of
     paper; each voice that addressed her seemed to cut her ears like a knife; and the chair that
     was given to her after the administration of the oath was indeed much needed.
She was examined upon her arrangement that the prisoner should provide for the asylum at St.
     Herbert’s, and on her monthly payment to him of the sums entered in the account-book. In some
     cases she knew he had shown her the bills unreceipted; in others, he had simply made the charge
     in the book, and she had given to him the amount that he estimated as requisite for the
     materials for wood-engraving. So far she felt satisfied that she was making herself distinctly
     understood, but the prisoner, acting as his own counsel, now turned to her and asked the
     question she had expected and was prepared for, whether she could refer to any written
     agreement.
“No; it was a viva voce agreement.”
Could she mention what passed at the time of making the arrangement that she had stated as
     existing between himself and her?
“I described my plans, and you consented.”
An answer at which some of the audience could have smiled, so well did it accord with her
     habits. The prisoner again insisted on her defining the mode of his becoming bound to the
     agreement. Rachel took time for consideration, and Alison Williams, sitting between Lady Temple
     and Colonel Keith, felt dizzy with anxiety for the answer. It came at last.
“I do not remember the exact words; but you acquiesced in the appearance of your name as
     secretary and treasurer.”
The prospectus was here brought forward, and Mauleverer asked her to define the duties he had
     been supposed to undertake in the character in which he had there figured. It of course came
     out that she had been her own treasurer, only entrusting the nominal one with the amount
     required for current expenses, and again, in reply to his deferential questions, she was
     obliged to acknowledge that he had never in so many words declared the sums entered in the book
     to have been actually paid, and not merely estimates for monthly expenditure to be paid to the
     tradesmen at the usual seasons.
“I understood that they were paid,” said Rachel, with some resentment.
“Will you oblige me by mentioning on what that understanding was founded?” said the prisoner,
     blandly.
There was a pause. Rachel knew she must say something; but memory utterly failed to recall
     any definite assurance that these debts had been discharged. Time passed, all eyes were upon
     her, there was a dire necessity of reply, and though perfectly conscious of the weakness and
     folly of her utterance, she could only falter forth, “I thought so.” The being the Clever Woman
     of the family, only rendered her the more sensible both of the utter futility of her answer,
     and of the effect it must be producing.
Alison hung her head, and frowned in absolute shame and despair, already perceiving how
     matters must go, and feeling as if the hope of her brother’s vindication were slipping
     away—reft from her by Rachel’s folly. Colin gave an indignant sigh, and whispering to her,
     “Come out when Lady Temple does, I will meet you,” he made his way out of court.
There had been a moment’s pause after Rachel’s “I thought so,” and then the chairman spoke to
     the counsel for the prosecution. “Mr. Murray, can you carry the case any further by other
     witnesses? At present I see no case to go to the jury. You will see that the witness not only
     does not set up any case of embezzlement, but rather loads to an inference in the contrary
     direction.”
“No, sir,” was the answer; “I am afraid that I can add nothing to the case already presented
     to you.”
Upon this, the chairman said,
“Gentlemen of the Jury,—The case for the prosecution does not sustain the indictment or
     require me to call on the prisoner for his defence, and it is your duty to find him not guilty.
     You will observe that we are not trying a civil action, in respect of the large sum which he
     has received from the young lady, and for which he is still accountable to her; nor by
     acquitting him are you pronouncing that he has not shown himself a man of very questionable
     honesty, but only that the evidence will not bring him within the grasp of the criminal law, as
     guilty of embezzlement under the statute, and this because of the looseness of the arrange
     ments, that had been implied instead of expressed. It is exceedingly to be regretted that with
     the best intentions and kindest purposes, want of caution and experience on her part should
     have enabled the prisoner thus to secure himself from the possibility of a conviction; but
     there can be no doubt that the evidence before us is such as to leave no alternative but a
     verdict of not guilty.”
The very tenderness and consideration of the grey-haired Sir Edward Morden’s tone were more
     crushing to Rachel than severe animadversions on her folly would have been from a stranger.
     Here was she, the Clever Woman of the family, shown in open court to have been so egregious a
     dupe that the deceiver could not even be punished, but must go scot-free, leaving all her
     wrongs unredressed! To her excited, morbid apprehension, magnified by past self-sufficiency, it
     was as though all eyes were looking in triumph at that object of general scorn and aversion, a
     woman who had stepped out of her place. She turned with a longing to rush into darkness and
     retirement when she was called to return to her mother, and even had she still been present,
     little would she have recked that when the jury had, without many moments’ delay, returned a
     verdict of “Not Guilty,” the prisoner received a strong, stem reprimand from Sir Edward, to
     whom he replied with a bow that had in it more of triumph than of acceptance.
Burning tears of disappointment were upon Alison’s cheek, the old hopeless blank was
     returning, and her brother might come back in vain, to find his enemy beyond his reach. Here
     was an end alike of his restoration and of Ermine’s happiness!
“Oh!” whispered Lady Temple, “is it not horrid? Is nothing to be done to that dreadful man? I
     always thought people came here to do justice. I shall never like Sir Edward Morden again! But,
     oh! what can that be? Where is the Colonel?”
It was a loud, frightful roar and yell, a sound of concentrated fury that, once heard, could
     never be forgotten. It was from the crowd outside, many of them from Avonmouth, and all frantic
     with indignation at the cruelty that had been perpetrated upon the helpless children. Their
     groans and execrations were pursuing the prison van, from which Maria Hatherton was at that
     moment making her exit, and so fearful was the outcry that penetrated the court, that Fanny
     trembled with recollections of Indian horrors, looked wistfully for her protector the Colonel,
     and murmured fears that her aunt must have been very much terrified.
At that moment, however, a summons came for Lady Temple, as this was the case in which she
     was to bear witness. Alison followed, and was no sooner past the spectators, who gladly made
     way, than she found her arm drawn into Colonel Keith’s. “Is he come?” she asked. “No,” was
     rather signed than spoken. “Oh, Colin!” she sighed, but still there was no reply, only she was
     dragged on, downstairs and along dark passages, into a room furnished with a table, chairs,
     pens, ink, and paper, and lighted with gas, which revealed to her not only Mr. Grey, but one
     who, though eight years had made him stouter, redder, and rougher, had one of the moat familiar
     faces of her youthful days. Her senses almost reeled with her as he held out his hand, saying
     heartily, “Well, Ailie, how are you? and how is Ermine? Where can this brother of yours
     be?”
“Harry! Mr. Beauchamp! You here!” she exclaimed, in the extremity of amazement.
“Here is Colin seeming to think that something may be done towards nailing this scoundrel for
     the present, so I am come at his call. We shall have the fellow in a moment.” And then, by way
     of getting rid of embarrassment, he began talking to Mr. Grey about the County Hall, and the
     room, which Mr. Grey explained to be that of the clerk of the peace, lent for this occasion
     while the usual justice room was occupied, Alison heard all as in a dream, and presently
     Mauleverer entered, as usual spruce, artist-like, and self-possessed, and was accosted by Harry
     Beauchamp, “Good evening, Mr. Maddox, I am sorry to trouble you.”
“I hope there is no misunderstanding, sir,” was the reply. “I have not the pleasure of
     knowing for whom you take me.”
Without regarding this reply, however, Mr. Beauchamp requested Mr. Grey to take his
     deposition, stating his own belief in the identity of the person before him with Richard
     Maddox, whom he charged with having delivered to him a letter falsely purporting to come from
     Edward Williams, demanding three hundred pounds, which upon this he had delivered to the
     accused, to be forwarded to the said Mr. Williams.
Alison’s heart beat violently at the ordeal before her of speaking to the genuineness of the
     letter. She had seen and suspected that to her brother-in-law, but she could not guess whether
     the flaws in that to Mr. Beauchamp would be equally palpable, and doubt and anxiety made her
     scarcely able to look at it steadily. To her great relief, however, she was able to detect
     sufficient variations to justify her assertion that it was not authentic, and she was able to
     confirm her statement by comparison of the writing with that of a short, indignant denial of
     all knowledge of the transaction, which Harry Beauchamp had happily preserved, though little
     regarding it at the time. She also showed the wrong direction, with the name of the place
     misspelt, according to her own copy of her sister-in-law’s address, at the request of Maddox
     himself, and pointed out that a letter to Ermine from her brother bore the right form. The seal
     upon that to Mr. Beauchamp she likewise asserted to be the impression of one which her brother
     had lost more than a year before the date of the letter.
“Indeed, sir,” said the accused, fuming to Mr. Grey, “this is an exceedingly hard case. Here
     am I, newly acquitted, after nearly six weeks’ imprisonment, on so frivolous a charge that it
     has been dismissed without my even having occasion to defend myself, or to call my own most
     respectable witnesses as to character, when another charge is brought forward against me in a
     name that there has been an unaccountable desire to impose on me. Even if I were the person
     that this gentleman supposes, there is nothing proved. He may very possibly have received a
     forged letter, but I perceive nothing to fix the charge upon the party he calls Maddox. Let me
     call in my own witnesses, who had volunteered to come down from Bristol, and you will be
     convinced how completely mistaken the gentleman is.”
To this Mr. Grey replied that the case against him was not yet closed, and cautioning him to
     keep his own witnesses back; but he was urgent to be allowed to call them at once, as it was
     already late, and they were to go by the six o’clock train. Mr. Grey consented, and a messenger
     was sent in search of them. Mr. Beauchamp looked disturbed. “What say you to this, Colin?” he
     asked, uneasily. “That man’s audacity is enough to stagger one, and I only saw him three times
     at the utmost.”
“Never fear,” said Colin, “delay is all in our favour.” At the same time Colin left them, and
     with him went some hope and confidence, leaving all to feel awkward and distressed during the
     delay that ensued, the accused expatiating all the time on the unreasonableness of bringing up
     an offence committed so many years ago, in the absence of the only witness who could prove the
     whole story, insisting, moreover, on his entire ignorance of the names of either Maddox or
     Williams.
The sight of his witnesses was almost welcome. They were a dissenting minister, and a neat,
     portly, respectable widow, the owner of a fancy shop, and both knew Mr. Mauleverer as a popular
     lecturer upon philanthropical subjects, who came periodically to Bristol, and made himself very
     acceptable. Their faith in him was genuine, and he had even interested them in the F. U. E. E.
     and the ladies that patronized it. The widow was tearfully indignant about the persecution that
     had been got up against him, and evidently intended to return with him in triumph, and endow
     him with the fancy shop if he would condescend so far. The minister too, spoke highly of his
     gifts and graces, but neither of them could carry back their testimony to his character for
     more than three years.
Mr. Grey looked at his watch, Harry Beauchamp was restless, and Alison felt almost faint with
     suspense; but at last the tramp of feet was heard in the passage. Colonel Keith came first, and
     leaning over Alison’s chair, said, “Lady Temple will wait for me at the inn. It will soon be
     all right.”
At that moment a tall figure in mourning entered, attended by a policeman. For the first
     time, Mauleverer’s coolness gave way, though not his readiness, and, turning to Mr. Grey, he
     exclaimed, “Sir, you do not intend to be misled by the malignity of a person of this
     description.”
“Worse than a murderess!” gasped the scandalized widow Dench. “Well, I never!”
Mr. Grey was obliged to be peremptory, in order to obtain silence, and enforce that, let the
     new witness be what she might, her evidence must be heard.
She had come in with the habitual village curtsey to Mr. Beauchamp, and putting back her
     veil, disclosed to Alison the piteous sight of the well-remembered features, once so bright
     with intelligence and innocence, and now sunk and haggard with the worst sorrows of womanhood.
     Her large glittering eyes did not seem to recognise Alison, but they glared upon Mauleverer
     with a strange terrible fixedness, as if unable to see any one else. To Alison the sight was
     inexpressibly painful, and she shrank back, as it were, in dread of meeting the eyes once so
     responsive to her own.
Mr. Grey asked the woman the name of the person before her, and looking at him with the same
     fearful steadiness, she pronounced it to be Richard Maddox, though he had of late called
     himself Mauleverer.
The man quailed for a moment, then collecting himself, said, “I now understand the incredible
     ingratitude and malignity that have pointed out against me these hitherto unaccountable
     slanders. It is a punishment for insufficient inquiry into character. But you, sir, in common
     justice, will protect me from the aspersions of one who wishes to drag me down in her justly
     merited fall.”
“Sentenced for three years! To take her examination!” muttered Mrs. Dench, and with some
     difficulty these exclamations were silenced, and Maria Hatherton called on for her
     evidence.
Concise, but terrible in its clear brevity, was the story of the agent tampering with her,
     the nursemaid, until she had given him access to the private rooms, where he had turned over
     the papers. On the following day, Mr. Williams had been inquiring for his seal-ring, but she
     herself had not seen it again till some months after, when she had left her place, and was
     living in lodgings provided for her by Maddox, when she had found the ring in the drawer of his
     desk; her suspicion had then been first excited by his displeasure at her proposing to him to
     return it, thinking it merely there by accident, and she had afterwards observed him
     endeavouring to copy fragments of Mr. Williams’s writing. These he had crushed up and thrown
     aside, but she had preserved them, owning that she did not know what might come of them, and
     the family had been very kind to her.
The seal and the scraps of paper were here produced by the policeman who had them in charge.
     The seal perfectly coincided with that which had closed the letter to Harry Beauchamp, and was,
     moreover, identified by both Alison and Colonel Keith. It was noticeable, too, that one of
     these fragments was the beginning of a note to Mr. Beauchamp, as “Dear H.” and this, though not
     Edward’s most usual style of addressing his friend, was repeated in the demand for the
     £300.
“Sir,” said the accused, “of course I have no intention of intimating that a gentleman like
     the Honourable Colonel Keith has been in any collusion with this unhappy woman, but it must be
     obvious to you that his wish to exonerate his friend has induced him to give too easy credence
     to this person’s malignant attempts to fasten upon one whom she might have had reason to regard
     as a benefactor the odium of the transactions that she acknowledges to have taken place between
     herself and this Maddox, thereto incited, no doubt, by some resemblance which must be strong,
     since it has likewise deceived Mr. Beauchamp.”
Mr. Grey looked perplexed and vexed, and asked Mr. Beauchamp if he could suggest any other
     person able to identify Maddox. He frowned, said there must have been workmen at the factory,
     but knew not where they were, looked at Colin Keith, asked Alison if she or her sister had ever
     seen Maddox, then declared he could lay his hands on no one but Dr. Long at Belfast.
Mauleverer vehemently exclaimed against the injustice of detaining him till a witness could
     be summoned from that distance. Mr. Grey evidently had his doubts, and began to think of
     calling in some fresh opinion whether he had sufficient grounds for committal, and Alison’s
     hopes were only unstained by Colin’s undaunted looks, when there came a knock at the door, and,
     as much to the surprise of Alison as of every one else, there entered an elderly maid-servant,
     leading a little girl by the hand, and Colonel Keith going to meet the latter, said, “Do not be
     frightened, my dear, you have only to answer a few questions as plainly and clearly as you
     can.”
Awed, silent, and dazzled by the sudden gas-light, she clung to his hand, but evidently
     distinguished no one else; and he placed her close to the magistrate saying, “This is Mr. Grey,
     Rose, tell him your name.”
And Mr. Grey taking her hand and repeating the question, the clear little silvery voice
     answered,
“I am Rose Ermine Williams.”
“And how old are you, my dear?”
“I was eight on the last of June.”
“She knows the nature of an oath?” asked Mr. Grey of the Colonel.
“Certainly, you can soon satisfy yourself of that.”
“My dear,” then said Mr. Grey, taking her by the hand again, and looking into the brown
     intelligent eyes, “I am sure you have been well taught. Can you tell me what is meant by taking
     an oath before a magistrate?”
“Yes,” said Rose, colour flushing into her face, “it is calling upon Almighty God to hear one
     speak the truth.” She spoke so low that she could hardly be heard, and she looked full of
     startled fear and distress, turning her face up to Colonel Keith with a terrified
     exclamation,
“Oh please, why am I here, what am I to say?”
He was sorry for her; but her manifest want of preparation was all in favour of the cause,
     and he soothed her by saying, “Only answer just what you are asked as clearly as you can, and
     Mr. Grey will soon let you go. He knows you would try any way to speak the truth, but as he is
     going to examine you as a magistrate, he must ask you to take the oath first.”
Rose repeated the oath in her innocent tones, and perhaps their solemnity or the fatherly
     gentleness of Mr. Grey reassured her, for her voice trembled much less when she answered his
     next inquiry, who her parents were.
“My mother is dead,” she said; “my father is Mr Williams, he is away at Ekaterinburg.”
“Do you remember any time before he was at Ekaterinburg?”
“Oh yes; when we lived at Kensington, and he had the patent glass works.”
“Now, turn round and say if there is any one here whom you know?”
Rose, who had hitherto stood facing Mr. Grey, with her back to the rest of the room, obeyed,
     and at once exclaimed, “Aunt Alison,” then suddenly recoiled, and grasped at the Colonel.
“What is it, my dear?”
“It is—it is Mr. Maddox,” and with another gasp of fright, “and Maria! Oh, let me go.”
But Mr. Grey put his arm round her, and assured her that no one could harm her, Colonel Keith
     let his fingers be very hard pinched, and her aunt came nearer, all telling her that she had
     only to make her answers distinctly; and though still shrinking, she could reply to Mr. Grey’s
     question whom she meant by Mr. Maddox.
“The agent for the glass—my father’s agent.”
“And who is Maria?”
“She was my nurse.”
“When did you last see the person you call Mr. Maddox?”
“Last time, I was sure of it, was when I was walking on the esplanade at Avoncester with
     Colonel Keith,” said Rose, very anxious to turn aside and render her words inaudible.
“I suppose you can hardly tell when that was?”
“Yes, it was the day before you went away to Lord Keith’s wedding,” said Rose, looking to the
     Colonel.
“Had you seen him before?”
“Twice when I was out by myself, but it frightened me so that I never looked again.”
“Can you give me any guide to the time?”
She was clear that it had been after Colonel Keith’s first stay at Avonmouth, but that was
     all, and being asked if she had ever mentioned these meetings, “Only when Colonel Keith saw how
     frightened I was, and asked me.”
“Why were you frightened?” asked Mr. Grey, on a hint from the Colonel.
“Because I could not quite leave off believing the dreadful things Mr. Maddox and Maria said
     they would do to me if I told.”
“Told what?”
“About Mr. Maddox coming and walking with Maria when she was out with me,” gasped Rose,
     trying to avert her head, and not comforted by hearing Mr. Grey repeat her words to those
     tormentors of her infancy.
A little encouragement, however, brought out the story of the phosphoric letters, the lions,
     and the vision of Maddox growling in the dressing-room. The date of the apparition could hardly
     be hoped for, but fortunately Rose remembered that it was two days before her mamma’s birthday,
     because she had felt it so bard to be eaten up before the fete, and this date tallied with that
     given by Maria of her admitting her treacherous admirer into the private rooms.
“The young lady may be precocious, no doubt, sir,” here said the accused, “but I hardly see
     why she has been brought here. You can attach no weight to the confused recollections of so
     young a child, of matters that took place so long ago.”
“The question will be what weight the jury will attach to them at the assizes,” said Mr.
     Grey.
“You will permit me to make one inquiry of the young lady, sir. Who told her whom she might
     expect to see here?”
Mr. Grey repeated the query, and Rose answered, “Nobody; I knew my aunt and the Colonel and
     Lady Temple were gone in to Avoncester, and Aunt Ermine got a note from the Colonel to say that
     I was to come in to him with Tibbie in a fly.”
“Did you know what you were wanted for?”
“No, I could not think. I only knew they came to get the woman punished for being so cruel to
     the poor little girls.”
“Do you know who that person was?”
“Mrs. Rawlins,” was the ready answer.
“I think,” said Mr. Grey to the accused, “that you must perceive that, with such coincidence
     of testimony as I have here, I have no alternative but to commit you for the summer
     assizes.”
Mauleverer murmured something about an action for false imprisonment, but he did not make it
     clear, and he was evidently greatly crestfallen. He had no doubt hoped to brazen out his
     assumed character sufficiently to disconcert Mr. Beauchamp’s faith in his own memory, and
     though he had carried on the same game after being confronted with Maria, it was already
     becoming desperate. He had not reckoned upon her deserting his cause even for her own sake, and
     the last chance of employing her antecedents to discredit her testimony, had been overthrown by
     Rose’s innocent witness to their mutual relations, a remembrance which had been burnt in on her
     childish memory by the very means taken to secure her silence. When the depositions were read
     over, their remarkable and independent accordance was most striking; Mrs. Dench had already
     been led away by the minister, in time to catch her train, just when her sobs of indignation at
     the deception were growing too demonstrative, and the policeman resumed the charge of Maria
     Hatherton.
Little Rose looked up to her, saying, “Please, Aunt Ailie, may I speak to her?”
Alison had been sitting restless and perplexed between impulses of pity and repulsion, and
     doubts about the etiquette of the justice room; but her heart yearned over the girl she had
     cherished, and she signed permission to Rose, whose timidity had given way amid excitement and
     encouragement.
“Please, Maria,” she said, “don’t be angry with me for telling; I never did till Colonel
     Keith asked me, and I could not help it. Will you kiss me and forgive me as you used?”
The hard fierce eyes, that had not wept over the child’s coffin, filled with tears.
“Oh, Miss Rose, Miss Rose, do not come near me. Oh, if I had minded you—and your aunts—” And
     the pent-up misery of the life that had fallen lower and lower since the first step in evil,
     found its course in a convulsive sob and shriek, so grievous that Alison was thankful for
     Colin’s promptitude in laying hold of Rose, and leading her out of the room before him. Alison
     felt obliged to follow, yet could not bear to leave Maria to policemen and prison warders.
“Maria, poor Maria, I am so sorry for you, I will try to come and see you—”
But her hand was seized with an imperative, “Ailie, you must come, they are all waiting for
     you.”
How little had she thought her arm would ever be drawn into that arm, so unheeded by
     both.
“So that is Edward’s little girl! Why, she is the sweetest little clear-headed thing I have
     seen a long time. She was the saving of us.”
“It was well thought of by Colin.”
“Colin is a lawyer spoilt—that’s a fact. A first-rate get-up of a case!”
“And you think it safe now?”
“Nothing safer, so Edward turns up. How he can keep away from such a child as that, I can’t
     imagine. Where is she? Oh, here—” as they came into the porch in fuller light, where the
     Colonel and Rose waited for them. “Ha, my little Ailie, I must make better friends with
     you.”
“My name is Rose, not Ailie,” replied the little girl.
“Oh, aye! Well, it ought to have been, what d’ye call her—that was a Daniel come to
     judgment?”
“Portia,” returned Rose; “but I don’t think that is pretty at all.”
“And where is Lady Temple?” anxiously asked Alison. “She must be grieved to be detained so
     long.”
“Oh! Lady Temple is well provided for,” said the Colonel, “all the magistrates and half the
     bar are at her feet. They say the grace and simplicity of her manner of giving her evidence
     were the greatest contrast to poor Rachel’s.”
“But where is she?” still persisted Alison.
“At the hotel; Maria’s was the last case of the day, and she went away directly after it,
     with such a choice of escorts that I only just spoke to her.”
And at the hotel they found the waggonette at the gateway, and Lady Temple in the parlour
     with Sir Edward Morden, who, late as it was, would not leave her till he had seen her with the
     rest of the party. She sprang up to meet them, and was much relieved to hear that Mauleverer
     was again secured. “Otherwise,” she said, “it would have been all my fault for having acted
     without asking advice. I hope I shall never do so again.”
She insisted that all should go home together in the waggonette, and Rose found herself upon
     Mr. Beauchamp’s knee, serving as usual as a safety valve for the feelings of her aunt’s
     admirers. There was no inconstancy on her part, she would much have preferred falling to the
     lot of her own Colonel, but the open carriage drive was rather a risk for him in the night air,
     and though he had undertaken it in the excitement, he soon found it requisite to muffle himself
     up, and speak as little as possible. Harry Beauchamp talked enough for both. He was in high
     spirits, partly, as Colin suspected, with the escape from a dull formal home, and partly with
     the undoing of a wrong that had rankled in his conscience more than he had allowed to himself.
     Lady Temple, her heart light at the convalescence of her sons, was pleased with everything,
     liked him extremely, and answered gaily; and Alison enjoyed the resumption of pleasant habits
     of days gone by. Yet, delightful as it all was, there was a sense of disenchantment: she was
     marvelling all the time how she could have suffered so much on Harry Beauchamp’s account. The
     rejection of him had weighed like a stone upon her heart, but now it seemed like freedom to
     have escaped his companionship for a lifetime.
Presently a horse’s feet were heard on the road before them; there was a meeting and a halt,
     and Alick Keith’s voice called out—“How has it gone?”
“Why, were you not in court?”
“What! I go to hear my friends baited!”
“Where were you then?”
“At Avonmouth.”
“Oh, then you have seen the boys,” cried Lady Temple. “How is Conrade?”
“Quite himself. Up to a prodigious amount of indoor croquet. But how has it gone?”
“Such a shame!” returned Lady Temple. “They acquitted the dreadful man, and the poor woman,
     whom he drove to it, has a year’s imprisonment and hard labour!”
“Acquitted! What, is he off?”
“Oh, no, no! he is safe, and waiting for the Assizes, all owing to the Colonel and little
     Rose.”
“He is committed for the former offence,” said Colonel Keith; “the important one.”
“That’s right! Good night! And how,” he added, reining back his horse, “did your cousin get
     through it?”
“Oh, they were so hard on her!” cried Lady Temple. “I could hardly bring myself to speak to
     Sir Edward after it! It was as if he thought it all her fault!”
“Her evidence broke down completely,” said Colonel Keith. “Sir Edward spared her as much as
     he could; but the absurdity of her whole conduct was palpable. I hope she has had a
     lesson.”
Alick’s impatient horse flew on with him, and Colin muttered to Alison under his mufflers,—“I
     never could make out whether that is the coolest or the most sensitive fellow living!”

