
CHAPTER XXV. THE HUNTSFORD CROQUET.

 “Une femme egoiste, non seulement de coeur, mais d’esprit, ne pent pas sortir d’elle-meme.
      Le moi est indelible chez elle. Une veritable egoiste ne sait meme pas etre fausse.”
 —MME. E. DE GIRARDIN. 
“I am come to prepare you,” said Lady Keith, putting her arm into her brother’s, and leading
     him into the peacock path. “Mrs. Huntsford is on her way to call and make a dead set to get you
     all to a garden party.”
“Then we are off to the Earlsworthy Woods.”
“Nay, listen, Alick. I have let you alone and defended you for a whole month, but if you
     persist in shutting up you wife, people won’t stand it.”
“Which of us is the Mahometan?”
“You are pitied! But you see it was a strong thing our appearing without our several
     incumbrances, and though an old married woman like me may do as she pleases, yet for a
     bridegroom of not three weeks’ standing to resort to bazaars solus argues some weighty
     cause.”
“And argues rightly.”
“Then you are content to be supposed to have an unproduceably eccentric melancholy
     bride?”
“Better they should think so than that she should be so. She has been victimized enough
     already to her mother’s desire to save appearances.”
“You do not half believe me, Alick, and this is really a very kind, thoughtful arrangement of
     Mrs. Huntsford’s. She consulted me, saying there were such odd stories about you two that she
     was most anxious that Rachel should appear and confute them; and she thought that an
     out-of-door party like this would suit best, because it would be early, and Rachel could get
     away if she found it too much for her.”
“After being walked out to satisfy a curious neighbourhood.”
“Now Alick, do consider it. This sort of thing could remind her of nothing painful; Uncle
     George would enjoy it.”
“And fall over the croquet traps.”
“No; if you wanted to attend to him, I could take care of Rachel.”
“I cannot tell, Bessie, I believe it is pure goodnature on Mrs. Huntsford’s part, but if we
     go, it must be from Rachel’s spontaneous movement. I will not press her on any account. I had
     rather the world said she was crazy at once than expose her to the risk of one of the dreadful
     nights that haunted us till we came here to perfect quiet.”
“But she is well now. She looks better and nicer than I ever saw her. Really, Alick, now her
     face is softer, and her eyes more veiled, and her chin not cocked up, I am quite proud of her.
     Every one will be struck with her good looks.”
“Flattery, Bessie,” he said, not ill pleased. “Yes, she is much better, and more like
     herself; but I dread all this being overthrown. If she herself wishes to go, it may be a good
     beginning, but she must not be persuaded.”
“Then I must not even tell her that she won’t be required to croquet, and that I’ll guard her
     from all civil speeches.”
“No, for indeed, Bessie, on your own account and Lord Keith’s, you should hardly spend a long
     afternoon from home.”
“Here’s the war in the enemy’s quarters! As to fatigue, dawdling about Mrs. Huntsford’s
     garden, is much the same as dawdling about my own, and makes me far more entertaining.”
“I cannot help thinking, Bessie, that Lord Keith is more ill than you suppose. I am sure he
     is in constant pain.”
“So I fear,” said Bessie, gravely; “but what can be done? He will see no one but his old
     surgeon in Edinburgh.”
“Then take him there.”
“Take him? You must know what it is to be in the hands of a clever woman before you make such
     a proposal.”
“You are a cleverer woman than my wife in bringing about what you really wish.”
“Just consider, Alick, our own house is uninhabitable, and this one on our hands—my aunt
     coming to me in a month’s time. You don’t ask me to do what is reasonable.”
“I cannot tell, Bessie. You can be the only judge of what is regard of the right kind for
     your husband’s health or for yourself; and see, there is Mrs. Huntsford actually arrived, and
     talking to my uncle.”
“One moment, Alick: I am not going to insult myself so far as to suppose that poor Charlie
     Carleton’s being at home has anything to do with your desire to deport me, but I want you to
     know that he did not come home till after we were settled here.”
“I do not wish to enter into details, Bessie,” and he crossed the lawn towards the window
     where Mr. Clare and Rachel had just received Mrs. Huntsford, a goodnatured joyous-looking lady,
     a favourite with every one. Her invitation was dexterously given to meet a few friends at
     luncheon, and in the garden, where the guests would be free to come and go; there might perhaps
     be a little dancing later, she had secured some good music which would, she knew, attract Mr.
     Clare, and she hoped he would bring Captain and Mrs. Keith. She knew Mrs. Keith had not been
     well, but she promised her a quiet room to rest in, and she wanted to show her a view of the
     Devon coast done by a notable artist in water-colours. Rachel readily accepted—in fact, this
     quiet month had been so full of restoration that she had almost forgotten her morbid shrinking
     from visitors; and Bessie infused into her praise and congratulations a hint that a refusal
     would have been much against Alick’s reputation, so that she resolved to keep up to the mark,
     even though he took care that she should know that she might yet retract.
“You did not wish me to refuse, Alick,” said she, struck by his grave countenance, when she
     found him lying on the slope of the lawn shortly after, in deep thought.
“No, not at all,” he replied; “it is likely to be a pleasant affair, and my uncle will be
     delighted to have us with him. No,” he added, seeing that she still looked at him
     inquisitively, “it is the old story. My sister! Poor little thing! I always feel as though I
     wore more unkind and unjust to her than any one else, and yet we are never together without my
     feeling as if she was deceiving herself and me; and yet it is all so fair and well reasoned
     that one is always left in the wrong. I regretted this marriage extremely at first, and I am
     not the less disposed to regret it now.”
“Indeed! Every one says how attentive she is to him, and how nicely they go on together.”
“Pshaw, Rachel! that is just the way. A few words and pretty ways pass with her and all the
     world for attention, when she is wherever her fancy calls her, all for his good. It is just the
     attention she showed my uncle. And now it is her will and pleasure to queen it here among her
     old friends, and she will not open her eyes to see the poor old man’s precarious state.”
“Do you think him so very ill, Alick?”
“I was shocked when I saw him yesterday. As to sciatica, that is all nonsense; the blow in
     his side has done some serious damage, and if it is not well looked-to, who knows what will be
     the end of it! And then, a gay young widow with no control over her—I hate to think of it.”
“Indeed,” said Rachel, “she is so warm and bright, and really earnest in her kindness, that
     she will be sure to see her own way right at home. I don’t think we can guess how obstinate
     Lord Keith may be in refusing to take advice.”
“He cut me off pretty short,” said Alick. “I am afraid he will see no one here; and, as
     Bessie says, the move to Scotland would not be easy just now. As I said, she leaves one in the
     wrong, and I don’t like the future. But it is of no use to talk of it; so let us come and see
     if my uncle wants to go anywhere.”
It was Alick’s fate never to meet with sympathy in his feeling of his sister’s
     double-mindedness. Whether it were that he was mistaken, or that she really had the gift of
     sincerity for the moment in whatever she was saying, the most candid and transparent people in
     the world—his uncle and his wife—never even succeeded in understanding his dissatisfaction with
     Bessie’s doings, but always received them at her own valuation. Even while he had been looking
     forward, with hope deferred, to her residence with him as the greatest solace the world could
     yet afford him, Mr. Clare had always been convinced that her constant absence from his Rectory,
     except when his grand neighbours were at home, had been unavoidable, and had always credited
     the outward tokens of zealous devotion to his church and parish, and to all that was useful or
     good elsewhere. In effect there was a charm about her which no one but her brother ever
     resisted, and even he held out by an exertion that made him often appear ungracious.
However, for the present the uneasiness was set aside, in the daily avocations of the
     Rectory, where Alick was always a very different person from what he appeared in Lady Temple’s
     drawing-room, constantly engaged as he was by unobtrusive watchfulness over his uncle, and
     active and alert in this service in a manner that was a curious contrast to his ordinary
     sauntering ways. As to Rachel, the whole state of existence was still a happy dream. She
     floated on from day to day in the tranquil activity of the Rectory, without daring to look back
     on the past or to think out her present frame of mind; it was only the languor and rest of
     recovery after suffering, and her husband was heedfully watching her, fearing the experiment of
     the croquet party, though on many accounts feeling the necessity of its being made.
Ermine’s hint, that with Rachel it rested to prevent her unpopularity from injuring her
     husband, had not been thrown away, and she never manifested any shrinking from the party, and
     even took some interest in arraying herself for it.
“That is what I call well turned out,” exclaimed Alick, when she came down.
“Describe her dress, if you please,” said Mr. Clare, “I like to hear how my nieces look.”
Alick guided his hand. “There, stroke it down, a long white feather in a shady hat trimmed
     with dark green, velvet; she is fresh and rosy, you know, sir, and looks well in green, and
     then, is it Grace’s taste, Rachel? for it is the prettiest thing you have worn—a pale buff sort
     of silky thing, embroidered all over in the same colour,” and he put a fold of the dress into
     his uncle’s hand.
“Indian, surely,” said Mr. Clare, feeling the pattern, “it is too intricate and graceful for
     the West.”
“Yes,” said Alick, “I remember now, Grace showed it to me. It was one that Lady Temple
     brought from India, and never had made up. Poor Grace could get no sympathy from Rachel about
     the wedding clothes, so she was obliged to come to me.”
“And I thought you did not know one of my things from another,” said Rachel. “Do you really
     mean that you care?”
“Depend upon it, he does, my dear,” said Mr. Clare. “I have heard him severely critical on
     his cousins.”
“He has been very good in not tormenting me,” said Rachel, nestling nearer to him.
“I apprehended the consequences,” said Alick, “and besides, you never mounted that black lace
     pall, or curtain, or whatever you call it, upon your head, after your first attempt at
     frightening me away with it.”
“A cap set against, instead of at,” said Mr. Clare, laughing; and therewith his old horse was
     heard clattering in the yard, and Alick proceeded to drive the well-used phaeton about three
     miles through Earlsworthy Park, to a pleasant-looking demesne in the village beyond. As they
     were turning in at the gate, up came Lady Keith with her two brisk little Shetlands. She was
     one mass of pretty, fresh, fluttering blue and white muslin, ribbon, and lace, and looked
     particularly well and brilliant.
“Well met,” she said, “I called at the Rectory to take up Rachel, but you were flown before
     me.”
“Yes, we went through the Park.”
“I wish the Duke would come home. I can’t go that way now till I have called. I have no end
     of things to say to you,” she added, and her little lively ponies shot ahead of the old
     rectorial steed. However, she waited at the entrance. “Who do you think is come? Colin Keith
     made his appearance this morning. He has safely captured his Ouralian bear, though not without
     plenty of trouble, and he could not get him on to Avonmouth till he had been to some chemical
     institution about an invention. Colin thought him safe there, and rushed down by the train to
     see us. They go on to-morrow.”
“What did he think of Lord Keith?” said Alick, in the more haste because he feared something
     being said to remind Rachel that this was the assize week at Avoncester.
“He has settled the matter about advice,” said Bessie, seriously; “you cannot think what a
     relief it is. I mean, as soon as I get home, to write and ask Mr. Harvey to come and talk to me
     to-morrow, and see if the journey to Edinburgh is practicable. I almost thought of sending an
     apology, and driving over to consult him this afternoon, but I did not like to disappoint Mrs.
     Huntsford, and I thought Rachel would feel herself lost.”
“Thank you,” said Rachel, “but could we not go away early, and go round by Mr. Harvey’s?”
“Unluckily I have sent the ponies home, and told the close carriage to come for me at nine.
     It was all settled, and I don’t want to alarm Lord Keith by coming home too soon.”
Alick, who had hitherto listened with interest, here gave his arm to Rachel, as if
     recollecting that it was time to make their entree. Bessie took her uncle’s, and they were soon
     warmly welcomed by their kind hostess, who placed them so favourably at luncheon that Rachel
     was too much entertained to feel any recurrence of the old associations with “company.”
     Afterwards, Bessie took her into the cool drawing-room, where were a few ladies, who preferred
     the sofa to croquet or archery, and Lady Keith accomplished a fraternization between Rachel and
     a plainly dressed lady, who knew all about the social science heroines of whom Rachel had
     longed to hear. After a time, however, a little girl darted in to call “Aunt Mary” to the aid
     of some playfellow, who had met with a mishap, and Rachel then perceived herself to have been
     deserted by her sister-in-law. She knew none of the other ladies, and they made no approaches
     to her; an access of self-consciousness came on, and feeling forlorn and uncomfortable, she
     wandered out to look for a friend.
It was not long before she saw Alick walking along the terrace above the croquet players,
     evidently in quest of her. “How is it with you?” he anxiously asked; “you know you can go home
     in a moment if you have had enough of this.”
“No, I want nothing, now I have found you. Where is your uncle?”
“Fallen upon one of his oldest friends, who will take care of him, and well out of the way of
     the croquet traps. Where’s my Lady? I thought you were with her.”
“She disappeared while I was talking to that good Miss Penwell! You must be pleased now,
     Alick, you see she is really going to see about going to Scotland.”
“I should be better pleased if she had not left that poor old man alone till nine
     o’clock.”
“She says that when he has his man Saunders to read to him—”
“Don’t tell me what she says; I have enough of that at first hand.”
He broke off with a start. The terrace was prolonged into a walk beyond the screen of
     evergreens that shut in the main lawn, and, becoming a shrubbery path, led to a smooth glade,
     on whose turf preparations had been made for a second field of croquet, in case there should
     have been too many players for the principal arena. This, however, had not been wanted, and no
     one was visible except a lady and gentleman on a seat under a tree about half-way down on the
     opposite side of the glade. The lady was in blue and white; the gentleman would hardly have
     been recognised by Rachel but for the start and thrill of her husband’s arm, and the flush of
     colour on his usually pale cheek, but, ere he could speak or move, the lady sprang up, and came
     hastening towards them diagonally across the grass. Rachel saw the danger, and made a warning
     outcry, “Bessie, the hoop!” but it was too late, she had tripped over it, and fell prone, and
     entirely unable to save herself. She was much nearer to them than to her late companion, and
     was struggling to disengage herself when Alick reached her, lifted her up, and placed her on
     her feet, supporting her as she clung fast to him, while he asked if she were hurt.
“No, no,” she cried. “Don’t let him come; don’t let him call any one, don’t,” she reiterated,
     as Mr. Carleton hovered near, evidently much terrified, but not venturing to approach.
Alick helped her to another garden chair that stood near. She had been entangled in her
     dress, which had been much torn by her attempt to rise, and hung in a festoon, impeding her,
     and she moved with difficulty, breathing heavily when she was first seated.
“I don’t know if I have not twisted myself a little,” she said, in answer to their anxious
     questions, “but it will go off. Rachel, how scared you look!”
“Don’t laugh,” exclaimed Rachel, in dread of hysterics, and she plunged her hand into Alick’s
     pocket for a scent-bottle, which he had put there by way of precaution for her, and, while
     applying it, said, in her full, sedate voice, keeping it as steady as she could, “Shall I drive
     you home? Alick can walk home with his uncle when he is ready.”
“Home! Thank you, Rachel, pray do. Not that I am hurt,” she added in her natural voice, “only
     these rags would tell tales, and there would be an intolerable fuss.”
“Then I will bring the carriage round to the road there,” said Alick. “I told Joe to be in
     readiness, and you need not go back to the house.”
“Thank you. But, oh, send him away!” she added, with a gasping shudder. “Only don’t let him
     tell any one. Tell him I desire he will not.”
After a few words with Mr. Carleton, Alick strode off to the stables, and Rachel asked
     anxiously after the twist.
“I don’t feel it; I don’t believe in it. My dear, your strong mind is all humbug, or you
     would not look so frightened,” and again she was on the verge of hysterical laughing; “it is
     only that I can’t stand a chorus of old ladies in commotion. How happy Alick must be to have
     his prediction verified by some one tumbling over a hoop!” Just then, however, seeing Mr.
     Carleton still lingering near, she caught hold of Rachel with a little cry, “Don’t let him
     come, dear Rachel; go to him, tell him I am well, but keep him away, and mind he tells no
     one!”
Rachel’s cold, repellent manner was in full force, and she went towards the poor little man,
     whose girlish face was blanched with fright.
She told him that Lady Keith did not seem to be hurt, and only wished to be alone, and to go
     home without attracting notice. He stammered out something about quite understanding, and
     retreated, while Rachel returned to find Bessie sitting upright, anxiously watching, and she
     was at once drawn down to sit beside her on the bench, to listen to the excited whisper. “The
     miserable simpleton! Rachel, Alick was right. I thought, I little thought he would forget how
     things stand now, but he got back to the old strain, as if—I shall make Lord Keith go to
     Scotland any way now. I was so thankful to see you and Alick.” She proceeded with the agitated
     vehemence of one who, under a great shock, was saying more than she would have betrayed in a
     cooler and more guarded mood, “What could possess him? For years he had followed me about like
     a little dog, and never said more than I let him; and now what folly was in his head, just
     because I could not walk as far as the ruin with the others. When I said I was going to
     Scotland, what business had he to—Oh! the others will be coming back, Rachel, could we not go
     to meet the carriage?”
The attempt to move, however, brought back the feeling of the strain of which she had
     complained, but she would not give way, and by the help of Rachel’s arm, proceeded across the
     grass to the carriage-drive, where Alick was to meet them. It seemed very far and very hot, and
     her alternately excited and shame-stricken manner, and sobbing breath, much alarmed Rachel; but
     when Alick met them, all this seemed to pass away—she controlled herself entirely, declaring
     herself unhurt, and giving him cheerful messages and excuses for her hostess. Alick put the
     reins into Rachel’s hands, and, after watching her drive off, returned to the party, and
     delivered the apologies of the ladies; then went in search of his uncle. He did not, however,
     find him quickly, and then he was so happy with his old friend among a cluster of merry young
     people, that Alick would not say a word to hasten him home, especially as Rachel would have
     driven Bessie to Timber End, so that it would only be returning to an empty house. And such was
     Mr. Clare’s sociableness and disability of detaching himself from pleasant conversation, that
     the uncle and nephew scarcely started for their walk across the park in time for the seven
     o’clock service. Mr. Clare had never been so completely belated, and, as Alick’s assistance was
     necessary, he could only augur from his wife’s absence that she was still at Timber End with
     his sister.

