
CHAPTER CXXIV. THE INTRIGUES OF A DEMIREP.
LADY Cecilia retired to her own chamber, locked the door, threw herself upon the bed, and
      burst into tears.
Oh! at that moment how the hated her husband;—how she hated herself!
She wept not in regret of her evil ways: she poured forth tears of spite when she thought of
      the opinion that her new lover must form of her, after the explanation given by Sir
      Rupert.
For Captain Fitzhardinge was rich and confiding; and the fair patrician had calculated upon
      rendering him subservient alike to her necessities and her licentiousness.
But, now—what must he think of one who bestowed
       upon him those favours that were alienated from her husband by a formal compact?
      What opinion could he entertain of a woman who sinned deliberately by virtue of an
      understanding with him whom she had sworn to respect and obey?
It could not be supposed that the morality of Captain Fitzhardinge was of a very elevated
      nature: but in the occurrence of that morning there was something calculated to shock the mind
      the least delicate—the least refined.
Yea—Lady Cecilia wept; for she thought of all this!
And then her rage against her husband knew no bounds.
"The wretch—the cowardly wretch!" she exclaimed aloud, as she almost gnashed her teeth with
      rage: "was he not born to be my ruin? From the moment that I saw him first until the present
      hour, has he not been an evil genius in my way? Yes—oh! yes: he is a demon sent to torture me
      in this world for my faults and failings! Seduced by him when I was very young, I might have
      been plunged into disgrace and infamy, had not my father purchased his consent to espouse me.
      Then the large sum that was paid to save my honour was squandered in the payment of his debts,
      or in ministering to his extravagances. Now, what is our position? what is my
      position? Shunned by my own father and mother, I am left dependent on him who knows not how to
      obtain enough for himself; or else I—I, the daughter of a peer, must sell myself to some Mr.
      Greenwood or Captain Fitzhardinge for the means to support my rank! Oh! it is atrocious: I
      begin to loathe myself! Would that I were the mistress of some wealthy man who would be
      constant and kind towards me, rather than the wife of this beggared baronet!"
Lady Cecilia rose from the bed, advanced towards the mirror, and smoothed her hair. Then she
      perceived that her eyes were red with weeping.
"Absurd!" she exclaimed, a contemptuous smile curling her lips: "why should I shed tears
      upon the past which no human power can recall? Rather let me avail myself of the present, and
      endeavour to provide for the future. Am I not young? and does not my glass tell me that I am
      beautiful? Even the immaculate—the taintless—the exemplary rector of Saint David's paid me a
      compliment on my good looks when I met him at Lady Marlborough's, a few days ago. Yes—and
      methought that if the most evangelical of evangelical clergymen of the Established Church
      could for a moment be moved by my smile,—if that admired preacher, who publicly avows that he
      refrains from marriage upon principle,—if that holy minister who is quoted as a pattern to his
      class, and an example for the whole world,—if he could whisper a word savouring of a
      compliment in my ear, and then seem ashamed of the moment of weakness into which his
      admiration had betrayed him;—if my charms could effect so great a miracle as this, what may
      they not do for me in helping me on to fortune?"
She paused and considered herself for some minutes in the glass opposite to her.
"Yes," she cried, again breaking silence, "I will no longer remain in the same house with my
      unprincipled and heartless husband: I will no longer breathe the tainted atmosphere which he
      inhabits. His very name is associated in my mind with forgery and felony! I will break the
      shackle which yet partially binds me to him; I will emancipate myself from the restraint and
      thraldom wherein I now exist. Fitzhardinge is rich and loving: perhaps he may still feel the
      influence of the silken chain which I threw around his heart. We will see! If he come gladly
      back to my feet, my aim is won: if not—well,"—and she smiled, complacently,—"there are others
      as rich, as handsome, and as easily enchained as he!"
Lady Cecilia proceeded to her desk and wrote the following note:—

"Come to me, dearest Fitzhardinge, at three precisely this afternoon: I have much to say
       respecting the specious falsehoods which Sir Rupert uttered this morning in order to conceal
       the natural cowardice of his disposition. He was afraid to involve himself in a quarrel with
       you; and he excused his unmanly forbearance by means of assertions that reflected upon me.
       Come, then, to me at three: I shall be alone, and at home only to you."

This note was immediately conveyed to Captain Fitzhardinge by Cecilia's lady's-maid, who was
      the confidant of her mistress's intrigues.
Having despatched her missive, the baronet's wife proceeded to the duties of the toilet.
This employment, breakfast, the newspaper, and a novel, wiled away the time until about one
      o'clock, when Lady Cecilia, having ascertained that her husband had gone out half an hour
      previously, descended to the drawing-room.
She was attired in a simple and unpretending manner; but then she knew that this style
      became her best.
She was determined to captivate that day; and certainly she had seldom appeared to greater
      advantage.
Her rich auburn hair,—of a hue as warm as the disposition which it characterised,—fell in
      long hyperion ringlets upon her sloping shoulders: her blue eyes were expressive of a feeling
      of languid voluptuousness; and her pure complexion was set off by the dark dress that she
      wore.
The time-piece upon the mantel had scarcely struck two, when a loud double-knock at the
      front-door resounded through the house.
Lady Cecilia started from her seat, for she had forgotten to instruct the servants "that she
      was only at home to Captain Fitzhardinge." But she was too late to remedy her neglect; the
      summons was already answered ere she had gained the landing on which the drawing-room
      opened.
She accordingly returned to the sofa, and composed herself to receive the visitor, whoever
      it might be.
In a few moments the servant announced the Earl of Warrington.
With this nobleman Lady Cecilia was only very slightly acquainted, she having met him on two
      or three occasions, some years previously, at her father's house.
"I must apologise, Lady Harborough, for this intrusion," said the earl; "but I trust to your
      kindness to pardon me in that respect, and to afford me a little information concerning a
      matter which has suddenly assumed an air of importance in my eyes."
"No apology is necessary for the honour which your lordship confers upon me by visiting my
      humble abode," answered Lady Cecilia; "and with regard to the subject to which your lordship
      alludes, I shall be happy to furnish any information in my power."
"Your ladyship's courtesy encourages me to proceed," continued the earl. "Forgive me if I
      must direct your attention to one of those pieces of gossip—I will not say scandal—which so
      often become current in the sphere in which we move. I allude to an anecdote relative to a
      certain mysterious remittance
       of a thousand pounds which was forwarded to Sir Rupert Harborough, and which
      your ladyship undertook to disburse for his advantage."
"Your lordship places the matter in as delicate a light as possible," said Lady Cecilia,
      affecting to laugh heartily in order to conceal the shame which she really experienced at this
      reference to her unworthy action; "but it was only a pleasant trick which I played Sir Rupert.
      The truth is, Sir Rupert is not the most generous of men towards his wife; and when I found
      that some honourable person was repaying him a debt contracted a long time previously, I
      thought that, as the amount fell so providentially into my hands, I could not do better than
      appropriate it to the liquidation of the arrears of pin-money due to me."
"Very just, madam," said the earl, forcing himself to smile at the incident which Lady
      Cecilia represented in the light of a venial little advantage taken by a wife against her
      husband. "I believe that the amount was forwarded anonymously?"
"To tell you the candid truth, my lord," answered Lady Cecilia, "the whole affair was so
      strange and romantic, that I kept, as a great curiosity, the letter which accompanied the
      bank-note. If you possess any interest in the matter——"
"Your ladyship knows that I am not seeking this information without some
      object," said the earl, emphatically. "Would it be indiscreet," he added, in a less serious
      tone, "to request a glimpse at that great curiosity?"
"Oh! by no means," returned Lady Cecilia, who affected to treat the whole matter as an
      excellent joke; then, rising from her seat, she hastened to her work-box, and in a few moments
      produced the letter. "It was not so scented with musk when I received it," she added,
      laughing; "but it was redolent of a far more grateful flavour—that of this world's
      mammon."
"I believe mammon is the deity whom we all more or less adore," observed the Earl of
      Warrington, gallantly taking up the tone of chit-chat, rather than formality, which Lady
      Cecilia endeavoured to infuse into the conversation: then, as he received the letter from her
      hand, he said, "May I be permitted to read it?"
"Oh! certainly, my lord: and, if you have any curiosity in the matter, you are welcome to
      retain it," answered Lady Cecilia.
"With your leave I will do so," said the earl.
"And now that I have replied to all your lordship's queries," continued Lady Cecilia, "may I
      ask one in my turn?"
The earl bowed, and smiled.
"Who was the indiscreet eave's-dropper or tale-bearer that gave your lordship the hint
      concerning this business?" asked the baronet's wife.
"Methinks that your ladyship has been at no pains to conceal the affair," said the earl:
      "and what hundreds have talked about cannot well be charged against an individual
      tale-bearer."
"Nay, my lord, I mentioned it but to two persons," exclaimed Cecilia; "the first was to Sir
      Rupert Harborough—in a moment of pique; and the other was to a—a—particular friend——"
"I am not indiscreet enough to ask for names," interrupted the earl, rising; and he hastened
      to take his leave, ere Lady Cecilia could reiterate her question relative to the person who
      had communicated to him the fact of the intercepted thousand pounds.
It was now nearly three o'clock; and Lady Cecilia again composed herself to receive Captain
      Fitzhardinge.
Punctual to the hour, that officer was introduced into the drawing-room.
But his manner, instead of being all love and tenderness, was simply polite and
      friendly.
"Fitzhardinge," said the lady, "I perceive that you have allowed yourself to be prejudiced
      against me."
"Not prejudiced, Lady Cecilia," answered the guardsman; "but I confess that I am no longer
      under the influence of a blind passion. The conduct of your husband this morning was that of a
      man who was acting consistently with the circumstances which he explained, and not that of an
      individual who was playing a part in order to disguise the innate cowardice of his
      disposition. No, Cecilia—your husband is not a coward—whatever else he may be! And now one
      word relative to myself. So long as I believed that you made to me, as a proof of love, the
      generous sacrifice of conjugal fidelity,—so long as I believed that an affection for me alone
      induced you to violate your marriage-vow,—then the dream was sweet, though not the less
      criminal! But when I discovered that you made no sacrifice to me,—that you came not to my arms
      warm with a love that trembled at detection, but secure in the existence of a heartless
      compact with your husband,—then my eyes were opened, and I saw that Lady Cecilia Harborough
      had risked nothing of all that she had pretended to risk—sacrificed nothing of all that she
      had affected to sacrifice—for the sake of Captain Fitzhardinge! Thus the delusion was
      destroyed; and although our amour might be based upon more impunity than I had ever conceived,
      it would be the less sweet! The charm—the spell is broken!"
"And have you come here to tell me all this—to insult me with your moralisings?" demanded
      Lady Cecilia, the fire of indignation and wounded pride displacing the languid voluptuousness
      which had at first reigned in the expression of her eyes.
"No! not to insult you, Cecilia," answered the officer; "but to explain in an open and
      candid manner the motive which leads me to say: 'Let us forget the past, as it regards
       each other!'"
"Be it so," said Lady Cecilia, deeply humiliated, and now hating the handsome officer much
      more than she had ever liked him. "In that case, sir, we can have nothing more to say to each
      other."
Captain Fitzhardinge bowed, and withdrew.
Lady Cecilia fell back upon the sofa, murmuring, "Beaten—beaten! defeated in this hope!"
And tears came into her eyes.
But in a few moments she exclaimed, "How foolish is this grief! how useless this
      indignation! Sorrow and hatred are the consuming enemies of female beauty! Did I not say ere
      now that there were others in the world as rich, as handsome, and as confiding as Captain
      Fitzhardinge?"
As she uttered these words aloud, the haughty beauty wiped her eyes and composed her
      countenance.
She rose and advanced towards the mirror to assure herself that her appearance indicated
      naught of those tears which she had shed; and as she contemplated her features with a very
      pardonable pride, the reminiscence of the compliment which the clergyman of Saint David's had
      paid her flashed to her mind.
She smiled triumphantly as she pondered upon it; and that vague, shadowy, unsubstantial
      phrase of flattery, that now formed the topic of her thoughts, gradually assumed a more
      palpable shape in her imagination,—became invested with a significant
       meaning,—then grew into a revelation of passion,—and was at length embodied into
      a perfect romance of love with all its enjoyments and blisses.
The ardent soul of that frail woman converted the immaculate clergyman into an admirer
      betrayed in an unguarded moment into a confession of love,—then changed him into a suitor
      kneeling at her feet,—and by rapid degrees carried him on, through all the mystic phases of
      passion, until he became a happy lover reclining on her bosom.
With a presumption which only characterises minds of her warm temperament and loose ideas of
      morality, Cecilia triumphed in the half-hour's impassioned reverie which succeeded the
      departure of Captain Fitzhardinge, over the ascetic virtue and self-denying integrity which
      public opinion ascribed to the rector of Saint David's.
Then, when some trifling incident aroused her from this wild and romantic dream, she did not
      smile at its folly—she regarded it as a species of inspiration prompting her in which
      direction to play the artillery of her charms.
"Yes," she exclaimed, musing aloud; "he once said, 'I never saw you look so well as you
       appear this evening:'—these words shall be a motto to a new chapter in my life!"
And she smiled triumphantly as if her daring aim were already accomplished!
"Thirty-six years of age," she abruptly resumed her musings,—"wealthy—handsome—unmarried,
       from principle,"—and here an erratic smile of mingled satisfaction and irony played
      on her rosy lips,—"and yet fond of society, the Reverend Reginald Tracy must no longer be
      permitted to remain proof against woman's beauty—aye, and woman's wiles. Oh! no—he shall
      repeat to me, but far more tenderly, the words he uttered the other evening: his passing
      compliment shall become a permanent expression of his sentiments! But his character—his
      disposition? must I not study them? If that be necessary, the task is ready to
      hand!"
She rose from the sofa, and having selected an ecclesiastical magazine from some books that
      stood upon a cheffonier, returned to her seat to peruse at leisure a sketch which the work
      contained of the character, ministry, and popularity of the rector of Saint David's.
