
CHAPTER XC. MARKHAM'S OCCUPATIONS.
SINCE the period when Markham had made so great a sacrifice of his pecuniary resources, in
      order to effect the liberation of Count Alteroni from a debtor's prison, he had devoted
      himself to literary pursuits. He aspired to the honours of authorship, and composed a
      tragedy.
All young authors, while yet nibbling the grass at the foot of Parnassus (and how many never
      reach any higher!) attempt either poetry or the drama. They invariably fix upon the most
      difficult tasks; and yet they did not begin learning Greek with Euripides, nor enter upon
      their initiation into the mysteries of the Latin tongue with Juvenal.
There is also another fault into which they invariably fall;—and that is an extraordinary
      tendency to three meretricious ornaments which they seem to mistake for fine writing. Truth
      and nature may be regarded as a noble flock, furnishing the richest fleece to mankind; but
      when a series of good writers have exhausted their fleece in weaving the fabrics of genius,
      their successors are tempted to have recourse to swine for a supply of materials; and we know,
      besides, that in this attempt, as in the rude dramas called "Moralities" in the middle ages,
      there is great cry and little wool. It is also liable to the objection that no skill in the
      workmanship, or adjustment in the machinery, can give it the beauty and perfection of the raw
      material which nature has appropriated to the purpose of clothing her favoured offspring.
Too many writers of the present day, instead of attempting to rival their predecessors in
      endeavouring to fabricate the genuine fleece derived from this flock of truth and nature, into
      new and exquisite forms, are engaged in shearing the swine. In this labour they can obtain, at
      best, nothing more than erroneous principles of science, worthless paradoxes, unnatural
      fictions, tinsel poetry and prose, and unnumbered crudities.
Richard Markham was not exempted from these faults. He wrote a tragedy—abounding in
      beauties, and abounding in faults.
The most delicious sweets, used in undue proportions with our food and drink, soon become in
      a high degree offensive and disgusting. Markham heaped figure upon figure—crammed his speeches
      with metaphors—and travelled many thousands of miles out of his way in search of a similitude,
      when he had a much better and more simple one close at hand. Nevertheless, his tragedy
      contained proofs of a brilliant talent, and, with much judicious pruning, every element of
      triumphant success.
Having obtained the address of the private residence of the manager of one of the principal
      metropolitan theatres, Richard sent his tragedy to the great man. He, however, withheld his
      real name, for he had determined to commence his literary career under a feigned one; so that,
      in case he should prove unsuccessful, his failure might not become known to his friends the
      Monroes, or reach the ears of his well-beloved Isabella. For the same reason he did not give
      his proper address in the letter which accompanied the drama; but requested that a reply might
      be sent to Edward Preston, to the care of Mr. Dyson (his solicitor).
He did not mention to a single soul—not even to Monroe or the faithful Whittingham—the
      circumstance of his authorship. He reflected that if he succeeded, it would then be time to
      communicate his happiness; but, that if he failed, it would be useless to wound others by
      imparting to them his disappointments. He had ceased to be sanguine about any thing in this
      world; for he had met with too many misfortunes to anticipate much success in life; and his
      only ambition was to obtain an honourable livelihood.
Scarcely a week had elapsed after Markham had sent his drama to the manager, when he
      received a letter from this gentleman. The contents were laconic enough, but explicit. The
      manager "had perused the tragedy with feelings of extreme satisfaction;"—he congratulated the
      writer upon "the skill which he had made his combinations to produce stage effect;"—he
      suggested "a few alterations and considerable abbreviations;" and concluded by stating that
      "he should be most happy to introduce so promising an author to the public." A postscript
      appointed a time for an interview at the manager's own private residence.
At eleven o'clock the next morning Markham was ushered into the presence of the manager.
The great man was seated in his study, dressed in a magnificent Turkish dressing-gown, with
      a French skull-cap upon his head, and red morocco slippers upon his feet. He was a man of
      middle
       age—gentlemanly and affable in manner—and possessed of considerable literary
      abilities.
"Sit down, sir—pray, sit down," said the manager, when Markham was introduced. "I have
      perused your tragedy with great attention, and am pleased with it. I am, moreover, perfectly
      willing to undertake the risk of bringing it out, although tragedy is at a terrible discount
      now-a-days. But, first and foremost, we most make arrangements about terms. What price do you
      put upon your manuscript?"
"I have formed no idea upon that subject," replied Markham. "I would rather leave myself
      entirely in your hands."
"Nay—you must know the hope you have entertained in this respect?" said the manager.
"To tell you the candid truth, this is my first essay," returned Markham; "and I am totally
      unacquainted with the ordinary value of such labour."
"If this be your first essay, sir," said the manager, surveying Markham with some
      astonishment, "I can only assure you that it is a most promising one. But once again—name your
      price."
"The manner in which you speak to me shows that if I trust to your generosity, I shall not
      do wrong."
"Well, Mr. Preston," cried the manager, pleased at this compliment, "I shall use you in an
      equally liberal manner. You must be informed that you will have certain pecuniary privileges,
      in respect to any provincial theatres at which your piece may be performed should it prove
      successful; and you will also have the benefit of the publication of the work in a volume.
      What, then, should you say if I were to give you fifty guineas for the play, and five guineas
      a-night for every time of its performance, after the first fortnight?"
"I should esteem your offer a very liberal one," answered Richard, overjoyed at the
      proposal.
"In that case the bargain is concluded at once, and without any more words," said the
      manager; then, taking a well-filled canvass bag from his desk, he counted down fifty guineas
      in notes, gold, and silver.
Markham gave a receipt, and they exchanged undertakings specifying the conditions proposed
      by the manager.
"When do you propose to bring out the piece?" inquired Richard, when this business was
      concluded.
"In about six weeks," said the manager. "Shall you have any objection to attend the
      rehearsals, and see that the gentlemen and ladies of the company fully appreciate the spirit
      of the parts that will be assigned to them?"
"I shall not have the least objection," answered Markham; "but I am afraid that my
      experience——"
"Well, well," said the manager, smiling, "I will not press you. Leave it all to me—I will
      see justice done to your design, which I think I understand pretty well. If I want you I will
      let you know; and if you do not hear from me, you will see by the advertisements in the
      newspapers for what night the first representation will be announced."
Markham expressed his gratitude to the manager for the kindness with which he had received
      him, and then took his leave, his heart elated with hope, and his mind relieved from much
      anxiety respecting the future.
When he left the manager's residence he repaired to an adjacent tavern to procure some
      refreshment; and there, while engaged in the discussion of a sandwich and a glass of sherry,
      he cast his eyes over The Times newspaper.
A particular advertisement arrested his attention.
A gentleman—a widower—required a daily tutor for his two young sons, whom he was desirous of
      having instructed in Latin, history, drawing, arithmetic, etc. The boys were respectively
      nine and eleven years old. The advertiser stated that any individual who could himself teach
      the various branches of education specified, would be preferred to a plurality of masters,
      each proficient only in one particular study. Personal application was to be made between
      certain hours.
The residence of the advertiser was in Kentish Town; and this vicinity to Markham's own
      abode induced him to think seriously of offering his services. He did not feel disposed to
      pursue his literary labours until after the representation of his drama, as he was as yet
      unaware of the reception it might experience at the hands of the public;—and he was also by no
      means inclined to remain idle. The occupation of daily tutor in a respectable family appeared
      congenial to his tastes; and he resolved to proceed forthwith to the residence of Mr. Gregory,
      in Kentish Town.
Arrived at the house, he was admitted into the presence of a gentleman of about fifty, with
      a serious and melancholy countenance, prepossessing manners, and a peculiar suavity of voice
      that gave encouragement to the applicant.
Markham told him in a few words that he was once possessed of considerable property, the
      greater portion of which he had lost through the unfortunate speculations of his guardian, and
      that he was now anxious to turn the excellent education which he had received to some
      advantage.
Mr. Gregory had only lately arrived in London with his family, from a very distant part of
      the country, where he had a house and small estate; but the recent death of a beloved wife had
      rendered the scenes of their wedded happiness disagreeable to him;—and this was the cause of
      his removal and his settlement in London. He lived in a very retired manner, and had
      previously known nothing of Markham—not even his name. He was therefore totally ignorant of
      Richard's trial and condemnation for forgery. The young man felt the greatest possible
      inclination to reveal the entire facts to Mr. Gregory, whose amiable manners gave him
      confidence; but he restrained himself—for it struck him that others were dependent upon
      him—that he ought not to stand in his own light—and that his innocence of the crime imputed to
      him, and the consciousness of those upright and honourable intentions which on all occasions
      filled his breast, were a sufficient extenuation for this silence.
Mr. Gregory, who was himself a highly-educated man, soon saw that Markham was competent to
      teach his children all that it was desirable for them to acquire; and he agreed to engage the
      applicant as his sons' tutor. Richard offered to give him a reference to his solicitor; but
      Mr. Gregory declined to take it, saying, "Your appearance, Mr. Markham, is sufficient."
On the following day Richard entered upon his new avocation. He was engaged to attend at Mr.
      Gregory's house from ten till three every day. The employment was a pleasant one; and the
      pecuniary terms were liberal in the extreme.
Gustavus and Lionel Gregory were two intelligent and handsome youths; and they soon became
      greatly attached to their tutor.
      
From the mere fact of having never been accustomed to tuition, Richard took the greater
      pains to explain all difficult subjects to them; and so well did he adapt his plan of
      instruction to their juvenile capacities, that in the short space of a month, Mr. Gregory was
      himself perfectly astonished at the advance which his sons had made in their studies. He then
      determined that the advantages of the tutor's abilities should be extended to his daughter, in
      respect to drawing; and Miss Mary-Anne Gregory was accordingly added to the number of
      Markham's pupils.
Mary-Anne was, at the time of which we are writing, sixteen years of age. Delicate in
      constitution, and of a sweet and amiable disposition, she was an object of peculiar interest
      to all who knew her. Her long flaxen hair, soft blue eyes, pale countenance, and vermilion
      lips, gave her the appearance of a wax figure; and her light and airy form, flitting ever
      hither and thither in obedience to the innocent gaiety and vivacity of her disposition, seemed
      that of some fairy whose destinies belonged not to the common lot of mortals.
Although she was sixteen, she was considered but a mere girl; and she romped with her
      brothers, and with the young female friends who occasionally visited her, with all the
      joyousness and glee of a child of ten years old.
The animation of her countenance was on those occasions radiant and brilliant in the
      extreme:—a spectator could have snatched her to his arms and embraced her fondly,—not with a
      single gross desire—not with the shadow of an unhallowed motive; but, in the same way as a
      man, who, being a parent himself, is attached to children, suddenly seizes upon a lovely
      little boy or girl of two or three years old, and covers its cheeks with kisses.
Mary-Anne was by no means beautiful—not even pretty; and yet there was something altogether
      unearthly in the whole character and expression of her countenance. It was a face of angelic
      interest—indicative of a mental amiability and serenity truly divine.
Without possessing the ingredients of physical beauty—without regularity of feature or
      classical formation of head,—there was still about her an abstract loveliness, apart from
      shape and features, which was of itself positive and distinct, and seemed an emanation of
      mental qualities, infantine joyousness, and winning manners. It produced a sort of atmosphere
      of light around her—enveloping her as with a halo of innocence.
Her face was as pale—as colourless as the finest Parian marble, but also, like the surface
      of that beautiful material, spotless and devoid of blemish. Her pure forehead was streaked
      with small azure veins: her lips were thin, and of the brightest vermilion; and these hues
      placed in contrast with that delicate complexion, gave a sentiment and expression to her
      countenance altogether peculiar to itself.
Her eyes, of a light and yet too positive a blue to be mistaken for grey, were fringed with
      long dark lashes, which imparted to them—ever gay and sparkling as they were—a magic eloquence
      as powerful as that of the most faultless beauty. And, again, in strange contrast with those
      dark lashes was her flaxen hair, the whole of which fell in ringlets and in waves over her
      shoulders and her back, no portion of it being collected in a knot behind.
Then her form—it was so slight as to appear almost etherealised, and yet there was no
      mistaking the symmetry of its proportions.
Thus—without being actually beautiful—Mary-Anne was a creature of light and joy who was
      calculated to interest, fascinate, and win, in a manner which produced feelings of admiration
      and of love. Her appearance therefore produced upon the mind an impression that she
       was beautiful—very beautiful; and yet, if any one had paused to analyse her
      features, she would have been found to possess no real elements of physical loveliness. She
      was charming—fascinating—bewitching—interesting; therefore lovely in one sense, and loveable
      in all respects!
Mary-Anne was a very difficult pupil to teach. In the midst of the most serious study, that
      charming and volatile creature would start from her chair, run to her piano, and commence a
      lively air, which she would leave also unfinished, and then narrate some sprightly anecdote,
      or utter some artless sally, which would create a general laugh.
The seriousness of the tutor would be disturbed in spite of himself: and even her father, if
      present, could not find it in his heart to scold.
The drawing would at length be resumed; and for half an hour, the application of Mary-Anne
      would be intense. Then away would be flung the pencil; and a new freak must be accomplished
      before the study would be resumed.
Richard could not help liking this volatile, but artless and innocent creature,—as a man
      likes his daughter or his sister; and she, on her part, appeared to become greatly attached to
      her tutor.
Although Mr. Gregory followed no profession, being a man of considerable independent
      property, he was nevertheless much from home, passing his time either at the library of the
      British Museum or at his Club. Richard and Mary-Anne were thus much together,—too much for the
      peace of that innocent and fascinating girl!
She speedily conceived a violent passion for her tutor, which he, however, neither perceived
      nor returned.
She was herself unaware of the nature of her own feelings towards him;—she knew as much of
      love and its sensations as a beauteous savage girl, in some far-off isle, knows of
      Christianity;—and hers was an attachment which could only be revealed to herself by some
      accident, which might excite her jealousy or awaken her grief.
One morning, before the usual lessons of the day commenced, Mr. Gregory entered the study,
      and, addressing himself to Markham, said, "We must now give the young people a holiday for a
      short time. Proper relaxation is as necessary to their bodily welfare as education to their
      mental well-being. We will suspend their studies for a month, if you be agreeable, Mr.
      Markham. I shall, however, be always pleased to see you as often as you choose to call during
      that interval; and every Sunday, at all events, we shall expect the pleasure of your company
      to dinner as usual."
"What!" cried Mary-Anne; "is Mr. Markham to discontinue his daily visits for a whole
      month?"
"Certainly, my dear," said her father. "Mr. Markham requires a holiday as well as you."
"I want no holiday," exclaimed Mary-Anne, pouting her lips in a manner that was quite
      charming, and which might remind the reader of the petite moue that Esmeralda was
      accustomed to make in Victor Hugo's admirable novel Notre Dame de Paris.
"But you always take a holiday, my dear," returned her father with a smile; "and
      therefore you fancy that others do not require a temporary relaxation. Gustavus and Lionel
      want a holiday; and Mr. Markham cannot be always poring over books and drawings."
      
"Well, I wish Mr. Markham to take the trouble to come every morning and give me my drawing
      lesson," said the young lady, with a little air of decision and firmness, which was quite
      comic in its way; "and if he will not," she added, "then I will never learn to draw any
      more—and that is decided."
Mr. Gregory surveyed his daughter with an air of astonishment.
Probably he half penetrated the secret—for her passion could not be called
       her secret, because she was totally unconscious of the nature of her feelings, and
      sought to conceal nothing.
Had she been aware of the real sentiment which she experienced, she would have at once
      revealed it; for she was guileless and unsuspicious—ignorant of all deceit—devoid of all
      hypocrisy—and endowed with as much simplicity and artlessness as a child of six years old.
"Mr. Markham must have a holiday, my dear," said Mr. Gregory, at length, with a peculiar
      emphasis; "and I beg that no further objection may be offered."
Mary-Anne instantly burst into tears, exclaiming, in a voice almost choked with sobs, "Mr.
      Markham may have his holiday, if he likes; but I will not learn any thing
      more of him when the studies begin again."
And she retired in a pet to another apartment.
Markham was himself astonished at this singular behaviour on the part of his interesting
      pupil.
He was, however, far from suspecting the real cause, and took his leave with a promise to
      return to dinner on the following Sunday, until which time there was then an interval of five
      days.
Three days after the one on which the above conversation took place, Markham was about to
      issue from his dwelling to proceed into town for the purpose of calling upon the manager, as
      he had that morning seen his drama advertised for early representation,—when Whittingham
      informed him that a young lady desired to speak to him In the drawing-room.
The idea of Isabella instantly flashed through the mind of Richard:—but would she
      call upon him, alone and unattended? No—for Isabella, was modesty and prudence
      personified.
Then, who could it be?
Markham asked this question of his butler.
"A remarkable sweet creatur," said Whittingham; "and come quite spontaneous like. Beautiful
      flaxy hair—blue eyes—pale complexion—"
"Impossible! you do not say that, Whittingham?" cried Markham, on whom a light now
      broke.
"Do I look like a man that speaks evasiously, Master Richard?" demanded the butler, shifting
      his inseparable companion—the white napkin—from beneath one arm to the other.
Markham repaired to the drawing-room:—his suspicions were verified;—the moment he entered
      the apartment, he beheld Miss Gregory seated upon the sofa.
"Well, Mr. Markham," she said, extending to him her hand, and smiling so sweetly with her
      vermilion lips, which disclosed a set of teeth not quite even, but as white as ivory, that
      Richard could not find it in his heart to be angry with her; "I was resolved not to pass the
      day without seeing you; and as you would not come to me, I was compelled to come to you."
"But, Miss Gregory," said Markham, "are you not aware that you have taken a most imprudent
      step, and that the world would highly censure your conduct?"
"Why?" demanded Mary-Anne, in astonishment.
"Because ladies, no matter whether single or married, never call upon single gentlemen; and
      society has laid down certain rules in this respect, which—"
"My dear Mr. Markham, you are not giving me a lesson now, remember, in my father's study,"
      interrupted Mary-Anne, laughing heartily. "I know nothing about the rules of society in this
      respect, or that respect, or any other respect. All I know is, that I cried all night long
      after you left us the other day; and I have been very miserable until this morning, when I
      suddenly recollected that I knew your address, and could come and call on you."
"If your father were to know that you came hither," said Richard, "he would never forgive
      you, nor ever see me again."
"Well, then, all we have to do is not to tell my father any thing about the matter," said
      Mary-Anne, with considerable ingenuousness. "But how cross you look; and I—I thought," she
      added, ready to cry, "that you would be as pleased to see me as I am to see you."
"Yes, Miss Gregory—I am pleased to see you—I am always pleased to see you,"
      answered Markham, by way of soothing the poor girl; "but you must allow me to assure you that
      this step is the most imprudent—the most thoughtless in the world. I really tremble for the
      consequences—should your father happen to hear of it."
"I tell you over and over again," persisted Miss Gregory, "that my papa shall never know any
      thing at all about the matter. Now, then, pray don't be cross; but tell me that you are glad
      to see me. Speak, Mr. Markham—are you glad to see me?"
"How shall I ever be able to convince this artless young creature of the impropriety of her
      conduct?" murmured Richard within himself. "To argue with her too long and too forcibly upon
      the subject would be to instruct her innocent mind in the evils and vices of society, and to
      imbue her with ideas which are as yet like a foreign and a strange tongue to her! Innocence,
      then, is not a pearl of invaluable price to its possessor, in this world,—since it can so
      readily prepare the path which might lead to ruin!"
"You do not answer me—you are thoughtful—you will not speak to me," said Mary Ann, rising
      from the sofa, with tears in her eyes, and preparing—or rather affecting an intention to
      depart.
Markham still gave her no reply.
He was grieved—deeply grieved to wound her feelings; but he thought that it would be better
      to allow her to return home at once, with sentiments of pique and wounded pride which would
      prevent a repetition of the same step, than to initiate her into those social mysteries which
      would only give an impulse to her lively imagination that would probably prove morally
      injurious to her.
But Mary Anne was incapable of harbouring resentment; and she burst into an agony of
      grief.
"Oh! how unkind you are, Mr. Markham," she exclaimed, "after all my endeavours to please
      you! I thought that you would have experienced as much joy to see me, as I felt when I saw you
      enter the room. Since the day that I lost my dear mother—upwards of nine years ago—I have
      never loved any one so much as I love you—no, not even my father; for I feel that at this
      moment I could dare even his anger, if you were to shelter me! I have long thought
      that I had no friend but God, to whom I could communicate my little secrets; and now I feel as
      if I could bestow all my confidence upon you. Since the
       death of my mother I have never sought my couch without resigning my soul into
      the hands of God, and without demanding of him an insight into truth and virtue. But now I
      would rather entrust my safety to you; and I would rather learn all I should know from your
      lips than from those of another! You ought, therefore, to treat me with more kindness and
      consideration than you have done up to this moment;—you should bestow upon me an additional
      share of your attention and notice,—because I am anxious to please you—I would do any thing to
      save you pain—I would lay down my life to ensure a prolongation of yours!"
Mary-Anne had never spoken so seriously, nor in so impassioned a manner, in her life before.
      She was even astonished herself at the very ideas which she was now expressing for the first
      time, and which seemed to flow from some inward fountain whose springs she could not
      check.
Markham was astounded.
He suddenly comprehended the true situation of the innocent and artless girl in respect to
      himself.
A pang shot through his heart when he considered the impossibility of her happiness ever
      being ensured by his means; and he thought within himself, "Alas! poor child, she does not
      rightly comprehend the state of her own mind!"
But how could this love of hers be stifled? how could that passion be suppressed?
All the remedies yet essayed to quench and annihilate love, have changed into poisons;—even
      violent and unexpected lessons will not always make the heart reflect.
The more the slave bends, the heavier becomes the yoke: the more a man employs an unjust
      force, the more will injustice become necessary to his views. No one should attempt to
      exercise tyranny upon proud souls; for he will readily learn that it is not easy to triumph
      over and trample on a noble love. Error succeeds error—outrage follows upon outrage—and
      bitterness increases like a torrent whose embankments have given way. Who can define the
      termination of these ravages? Will not the tender and affectionate woman, whose love man may
      endeavour to stifle by coldness or neglect, perish in the ruin? She will succumb to
      tears and to devouring cares—even while the love which she cherishes still preserves
      all its vigour, and loses nothing of its ardour through intense suffering!
Markham knew not how to reply to that affectionate girl, whose spirit he dared not break by
      his unkindness,—whose passion he could not return, because his heart was devoted to
      another,—and whose mind he was afraid to enlighten with regard to those social duties which
      originated in reasons and motives totally unknown to her.
"Mr. Markham," said Mary-Anne, wiping away her tears, "tell me that you are not angry with
      me for calling: and, as you say it is not right, I will never come again."
"Angry with you, Miss Gregory, I cannot be," exclaimed Markham. "But I ought to tell you
      that you must not give way to that feeling of—of—preference towards me—"
"Oh! I suppose that the rules of society also prevent a single lady from liking a single
      gentleman?" interrupted Mary-Anne pettishly.
"No rules can control volition, Miss Gregory," said Richard, cruelly embarrassed how to
      explain himself to the young lady; "but if you tell me that you prefer me to your father—"
"And so I do," exclaimed Mary-Anne quickly.
"Then you are wrong," returned Markham.
"Wrong, indeed! and yet you have just told me that no rules can control volition."
"True; but we must endeavour to conquer those feelings. You say that you like me?—suppose
      that we were never to meet again; would you not then learn to forget that you ever knew such a
      being?"
"Impossible! never—never!" cried Mary-Anne enthusiastically. "I am always thinking of
      you!"
"But the time must come, some day or another—whether now, or a year, or ten years hence—when
      we must cease to meet. I may be married—or you yourself may marry—"
"Married!" ejaculated Mary-Anne: "do you think of marrying, then, Mr. Markham?"
"I am certainly attached to a young lady," replied Richard; "but there are circumstances
      which—"
"You are attached to a young lady? Is she beautiful—very beautiful?"
"Very beautiful," answered Richard.
Mary-Anne remained silent for some moments: she appeared to reflect profoundly.
A sudden glow of animation flushed her cheek:—was it a light that dawned in upon her
      soul?
Richard sincerely hoped so.
"Mr. Markham," said Mary-Anne, rising from her seat, and speaking in a tone so serious that
      Richard could scarcely believe he was now listening to the once volatile, sprightly,
      thoughtless, and playful creature he had known,—"Mr. Markham, I have to apologise most
      sincerely for the trouble I have given you, and the intrusion of which I have been guilty. A
      veil has suddenly fallen from my eyes; and I now comprehend the impropriety of my conduct. Ah!
      I see what you mean by the laws of society. But God—and you also, Mr. Markham, well know the
      innocence of my motives in calling this morning upon you; and if my friendship for you has
      betrayed me into error, I beseech you to forget that such a scene has ever taken place."
She shook hands with Richard with her usual cordiality and warmth, and then took her
      departure—no longer skipping like the young fawn, but with steady and measured pace.
And still that young girl did not dream that love had influenced her conduct;—she continued
      to believe that the sentiment she experienced was one of friendship. The idea of Richard's
      marriage with another had only enlightened her in respect to those laws which, as social and
      sympathetic beings, we have conventionally enacted.
On the ensuing Sunday Markham dined, according to engagement, with Mr. Gregory.
Mary-Anne was present; and striking was the change which had taken place in her!
Her manners were no longer gay, joyous, confiding, and full of animation. As sickness chases
      from the cheek the flush of hoyden health, so had a new sentiment banished that sprightliness
      of disposition and that liveliness of temperament which so lately had characterised this
       child of nature.
Love, then, is omnipotent, if he can effect such changes as these! Alas! Love can work much
      for our unhappiness, but little for our felicity:—he may make the gladsome companion
      melancholy and serious; but he seldom covers the countenance of the morose one with
      smiles!
Mary-Anne endeavoured to seem as reserved as possible with Richard; and yet, from time to
      time, when she thought he did not notice her, she fixed her eyes upon him with an expression
      of such heart-devoted tenderness, that it seemed as if she were pouring forth her entire soul
      to the divinity whom she worshipped.
      

In the grotesque and colossal sculptures, and the mountainous architectural piles of the
      East, we seem to behold the products of an imagination struggling with conceptions too vast
      for its compass, and hence endeavouring to make some approximation to the reality by heaping
      up the irregular and huge invisible forms;—and thus did the tortured and embarrassed mind of
      this poor girl, unacquainted with the precise nature of the sentiment it cherished, maintain a
      conflict with the feelings which oppressed it, and offer up an idolatry of its own invention
      to the object of its unbounded veneration.
Mr. Gregory could not but perceive this change in his daughter's behaviour; and he was more
      or less at a loss to conceive the cause.
He had entertained, for a few days previously, a faint suspicion that Mary-Anne had
      peradventure formed an attachment, which would thus account for her altered demeanour; for
      since her call upon Markham, had her manners changed. But the good-hearted father was still
      loth to believe that his daughter's young heart had been smitten—and for the simple reason
      because he did not wish it to be so.
Although he respected Markham, he was like all parents, who, possessing fortunes themselves,
      are anxious that the suitors for their daughters' hands should also be enabled to produce a
      modicum of this world's lucre.
He was therefore unwilling to admit in his own mind the conviction that his suspicion was
      well-founded: he fancied that change of scene or amusement would probably operate favourably
      upon his daughter's mind, and bring her spirits back to their proper tone; and in this
      resolution was he confirmed, when in the course of that Sunday evening, he saw the
      confirmation of his suspicion. He could no longer doubt:—a thousand little incidents proved to
      him the attachment of his daughter to Richard Markham; and his quick glance convinced him that
      she was not loved by her tutor in return.
That night Mr. Gregory lay awake, pondering upon the best course to pursue. At one moment he
      thought of communicating to Markham the state of his daughter's heart (for he could not
      suppose that Richard was aware of the passion of which he was the object), and permitting the
      young couple to look upon each other as destined to be one day united:—at another moment, he
      imagined that it would be better to allow things to take their chance for a
       short time, and thereby ascertain whether the attachment gained ground on the
      part of his daughter, and whether it would become mutual (for he was entirely ignorant of
      Markham's love for another); and at length he resolved upon dispensing with the services of
      Richard, and trusting to time to eradicate the seeds of the unfortunate passion from the heart
      of Mary-Anne.
This plan Mr. Gregory put into execution in the course of a few days—indeed, the very next
      time that Richard called at his house.
"Mr. Markham," said the father, "I deeply regret that certain circumstances, which it is not
      necessary for me to explain to you, compel me to dispense with your farther attendance upon my
      children."
"I hope," said Markham, "that I have given you no cause——"
"Not at all—not in the least," interrupted Mr. Gregory, shaking Richard cordially by the
      hand: then, in a serious tone, he added, "my daughter's health requires rest—repose—and quiet.
      I shall see no visitors for some time."
Markham was satisfied. Mr. Gregory had heard nothing prejudicial to his character; but he
      had evidently penetrated into the state of Mary-Anne's feelings. Richard was delighted to be
      thus dismissed from a house where his presence was only calculated to destroy the more
      profoundly the peace of one of its inmates:—indeed, he himself had already entertained serious
      ideas of severing his connexion with that family.
"If I can at any time be of service to you, Mr. Markham, in any way, you may command me,"
      said Mr. Gregory, when the former rose to depart; "and do not think that I am merely uttering
      a cold ceremonial phrase, when I desire you to make use of me as a friend, should you ever
      require one."
Richard thanked Mr. Gregory for his kindness, and took leave of him. He also bade adieu to
      Gustavus and Lionel, both of whom were deeply affected at the idea of losing the visits of
      their tutor:—but Mary-Anne had been purposely sent to pass a few days with some friends in the
      country.
