
CHAPTER CXCII.   THE MINT.—THE FORTY THIEVES.
Reader, if you stroll down that portion of the Southwark Bridge Road which lies between
      Union Street and Great Suffolk Street, you will perceive, midway, and on your left hand, a
      large mound of earth heaped on an open space doubtless, intended for building-ground.
At the southern extremity of this mound (on which all the offal from the adjacent houses is
      thrown, and where vagabond boys are constantly collected) is the entrance into an assemblage
      of miserable streets, alleys, and courts, forming one of the vilest, most dangerous, and most
      demoralised districts of this huge metropolis.
The houses are old, gloomy, and sombre. Some of them have the upper part, beginning with the
      first floor, projecting at least three feet over the thoroughfares—for we cannot say over the
      pavement. Most of the doors stand open, and reveal low, dark, and filthy passages, the mere
      aspect of which compels the passer-by to get into the middle of the way, for fear of being
      suddenly dragged into those sinister dens, which seem fitted for crimes of the blackest
      dye.
This is no exaggeration.
Even in the day-time one shudders at the cut-throat appearance of the places into the full
      depths of whose gloom the eye cannot entirely penetrate. But, by night, the Mint,—for it is of
      this district that we are now writing,—is far more calculated to inspire the boldest heart
      with alarm, than the thickest forest or the wildest heath ever infested by banditti.
The houses in the Mint give one an idea of those dens in which murder may be committed
      without the least chance of detection. And yet that district swarms with population. But of
      what kind are its inhabitants? The refuse and the most criminal of the metropolis.
There people follow trades as a blind to avert suspicions relative to their real calling:
      for they are actually housebreakers or thieves themselves, or else the companions and abettors
      of such villains.
In passing through the mazes of the Mint—especially in Mint Street itself—you will observe
      more ill-looking fellows and revolting women in five minutes than you will see either on
      Saffron Hill or in Bethnal Green in an hour. Take the entire district that is bounded on the
      north by Peter Street, on the south by Great Suffolk Street, on the east by Blackman Street
      and High Street, and on the west by the Southwark Bridge Road,—take this small section of the
      metropolis, and believe us when we state that within those limits there is concentrated more
      depravity in all its myriad phases, than many persons could suppose to exist in the entire
      kingdom.
The Mint was once a sanctuary, like Whitefriars; and, although the law has deprived it of
      its ancient privileges, its inhabitants still maintain them, by a tacit understanding with
      each other, to the extent of their power. Thus, if a villain, of whom the officers of justice
      are in search, takes refuge at a lodging in the Mint, the landlord will keep his secret in
      spite of every inducement. The only danger which he might incur would be at the hands of the
      lowest
      description of buzgloaks, dummy-hunters, area-sneaks, and vampers who dwell in
      that district.
There is no part of Paris that can compare with the Mint in squalor, filth, or moral
      depravity;—no—not even the street in the Island of the City, where Eugene Sue has placed his
      celebrated tapis-franc.
Let those who happen to visit the Mint, after reading this description thereof, mark well
      the countenances of the inhabitants whom they will meet in that gloomy labyrinth. Hardened
      ruffianism characterises the men;—insolent, leering, and shameless looks express the depravity
      of the women;—the boys have the sneaking, shuffling manner of juvenile thieves;—the girls,
      even of a tender age, possess the brazen air of incipient profligacy.
It was about nine o'clock in the evening when the Resurrection Man, wrapped in a thick and
      capacious pea-coat, the collar of which concealed all the lower part of his countenance,
      turned hastily from the Southwark Bridge Road into Mint Street.
The weather was piercingly cold, and the sleet was peppering down with painful violence: the
      Resurrection Man accordingly buried his face as much as possible in the collar of his coat,
      and neither looked to the right nor left as he proceeded on his way.
To this circumstance may be attributed the fact that one so cautious and wary as he, should
      now fail to observe that his motions were watched and his steps dogged by a lad whose
      countenance was also well concealed by a high collar which was drawn up to his ears.
In order to avoid unnecessary mystification, we may as well observe that this youth was
      Henry Holford.
The Resurrection Man pursued his way along Mint Street, and suddenly turned into a small
      court on the left-hand side. There he knocked at a door in a peculiar manner, whistling a
      single sharp shrill note at the same time; and in another moment Holford saw him enter the
      house.
"Well, Mr. Tidkins," said a boy of about fourteen, who had opened the door to admit the
      formidable individual with whom he was evidently well acquainted: "a preshus cold night, arn't
      it?"
"Very, my lad," answered the Resurrection Man, turning down his collar, so that the light of
      the candle which the boy held, gleamed upon his cadaverous countenance. "Is the Bully Grand at
      home?"
A reply in the affirmative was given; and the boy led the way, up a narrow and dilapidated
      staircase, to a large room where a great number of youths, whose ages varied from twelve to
      eighteen, were seated at a table, drinking and smoking.
The organisation of this society of juvenile reprobates requires a detailed notice.
The association consisted of thirty-nine co-equals and one chief who was denominated the
      Bully Grand. The fraternity was called The Forty Thieves;—whether in consequence of
      the founders having accidentally amounted to precisely that number, or whether with the idea
      of emulating the celebrated heroes of the Arabian tale, we cannot determine.
The society had, however, been established for upwards of thirty years at the time of which
      we are writing,—and is in existence at this present moment.
The rules of the association may thus be briefly summed up:—The society consists of Forty
      Members, including the Bully Grand. Candidates for admission are eligible at twelve years of
      age. When a member reaches the age of eighteen, he must retire from the association. This rule
      does not, however, apply to the Bully Grand, who is not eligible for that situation until he
      has actually reached the age of eighteen, and has been a member for at least four years. Each
      candidate for membership must be guaranteed as to eligibility and honour (that
       honour which is necessary amongst thieves) by three members of good standing in the
      society; and should any member misconduct himself, or withhold a portion of any booty which he
      may acquire, his guarantees are responsible for him. The Bully Grand must find twelve
      guarantees amongst the oldest members. His power is in most respects absolute; and the
      greatest deference is paid to him.
The modes of proceeding are as follow:—The metropolis is divided into twelve districts
      distinguished thus:—1. The Regent's Park; 2. Pentonville; 3. Hoxton; 4. Finsbury; 5. City; 6.
      Tower Hamlets; 7. Westminster; 8. Pimlico; 9. Hyde Park; 10. Grosvenor Square; 11. Lambeth;
      12. The Borough. Three members are allotted to each district, and are changed in due rotation
      every day. Thus the three who take the Regent's Park district on a Monday, pass to the
      Pentonville district on Tuesday, the Hoxton district on Wednesday, and so on. Thus thirty-six
      members are every day employed in the district-service. The Bully Grand and the three others
      in the meantime attend to the disposal of the stolen property, and to the various business of
      the fraternity. In every district there is a public-house, or boozing-ken, in the interest of
      the association; and to the landlords of these flash cribs is the produce of each day's work
      consigned in the evening. The house in the Mint is merely a place of meeting once a fortnight,
      a residence for the Bully Grand, and the central depôt to which articles
      are conveyed from the care of the district boozing-kens.
The minor regulations and bye-laws may be thus summed up:—Of the three members allotted to
      each district, the oldest member acts as the chief, and guides the plan of proceedings
      according to his discretion. Should any member be proved to have secreted booty, his
      guarantees must pay the value of it; and with them rests the punishment of the defaulter.
      General meetings take place at the head-quarters in the Mint on the first and third Wednesday
      in every month; but if the Bully Grand wishes to call an extraordinary assembly, or to summon
      any particular member or members to his presence, he must leave notices to that effect with
      the landlords of the district houses-of-call. The members are to effect no robberies by
      violence, nor to break into houses: their proceedings must be effected by sleight of hand,
      cunning, and artifice. All disputes must be referred to the Bully Grand for settlement. The
      booty must be converted into money, and the cash divided fairly between all the members every
      fortnight, a certain percentage being allotted by way of salary to the Bully Grand.
Such are the principles upon which the association of the Forty Thieves is based. Every
      precaution is adopted, by means of the guarantees, to prevent the admission of unsuitable
      members, and to ensure the fidelity and honour of those who belong to the fraternity.
      When a member "gets into trouble," persons of apparent respectability come forward to give the
      lad a character; so that magistrates or judges are quite bewildered by the assurances that "it
      must be a mistake;" "that the prisoner is
      an honest hard-working boy, belonging to poor but respectable parents in the
       country;" or "that so convinced is the witness of the lad's innocence, that he will
      instantly take him into his service if the magistrate will discharge him." While a member
      remains in prison previous to trial, the funds of the association provide him with the best
      food allowed to enter the gaol; and, if he be condemned to a term of incarceration in the
      House of Correction, he looks forward to the banquet that will be given in the Mint to
      celebrate the day of his release. Moreover, a member does not lose his right to a share of the
      funds realised during his imprisonment. Thus every inducement is adopted to prevent members
      who "get into trouble" from peaching against their comrades, or making any revelations
      calculated to compromise the safety of the society.
It was a fortnightly meeting of the society when the Resurrection Man visited the house in
      the Mint, on the occasion of which we were ere now speaking.
The Forty Thieves were all gathered round a board formed of several rude deal tables placed
      together, and literally groaning beneath the weight of pewter-pots, bottles, jugs, etc.
The tallow-candles burnt like stars seen through a mist, so dense was the tobacco-smoke in
      the apartment.
At the upper end of the table sate the Bully Grand—a tall, well-dressed, good-looking young
      man, with a profusion of hair, but no whiskers, and little of that blueish appearance on the
      chin which denotes a beard. His aspect was therefore even more juvenile than was consistent
      with his age, which was about twenty-five. He possessed a splendid set of teeth, of which he
      seemed very proud; and his delicate white hand, which had never been applied to any harder
      work than picking pockets, was waved gently backward and forward when he spoke.
Around the table there were fine materials for the study of a phrenologist. Such a
      concatenation of varied physiognomies was not often to be met with; because none of the
      charities nor amenities of life were there delineated;—those countenances were indices only of
      vice in all its grades and phases.
The Resurrection Man was welcomed with a hum of applause on the part of the members, and
      with out-stretched hands by the Bully Grand near whom he was invited to take a seat.
"The business of the evening is over, Mr. Tidkins," said Mr. Tunks,—for so the Bully Grand
      was named; "and we are now deep in the pleasures of the meeting, as you see. Help yourself!
      There are spirits of all kinds, and pipes or cigars—whichever you prefer."
"Have you any information to give me?" inquired Tidkins in a low tone.
"Plenty—but not at this moment, Mr. Tidkins. Take a glass of something to dispel the cold;
      and by-and-bye we will talk on matters of business. There is plenty of time; and many of my
      young friends here would no doubt be proud to give you a specimen of their vocal powers. Let
      me see—who's turn is it?"
"Leary Lipkins's, sir," whispered a boy who sate near the Bully Grand.
"Oh! Leary Lipkins—is it?" said Tunks aloud. "Now, brother Lipkins, the company are waiting
      for an opportunity to drink to your health and song."
Mr. Lipkins—a sharp-looking, hatchet-faced, restless-eyed youth of about sixteen—did not
      require much pressing ere he favoured his audience with the following sample of vocal
      melody:—

THE SIGN OF THE FIDDLE.
There's not in all London a tavern so gay,
As that where the knowing ones meet of a day:
So long as a farthing remains to my share,
I'll drink at that tavern, and never elsewhere.
Yet it is not that comforts there only combine,
Nor because it dispenses good brandy and wine;
'Tis not the sweet odour of pipe nor cigar—
Oh! no—'tis a something more cozie by far!
'Tis that friends of the light-fingered craft are all nigh,
Who'd drink till the cellar itself should be dry,
And teach you to feel how existence may please,
When pass'd in the presence of cronies like these.
Sweet Sign of the Fiddle! how long could I dwell
In thy tap full of smoke, with the friends I love well;
When bailiffs no longer the alleys infest,
And duns, like their bills, have relapsed into rest.
"Bravo!" "Brayvo!" "Bra-ah-vo!" echoed on all sides, when this elegant effusion was brought
      to a close.
The Bully Grand then rose, and spoke in the following manner:—
"Gentlemen, in proposing the health of our excellent brother Leary Lipkins, I might spare
      eulogy, his merits being so well known to us all. But I feel that there are times when it is
      necessary to expatiate somewhat on the excellent qualities of the leading members of our
      honourable Society—in order to encourage an emulative feeling in the breasts of our younger
      brethren. Such an occasion is the present one, when we are all thus sociably assembled.
      Gentlemen, you all know Leary Lipkins! (Cheers, and cries of "We do! we do!") You all know
      that he is indeed leary in every sense of the word. (Hear! hear!) He can see through the best
      bit of broad cloth that ever covered a swell's pocket. There seems to be a sort of magnetic
      attraction between his fingers and a gold watch in the fob of a Bond Street lounger. (Cheers.)
      Talk of mesmerism! why—Leary Lipkins can send a gentleman into a complete state of
       coma as he walks along the streets, so that he never can possibly feel Leary's hands
      in his pockets. Gentlemen, I hold Leary Lipkins up to you as an excellent example; and beg to
      propose his very good health."
The toast was drunk with "three times three."
Mr. Lipkins returned thanks in what a newspaper-reporter would term "a neat speech;" and he
      then exercised the usual privilege of calling upon a particular individual for a song.
A certain Master Tripes Todkinson accordingly indulged his companions in the following
      manner:—

THE COMPASSIONATE LADY AND THE CHIMNEY-SWEEP.
"Pray, who's the little boy that is dancing so nimbly?
Come, Mary, bring a halfpenny down.—"
"Please, ma'am, I'm the feller as swept your chimbley,
And I'm very much obleeged for the brown.—"
"Alas! how his schooling has been neglected!
But perhaps his kind father's dead?—"
"No, ma'am; he's a tinker as is wery much respected
And this mornin' he's drunk in bed.—"
"Perchance 'tis a motherless child that they've fixed on
To dance. Does your mamma live still?—"
"Yes, ma'am; at this moment she's stayin' at Brixton,
Vith a gen'leman as keeps a mill.—"

"Poor child, he is miserably clad! How shocking!
Not to give him some clothes were a sin!—"
"Thank'ee, ma'am; but I doesn't want no shoe nor stocking,
I'd rayther have a quartern o' gin!"

The Bully Grand proposed the health Of Master Tripes Todkinson, in a speech which was
      mightily applauded; and Master Tripes Todkinson, having duly returned thanks, called on Master
      Bandy-legged Diggs to continue the vocal harmony.
This invitation was responded to with as much readiness as Master Diggs would have displayed
      in easing an elderly gentleman in a crowd of his purse; and the air with which he favoured his
      audience ran thus:—

THE LAST OATH.
Upon the drop he turned
To swear a parting oath;
He cursed the parson and Jack Ketch,
And he coolly damned them both.
He listened to the hum
Of the crowds that gathered nigh;
And he carelessly remarked,
"What a famous man am I!"
Beside the scaffold's foot
His mistress piped her eye:
She waved to him her dirty rag,
And whimpering said, "Good bye!"
She mourned the good old times
That ne'er could come again,
When he brought her home a well-lined purse;—
But all her tears were vain!
Poor Jack was soon turned off,
And gallantly was hung:
There was a sigh in every breast,
A groan on every tongue.
Go—gaze upon his corse,
And remember then you see
The bravest robber that has been,
Or ever more shall be!

We need scarcely observe that this chant was received with as much favour as the preceding
      ones. The Resurrection Man was, however, growing impatient; for the reader doubtless
      comprehends enough of his character to be well aware that Tidkins was not one who loved
      pleasure better than business. He looked at his watch, and cast a significant glance towards
      the Bully Grand.
"What o'clock is it, Mr. Tidkins?" inquired that great functionary.
"Half-past ten," was the answer.
"Well, I will devote my attention to you in a few minutes," said Tunks. "You may rest
      perfectly easy—I have obtained information on every point in which you are interested.
      But—hark! Shuffling Simon is going to speak!"
A lad of about seventeen, who had a weakness in the joints of his knees, and walked in a
      fashion which had led to the nickname mentioned by the Bully Grand, rose from his seat, and
      proposed the health of Mr. Tunks, the chief of the society of the Forty Thieves.
Then followed a tremendous clattering of bottles and glasses as the company filled up
      bumpers in order to pay due honour to the toast; and every one, save the Grand himself, rose.
      The health was drunk with rounds of applause: a pause of a few moments ensued; and then
      Shuffling Simon commenced the following complimentary song, in the repetition of which all the
      other adherents of the Chief vociferously joined:—

PROSPER THE GRAND.
Prosper our Bully Grand,
Great Tunks, our noble Grand;
Prosper the Grand
Send him good swag enough,
Heart made of sterling stuff,
Long to be up to snuff;—
Prosper the Grand.
Save him from all mishaps,
Scatter blue-bottle traps
Throughout the land
Confound the busy beak,
Flourish the area-sneak;
In Tunks a chief we seek;—
Prosper the Grand!
The best lush on the board
To Tunks's health be poured
By all the band!
May he continue free,
Nor ever tread-mill see;
And all shall shout with glee,
Prosper the Grand!'

It was really extremely refreshing for the Resurrection Man to contemplate the deep
      manifestation of loyalty with which the thirty-nine thieves sang the preceding air.
Nor less was it an imposing spectacle when the object of that adoration rose from his seat,
      waved his right hand, and poured forth his gratitude in a most gracious speech.
This ceremony being accomplished, the Grand (what a pity it was that so elegant and elevated
      a personage had retained his unworthy patronymic of Tunks!) took a candle from the
      table, and conducted the Resurrection Man down stairs into a back room, which the Chief
      denominated his "private parlour."
"Now for your information," said the Resurrection Man, somewhat impatiently. "In the first
      place, have you discovered any thing concerning Crankey Jem Cuffin?"
"My emissaries have been successful in every instance," answered Tunks, with a complacent
      smile. "A man exactly corresponding with your description of Crankey Jem dwells in an obscure
      court in Drury Lane. Here is the address."
"Any tidings of Margaret Flathers?" inquired Tidkins.
"She has married a young man who answers to your description of Skilligalee; and they keep a
      small chandlery-shop in Pitfield Street, Hoxton Old Town. The name of Mitchell is over the
      door."
"Your lads are devilish sharp fellows, Bully Grand," said the Resurrection Man,
      approvingly.
"With thirty-six emissaries all over London every day, it is not so very difficult to obtain
      such information as you required," returned Tunks. "Moreover, you paid liberally in advance;
      and the boys will always be glad to serve you."
"Now for the next question," said Tidkins. "Any news of the old man that Tomlinson goes to
      see sometimes?"
"Yes—he lives in a small lodging in Thomas Street, Bethnal Green," was the answer. "There is
      his address also. His name is Nelson:—you best know whether it is his right one or not. That
      is no business of mine. Mr. Tomlinson regularly calls on him every Sunday afternoon, and
      passes some hours with him. The old man never stirs out, and is very unwell."
"Once more I must compliment your boys," exclaimed Tidkins, overjoyed with this
      intelligence.
      "Have you been able to learn any thing concerning Katherine Wilmot?"
"There I have also succeeded," replied Mr. Tunks. "My boys discovered that, after the trial
      of Katherine, she lunched with some friends at an inn in the Old Bailey, and shortly
      afterwards left in a post-chaise. She was accompanied by an old lady; and the chaise took them
      to Hounslow."
"And there, I suppose, all traces of them disappear?" said the Resurrection Man,
      inquiringly.
"Not at all. I sent Leary Lipkins down to Hounslow yesterday; and he discovered that Miss
      Wilmot is staying at a farm-house belonging to a Mr. and Mrs. Bennet."
"Precisely!" exclaimed the Resurrection Man. "That Mrs. Bennet was a witness on the trial. I
      remember reading all about it. She was the sister of the woman whom Reginald Tracy
      murdered."
"The farm is only a short distance from Hounslow," observed the Bully Grand: "any one in the
      town can direct you to it. Most probably it was with this Mrs. Bennet that Miss Wilmot
      travelled in the post-chaise."
"Evidently so," said the Resurrection Man. "But of that no matter. All I required was
      Katherine Wilmot's address; and you have discovered it. Now for my last question. Have you
      ascertained whether it will be possible to bribe the clerk of the church where Lord
      Ravensworth and the Honourable Miss Adeline Enfield were married, to tear out the leaf of the
      register which contains the entry of that union?"
"I have learnt that the clerk is open to bribery: but he is a cautious man, and will not
      allow himself to be sounded too deeply in the matter," was the answer.
"Then that business must regard me," observed the Resurrection Man. "You have served me well
      in all these matters. Twenty pounds I gave you the other day: here are twenty pounds more. Are
      you satisfied?"
"I have every reason to be pleased with your liberality," returned the Bully Grand, folding
      up the bank-notes with his delicate fingers. "Have you any further commands at present?"
"Yes," replied the Resurrection Man, after a few moments' consideration: "let one of your
      lads take a couple of notes for me."
While the Bully Grand proceeded to summon Leary Lipkins, the Resurrection Man seated himself
      at a desk which there was in the room, and wrote the following note:—
"The news I have just received are rather good than bad. The clerk is open to bribery, but
      is cautious. I will myself call upon him the day after to-morrow; and I will meet you
      afterwards, at our usual place of appointment, in the evening between six and seven. But you
      must find money somehow or another: I am incurring expenses in this matter, and cannot work
      for nothing. Surely Greenwood will assist you?"
This letter was sealed and addressed to "Gilbert Vernon, Esq., No.—Stamford
       Street."
The Resurrection Man then penned another note which ran thus:—
"I have discovered Katherine's address, and shall call upon you the day after to-morrow at
      nine o'clock in the evening. Remain at home; as you know the importance of the business."
By the time he had concluded his correspondence, the Bully Grand had returned with Leary
      Lipkins.
"My good lad," said the Resurrection Man, addressing the latter, "here are two notes, which
      you must deliver this night—this night, mind. The first is addressed; and the person
      for whom it is intended never retires to bed until very late. He will be up, when you call at
      the house where he lodges in Stamford Street. Give the letter into his own hand. You must then
      proceed to Golden Lane; and in the third court on the right-hand side of the way, and in the
      fourth house on the left-hand in that court, an old woman lives. You must knock till she
      answers you; and give her this second letter. I actually do not know her name, although I have
      dealings with her at present."
Leary Lipkins promised to fulfil these directions, and immediately departed to execute
      them.
Shortly afterwards the Resurrection Man took his leave of the Bully Grand, and left the
      head-quarters of the Forty Thieves.
Henry Holford, who had never lost sight of the door of that house since he had seen the
      Resurrection Man enter it, and who had remained concealed in the shade of an overhanging
      frontage opposite for more than two hours, resumed his task of dogging that formidable
      individual.
The Resurrection Man passed down Mint Street, into the Borough, and called a cab from the
      nearest stand, saying to the driver, "New Church, Bethnal Green."
The moment Tidkins was ensconced within, and the driver was seated on his box, Henry Holford
      crept softly behind the cab. In that manner he rode unmolested until within a short distance
      of the place of destination, when he descended, and followed the vehicle on foot.
The cab stopped near the railings that surround the church; and the Resurrection Man, having
      settled the fare, hurried onwards into Globe Town, Holford still dogging him—but with the
      utmost caution.
Presently Tidkins struck into a bye-street at the eastern extremity of the Happy Valley (as,
      our readers will remember, Globe Town is denominated in the gazetteer of metropolitan
      thieves), and stopped at the door of a house of dilapidated appearance. In a word, this was
      the very den where we have before seen him conducting his infamous plots, and in the
      subterranean vaults of which Viola Chichester was imprisoned for a period of three weeks.
Holford saw the Resurrection Man enter this house by the front door communicating with the
      street. He watched the windows for a few moments, and then perceived a light suddenly appear
      in the room on the upper floor.
"I have succeeded!" exclaimed Holford, aloud, "the villain lives there! I have traced him to
      his lurking-hole; and Jem may yet be avenged!"
Then, in order to be enabled to give an accurate description of the house to the returned
      convict, Holford studied its situation and appearance with careful attention. He observed that
      it was two storeys high, and that by the side was a dark alley.
At length he was convinced that he should be enabled to find that particular dwelling again,
      or to direct Crankey Jem to it without the possibility of error; and, rejoicing at being thus
      enabled to oblige his new friend, the young man commenced his long and weary walk back to
      Drury Lane.
