
CHAPTER CCXL.   A NEW EPOCH.
Twenty months had elapsed since the events just related.
It was now the end of January, 1843.
Haply the reader may begin to imagine that our subject is well-nigh exhausted—that the
      mysteries of London are nearly all unveiled?
He errs; for London is a city containing such a variety of strange institutions, private as
      well as public, and presenting so many remarkable phases to the contemplation of the acute
      observer, that the writer who is resolved to avail himself fully of the heterogeneous
      materials thus supplied him, cannot readily lack food for comment and narrative.
The dwellers in the country, and even the inhabitants of the great provincial cities and
      manufacturing towns, can form no just estimate of the wondrous features of the sovereign
      metropolis by the local scenes with which they are familiar.
Who can judge of the splendour of the West End of London by even the most fashionable
      quarters of Edinburgh or Dublin?
Who can conceive the amount of revolting squalor and hideous penury existing in the poor
      districts of London, by a knowledge of the worst portions of Liverpool or Manchester?
Who can form a conjecture of the dreadful immorality and shocking vice of the low
      neighbourhoods of London, judging by the scenes presented to view in the great mining or
      manufacturing counties?
No:—for all that is most gorgeous and beautiful, as well as all that is most filthy and
      revolting,—all that is best of talent, or most degraded of ignorance,—all that is most
      admirable for virtue, or most detestable for crime,—all that is most refined in elegance, or
      most strange in barbarism,—all, all these wondrous phases are to be found, greatest in glory,
      or lowest in infamy, in the imperial city of the British Isles!
And shall we be charged with vanity, if we declare that never until now has the veil been so
      rudely torn aside, nor the corruptions of London been so boldly laid bare?
But, in undertaking this work, we were determined at the outset to be daunted by no fear of
      offending the high and the powerful: we were resolved to misrepresent nothing for the purpose
      of securing to ourselves the favour of those whom so many sycophants delight to bespatter with
      their sickly praises.
In the same independent spirit do we now pursue our narrative.
On the left-hand side of Brydges Street, as you proceed from the Strand towards Russell
      Street, Covent Garden, you may perceive a lamp projecting over the door of an establishment
      which, viewed externally, appears to be a modest eating-house; but which in reality is one of
      the most remarkable places of nocturnal entertainment in London.
Upon the lamp alluded to are painted these words——"The Paradise."
It was past midnight, towards the end of January, 1843, when two gentlemen, wearing
      fashionable Taglioni coats over their elegant attire, and impregnating the fine frosty air
      with the vapour of their cigars, strolled into this establishment.
Proceeding down a passage, they pushed open a door with a painted ground-glass window, and
      entered a spacious supper-room.
This apartment was lofty, handsomely fitted up, well furnished, and provided with boxes
      containing little tables, like the coffee-room of an hotel.
A cheerful fire burnt in the grate, and the numerous lights suspended around the apartment
      were reflected in a handsome mirror over the mantel-piece.
Above the door leading into the room was a species of gallery, forming a grotto-like opening
      into a suite of upper apartments, which were reached by a flight of stairs leading from the
      passage just now mentioned.
All was gaiety and bustle both in the coffee-room below and the chambers above. Numerous
      suppers were in progress, the partakers thereof consisting of gentlemen of various
      descriptions and gay ladies of only one particular class. Oysters, lobsters, cold fowls, ham,
      and kidneys, constituted the principal edibles; while liquor flowed copiously and in all
      gradations of luxury, from humble porter in pewter pots to sparkling champagne in green
      bottles.
The male portion of the guests was composed of those various specimens of "gentlemen" who
      either turn night into day, or who make up for the toils of the day by the dissipated
      enjoyments of the night.
There was an attorney's clerk, who, having picked up a stray guinea in a manner for which he
      would not perhaps have liked to account, was doing the liberal, in the shape of oysters,
      stout, and hot brandy-and-water, to some fair Cyprian whom he had never seen before, and whom
      he would perhaps never see again, but with whom he was on the very best possible terms for the
      time being; the only trifling damper to his enjoyment being her constant
      anxiety lest "her friend" should happen to come in and catch her at supper with the said
      attorney's clerk.
There was a notorious black-leg, who was regaling a couple of frail ones with champagne and
      looking out for flats as well; while his accomplice was doing precisely the same in the next
      box,—both these respectable gentlemen affecting to be total strangers to each other.
There also was a handsome young man, who, having just come of age, and stepped into the
      possession of a good property, was commencing his career of waste and extravagance at the
      Paradise. Proud of the nauseating flattery of the three or four abandoned women who had him in
      tow, he was literally throwing about his money in all directions, and staring around him with
      the vacant air of semi-intoxication, as much as to say, "Don't you think me a very fine
      dashing fellow indeed?"

In another box was an old man, who had reached the wrong side of sixty, but who
      was endeavouring to make a young girl of seventeen believe that he was but forty-four last
      birth-day,—a tale which she had too much tact to appear to doubt for a moment, as the
      antiquated beau supplied her with copious draughts of champagne to enable her to swallow the
      lie the more easily.
A little farther on was a dandified, stiff-necked, coxcomical individual of about
      six-and-twenty, sipping sherry with a fair friend, and endeavouring to render himself as
      polite and agreeable as possible. But, at every word he spoke, he drew out the edge of the
      table-cloth to precisely the extent of a yard between his fore-fingers and thumbs;—whereby it
      was easy to perceive that, although he assured his companion he was a captain in the Guards,
      he in reality exercised the less conspicuous but more active employment of a linen-draper's
      assistant.
Crowding near the fire were several Cyprians, who had not as yet obtained cavaliers, and
      were therefore hovering between the alternatives of "supper" or "no supper," the odds being,
      to all appearances, in favour of the latter. They did not, however, seem very unhappy while
      their fate, as to oysters and stout, was pending in the balance of suspense; but laughed,
      chattered, and larked amongst themselves; and then, by way of avoiding any thing like monotony
      or sameness in their recreation, two of them got up a pleasant little quarrel which terminated
      in a brisk exchange of blows and scratches.
Leaning over the side of the grotto-like gallery before referred to, were two individuals,
      whose appearance was something between that of dissipated actors and broken down tradesmen;
      and who were so disguised in liquor that their own mothers could scarcely have recognised
      them. Being most probably wearied of their own conversation, they diverted themselves by
      addressing their remarks to the people in the coffee-room below, whom they invited in the most
      condescending manner possible to "flare up," "mind their eyes," "form a union," and enact
      various other little social civilities of the same ambiguous nature.
Within the upper rooms were several gay ladies and jovially disposed gentlemen, all mainly
      intent upon the pleasures of eating or drinking, which occupations were however relieved by
      boisterous shouts of laughter and practical jokes of all kinds.
In justice to the proprietor of this establishment it must be observed that he conducted it
      upon as orderly a system as could be possibly maintained when the characters of his patrons
      and patronesses are taken into consideration; and the moment a disturbance occurred, either
      himself or his waiters adopted the most efficient means of putting an end to it, by bundling
      the offenders neck-and-crop into the street.
The two gentlemen who lounged, as before stated, into this celebrated night-house on the
      occasion alluded to, took possession of a vacant box, and throwing down their cigars, summoned
      the waiter.
"Yes, sir—coming, sir—di-rectly, sir," cried the chief functionary thus adjured,
      and who was busy at the moment in disputing the items of the score with the linen-draper's
      assistant:—but, when that little matter was duly settled to the satisfaction of the waiter and
      the discomfiture of the assistant aforesaid, he hurried up to the table occupied by the new
      comers.
"Well, what shall we have, Harborough?" asked one of the gentlemen, appealing to his
      companion.
"'Pon my honour, I don't care a rap," was the reply. "Order what you like, old fellow."
Thus encouraged, Mr. Chichester (for it was he) desired the waiter to bring "no end of
      oysters," and to follow with a cold fowl.
"Yes, sir—certainly, sir," said the domestic, hastily transferring a pepper-box from one
      side of the table to the other, and smoothing down the cloth: "please to order any thing to
      drink, gentlemen?"
"A bottle of champagne," returned Mr. Chichester; "and make haste about it."
"Yes, sir—this minute, sir:"—and the waiter glided away with that kind of shuffling,
      shambling motion which no living beings save waiters can ever accomplish.
When the provender was duly supplied, and the first glass of champagne was quaffed,
      Chichester leant across the table, and said to the baronet in a low tone of chuckling triumph,
      "Well, old chap, I don't think we can complain of Fortune during the last three or four
      months?"
"No—far from it," returned Sir Rupert Harborough. "But we musn't be idle because we happen
      to have a few five pound notes in our pocket. However, things will turn up, I dare say."
"Yes—if we look out for them," said Chichester; "but not unless. By the bye, who do you
      think I met this afternoon, as I was strolling along the Strand?"
"Can't say at all," replied the baronet. "Who?"
"Greenwood," added Chichester.
"The deuce you did! And how was he looking?"
"Not so slap-up as he used to be:—no jewellery—toggery not quite new—hat showing marks of
      the late rain—boots patched at the sides—and cotton gloves."
"The scoundrel! Do you remember how he served me about that bill which I accepted in Lord
      Tremordyn's name? Ah! shouldn't I like to pay him out for it!" said the baronet. "But how he
      has fallen within the last two years! Turned out of his seat for Rottenborough at the last
      election—obliged to give up his splendid house in Spring Gardens——"
"Well, well—we know all about that," interrupted Chichester, impatiently. "Don't speak so
      loud; but look into the next box—the one behind me, I mean—and tell me if you think that young
      fellow who is treating those girls to champagne would prove a flat or not."
The baronet glanced in the direction indicated; and immediately afterwards gave an
      affirmative nod of the head to his companion: then, leaning across the table he whispered, "To
      be sure he would; and I know who he is. It's young Egerton—the son of the great outfitter, who
      died a few years ago, leaving a large fortune in trust for this lad. I'll be bound to say he
      has just come of age, and is launching out."
"Does he know you?" inquired Chichester, also speaking in a subdued tone.
"I am almost certain he does not," replied the baronet. "But sit up—we will soon see what he
      is made of. I will touch him on the cross that we have got up together."

The two friends resumed the discussion of their supper, and in a few minutes
      began to converse with each other in a tone loud enough to be heard—and intended also to be so
      heard—in the next box.
"And so you really think the Haggerstone Pet will beat the Birmingham Bruiser, Mr.
      Chichester?" observed the baronet, in a tone of mere friendly courtesy.
"I am convinced of it, Sir Rupert, in spite of the odds," was the answer, delivered in the
      same punctilious manner. "Will you take my four ponies upon the Haggerstone Pet to five?"
"Done, Mr. Chichester!" cried the baronet: then drawing out a betting-book from the
      breast-pocket of his coat, he proceeded to enter the wager, saying aloud and in a measured
      tone as he did so, "Back Birmingham Bruiser against Haggerstone Pet—five ponies to
      four—Honourable—Arthur—Chichester. There it is!"
This ceremony was followed on the part of Mr. Chichester, who, having produced his
      book, wrote down the wager, saying, "Back Haggerstone Pet against Birmingham Bruiser—four
      ponies to five—Sir—Rupert—Harborough—baronet."
"And now," exclaimed the baronet, "before we put up our books, I'll give you another chance.
      Will you take three hundred to one that the favourites for the fight and the Derby
      don't both win?"
"Stop, Sir Rupert!" cried Chichester. "Let me first see how I stand for the
      Derby:"—then, as if speaking to himself, he continued, "Taken even five hundred, four
      horses against the field, from Lord Dunstable;—seven hundred to one against
       Eagle-wing, from the Honourable Colonel Cholmondeley;—betted even five hundred,
       Skyscraper to Moonraker, with the Honourable Augustus Smicksmack. Well, Sir
      Rupert," he exclaimed, raising his head from the contemplation of the leaf on which these sham
      bets were entered, "I don't mind if I take you."
"It's a bargain," said the baronet; and the wager was accordingly inscribed in the little
      books.
The two gentlemen then refreshed themselves each with another draught of champagne; and Sir
      Rupert Harborough, as he drank, glanced over the edge of the glass into the next box, to
      ascertain the effect produced upon Mr. Egerton by the previous little display of sporting
      spirit.
That effect was precisely the one which had been anticipated. Mr. Egerton was not so tipsy
      but that he was struck with the aristocratic names of the two gentlemen in the next box; and
      he raised his head from the bosom of a Cyprian to take a view of Sir Rupert Harborough, Bart.,
      and the Honourable Arthur Chichester.
So satisfactory was the result of the survey—at least to himself—that he determined not only
      to show off a little of his own "dashing spirit," but also, if possible, form the acquaintance
      of the two gentlemen; for, like many young fellows similarly circumstanced, he was foolish
      enough to believe that the possession of money must prove a passport to the best
      society, if he could only obtain an opening.
Therefore, having greedily devoured every word of the dialogue just detailed, and taking it
      for granted that nothing in this world was ever more sincere than the betting of Sir Rupert
      Harborough, Bart., and the Honourable Arthur Chichester, Mr. Egerton exclaimed, "Beg pardon,
      gentlemen, for intruding upon you; but I think I heard you staking some heavy sums on the
      coming fight?"
"Really, sir," said the baronet, gravely, "I was not aware that any thing which took place
      between me and this gentleman could be overheard;—and yet, after all," he added with a
      gracious smile, "I do not know that there is the least harm in a little quiet bet."
"Harm, no—and be damned to it!" ejaculated Mr. Egerton. "All I can say is, that I admire
      sporting men—I honour them: they're an ornament to the country. What would Old England—hic—be
      without her Turf—her hunting—her prize-fighting? For my part, I have a great idea of this
      fight—a very great—hic—idea. But I back the Birmingham Bruiser—I do."
"So do I, sir," answered the baronet "My friend here, however—the Honourable Mr.
      Chichester—fancies the Haggerstone Pet."
"I heard him say so," returned the young man. "But, if he hasn't made up his book, I don't
      mind betting him five hundred pounds—hic—to his four—that's the odds, I believe——"
"Yes—those are the odds," observed Mr. Chichester, carelessly: then, taking out his book, he
      said, "But I am already so deep in this fight, that I really am afraid——however, if you wish
      it, I don't mind——"
"Is it a bet, then, sir?" asked the young gentleman, looking round the room with an air of
      importance, as if he were quite accustomed to the thing, although it was in reality the first
      wager he had ever laid in his life.
"It shall be so, if you choose, sir," returned Chichester: then, glancing in an inquiring
      manner towards his new acquaintance, he said with a bland smile, "I really beg your pardon—but
      I have not the pleasure——"
"Oh! truly—you don't know me from Adam!" interrupted the other. "But you shall know me,
      sir—and I hope we shall know each other better too—hic."
He then produced his card; and Mr. Chichester, of course, affected not to have been
      previously aware of the young gentleman's name.
The bet between them was duly recorded—by Mr. Chichester in his little book, and by Mr.
      Albert Egerton on the back of a love-letter.
The latter gentleman then called for his bill, and having glanced at the amount, paid it
      without a murmur, adding a munificent donation for the waiter. Having effected this
      arrangement, by means of which he got rid of the women who had fastened themselves on him, he
      coolly passed round to the table at which his new acquaintances were seated, and called for
      another bottle of champagne.
When it was brought, he was about to pay for it; but Sir Rupert interrupted him, saying,
      "No—that would be too bad. If you sit at our table, you are our guest;—and here's to a better
      acquaintance."
The bottle went round rapidly; and Mr. Egerton became quite enchanted with the agreeable
      manners of Sir Rupert Harborough, Bart., and the off-hand pleasant conversation of the
      Honourable Arthur Chichester.
It was now past one o'clock; and the baronet proposed to depart.
"Which way do you—hic—go?" inquired Egerton.
"Oh! westward, of course," returned Harborough,
      in a tone of gentle remonstrance, as much as to say that there could have been no
      doubt upon the subject. "Will you walk with us?"
"Certainly," was the answer: "and we will smoke a—hic—cigar as we go along."
The baronet called for the bill, paid it, and led the way from the room, followed by Egerton
      and Chichester, the former of whom insisted upon stopping at the bar to take some soda water,
      as he declared himself to be "half-seas—hic—over."
While the three gentlemen were engaged in partaking each of a bottle of the refreshing
      beverage, Sir Rupert felt his coat-sleeve gently pulled from behind; and, turning round, he
      perceived a man whom he had noticed in the coffee-room. Indeed, this was one of the black-legs
      already alluded to as having been engaged in treating Cyprians to supper and champagne.
The baronet instantly comprehended the nature of the business which this individual had to
      address him upon; and making him a significant sign, he said to Chichester, "Do you and Mr.
      Egerton go very slowly along the Strand; and I will follow you in a few minutes. I have a word
      to say to this gentleman."
Gentleman, indeed!—one of the most astounding knaves in London! But vice and
      roguery compel the haughty aristocrat to address the lowest ruffian as an equal.
Chichester took Egerton's arm, and sauntered out of the house, attended to the door by the
      obsequious master of the establishment—an honour shown only to those who drink champagne or
      claret.
"Well, sir, what is it?" asked the baronet, taking the black-leg aside, and speaking to him
      in a whisper.
"Only this, Sir Rupert," returned the man: "you've got that youngster in tow, and he'll turn
      out profitable, no doubt. Me and my pal, which is inside the room there, meant to have had him
      somehow or another; and we planted our vimen on him to-night:—but we thought he wasn't drunk
      enough; and then you come in and take him from us. Your friend has nailed him for a bet of
      five hundred, which he's safe to pay; so you must stand someot for my disappointment."
"I understand you, sir," said the baronet. "Here are twenty pounds: and if the bet be paid,
      you shall have thirty more. Will that do?"
"Thank'ee for the twenty, which is ready," answered the black-leg, consigning the notes to
      his pocket. "Now never mind the other thirty; but make the best you can out of that young
      chap; and all I ask in return is just a word or two about the mill that's coming off."
"I don't understand you," said the baronet, colouring.
"Come, come—that won't do," continued the man. "But don't be afeard—it's all in the way of
      business that I'm speaking. I see you and Mr. Chichester at a public about three weeks ago
      along with the Birmingham Bruiser; and therefore I knowed you was the friends which deposited
      the money for him, but which kept in the back-ground. So all I want is the office—just a
      single word: is the Bruiser to win or to make a cross of it?"
"Really, my good fellow——" stammered the baronet.
"Only just one word, so that I may know how to lay my money," persisted the black-leg, "and
      your secret is safe with me. For my own interest it will be so, if you tell me which way it is
      to be."
"Can I rely on you?" said Sir Rupert. "But of course I may, if you really mean to bet. Now
      keep the thing dark—and you may win plenty of money. The Bruiser is to lose: the odds
      are five to four on him now—and they will be seven to four in his favour before the fight
      comes off. No one suspects that it is to be a cross; and the reports of the Bruiser's training
      are glorious."
"Enough—and as mum as a dead man, Sir Rupert," whispered the black-leg.
He then returned to the supper-room; and the baronet hastened after his friends.
