
CHAPTER CXXXIV. THE PALACE IN THE HOLY LAND.
THE wanderer amidst the crowded thoroughfares of the multitudinous metropolis cannot be
      unacquainted with that assemblage of densely populated streets and lanes which is situate
      between High Street (St. Giles's) and Great Russell Street (Bloomsbury).
The district alluded to is called the Holy Land.
There poverty hides its head through shame, and crime lurks concealed through fear;—there
      every
       thing that is squalid, hideous, debauched, and immoral, makes its
      dwelling;—there woman is as far removed from the angel as Satan is from the Godhead, and man
      is as closely allied to the brute as the idiot is to the baboon;—there days are spent in
      idleness, and nights in dissipation;—there no refinement of habit or of speech is known, but
      male and female alike wallow in obscene debauchery and filthy ideas;—there garments are
      patched with pieces of various dyes, and language is disfigured with words of a revolting
      slang;—there the natural ruffianism and brutal instincts of the human heart are unrepressed by
      social ties or conventional decencies;—there infamy is no disgrace, crime no reproach, vice no
      stain.
Such is the Holy Land.
In a dark and gloomy alley, connecting two of the longer streets in this district, stood a
      large house four storeys high, and with windows of such narrow dimensions that they seemed
      intended to admit the light of day only by small instalments.
Four steep stone steps, each only about six inches broad, led to the front door, which
      always stood open during the day-time.
This front-door gave admittance into a small square compartment, which was denominated "the
      lobby," and from which a second door opened into the house.
The inner door just alluded to was kept constantly shut, save when admittance was demanded
      by any one who had the right of entry into the habitation. But even that admittance was never
      granted without precaution. In the ceiling of the little hall or lobby described, there was a
      small trap-door, let into the floor of the room above; and by these means the sentinel on duty
      up-stairs was enabled to reconnoitre every one who knocked at the inner door.
The interior of the house resembled a small barrack. The apartments on the ground floor were
      used as day-rooms or refectories, and were fitted up with long tables and forms. The floors
      were strewed with sand; and the appearance of the place was more cleanly and comfortable than
      might have been expected in such a neighbourhood. The lower panes of the windows were smeared
      with a whitewash, which prevented passers-by from peering from the street into the
      apartments.
The upper storeys were all used as dormitories, some being allotted to the male and others
      to the female inmates of the house. These rooms were furnished with mattresses, blankets, and
      coverlids; but there were no bedsteads. The aspect of the dormitories was as cleanly as that
      of the day-rooms.
To the ceiling over the landing-place of the second floor was hung a large bell, to the
      wheel of which were attached numerous ropes, which branched off, through holes in the walls
      and floors, in all directions, so that an alarm could be rung from every room in that spacious
      tenement.
Behind the house there was a large yard, surrounded by the dead walls which formed the sides
      of other buildings; thus, in no way, was the dwelling which we have described, overlooked by
      the neighbours. At the bottom of the yard was a door opening into a court which communicated
      with another street; and thus a convenient mode of egress was secured to any one who might
      find it prudent to beat a precipitate retreat from the house.
We have now endeavoured to furnish the reader with an idea of King Zingary's Palace in the
      Holy Land.
In order to complete the description, it only remains for us to state that the various
      precautions to which we have alluded, in connexion with the Palace, were adopted for the
      protection and safety of those inmates who, either in the course of their avocations or
      otherwise, might happen to render themselves obnoxious to the myrmidons of the law. Not that
      the pursuits of the subjects of King Zingary necessarily comprised practices which rendered
      their headquarters liable to constant visits from the police: but persons accustomed to a
      vagabond kind of existence, could not be otherwise than often tempted into lawless courses;
      and his Majesty did not dare disown or discard a dependant who thus became involved in danger.
      Moreover, the protection of the gipsies was frequently accorded to persons who rendered them a
      service, or who could pay for such succour, as in the respective cases of Skilligalee and the
      Rattlesnake: or it was not unusually granted upon motives of humanity, as in reference to the
      man called the Traveller. This intercourse with characters of all descriptions was another
      reason for the adoption of precautionary measures at the Palace; but seldom—very seldom was it
      that the necessity of those measures was justified by events, the police being well aware that
      no good ever resulted from a visit to the royal mansion in the Holy Land.
It was ten o'clock at night; and the king of the gipsies was presiding at the
      banqueting-table in his palace.
Upwards of sixty gipsies, male and female, were assembled round the board. These consisted
      of the chiefs of the different districts into which the gipsy kingdom was divided, with their
      wives and daughters.
Skilligalee, the Rattlesnake, and the Traveller were also seated at the table, and were
      honoured as the king's guests.
The meal was over; and the board was covered with bottles containing various descriptions of
      liquor, drinking mugs, pipes, and tobacco.
With all the solemn gravity of a chairman at a public dinner, Zingary rapped his knuckles
      upon the table, and commanded those present to fill their glasses.
The order was obeyed by both men and women; and the king then spoke as follows:—
"Most loyal and dutiful friends, this is the hundred and thirty-first anniversary of the
      institution of that custom in virtue of which the provincial rulers of the united races of
      Egyptians and Bohemians in England assemble together once every year at the Palace. A hundred
      and thirty-one years ago, this house was purchased by my grandfather King Sisman, and
      bequeathed to his descendants to serve as the head-quarters and central point of our
      administration. There is scarcely an individual of the united races who has not experienced
      the hospitality of this Palace. Every worthy Zingaree who visits the metropolis enjoys his bed
      and his board without fee and without price for seven days in our mansion, the superintendence
      of which is so ably conducted, while we are absent, by our brother on my right." Here the king
      glanced towards a venerable-looking gipsy who sate next to him. "In his hands our treasures
      are safe; and to-morrow he will place before you an account of the remittances he has received
      from the provincial districts, and the expenditures he has made in the maintenance of this
      establishment. You will find, I have reason to believe, a considerable balance in our favour.
      Let us then celebrate with a bumper the hundred and thirty-first anniversary of the opening of
      our royal palace!"
This toast was drunk without noise—without
      hurrahs—without clamour,—but not the less sincerely on that account.
"My pretty Eva," said the king, after a pause, "will now oblige us with a song?"
Zingary's daughter-in-law did not require to be pressed to exhibit her vocal powers; but in
      a sweet voice she sang the following air:—
THE GIPSY'S HOME.

Oh! who is so blythe, and happy, and free
As the ever-wandering Zingaree?
'Tis his at his own wild will to roam;
And in each fair scene does he find a home,—
Does he find a home!
The sunny slope, or the shady grove,
Where nightingales sing and lovers rove;
The fields where the golden harvests wave,
And the verdant bank which the streamlets lave,
Are by turns his home.
The busy town with its selfish crowd,
The city where dwell the great and proud,
The haunts of the mighty multitude,
Where the strong are raised and the weak subdued,
Are to him no home.
Oh! ever happy—and ever free,
Who is so blest as the Zingaree?—
Where nature puts on her gayest vest,
Where flowers are sweetest and fruits are best,
Oh! there is his home.

"Thank you, sweet Eva," said the king, when the gipsy woman had concluded her song, in the
      chorus of which the other females had joined in a low and subdued tone. "Ours is indeed a
      happy life," continued Zingary. "When roving over the broad country, we enjoy a freedom
      unknown to the rest of the world. No impost or taxes have we then to pay: we drink of the
      stream at pleasure, and never feel alarmed lest our water should be cut off. We can choose
      pleasant paths, and yet pay no paving-rate. The sun lights us by day, and the stars by night;
      and no one comes to remind us that we owe two quarters' gas. We pitch our tents where we will,
      but are not afraid of a ground-landlord. We do not look forward with fear and trembling to
      Lady-day or Michaelmas, for the broker cannot distress us. We move where we like, without
      dreading an accusation of shooting the moon. In fine, we are as free and independent
      as the inhabitants of the desert. A health, then, to the united races of Zingarees!"
This toast was drunk in silence, like the former; and the king then called upon the pretty
      dark-eyed daughter of one of the chiefs to favour the company with a song.
The request was complied with in the following manner:—
"COME HITHER, FAIR MAIDEN."

Come hither, fair maiden! and listen to me,
I've a store of good tidings to tell unto thee—
Bright hopes to call smiles to those sweet lips of thine,
And visions of bliss little short of divine.
Come hither, fair maiden! the poor Zingaree
Hath promise of love and of fortune for thee:
Away from the future the dark cloud shall fly,
And years yet unborn be revealed to thine eye.
Come hither, fair maiden! no more shall thou be
Alarmed lest the fates act unkindly to thee;—
The planet that governed the hour of thy birth
Shall guide thee to all the fair spots of the earth!
Come hither, fair maiden! futurity's sea
Shall roll on no longer unfathomed by thee;
With me canst thou plunge in its dark depths, and know
How rich are the pearls that Hope treasures below.

In this manner did the gipsies pass the evening, until the clock struck eleven, when they
      separated to their dormitories.
The Rattlesnake was astonished to observe the order and regularity which prevailed with the
      strange association amongst which accident had thrown her. The festival had passed without
      noise and without intemperance; the presence of the king and queen seemed alone sufficient to
      maintain tranquillity and prevent enjoyment from passing the barriers of propriety.
We need not, however, linger upon this portion of our tale. Suffice it to say that a
      fortnight glided away, during which the king of the gipsies was detained in the metropolis by
      the business which he had to transact with his chiefs. The Rattlesnake did not venture out of
      the house; and Skilligalee was her constant companion.
The Traveller meantime disguised himself in a manner which would have defied the penetrating
      eyes of even a parent, had he met his own mother; and from morning until evening did he prowl
      about London, in search of the one individual against whom he nourished the most
      terrible hatred. But, every evening, when he returned home to the Gipsy Palace, his
      countenance was more gloomy and his brow more lowering; and, if questioned relative to the
      causes of his rage or grief, he replied in a savage tone, "Another day is gone—and he
      still lives: but I will never rest until I trace him out."
And then he would grind his teeth like a hyena.
