
CHAPTER LXXIX. THE BILL.—A FATHER.
NOTHING could be more business-like than the study of Mr. Greenwood. The sofa was heaped up
      with papers tied round with red tape, and endorsed, some "Corn-Laws," others "New Poor Law," a
      third batch "Rottenborough Union," a fourth "Select Committee on Bribery at Elections;" and so
      on.
Piles of letters lay upon one table; piles of newspapers upon another; and a number of
      Reports of various Committees of the House of Commons, easily recognised by their unwieldy
      shapes and blue covers, was heaped up on the cheffonier between the windows.
The writing-table was also arranged, with a view to effect, in the manner described upon a
      former occasion; and in his arm-chair lounged Mr. Greenwood, pleasantly engaged in perusing
      the daily newspaper which contained the oration that he had delivered in the House on the
      preceding evening.
      
It was about three o'clock in the afternoon. Mr. Greenwood had risen late, for the House had
      not separated until half-past two in the morning, and the member for Rottenborough was a man
      of too decidedly business-habits to leave his post in the middle of a debate.
Lafleur entered, and announced Sir Rupert Harborough.
"I have called about that bill again," said the baronet. "When it came due at the end of
      March, we renewed it for four months. It will be due again to-morrow."
"I am aware of it," said Greenwood. "What do you propose to do?"
"I am in no condition to pay it," answered the baronet.
"You must provide a portion, and renew for the remainder," said Greenwood.
"It is impossible, my dear fellow!" exclaimed Sir Rupert. "I am completely at low water-mark
      again, upon my honour!"
"And yet I have heard that you and Chichester have not been altogether unsuccessful in the
      play-world during the last few months," observed Greenwood.
"Not so prosperous as you may fancy," returned the baronet. "Come, what shall we say about
      this bill?"
"I have told you. The bill was originally given for fifteen hundred pounds—"
"For which I only had a thousand."
"I don't recollect now. At all events, it fell due; and fortunately I had not passed it
      away."
"Of course not. You promised to retain it in your portfolio."
"I don't recollect. You could not pay it; and I agreed to renew it—"
"On condition of making it sixteen hundred," said the baronet.
"I don't recollect," observed Greenwood again. "Now you come to me, and tell me that you can
      do nothing towards it. Things cannot go on so."
"But you knew very well, Greenwood, when you took it, that the day of payment might be
      rather distant."
"I don't recollect. You must bring me the six hundred, and I will renew for the
      thousand—without interest. There!"
"And where the devil am I to find six hundred pounds on a sudden like this?" exclaimed Sir
      Rupert.
"I am sure I am not aware of your private resources, my good sir," answered Greenwood,
      coolly. "You must be well aware that I cannot afford to remain without my money in this
      manner; and since it would appear you do not wish Lord Tremordyn to know that you have not
      paid the acceptance which he so kindly lent you—"
"Lent me!" ejaculated Sir Rupert, now really alarmed.
"Of course. He could not possibly have owed you the amount."
"Greenwood, what do you mean by this?" cried the baronet. "Upon my honour, one would almost
      suppose that you had forgotten the real nature of the transaction."
"Possibly I may not recall to mind some of the minor details. One thing is, however,
      certain: I have in my possession a bill bearing your endorsement and accepted by Lord
      Tremordyn, for sixteen hundred pounds; and I offer you the most easy terms I can think of for
      its payment."
"Greenwood, you cannot have forgotten—"
"Forgotten what?"
"Forgotten that the acceptance—"
"Well?"
"Is not Lord Tremordyn's."
"The acceptance not Lord Tremordyn's!" cried Mr. Greenwood, affecting to be quite confounded
      by this statement.
"Certainly not," answered the baronet. "You yourself suggested to me—"
"I suggested!" cried Greenwood, now pretending indignation. "Sir Rupert Harborough, what are
      you aiming at? to what point would you arrive?"
"Oh! if I were not in the power of this man!" thought the baronet, actually grinding his
      teeth with rage; but suppressing his feelings, he said, "My dear Greenwood, pray renew this
      bill for four months more, and it shall be paid at maturity."
"No, Sir Rupert Harborough," replied the capitalist, who had not failed to notice the
      emotions of concentrated rage which filled the mind of the baronet. "I am decided: give me six
      hundred pounds, and I renew for the thousand; otherwise—"
"Otherwise," repeated Sir Rupert mechanically.
"I shall pay the bill into my banker's this afternoon, and it will be presented for payment
      at Lord Tremordyn's agent's to-morrow morning."
"You would not wish to ruin me, Greenwood!"
"Such a course will not ruin you: Lord Tremordyn will of course honour his acceptance."
"Greenwood, you drive me mad!"
"I am really very sorry to hear it; but if every one who could not meet his bills were
      driven mad by being asked for payment of them, every third house in the street would become a
      lunatic-asylum."
"You can spare your raillery, Mr. Greenwood," said the baronet. "Do you wish to have me
      transported?"
"Certainly not. I want a proper settlement in this respect."
"And how can I settle the bill? Where am I to procure six hundred pounds at a moment's
      warning?"
"A moment's warning! you have had four clear months."
"But I fancied—I hoped you would renew the bill from time to time until I could pay it. You
      said as much when you lent me the money upon it."
"I don't recollect."
"You did indeed; and upon the faith of that promise, I—"
"I don't recollect."
"My God! what am I to do?" cried Sir Rupert, despairingly. "I have no means of raising half
      the sum you require."
"Then why did you take my money seven months ago?"
"Why did I take the money? why did I take it? Because you yourself proposed the transaction.
      You said, 'Bring me the acceptance of Lord Tremordyn for fifteen hundred pounds, and I
       will lend you a thousand upon it immediately.'"
"I don't recollect."
"And you said emphatically and distinctly that you should not call upon Lord Tremordyn
       to inquire if it were his acceptance."
"Of course not. Amongst gentlemen such a proceeding would be unpardonable."
"Oh! Greenwood, you affect ignorance in all this! and yet it was you who put the infernal
      idea into my head—"
"Sir Rupert Harborough," said the capitalist, rising from his chair; "enough of this! I put
      no
       infernal ideas into any one's head. Settle the bill in the way I propose; or it
      shall take its course."

"But—my God! you will send me to the Old Bailey!" cried the baronet, whose countenance was
      actually livid with rage and alarm.
"And did you not send Richard Markham thither?" said Greenwood, fixing his piercing dark
      eyes upon Sir Rupert Harborough in so strange a manner that the unhappy man shrank from that
      fearful glance.
"But what matters that to you?" cried the baronet. "In one word, will you ruin me? or will
      you give me time to pay this accursed bill?"
"I have stated my conditions: I will not depart from them," replied Greenwood in a
      determined manner. "You have plenty of time before you. I will keep the bill back until
      to-morrow morning at twelve o'clock."
"Very good, sir," said the baronet, scarcely able to repress his rage.
Sir Rupert Harborough then withdrew, a prey to feelings more easily imagined than
      described.
"Why should I allow this gambler to retain my money without even paying me the interest?"
      said Greenwood to himself, when he was again alone. "I can keep him in my power as well with a
      forged bill for a thousand, as for sixteen hundred pounds. As for his wife, the beautiful
      Cecilia—I am now wearied of that intrigue, which, moreover, becomes too expensive! Lady
      Cecilia's extravagance is unbounded. I must put an end to that connexion without delay!"
Lafleur entered the room at this moment, and said, "A female, sir, desires to see you upon
      particular business."
"Is it anybody whom you know?"
Lafleur replied in the negative.
"Never mind! I will see her," said Greenwood; and, unaware who she might be, he seated
      himself at his writing-table, where he appeared to be profoundly occupied with some deeds that
      were lying before him.
In a few moments Marian entered the room.
"Well, my good woman, what is the object of your call?" demanded Greenwood.
"I am the bearer of a letter, sir, from Miss Monroe," was the reply.
"From Miss Monroe!" ejaculated Greenwood; and he hastened to peruse the letter which the
      servant placed in his hand.
      
Its contents ran thus:—

"You are the father of a boy. The excellent woman who bears this will explain every thing
       to you. I should not recall myself to your memory—if you have forgotten the mother of your
       child—did not a sacred duty towards the female whom I have above alluded to, and towards the
       helpless infant who perhaps will never know a parent's care, compel me thus to address you.
       The kind woman who will give you this, expended forty pounds—all her little savings—to save
       me from disgrace. The surgeon to whose care the child is entrusted, must receive a small
       allowance for its support. If you ever entertained one generous feeling towards me, relieve
       my mind on these two subjects.
"ELLEN MONROE."

For some minutes Mr. Greenwood appeared to be absorbed in thought.
He then questioned Marian relative to the particulars of Ellen's accouchement; and she
      detailed to him every particular with which the reader is already acquainted.
"You managed the matter admirably," said Greenwood. "There are two points to which Miss
      Monroe directs my attention in this note. In the first place, she speaks of your most
      disinterested services. Accept this as a trifling mark of my gratitude:"—and he placed six
      Bank-notes for ten pounds each in Marian's hand.
"I do not desire any remuneration, sir," said the kind-hearted woman. "I will take my forty
      pounds; but the other two notes I must beg to return."
"No—keep them," exclaimed Greenwood.
"I thank you, sir, most sincerely," said the servant firmly; "but I would rather not. I
      rendered Miss Monroe that service which one female should afford another in such a case; and I
      cannot think of accepting any recompense."
With these words she laid two of the notes upon the table.
"You are really a most extraordinary woman," cried Greenwood, who was perfectly astonished
      at the idea of any one in her class of life refusing money. "Will you not permit me to offer
      you a ring—a watch—or some trinket—"
"No, sir," replied Marian, with severe firmness of tone and manner. "Miss Monroe is so
      kind—so good—so gentle, I would go to the end of the world to serve her."
"Well—you must have your own way," said Mr. Greenwood. "The next point in Miss Monroe's
      letter is a provision for her child. What sum do you suppose would content the surgeon and his
      wife who have taken care of it?"
"They are poor people, sir—struggling against difficulties—and having their way to make in
      the world—"
"Suppose we say forty pounds a year for the present," interrupted Greenwood.
"Oh! sir—that will be ample!" exclaimed Marian: "and Miss Monroe will be so rejoiced! Ah!
      sir—what consolation to the poor young lady!"
"What is the address of the surgeon?" demanded Greenwood.
"Mr. Wentworth, Lower Holloway," was the reply.
"My servant shall call upon that gentleman this very evening, and carry him the first
      quarter's payment," continued Greenwood. "You can say to Miss Monroe—but stay: I will write
      her a few lines."
"Oh! do, sir. Who knows but it may console her?" ejaculated the kind-hearted Marian.
Mr. Greenwood wrote as follows:—

"Your wishes are attended to in every point. The existence of the child need never be known
       to either Mr. Monroe or Mr. Richard Markham. Keep faithfully all the secrets which
       are treasured in your bosom; and I will never desert the child. I will watch over its welfare
       from a distance: trust to me. You were wrong to hesitate to apply to me. My purse is at all
       times at your disposal—so long as those secrets remain undivulged.
"G. M. G."

Marian, prompted by that inherently kind feeling which had influenced her entire conduct
      towards Ellen, hesitated for a few moments, after receiving this letter, and seemed anxious to
      speak. She would have pleaded in behalf of the young mother: she would have implored Greenwood
      to make her his own in the sight of heaven, and acknowledge their child. But her tongue clave
      to the roof of her mouth;—and she at length retired, unable to give utterance to a single word
      in favour of poor Ellen.
As soon as she was gone, Greenwood rang for his faithful French valet.
"Lafleur," said he, "you will take these ten pounds, and proceed without delay to the house
      of Mr. Wentworth, a surgeon residing in Lower Holloway. You will say to him, 'The father
       of the child which was entrusted to you last night in so mysterious a manner, will allow you
       forty pounds a year for its support. As it grows older, and the expenses it incurs augment,
       this allowance will be proportionately increased. But should you endeavour to find out who
       are the parents of that child, it will instantly be removed to the care of others who may
       possess less curious dispositions.'—You will pay him those ten pounds: you will tell him
      that every three months you will call with a similar sum; and you will see the child.
      Remember, you will see the child. If it have any peculiar mark about it, notice that mark: at
      all events, study it well, that you may know it again. You will moreover direct that its
      Christian name be Richard: its surname is immaterial. In a word, you will neither say
      nor do a whit more nor less than I have told you."
"I understand, sir," answered Lafleur. "Any further commands?"
"No—not at present. Be cautious how you conduct this business. It is delicate."
"You may depend upon me, sir."
And Lafleur retired.
"Thus far it is well," said Greenwood to himself, when he was again alone. "I am relieved of
      a subject of frequent annoying reflection and suspense. Ellen's shame is unknown to those from
      whom I was most anxious it should be concealed. It can never transpire now!"
The clock struck six; and Mr. Greenwood repaired to his dressing-room to arrange his toilet
      for dinner.
