
CHAPTER VI. MRS. ARLINGTON.
THE Honourable Mr. Arthur Chichester had not exaggerated his description of the beauty of
      the Enchantress—for so she was called by the male portion of her admirers. Indeed, she was of
      exquisite loveliness. Her dark-brown hair was arranged en bandeaux, and parted over a
      forehead polished as marble. Her eyes were large, and of that soft dark melting blue which
      seems to form a heaven of promises and bliss to gladden the beholder.
She was not above the middle height of woman; but her form was modelled to the most
      exquisite and voluptuous symmetry. Her figure reminded the spectator of the body of the wasp,
      so taper was the waist, and so exuberant was the swell of the bust.
Her mouth was small and pouting; but, when she smiled, the parting roses of the lips
      displayed a set of teeth white as the pearls of the East.
Her hand would have made the envy of a queen. And yet, above all these charms, a certain
      something which could not be exactly denominated boldness nor effrontery, but which was the
      very reverse of extreme reserve, immediately struck Richard Markham.
He could not define the fault he had to find with this beautiful woman; and still there was
      something in her manners which seemed to proclaim that she did not possess the tranquillity
      and ease of a wife. She appeared to be constantly aiming at the display of the accomplishments
      of her mind, or the graces of her attitudes. She seemed to court admiration by every word and
      every motion; and to keep alive in the mind of the baronet the passion with which she had
      inspired him. She possessed not that confidence and contented reliance upon the idea of
      unalienable affections which characterise the wife. She seemed to be well aware that no legal
      nor religious ties connected the baronet to her; and she, therefore, kept her imagination
      perpetually upon the rack to weave new artificial bonds to cast around him. And, as if each
      action or each word of the baronet severed those bonds of silk and wreathed flowers, she
      found, Penelope-like, that at short intervals her labours were to be achieved over again.
This constant state of mental anxiety and excitement imparted a corresponding restlessness
      to her body; and those frequent changes of attitude, which were originally intended to develop
      the graces of her person, or allow her lover's eye to catch short glimpses of her heaving
      bosom of snow, became now a settled habit.
Nevertheless, she was a lovely and fascinating woman, and one for whom a young heart would
      undertake a thousand sacrifices.
By accident Richard was seated next to Mrs. Arlington upon the sofa. He soon
      perceived that she was, indeed, as accomplished as the baronet had represented her to be; and
      her critical opinions upon the current literature, dramatic novelties, and new music of the
      day were delivered with judgment and good taste.
Richard could not help glancing from time to time in admiration at her beautiful
      countenance, animated as it now was with the excitement of the topics of discourse; and
      whenever her large blue eyes met his, a deep blush suffused his countenance, and he knew not
      what he said or did.
"Well, what shall we do to amuse ourselves?" said Chichester, at the expiration of about an
      hour, during which coffee had been handed round.
"Upon my honour," exclaimed the baronet, "I am perfectly indifferent. What say you to a game
      of whist or écarté?"
"Just as you choose," said Chichester carelessly.
At this moment the door opened, and a roguish-looking little tiger—a lad of about fourteen,
      in a chocolate-coloured livery, with three rows of bright-crested buttons down his Prussian
      jacket—entered to announce another guest.
A short, stout, vulgar-looking man, about forty years of age, with a blue coat and brass
      buttons, buff waistcoat, and grey trousers, entered the room.
"Holloa, old chap, how are you?" he exclaimed in a tone of most ineffable vulgarity.
      "Harborough, how are you? Chichester, my tulip, how goes it?"
The baronet hastened to receive this extraordinary visitor, and, as he shook hands with him,
      whispered something in his ear. The stranger immediately turned towards Richard, to whom he
      was introduced by the name of Mr. Augustus Talbot.
This gentleman and the baronet then conversed together for a few moments; and Chichester,
      drawing near Markham, seized the opportunity of observing, "Talbot is an excellent fellow—a
      regular John Bull—not over polished, but enormously rich and well connected. You will see that
      he is not more cultivated in mind than in manners; but he would go to the devil to do any one
      a service; and, somehow or another, you can't help liking the fellow when once you know
      him."
"Any friend of yours or of the baronet's will be agreeable to me," said Richard; "and,
      provided he is a man of honour, a little roughness of manner should be readily
      overlooked."
"You speak like a man of the world, and as a man of honour yourself," said Mr.
      Chichester.
Meantime the baronet and Mr. Talbot had seated themselves, and the Honourable Mr. Chichester
      returned to his own chair.
The conversation then became general.
"I didn't know that you were in town, Talbot," said Mr. Chichester.
"And I forgot to mention it," observed the baronet.
"Or rather," said the lady, "you meditated a little surprise for your friend Mr.
      Chichester."
"I hope you've been well, ma'am, since I saw you last—that is the day before yesterday,"
      said Mr. Talbot. "You was complaining then of a slight cold, and I recommended a
      treacle-posset and a stocking tied round the throat."
"My dear Talbot, take some liqueur," cried the baronet, rising hastily, and purposely
      knocking down his chair to drown the remainder of Mr. Talbot's observation.
      
"But I dare say you didn't follow my advice, ma'am," pursued Mr. Talbot, with the most
      imperturbable gravity. "For my part I am suffering dreadful with a bad foot. I'll tell you how
      it were, ma'am. I've got a nasty soft corn on my little toe; and so what must I do, but
      yesterday morning I takes my razor, sharpens it upon the paytent strap, and goes for to cut
      off master corn. But instead of cutting the corn, I nearly sliced my toe off; and——"
"By the way, Diana, has the young gentleman called yet, whom we met the other evening at the
      Opera?" said the baronet, abruptly interrupting this vulgar tirade.
"Do you mean the effeminate youth whom we dubbed the Handsome Unknown?" said the
      Enchantress.
"Yes: he who was so very mysterious, but who seemed so excessively anxious to form our
      acquaintance."
"He promised to call some evening this week," answered Diana, "and play a game of
       écarté. He told me that he was invincible at écarté."
"Talking of écarté, let us play a game," ejaculated Mr. Chichester, who was sitting
      upon thorns lest Mr. Talbot should commence his vulgarities again.
"Well, I'll take a hand with pleasure," said this individual: then turning towards Diana, he
      added, "I will tell you the rest of the adventure about the soft corn another time,
      ma'am."
"What a nuisance this is!" whispered Chichester to the baronet. "The young fellow does stare
      so."
"You must give him some explanation or another," hastily replied the baronet; "or I'll tell
      Diana to say something presently that will smooth down matters."
The cards were produced, and Mr. Talbot and the Honourable Mr. Chichester sat down to
      play.
Sir Rupert backed the former, and considerable sums in gold and notes were placed upon the
      table. Presently the lady turned towards Richard, and said with a smile, "Are you fond of
       écarté?" "I must venture a guinea upon Mr. Chichester. Sir Rupert is betting against
      him; and I love to oppose Sir Rupert at cards. You will see how I shall tease him
      presently."
With these words the Enchantress rose and seated herself near Mr. Chichester. Of course
      Markham did the same; and in a very short time he was induced by the lady to follow her
      example, and back the same side which she supported.
Mr. Chichester, however, had a continued run of ill luck, and lost every rubber. Richard was
      thus the loser of about thirty sovereigns; but he was somewhat consoled by having so fair a
      companion in his bad fortune. He would have suffered himself to be persuaded by her to persist
      in backing Mr. Chichester, as she positively assured him that the luck must change, had not
      that gentleman himself suddenly risen, thrown down the cards, and declared that he would play
      no more.
"Would you, ma'am, like to take Mr. Chichester's place?" said Mr. Talbot.
Mr. Chichester shook his head to the baronet, and the baronet did the same to Diana, and
      Diana accordingly declined. The card-table was therefore abandoned; and Mrs. Arlington, at the
      request of Sir Rupert, seated herself at the piano. Without any affectation she sang and
      accompanied herself upon the instrument in a manner that quite ravished the heart of Richard
      Markham.
Suddenly the entire house echoed with the din of the front-door knocker, and almost
      simultaneously the bell was rung with violence.
In a few moments the young tiger announced Mr. Walter Sydney.
He was a youth apparently not more than nineteen or twenty, of middle height, and very slim.
      He wore a tight blue military frock coat buttoned up to the throat; ample black kerseymere
      trousers, which did not, however, conceal the fact that he was the least thing knock-kneed,
      and a hat with tolerably broad brims. His feet and hands were small to a fault. His long light
      chestnut hair flowed in luxuriant undulations over the collar of his coat, even upon his
      shoulders, and gave him a peculiarly feminine appearance. His delicate complexion, upon the
      pure red and white of which the dark dyes of no beard had yet infringed, wore a deep blush as
      he entered the room.
"Mr. Sydney, you are welcome," said Mrs. Arlington, in a manner calculated to reassure the
      bashful youth. "It was but an hour ago that we were talking of you, and wondering why we had
      not received the pleasure of a visit."
"Madam, you are too kind," replied Mr. Sydney, in a tone which sounded upon the ear like a
      silver bell—so soft and beautiful was its cadence. "I am afraid that I am intruding: I had
      hoped to find you alone—I mean yourself and Sir Rupert Harborough—and I perceive that you have
      company——"
He stammered—became confounded with excuses—and then glanced at his attire, as much as to
      intimate that he was in a walking dress.
Both the baronet and Diana hastened to welcome him in such a manner as to speedily place him
      upon comfortable terms with himself once more; and he was then introduced to Mr. Chichester,
      Mr. Talbot, and Mr. Markham.
The moment the name of Markham was mentioned, the youthful visitor started perceptibly, and
      then fixed his intelligent hazel eyes upon the countenance of Richard with an expression of
      the most profound interest mingled with surprise.
Mr. Chichester made an observation at the same moment, and Sydney immediately afterwards
      entered with ease and apparent pleasure into a conversation which turned upon the most popular
      topics of the day. Richard was astonished at the extreme modesty, propriety, and good sense
      with which that effeminate and bashful youth expressed himself; and even the baronet, who was
      in reality well informed, listened to his interesting visitor with attention and admiration.
      Still there was a species of extreme delicacy in his tastes, as evidenced by his remarks,
      which bordered at times upon a fastidiousness, if not an inexperience actually puerile or
      feminine.
At half-past eleven supper was served up, and the party sat down to that most welcome and
      sociable of all meals.
It was truly diverting to behold the manner in which Mr. Talbot fell, tooth and nail, upon
      the delicacies which he heaped upon his plate; and his applications to the wine-bottle were to
      correspond. At one time he expressed his regret that it was too vulgar to drink half-and-half;
      and on another he vented his national prejudices against those who maintained that Perigord
      pies were
       preferable to rump steaks, or that claret was more exquisite than port or
      sherry. Once, when, it would appear, Mr. Chichester kicked him under the table, he roared out
      a request that his soft corn might be remembered; and as his friends were by no means anxious
      for a second edition of that interesting narrative—especially before Mr. Walter Sydney—they
      adopted the prudent alternative of conveying their remonstrances to him by means of winks
      instead of kicks.
After supper Mr. Talbot insisted upon making a huge bowl of punch in his own fashion; but he
      found that Mr. Chichester would alone aid him in disposing of it. As for Mr. Walter Sydney, he
      never appeared to do more than touch the brim of the wine-glass with his lips.
In a short time Mr. Talbot insisted upon practising his vocal powers by singing a hunting
      song, and was deeply indignant with his friends because they would not join in the very
      impressive but somewhat common chorus of "Fal de lal lal, fal de lal la." It is
      impossible to say what Mr. Talbot would have done next; but, much to the horror of the
      baronet, Mr. Chichester, and Diana—and equally to the surprise of Richard Markham and Walter
      Sydney—he suddenly lost his balance, and fell heavily upon the floor and into a sound sleep
      simultaneously.
"What a pity," said Mr. Chichester, shaking his head mournfully, and glancing down upon the
      prostrate gentleman, as if he were pronouncing a funeral oration over his remains; "this is
      his only fault—and, as it happens every night, it begins materially to disfigure his
      character. Otherwise, he is an excellent fellow, and immensely rich!"
At this moment the eyes of Richard caught those of Walter Sydney. An ill-concealed
      expression of superlative contempt and ineffable disgust was visible upon the handsome
      countenance of the latter; and the proud curl of his lip manifested his opinion of the scene
      he had just witnessed. In a few moments he rose to depart. To Diana he was only coldly polite;
      to the baronet and Chichester superbly distant and constrained; but towards Markham, as he
      took leave of him, there was a cordiality in his manner, and a sincerity in the desire which
      he expressed "that they should meet again," which formed a remarkable contrast with his
      behaviour towards the others.
That night slumber seemed to evade the eyes of Richard Markham. The image of Mrs. Arlington,
      and all that she had said, and the various graceful and voluptuous attitudes into which she
      had thrown herself, occupied his imagination. At times, however, his thoughts wandered to that
      charming youth—that mere boy—who seemed to court his friendship, and who was so delicate and
      so fragile to encounter the storms and vicissitudes of that world in whose dizzy vortex he was
      already found. Nor less did Richard ever and anon experience a sentiment of profound surprise
      that the elegant and wealthy Sir Rupert Harborough, the accomplished and lovely Diana, and the
      fastidious Mr. Arthur Chichester, should tolerate the society of such an unmitigated vulgarian
      as Mr. Talbot.
