
CHAPTER LXIX. THE "WHIPPERS-IN."
HAVING reassured Lady Cecilia Harborough relative to the alarm inspired by the intrusion of
      Chichester at so critical a moment, Mr. Greenwood returned to his own residence in Spring
      Gardens.
"Any one called, Lafleur?" he said to his favourite valet, as he ascended to his study.
"Two gentlemen; sir. Their cards are upon your desk. They both declared that they would call
      again to day."
Mr. Greenwood hastened to inspect the cards of his two visitors. One contained the following
      name and address:—
The Hon. V. W. Y. Sawder, M.P.
Reform-Club.
The other presented the annexed superscription to view:—
Sir T. M. B. Muzzlehem, Bart., M.P.
Carlton-Club.
"Ah! ha!" exclaimed Mr. Greenwood, chuckling audibly: "I understand what this means! Already
      at work, eh? No time to be lost, I see." Then turning towards Lafleur, he added, "You see, my
      good fellow, that when a man like me—a man of—of—consideration, in a word—becomes entrusted
      with the interests of a free, enlightened, and independent constituency, like that of
      Rottenborough, the Ministerial party and the Opposition each endeavour to secure me to their
      cause—you understand, Lafleur—eh?"
"Perfectly, sir," answered the imperturbable valet, with his usual bow.
"Well, then, Lafleur," continued Mr. Greenwood, "you must know farther that each party has
      its whipper-in. The whippers-in keep lists of those who belong respectively to their own
      parties, and collect them together when their support is absolutely necessary on a division of
      the House. In fact, the whippers-in are the huntsmen of the pack: and the members all collect
      at the sound of their bugles. Do you comprehend, Lafleur?"
"Yes, sir—thank you, sir."
"I must therefore see both these gentlemen—but separately, mind. If they should happen to
      call at the same time, show one into the drawing-room while I receive the other here."
"Yes, sir."
      
"And now, Lafleur," proceeded Mr. Greenwood, "while we are upon the subject, I may as well
      give you a few instructions relative to that deportment which my altered position renders
      necessary."
Lafleur bowed.
"Placed in a situation of high responsibility and trust, by the confidence of an intelligent
      and enlightened constituency," resumed Mr. Greenwood, "I am bound to maintain a position which
      may inspire respect and confidence. In the first place, as it cannot be supposed that I shall
      receive many epistolary communications until my opinions upon particular measures and
      questions become known through my parliamentary conduct,—and as, at the same time, it would be
      disgraceful for the neighbourhood to imagine that my correspondence is limited, you must take
      care that the two-penny postman never passes my door without leaving a letter."
"Yes, sir. I will have a letter, addressed to you, posted every two hours, sir, so that you
      cannot fail to receive one by each delivery."
"Good, Lafleur; and you can tell the postman," added Mr. Greenwood, "to knock louder than he
      has been in the habit of doing——"
"Yes, sir; because it is difficult to hear from the servants' offices."
"Precisely, Lafleur. And you can tell our newsman to bring me all the second
       editions of the newspapers whenever there are any; and mind you always keep the news-boy
      waiting a long time at the door. Tell him, moreover, to bawl out 'second edition' of
      whatever paper it may be, as loud as he can."
"I will take care he shall do so, sir," answered Lafleur.
"And once a week, or so," proceeded Greenwood, after a pause, "let an express-courier gallop
      at full speed up to the house, and ring and knock furiously until the door is opened. But,
      mind that he comes from at least three or four miles distant, so that his horse may be covered
      with foam, and himself with mud or dust, according to the state of the weather."
"I understand, sir."
"Moreover, Lafleur, at least three or four times a week, go to Leadenhall Market and
      purchase the game and poultry which we may require for the house, and send it home by the
      London Parcels Delivery Company, so that the neighbours may say, 'More presents for Mr.
       Greenwood. Dear me! how popular he must be with his constituents!'"
"I fully comprehend, sir."
"You can send fish home, too,—and haunches of venison in the same manner," continued the new
      Member of Parliament; "but mind that the feathers of the pheasants, the tails of the fish, and
      the feet of the haunches always hang out of the baskets in which they are packed."
"Oh! certainly, sir."
"If you could possibly get a charity-school to wait upon me some morning, to solicit me to
      become a patron, or any thing of that sort, it would do good, and I should make a handsome
      donation to the funds."
"That can be managed, sir. I can safely promise that seventy boys and ninety girls shall
      wait upon you in procession any day you choose to appoint."
"Well and good, Lafleur. And mind that they are kept standing for three quarters of an hour
      in the street before they are admitted."
"As a matter of course, sir."
"And now I will just mention a few things," continued Mr. Greenwood, "that you most manage
      with very great nicety. Indeed, I know I can rely upon you in every thing."
Lafleur bowed.
"You must turn away all Italian organ-players. The moment one shows himself under our
      windows, let one of the footmen rush out and order him off. It is not proper to encourage such
      vagabonds: the aristocracy don't like them."
"Certainly not, sir."
"Organ-playing is a thing I am determined to put an end to. There is also the hoop nuisance.
      Give any boy into charge, whatever may be his age, who is caught trundling a hoop in Spring
      Gardens. That is another thing I am resolved to put an end to. Ballad-singers and broom-girls
      you will of course have taken into custody without hesitation. In fact you had better give the
      policeman upon the beat general instructions upon this head; and you can slip a guinea into
      his hand at the same time."
"Very good, sir."
"At the same time we must be charitable, Lafleur—we must be charitable."
"Decidedly, sir."
"You must find out some decent woman with half a dozen children, to whom the broken victuals
      can be given every day at about three o'clock, when there are plenty of people in the
      street;—a woman who does not exactly want the food, but who will not refuse it. The
      respectability of her appearance will be set down to my benevolence, Lafleur; and she must be
      careful always to come with her children. By these means we shall gain the reputation of being
      judiciously particular in respect to vagabonds and impostors, but charitable in the extreme to
      the deserving poor."
"Just so, sir."
"One word more, Lafleur. When any person calls whom you know I do not want to see, say,
       'Mr. Greenwood is engaged with a deputation from his constituents;' or else,
       'Mr. Greenwood has just received very important dispatches, and cannot be
      disturbed;'—or, again, 'Mr. Greenwood has just stepped down as far as the Home
       Office.' You fully comprehend."
"Perfectly, sir."
"Then you may retire, Lafleur. But—by the bye—Lafleur!"
"Yes, sir?"
"I shall add twenty guineas a year to your wages from this date, Lafleur," said Mr.
      Greenwood.
"Thank you, sir," answered the valet; and, with a low bow, he retired.
"Another step gained in the ladder of ambition!" said Greenwood to himself, when he was
      alone. "A Member of Parliament—and in spite of Lord Tremordyn! ha! ha! ha! In spite of Lord
      Tremordyn! Oh most intelligent and independent electors of Rottenborough: I bought your
      suffrages with gold, with fine words, with clowns and mountebanks, and with pots of beer! Free
      and enlightened electors! ha! ha! I shall turn against the very interest in which I was
      elected; but if my constituents grumble, I will silence them with more gold;—if they reproach,
      I will use all the sophistry of which language is capable—and that is not a little;—if they
      repine, I will win them back to good humour with fresh sights, and buffoons, and galas;—if
      they grow dry with talking against me, I will have whole pipes of wine and butts of beer
      broached in their streets! Yes—I must join the Tory interest: I see that it is now upon the
      rise. And yet I know—I feel in my heart—I have the conviction that the popular cause is the
      true one, the just one.
       But what of that? I stood forward as a candidate to suit myself, and not for the
      sake of the free and independent electors of Rottenborough! Yes, all goes well with me! An
      occasional annoyance—such as my failure in obtaining possession of the person of Eliza Sydney,
      and of the hand of Isabella, the lovely Italian—cannot be avoided;—but in all great points—in
      all my important views, I am successful! And yet, Isabella—Isabella! Upon her the eye that is
      wearied with the contemplation of the rude and discordant scenes of life, could rest—could
      rest with unfeigned, with ineffable delight! O Isabella, there are times when thine image
      comes before me, like the vision of a holy and chaste Madonna to the sleep-bound mind of the
      pious Catholic;—and there have been solitary hours in which the whole earth has seemed to me
      to be covered with flowers beneath the sweet sunlight of thine eyes! And yet—who knows? The
      day may come when even thou shalt be mine! I longed to languish in the arms of Diana
      Arlington;—and I had my wish. I coveted the patrician loveliness of Cecilia Harborough;—and,
      behold! my wealth purchased it. I sought for change; and accident—a strange
      accident—surrendered to my embraces another—yes, another—whom I have never
      seen since that day—now more than two months ago,—but who, I have since learnt through the
      medium of my faithful Lafleur, dwells in the same house with—"
Mr. Greenwood's reverie was interrupted by the entrance of his valet, who introduced the
      Honourable Mr. Sawder into the study. The new Member of Parliament received the Whig
      whipper-in with his usual courtesy of manner; and, when they were both seated, Mr. Sawder
      felicitated Mr. Greenwood upon the successful result of the Rottenborough election.
"The liberal cause triumphed most signally," said Mr. Sawder: "the result was hailed with
      enthusiasm at the Reform Club, I can assure you."
"I have no doubt," answered Mr. Greenwood, already adopting the method of evasion so much in
      vogue amongst diplomatic and political circles,—"I have no doubt that every true lover of his
      country must be rejoiced at the victory achieved by straightforward conduct over the system of
      bribery, intimidation, and corruption practised by the nominee of Lord Tremordyn and his
      agents."
"Oh! certainly—certainly," returned Mr. Sawder. "The object of my present visit is to
      ascertain whether you will permit me to introduce you to the House this evening?"
"It is my intention to take the oaths and my seat this evening," answered Mr. Greenwood.
"And my services as chaperon—"
"You really confer a great honour upon me."
"Then I may consider that you accept—"
"My dear sir, how can I sufficiently thank you for this kind interest which you take in my
      behalf?"
"Pray do not mention it, Mr. Greenwood."
"No, Mr. Sawder, I will not allude to it; since it is the more to be appreciated, inasmuch
      as I never had the pleasure of being known to you previous to this occasion."
"I am therefore to understand," said the whipper-in, who could not precisely fathom the new
      member through the depths of these ambiguous phrases, "that you will allow me the honour of
      introducing you—"
"The honour, my dear sir, would be with me," observed Mr. Greenwood, with a gracious
      bow.
"At what hour, then, will you be prepared—"
"My time shall henceforth always be devoted to the interests of my constituents."
"A very noble sentiment, my dear Mr. Greenwood," said the whipper-in. "Shall we then fix the
      ceremony for five o'clock?"
"Five o'clock is an excellent hour, Mr. Sawder—an excellent hour. I know no hour that I like
      more than five o'clock," exclaimed Mr. Greenwood.
"Be it five, then," said the whipper-in. "And now, relative to the Reform club—when will it
      please you to be proposed a member?"
"It will please me, my dear sir, at any time, to join that fraternity of honourable
      gentlemen with whom I shall in future co-operate."
"Well and good, my dear sir," said Mr. Sawder; and he slowly and reluctantly took his leave,
      not knowing what to make of the new member for Rottenborough, nor whether to calculate upon
      his adhesion to the Whig cause, or not.
Scarcely had the Honourable Mr. V. W. Y. Sawder, M. P., driven away in his beautiful
      cabriolet from Mr. Greenwood's door, when Sir T. M. B. Muzzlehem, Bart., M. P. arrived in his
      brougham at the same point. But if Mr. Greenwood were evasive and ambiguous to the Whig
      whipper-in, he was clear and lucid to the Tory one.
Sir T. Muzzlehem began by felicitating him upon his election, and in a verbose harangue,
      expressed his hopes that Mr. Greenwood would support that cause "the object of which was to
      maintain the glorious old constitution inviolate, and uphold the Established Church in its
      unity and integrity."
"Those are precisely my intentions," said Mr. Greenwood.
"I am delighted to hear you say so, my dear sir," resumed the Tory whipper-in; "but I have
      one deep cause of uneasiness, which is that you may not entertain precisely the same views of
      what is necessary to maintain these honourable and ancient institutions, as the men who would
      gladly lay down their lives to benefit their country."
"I believe, Sir Thomas Muzzlehem," answered Mr. Greenwood, "that I shall act according to
      the wishes of my constituents, the dictates of my own conscience, and the views of the
      illustrious men of whom you speak."
"In which case, my dear Mr. Greenwood, I am of course to understand that you will be one of
       us—one of the true defenders of the Throne, the Constitution, and the Church—"
"In other words, a Conservative," added Mr. Greenwood.
"Bravo!" ejaculated the whipper-in, unable to conceal his joy at this unexpected result of a
      visit whose object he had at first deemed certain of defeat: then, shaking Mr. Greenwood
      heartily by the hand, he said, "At what hour shall I have the pleasure of introducing you this
      evening?"
"At a quarter to five precisely," replied Mr. Greenwood.
"And of course you will become a member of the Carlton?" added the whipper-in.
"Of course—whenever you choose—as early as possible," said Mr. Greenwood.
Sir Thomas Muzzlehem again wrung the hand of the new member, and then took his leave.
The moment he had departed, Lafleur repaired to the study, and said, "A lady, sir, is
      waiting to see you in the drawing-room."
"A lady!" ejaculated Mr. Greenwood: "who is she?"
"I do not know, sir. She refused to give me her name; and I have never seen her before."
"How did she come?"
"On foot, sir. She is neatly, but plainly dressed;
       and yet her manners seem to indicate that she is a lady."
"Strange! who can she be?" murmured Greenwood, as he hastened to the drawing-room.
