
CHAPTER IX. A CITY MAN.—SMITHFIELD SCENES.
GEORGE Montague was a tall, good-looking young man of about three or four-and-twenty. His
      hair and eyes were black, his complexion rather dark, and his features perfectly regular.
His manners were certainly polished and agreeable; but there was, nevertheless, a something
      reserved and mysterious about him—an anxiety to avert the conversation from any topic
      connected with himself—a studied desire to flatter and gain the good opinions of those about
      him, by means of compliments at times servile—and an occasional betrayal of a belief in a code
      of morals not altogether consistent with the well-being of society, which constituted features
      in his character
       by no means calculated to render him a favourite with all classes of persons. He
      was, however, well-informed upon most topics; ambitious of creating a sensation in the world,
      no matter by what means; resolute in his pursuit after wealth, and careless whether the paths
      leading to the objects which he sought were tortuous or straightforward. He was addicted to
      pleasure, but never permitted it to interfere with his business or mar his schemes.
       Love with him was merely the blandishment of beauty; and friendship was
      simply that bond which connected him with those individuals who were necessary to him. He was
      utterly and completely selfish; but he was somehow or another possessed of sufficient tact to
      conceal most of his faults—of the existence of which he was well aware. The consequence was
      that he was usually welcomed as an agreeable companion; some even went so far as to assert
      that he was a "devilish good fellow;" and all admitted that he was a thorough man of the
      world. He must have commenced his initiation early, thus to have acquired such a character ere
      he had completed his four-and-twentieth year!
London abounds with such precocious specimens of thorough heartlessness and
      worldly-mindedness. The universities and great public schools let loose upon society every
      half-year a cloud of young men, who think only how soon they can spend their own property in
      order to prey upon that of others. These are your "young men about town:" as they
      grow older they become "men upon the town." In their former capacity they graduate in
      all the degrees of vice, dissipation, extravagance, and debauchery; and in the latter they
      become the tutors of the novices who are entering in their turn upon the road to ruin. The
      transition from the young man about town to the man upon the town is as natural as that of a
      chrysalis to a butterfly. These men upon the town constitute as pestilential a
      section of male society as the women of the town do of the female portion of the
      community. They are alike the reptiles produced by the great moral dung-heap.
We cannot, however, exactly class Mr. George Montague with the men upon the town in the true
      meaning of the phrase, inasmuch as he devoted his attention to commercial speculations of all
      kinds and under all shapes, and his sphere was chiefly the City; whereas men upon the town
      seldom entertain an idea half "so vulgar" as mercantile pursuits, and never visit the domains
      of the Lord Mayor save when they want to get a bill discounted, or to obtain cash for a check
      of too large an amount to be entrusted to any of their high-born and aristocratic
      companions.
Mr. George Montague was, therefore, one of that multitudinous class called "City men," who
      possess no regular offices, but have their letters addressed to the Auction Mart or
      Garraway's, and who make their appointments at such places as "the front of the Bank," "the
      Custom-house Wharf," and "under the clock at the Docks."
City men are very extraordinary characters. They all know "a certain speculation that would
      make a sure fortune, if one had but the capital to work upon;" they never fail to observe,
      while making this assertion, that they could apply to a friend if they chose, but
      that they do not choose to lay themselves under the obligation; and they invariably affirm
      that nothing is more easy than to make a fortune in the City, although the greater portion of
      them remain without that happy consummation until the day of their deaths. Now and then,
      however, one of these City men does succeed in "making a hit" by some means or other;
      and then his old friends, the very men who are constantly enunciating the opinion relative to
      the facility with which fortunes are obtained in the City, look knowing, wink at each other,
      and declare "that it never could have been done unless he'd had somebody with plenty of money
      to back him."
Now Mr. Montague was one of those who adopted a better system of logic than the vulgar
      reasoning. He knew that there was but little merit in producing bread from flour, for
      instance; but he perceived that there was immense credit due to those who could produce their
      bread without any flour at all. Upon this principle he acted, and his plan was not unattended
      with success. He scorned the idea "that money was necessary to beget money;" he began his
      "City career," as he sometimes observed, without a farthing; and he was seldom without gold in
      his pocket.
No one knew where he lived. He was sometimes seen getting into a Hackney omnibus at the
      Flower Pot, a Camberwell one at the Cross Keys; or running furiously after a Hammersmith one
      along Cheapside; but as these directions were very opposite, it was difficult to deduce from
      them any idea of his domiciliary whereabouts.
He was young to be a City man; the class does not often include members under thirty; but of
      course there are exceptions to all rules; and Mr. George Montague was one.
He was then a City man: but if the reader be anxious to know what sort of business
      he transacted to obtain his living; whether he dabbled in the funds, sold wines upon
      commission, effected loans and discounts, speculated in shares, got up joint-stock companies,
      shipped goods to the colonies, purchased land in Australia at eighteen-pence an acre and sold
      it again at one-and-nine, conducted compromises for insolvent tradesmen, made out the accounts
      of bankrupts, arbitrated between partners who disagreed, or bought in things in a friendly way
      at public sales; whether he followed any of these pursuits, or meddled a little with them all,
      we can no more satisfy our readers than if we attempted the biography of the Man in the
      Moon.—all we can say is, that he was invariably in the City from eleven to four; that he
      usually had "an excellent thing in hand just at that moment;" and, in a word, that he belonged
      to the class denominated City Men!
We have taken some pains to describe this gentleman; for reasons which will appear
      hereafter.
Having been duly introduced to Walter Sydney by Mr. Stephens, and after a few observations
      of a general nature, Mr. Montague glided almost imperceptibly into topics upon which he
      conversed with ease and fluency.
Presently a pause ensued; and Mr. Stephens enquired "if there were anything new in the
      City?"
"Nothing particular," answered Montague. "I have not of course been in town this morning;
      but I was not away till late last night. I had a splendid thing in hand, which I succeeded in
      bringing to a favourable termination. By-the-by, there was a rumour on 'Change yesterday
       afternoon, just before the close, that Alderman Dumkins is all wrong."
"Indeed," said Stephens; "I thought he was wealthy."
"Oh! no; I knew the contrary eighteen months ago! It appears he has been starting a
      joint-stock company to work the Ercalat tin-mines in Cornwall——"
"And I suppose the mines do not really exist?"
"Oh! yes; they do—upon his maps! However, he has been exhibiting certain specimens of tin,
      which he has passed off as Ercalat produce; and it is now pretty generally known that the
      article was supplied him by a house in Aldgate."
"Then he will be compelled to resign his gown?"
"Not he! On the contrary, he stands next in rotation for the honours of the civic chair; and
      he intends to go boldly forward as if nothing had happened. You must remember that the
      aldermen of the City of London have degenerated considerably in respectability during late
      years; and that none of the really influential and wealthy men in the City will have anything
      to do with the corporation affairs. You do not see any great banker nor merchant wearing the
      aldermanic gown. The only alderman who really possessed what may be called a large fortune,
      and whose pecuniary position was above all doubt, resigned his gown the other day in disgust
      at the treatment which he received from his brother authorities, in consequence of his
      connexion with the Weekly Courier—the only newspaper that boldly, fearlessly, and
      effectually advocates the people's cause."
"And Dumkins will not resign, you think?"
"Oh! decidedly not. But for my part," added Montague, "I feel convinced that the sooner some
      change is made in the City administration the better. Only conceive the immense sums which the
      corporation receives from various sources, and the uses to which they are applied. Look at the
      beastly guzzling at Guildhall, while there are in the very heart of the City Augean stables of
      filth, crime, and debauchery to be cleansed—witness Petticoat-lane, Smithfield——"
A species of groan or stifled exclamation of horror issued from the lips of Walter as
      Montague uttered these words: her countenance grew deadly pale, and her entire frame appeared
      to writhe under a most painful reminiscence or emotion.
"Compose yourself, compose yourself," said Stephens, hastily. "Shall I ring for a glass of
      water, or wine, or anything——"
"No, it is past," interrupted Walter Sydney; "but I never think of that horrible—that
      appalling adventure without feeling my blood curdle in my veins. The mere mention of the word
      Smithfield——"
"Could I have been indiscreet enough to give utterance to anything calculated to annoy?"
      said Montague, who was surprised at this scene.
"You were not aware of the reminiscence you awoke in my mind by your remark," answered
      Walter, smiling; "but were you acquainted with the particulars of that fearful night, you
      would readily excuse my weakness."
"You have excited Mr. Montague's curiosity," observed Stephens, "and you have now nothing to
      do but to gratify it."
"It is an adventure of a most romantic kind—an adventure which you will scarcely believe—and
      yet one that will make your hair stand on end."
"I am now most anxious to learn the details of this mysterious occurrence," said Montague,
      scarcely knowing whether these remarks were made in jest or earnest.
Walter Sydney appeared to reflect for a few moments; and then commenced the narrative in the
      following manner:—
"It is now a little more than four years ago—very shortly after I first arrived at this
      house—that I rode into town, attended by the same groom who is in my service now. I knew
      little or nothing of the City, and felt my curiosity awakened to view the emporium of the
      world's commerce. I accordingly determined to indulge in a ramble by myself amidst the streets
      and thoroughfares of a place of which such marvellous accounts reach those who pass their
      youth in the country. I left the groom with the horses at a livery-stable in
      Bishopsgate-street, with a promise to return in the course of two or three hours. I then roved
      about to my heart's content, and never gave the lapse of time a thought. Evening came, and the
      weather grew threatening. Then commenced my perplexities. I had forgotten the address of the
      stables where the groom awaited my return; and I discovered the pleasing fact that I had lost
      my way just at the moment when an awful storm seemed ready to break over the metropolis. When
      I solicited information concerning the right path which I should pursue, I was insulted by the
      low churls to whom I applied. To be brief, I was overtaken by darkness and by the storm, in a
      place which I have since ascertained to be Smithfield market. I could not have conceived that
      so filthy and horrible a nuisance could have been allowed to exist in the midst of a city of
      so much wealth. But, oh! the revolting streets which branch off from that Smithfield. It
      seemed to me that I was wandering amongst all the haunts of crime and appalling penury of
      which I had read in romances, but which I never could have believed to exist in the very heart
      of the metropolis of the world. Civilisation appeared to me to have chosen particular places
      which it condescended to visit, and to have passed others by without even leaving a foot-print
      to denote its presence."
"But this horrible adventure?" said Montague.
"Oh! forgive my digression. Surrounded by darkness, exposed to the rage of the storm, and
      actually sinking with fatigue, I took refuge in an old house, which I am sure I could never
      find again; but which was situated nearly at the end, and on the right-hand side of the way,
      of one of those vile narrow streets branching off from Smithfield. That house was the den of
      wild beasts in human shape! I was compelled to hear a conversation of a most appalling nature
      between two ruffians, who made that place the depôt for their plunder. They planned, amongst
      other atrocious topics, the robbery of a country-seat, somewhere to the north of Islington,
      and inhabited by a family of the name of Markham."
"Indeed! What—how strange!" ejaculated Montague: then immediately afterwards, he added, "How
      singular that you should have overheard so vile a scheme!"
"Oh! those villains," continued Walter, "were capable of crimes of a far deeper dye! They
      discussed horror upon horror, till I thought
       that I was going raving mad. I made a desperate attempt to escape, and was
      perceived. What then immediately followed I know not, for I became insensible: in a word, Mr.
      Montague, I fainted!"
A deep blush suffused her countenance, as she made this avowal—for it seemed to have a
      direct relation to her sex; and she was well aware that the secret connected therewith had
      been revealed by her benefactor to George Montague. On his part, he gazed upon her with
      mingled interest and admiration.
"I awoke to encounter a scene of horror," she continued, after a short pause, "which you
      must fancy; but the full extent of which I cannot depict. I can only feel it even
      now. Those wretches were conveying me to a room upon the ground-floor—a room to which the
      cells of the Bastille or the Inquisition could have produced no equal. It had a trap-door
      communicating with the Fleet Ditch! I begged for mercy—I promised wealth—for I knew that my
      kind benefactor," she added, glancing towards Mr. Stephens, "would have enabled me to fulfil
      my pledge to them; but all was in vain. The murderers hurled me down the dark and pestiferous
      hole!"
"Merciful heavens!" ejaculated Montague.
"It would appear that the house in question," proceeded Walter, "stood upon the side of, and
      not over the Ditch. There can be, however, no doubt that the trap-door was contrived for the
      horrible purpose of disposing of those victims who fell into the merciless hands of the
      occupants of the dwelling; for when I had fallen some distance, instead of being immersed in
      black and filthy mud, I was caught upon a sloping plank which shelved towards a large aperture
      in the wall of the Ditch. I instinctively clung to this plank, and lay stretched upon it for
      some moments until I had partially recovered my presence of mind. The circumstance of having
      thus escaped a dreadful death gave me an amount of courage at which I myself was astonished.
      At length I began to reason whether it would be better to remain there until morning, and then
      endeavour to reach the trap-door above my head, or to devise some means of immediate escape. I
      decided upon the latter proceeding; for I reflected that the morning would not afford light to
      that subterranean hole to enable me to act with certainty; and I, moreover, dreaded the
      extreme vengeance of those ruffians who had already given me a sample of their brutality,
      should I happen to encounter them on emerging from the trap-door. Lastly, I considered that it
      was also probable that I might not succeed in raising the trap-door at all."
"What a fearful situation!" observed Montague.
"Horrible even to think of," added Stephens, who listened with the deepest attention to this
      narrative, although he had heard it related on former occasions.
"With my hands and legs I groped about," continued Walter, "and I speedily ascertained my
      exact position with regard to the locality. My feet were close to a large square aperture in
      the perpendicular wall overhanging the Ditch; and the floor of the cellar was only a couple of
      feet below the aperture. I accordingly got cautiously off the board, and stood upon the damp
      ground. After the lapse of several minutes, during which I nerved myself to adopt the idea
      that had struck me, I passed my head through the aperture, and looked out over the Ditch. The
      stream appeared rapid, to judge by its gurgling sound; and the stench that exhaled from it was
      pestiferous in the extreme. Turning my head to the left I saw hundreds of lights twinkling in
      the small narrow windows of two lines of houses that overhung the Ditch. The storm had now
      completely passed away—the rain had ceased—and the night was clear and beautiful. In a few
      minutes I was perfectly acquainted with the entire geography of the place. The means of escape
      were within my reach. About three feet above the aperture through which I was now looking, a
      plank crossed the Ditch; and on the opposite side—for the Ditch in that part was not above two
      yards wide from wall to wall—was a narrow ledge running along the side of the house facing the
      one in which I was, and evidently communicating with some lane or street close by. I can
      scarcely tell you how I contrived to creep through the aperture and reach the plank overhead.
      Nevertheless, I attempted the dangerous feat, and I accomplished it. I crossed the plank, and
      reached the ledge of which I have spoken: it terminated in the very street where stood the
      terrible den from which I had just so miraculously escaped. Indeed, I emerged upon that street
      only at a distance of a few yards from the door of that detestable place. To hurry away in a
      contrary direction was my first and most natural impulse; but I had not proceeded far when the
      door of a house was suddenly thrown violently open, and out poured a crowd of men and women,
      among whom I was, as it were, immediately hemmed in."
"What! another adventure?" exclaimed Montague.
"One calculated to inspire feelings of deep disgust, if not of alarm," answered Walter. "It
      appeared that two women had been quarreling and had turned out to fight. They fell upon each
      other like wild cats, or as you would fancy that tigers would fight. A clear and lovely moon
      lighted this revolting scene. A circle was formed round the termagants, and for ten minutes
      did they lacerate themselves with fists and nails in a fearful manner. Their clothes were torn
      into ribands—their countenances were horribly disfigured with scratches—the blood poured from
      their noses—and their hair, hanging all dishevelled over their naked shoulders, gave them a
      wild, ferocious, and savage appearance, such as I never could have expected to encounter in
      the metropolis of the civilised world."
"And in the very heart of the City," added Mr. Montague.
"Suddenly a cry of 'The Bluebottles!' was raised, and the crowd, belligerents and
      all, rushed pell-mell back again into the house. In spite of all my endeavours to escape I was
      hurried in with that hideous mob of ferocious-looking men and brazen-faced women. In a few
      moments I found myself in a large room, in which there were at least thirty wretched beds
      huddled close together, and so revoltingly dirty that the cold pavement or a hedge-side would
      have seemed a more preferable couch. And, oh! how can I describe the inmates of that den, many
      of whom were crowding round a fire cooking provender, which filled the place with a sickening
      and most fetid odour. There were young girls almost naked, without shoes or stockings, and
      whose sunken checks, dimmed eyes, and miserable attire contrasted
       strangely with their boisterous mirth. Some of these unfortunate creatures,
      nevertheless, retained traces of original beauty prematurely faded. The men were hatless and
      shoeless; indeed the entire assembly consisted of males and females evidently of the most
      wretched description. Scarcely had I time to cast a glance around me when I was questioned as
      to how I came there? what I wanted? and whether I meant to stand anything? 'I will tell you
      what it is,' said one to his companions, 'he is a swell who is come to have a look at these
      kind of cribs, and he must pay his footing.' I immediately comprehended the nature of the
      impression which my presence had created, and presented the individual who had spoken with a
      couple of half-crowns. The sight of the money produced an immense feeling in my favour. Heaven
      only knows how many gallons of beer were fetched from a neighbouring public-house; and when
      the inmates of that lazar-house—for I can scarcely call it anything else—had all partaken of
      the liquor, I was overwhelmed with offers of service. One declared, that if I merely came to
      see the neighbourhood he would take me round to every place in the street; another assured me,
      that if I had committed a forgery or any other 'genteel crime,' he would either help me to lie
      secure until the matter had blown over, or to escape from the country; and so on. I suffered
      the wretches to retain the impression that curiosity had alone led me thither; and as soon as
      I had made this announcement the mistress of the house was summoned to do the honours of the
      establishment. A blear-eyed old crone made her appearance, and insisted upon showing me over
      the house. 'These rooms,' said she, meaning the two upon the ground floor, 'are for those who
      can afford to pay threepence for their bed and who have supper to cook.' We then ascended to
      the first floor. 'These are the four-penny beds,' said the old woman, pointing with pride and
      satisfaction to some thirty or forty couches, a shade cleaner, and the least thing further off
      from each other than those down stairs. The rooms on the first floor were also filled with
      lodgers; and another demand was made upon my purse. On the third floor and in the attics were
      the most horrible scenes of wretchedness which I had yet beheld. Those dens were filled with
      straw beds, separated from each other only by pieces of plank about eight or ten inches in
      height. Men, women, and children were all crowded together—sleeping pell-mell. Oh! it was a
      horrible, horrible spectacle. To be brief, I escaped from that moral plague-house; and in a
      few moments was traversing Smithfield once more. Even the tainted air of that filthy enclosure
      was refreshing after the foul atmosphere from which I had just emerged."
Louisa entered the room at this moment to announce that luncheon was prepared in another
      apartment.
"And you never took any steps to root out that nest of villains in the Old House whence you
      escaped alive so miraculously?" said Montague sipping a glass of exquisite wine after his
      luncheon.
"I wrote two anonymous letters the very next morning," answered Walter: "one to Mr. Markham,
      warning him of the contemplated burglar at his house; and another to the Lord Mayor of London.
      It did not altogether suit Mr. Stephens's plans——"
"No—not to make a fuss about an affair which would have been sure to bring your name into
      notoriety," added this gentleman hastily.
"That adventure has no doubt given you a distaste for late rambles," said Montague.
"In the City—decidedly so," was the reply. "I seldom go into London, early or late—I have so
      few inducements—so few acquaintances! By the way, a few evenings ago I treated myself to a
      visit to the Opera, and there accident threw me into conversation with a gentleman and lady
      who sat in the same box as myself. The result was an invitation to the abode of the lady—a
      Mrs. Arlington——"
"Mrs. Arlington," ejaculated Montague, a light flush animating his countenance.
"The same. She is the friend of Sir Rupert Harborough. I am anxious to see
      something of the world now and then—and to avail myself of my present garb for that purpose. I
      accordingly called upon Mrs. Arlington last evening, and learnt 'a lesson of life.' I saw an
      elegant woman, a baronet, a fashionable gentleman, and a very interesting young man,
      associating with a vulgar wretch of the name, I believe, of Talbot, whose manners would have
      disgraced a groom. I must, however, observe that the interesting young gentleman to whom I
      allude did not seem to be more pleased with the conversation and conduct of this vulgarian
      than myself. One coincidence somewhat extraordinary occurred—that same interesting young man
      was no other than Mr. Richard Markham, one of the sons of——"
"Ah! indeed—how singular!" exclaimed George Montague, not waiting till Walter finished his
      sentence; "very singular!" he added; then, having tossed off a bumper of Madeira, he walked up
      to the window, where he affected to inhale with delight the exquisite fragrance of the flowers
      that adorned the casement.
