
CHAPTER CCLIII.   THE EX-MEMBER FOR ROTTENBOROUGH.
It was now the middle of April, 1843.
The morning was fine, and the streets were marked with the bustle of men of business,
      clerks, and others repairing to their respective offices, when Mr. George Montague Greenwood
      turned from Saint Paul's Churchyard into Cheapside.
He was attired in a plain, and even somewhat shabby manner: there was not a particle of
      jewellery about him; and a keen eye might have discovered, in the tout
       ensemble of his appearance, that his toilette had been arranged with every
      endeavour to produce as good an effect as possible.
Thus his neckcloth was tied with a precision seldom bestowed upon a faded piece of black
      silk: his shirt-cuffs were drawn down so as to place an interval of snowy white between the
      somewhat threadbare sleeve of the blue coat and the common grey glove of Berlin wool:—a black
      riband hung round his neck and was gathered at the ends in the right pocket of the soiled
      satin waistcoat, so as to leave the beholder in a state of uncertainty whether it were
      connected with a watch or only an eye-glass—or, indeed, with any thing at all;—and the
      Oxford-mixture trousers, rather white at the knees, were strapped tightly over a pair
      of well-blacked bluchers, a casual observer would certainly have taken for Wellingtons.
In his hand he carried a neat black cane; and his gait was characterised by much of the
      self-sufficiency which had marked it in better days. It was, however, far removed from a
      swagger: Greenwood was too much of a gentleman in his habits to fall into the slightest
      manifestation of vulgarity.
His beautiful black hair, curling and glossy, put to shame the brownish hue of the beaver
      hat which had evidently seen some service, and had lately been exposed to all the varieties of
      weather peculiar to this capricious climate. His face—eminently handsome, as we have before
      observed—was pale and rather thin; but there was a haughty assurance in the proud curl of the
      upper lip, and a fire in his large dark eyes, which showed that hope was not altogether a
      stranger to the breast of Mr. George Montague Greenwood.
It was about a quarter past nine in the morning when this gentleman entered the great
      thoroughfare of Cheapside.
Perhaps there is no street in all London which presents so many moral phases to the eyes of
      the acute beholder as this one, and at that hour; inasmuch as those eyes may single out, and
      almost read the pursuit of, every individual forming an item in the dense crowd that is then
      rolling onward to the vicinity of the Bank of England.
For of every ten persons, nine are proceeding in that direction.
Reader, let us pause for a moment and examine the details of the scene to which we allude:
      for Greenwood has slackened his pace—his eye has caught sight of Bow clock—and he perceives
      that he is yet too early to commence the visits which he intends to make in certain
      quarters.
And first, gentle reader, behold that young man with the loose taglioni and no undercoat: he
      has a devil-me-care kind of look about him, mingled with an air of seediness, as if he had
      been up the best
      part of the night at a free-and-easy. He is smoking a cigar—at that hour of the
      morning! It is impossible to gaze at him for two seconds, without being convinced that he is
      an articled clerk to an attorney, and that he doesn't care so long as he reaches the office
      just five minutes before the "governor" arrives.
But that old man, with a threadbare suit of black, and the red cotton handkerchief sticking
      so suspiciously out of his pocket, as if he had something wrapped up in it,—who is he? Mark
      how he shuffles along, dragging his heavy high-lows over the pavement at a pace too speedy for
      his attenuated frame: and see with what anxiety he looks up at the clock projecting out far
      overhead, to assure himself that he shall yet be at his office within two minutes of half-past
      nine—or else risk his place and the eighteen shillings a week which it brings him in, and on
      which he has to support a wife and large family. He is a copying clerk in a lawyer's
      office—there can be no doubt of it; and the poor man has his dinner wrapped up in his
      pocket-handkerchief!
Do you observe that proud, pompous-looking stout man, with the large yellow cane in his
      hand, and the massive chain and seals hanging from his fob? He is a stockbroker who, having
      got up a bubble Railway Company, has enriched himself in a single day, after having struggled
      against difficulties for twenty years. But, see—a fashionably-dressed gentleman, with a
       little too much jewellery about his person, and a rather too severe swagger
      in his gait, overtakes our stout friend, and passes his arm familiarly in his as he wishes him
      "good morning." There is no mistake about this individual: he is the Managing-Director of the
      stockbroker's Company, and was taken from a three-pair back in the New Cut to preside at the
      Board. Arcades ambo—a precious pair!
Glance a moment at that great, stout, shabbily-dressed man, whose trousers are so tight that
      they certainly never could have been made for him, and whose watery boiled-kind of eyes,
      vacant look, and pale but bloated face, denote the habitual gin-drinker. He rolls along with a
      staggering gait, as if the effects of the previous night's debauch had not been slept off, or
      as if he had already taken his first dram. He is on his way to the neighbourhood of the Bank,
      where he either loiters about on the steps of the Auction Mart, or at the door of Capel Court,
      or else proceeds to some public-house parlour "which he frequents." His business is to hawk
      bills about for discount; and, to hear him speak, one would believe that he could raise a
      million of money in no time—whereas he has most likely the pawn-ticket of his Sunday's coat in
      his pocket.
And now mark that elderly, sedate, quiet-looking man, whose good black suit is well-brushed
      and his boots nicely polished. He compares his heavy gold watch with the clock of Bow church,
      and is quite delighted to see that his time is correct to a second. And now he
      continues his way, without looking to the right or the left: he knows every feature—every
      shop—every lamp-post of Cheapside and the Poultry too well to have any farther curiosity about
      those thoroughfares—for he has passed along that way every morning, Sundays excepted, during
      the last twenty years. Are you not prepared to make an affidavit that he is a superior clerk
      in the Bank of England?
But we must abandon any farther scrutiny of the several members of the crowd in Cheapside—at
      least for the present; because it is now half-past nine o'clock, and Mr. Greenwood has reached
      Cornhill.
Here he paused—and sighed,—sighed deeply.
That sigh told a long and painful history,—of how he had lately been rich and prosperous—how
      he had lost all by grasping at more—how he was now reduced almost to the very verge of
      penury—and how he wondered whether he should ever be wealthy and great again!
"Yes—yes: I will be!" he said to himself—speaking not with his lips, but with that
      silent though emphatic tongue which belongs to the soul. "My good star cannot have deserted me
      for ever! But this day must show!"
Then, calling all his assurance to his aid, he turned into the office of a well-known
      merchant and capitalist on Cornhill.
The clerks did not immediately recognise him; for the last time he had called there, it was
      at four in the afternoon and he had alighted from an elegant cab: whereas now it was half-past
      nine in the morning, and he had evidently come on foot. But when he demanded, in his usual
      authoritative tone, whether their master had arrived yet, they recollected him, and replied in
      the affirmative.
Greenwood accordingly walked into the merchant's private office.
"Ah! my dear sir," he said, extending his hand towards the merchant, "how do you find
      yourself? It is almost an age since we met."
The merchant affected not to perceive the out-stretched hand; nor did he return the bland
      smile with which Mr. Greenwood accosted him. But, just raising his eyes from the morning paper
      which lay before him, he said in a cold tone, "Oh! Mr. Greenwood, I believe? Pray, sir, what
      is your business?"
The ex-member for Rottenborough took a chair uninvited, and proceeded to observe in a
      confidential kind of whisper,—"The fact is, my dear sir, I have conceived a magnificent
      project for making a few thousands into as many millions, I may say; and as on former
      occasions you and I have done some little business together—and I have put a
       few good things in your way—I thought I would give you the refusal of my new
      design."
"I am really infinitely obliged to you, Mr. Greenwood——"
"Oh! I knew you would be, my dear sir!" interrupted the ex-member. "The risk is nothing—the
      gains certain and enormous. You and I can keep it all to ourselves; and——"
"You require me to advance the funds, I presume?" asked the merchant, eyeing his visitor
      askance.
"Just so—a few thousands only—to be repaid out of the first proceeds, of course," returned
      Greenwood.
"Then, sir, I beg to decline the speculation," said the merchant, drily.
"Speculation! it is not a speculation," cried Greenwood: "it is a certainty."
"Nevertheless, sir, I must decline it; and as my time is very much occupied——"
"Oh! I shall not intrude upon you any longer," interrupted Greenwood, indignantly; and he
      strode out of the office.
"The impertinent scoundrel!" he muttered to
      himself, when he had gained the street. "After all the good things I have placed
      in his way, to treat me in this manner. But, never mind—let me once grow rich again and I will
      humble him at my feet!"
In spite of this attempt at self-consolation, Greenwood was deeply mortified with the
      reception which he had experienced at the merchant's office: his anger had, however, cooled
      and his spirits revived by the time he reached Birchin Lane, where dwelt another of his City
      acquaintances.
This individual was a capitalist who had once been saved from serious embarrassment, if not
      from total ruin, by a timely advance of funds made to him by Greenwood; and though the
      capitalist had paid enormous interest for the accommodation, he had nevertheless always
      exhibited the most profound gratitude towards the ex-member for Rottenborough.
It was, therefore, with great confidence that Greenwood entered the private office of the
      capitalist.
"Ah! my dear fellow," cried the latter, apparently overjoyed to see his visitor, "how
       have you been lately? Why—it is really an age since I have seen you! Pray sit
      down—and now say what I can do for you."
Greenwood addressed him in terms similar to those which he had used with the merchant a few
      minutes previously.
"And so you actually have a scheme that will make millions, my dear Greenwood?" said the
      capitalist, his entire countenance beaming with smiles.
"Just as I tell you," answered the ex-member.
"And you have considered it in all its bearings?"
"In every shape and way. Success is certain."
"Oh! what a lucky dog you are," cried the capitalist, playfully thrusting his fingers into
      Greenwood's ribs.
"Well—I can't say that I am lucky," observed the latter, in a measured tone. "I have had
      losses lately—serious losses: but you know that I am not the man to be long in remedying
      them."
"Far from it, my boy!" exclaimed the capitalist. "You will make an enormous fortune before
      you die—I am sure you will. And this new scheme of yours,—although you have only hinted darkly
      at it,—must succeed—I am convinced it must."
"Then you are prepared to join me in the project?" said Greenwood.
"Nothing would give me greater pleasure, my dear friend," ejaculated the capitalist: "but it
      is impossible."
"Impossible! How can that be, since you think so well of any thing which I may devise?"
      asked Greenwood.
"God bless your soul!" cried the other; "money is money now-a-days. For my part I can't
      think where the devil it all gets to! One hears of it—reads of it—but never sees it! In fact,"
      he added, sinking his voice to a mysterious whisper, "I do believe that there is no such thing
      now as money in the whole City."
"Ridiculous!" exclaimed Greenwood. "Complaints from you are absurd—because every
      one knows that you have made an enormous fortune since that time when I was so happy to save
      you from bankruptcy."
"Yes—yes," said the capitalist: "I remember that incident—I have never forgot it—I always
      told you I never should."
"Then, in plain terms," continued Greenwood, "do me the service of advancing two or three
      thousand pounds to set my new project in motion."
"Impossible, Greenwood—impossible!" cried the capitalist, buttoning up his breeches-pockets.
      "Things are in such a state that I would not venture a penny upon the most feasible
      speculation in the world."
"Perhaps you will lend me a sum——"
"Lend! Ah! ha! Now, really, Greenwood, this is too good! Lend, indeed! What—when we are all
      in the borrowing line in the City!"—and the capitalist chuckled, as if he had uttered a
      splendid joke.
"In one word, then," said Greenwood, relishing this mirth as little as a person in his
      situation was likely to do; "will you assist my temporary wants—even if you do not choose to
      enter into my speculation? You know that I am proud, and that it must pain me thus to speak to
      you: but I declare most solemnly that fifty pounds at this moment would be of the greatest
      service to me."
"Nothing gives me more pain than to refuse a friend like you," answered the capitalist:
      "but, positively, I could not part with a shilling to-day to save my own brother from a
      gaol."
Greenwood rose, put on his hat, and left the office without uttering another word.
He felt that he was righteously punished—for he had, in his time, often treated men
      in the same manner,—professing ardent friendship, and yet refusing the smallest pecuniary
      favour!
Having walked about for nearly half an hour, to calm the feelings which the conduct of the
      capitalist had so painfully excited, Greenwood repaired to the office of a great
      bill-discounter and speculator in Broad Street. This individual had been a constant visitor at
      Greenwood's house in Spring Gardens—had joined him in many of his most profitable
      speculations—and had gained considerable sums thereby. He was, moreover, of a very
      enterprising character, and always ready to risk money with the hope of large returns.
Greenwood entered the clerks' office; and, glancing towards the private one at the lower
      extremity, he caught sight of the speculator's countenance peering over the blinds of the
      glass-door which opened between the two rooms.
The face was instantly withdrawn; and Greenwood, who of course affected not to have observed
      its appearance at the window, inquired whether the speculator was within.
"Really I can't say, sir," drawled a clerk, who was mending a pen: then, without desisting
      from his operation, he said, "I'll see, sir, in a moment."
"Be so kind as to see this moment," exclaimed Greenwood, angrily. "I suppose you
      know who I am?"
"Oh! yes—sir—certainly, sir," returned the clerk; and, having duly nibbed the pen, he
      dismounted very leisurely from his stool—paused to arrange a piece of blotting-paper on the
      desk in a very precise manner indeed—brushed the splinters of the quill from his trousers—and
      then dragged himself in a lazy fashion towards the private office.
Greenwood bit his quivering lip with rage.
"Two years ago," he thought to himself, "I should not have been treated thus!"

Meantime the clerk entered the inner office, and carefully closed the door behind
      him.
Greenwood could hear the murmuring sounds of two voices within.
At length the clerk re-appeared, and said in a careless tone, "The governor isn't in, Mr.
      Greenwood: I thought he was—but he isn't—and, what's more, I don't know when he will be. You'd
      better look in again, if it's particular; but I know the governor's uncommon busy to-day."
"I shall not trouble you nor your governor any more," returned Greenwood, his heart
      ready to break at the cool, deliberate insult thus put upon him. "You think me a fallen
      man—and you dare to treat me thus. But——"
"Why, as for that," interrupted the clerk, with impertinent emphasis, "every one
      knows you're broke and done up—and my governor doesn't want shabby insolvents hanging about
      his premises."
Greenwood's countenance became scarlet as these bitter taunts met his ears; and for a moment
      he felt inclined to rush upon the insolent clerk and punish him severely with his cane.
But, being naturally of a cool and cautious disposition, he perceived with a second thought
      that he might only become involved in a dilemma from which he had no means to extricate
      himself: so, conquering his passion, he rushed out of the office.
He could now no longer remain blind to the cruel conviction that the extremities of his
      position were well known in the City, and that the hopes with which he had sallied forth three
      hours previously were mere delusive visions.
Still he was resolved to leave no stone unturned in the endeavour to retrieve his ruined
      fortunes; but feeling sick at heart and the prey to a deep depression of spirits, he plunged
      hastily into a public-house to take some refreshment.
And now behold the once splendid and fastidious Greenwood,—the man who had purchased the
      votes of a constituency, and had even created a sensation within the walls of Parliament,—the
      individual who had discounted bills of large amount for some of the greatest peers of England,
      and whose luxurious mode of living had once been the envy and wonder of the fashionable
      world,—behold the ex-member for Rottenborough partaking of a pint of porter and a crust of
      bread and cheese in the dingy parlour of a public-house!
There was a painful knitting of the brows, and there was a nervous quivering of the lip,
      which denoted the acute emotions to which he was a prey, as he partook of his humble fare; and
      once—once, two large tears trickled down his cheeks, and moistened the bread that he was
      conveying to his mouth.
For he thought of the times when money was as dirt in his estimation,—when he rode in
      splendid vehicles, sate down to sumptuous repasts, was ministered unto by a host of servants
      in gorgeous liveries, and revelled in the arms of the loveliest women of the metropolis.
Oh! he thought of all this: he recalled to mind the well-filled wardrobes he had once
      possessed, and glanced at his present faded attire;—he shook up the remains of the muddy beer
      at the bottom of the pewter-pot, and remembered the gold he had lavished on champagne: his
      eyes lingered upon the crumbs of the bread and the rind of the cheese left on the plate, and
      his imagination became busy with the reminiscences of the turtle and venison that had once
      smoked upon his board.
But worse—oh! far worse than this was the dread conviction that all his lavish
      expenditure—all his ostentatious display—all his princely feasts, had failed to secure him a
      single friend!
No wonder, then, that the bitter—bitter tears started from his eyes; and, though he
      immediately checked that first ebullition of heart-felt anguish yet the effort only caused the
      storm of emotions to rage the more painfully within his breast.
For, in imagination, he cast his eyes towards a mansion a few miles distant; and there he
      beheld one whose condition formed a striking contrast with his own—one who
      had suddenly burst from obscurity and created for himself as proud a name as might be found in
      Christendom,—a young man whose indomitable energies and honourable aspirations had enabled him
      to lead armies to conquest, and who had taken his place amongst the greatest Princes in the
      universe!
The comparison which Greenwood drew—despite of himself—between the elevated position of
      Richard Markham and his own fallen, ruined lot, produced feelings of so painful—so exquisitely
      agonising a nature, that he could endure them no longer. He felt that they were goading him to
      madness—the more so because he was alone in that dingy parlour at the time, and was therefore
      the least likely to struggle against them successfully.
Hastily quitting the public-house, he rushed into the street, where the fresh air seemed to
      do him good.
And then he asked himself whether he should risk farther insult by calling upon other
      wealthy men with whom he had once been on intimate terms? For a few moments he was inclined to
      abandon the idea: but a little calm reflection told him not to despair.
Moreover, he had a reason—a powerful motive for exerting all his energies to repair the
      past, so far as his worldly fortunes were concerned; and though the idea was almost insane, he
       hoped—if he had but a chance—to make such good use of the coming few weeks as would
      reinstate him in the possession of enormous wealth.
But, alas! it seemed as if no one would listen to the scheme which he felt convinced was
      calculated to return millions for the risk of a few thousands!
"Oh! I must retrieve myself—I must make a fortune!" he thought, as he
      hurried towards Moorgate Street. "One lucky stroke—and four-and-twenty hours shall see me rich
      again!"
This idea brought a smile to his lips; and, relaxing his pace, he composed his countenance
      as well as he could ere he entered the office of a wealthy stockbroker in Moorgate Street.
The stockbroker was lounging over the clerks' desk, conversing with a merchant whom
      Greenwood also knew; and the moment the ex-member for Rottenborough entered, the two City
      gentlemen treated him to a long, impertinent, and contemptuous stare.
"Ah!" said Greenwood, affecting a pleasant smile, which, God knows! did not come from the
      heart; "you do not appear to recollect me? Am I so very much changed as all
      that?"
"Well—it is Greenwood, pos-i-tive-ly!" drawled the stockbroker, turning towards his
      friend the
      merchant in a manner that was equivalent to saying, "I wonder at his impudence in
      coming here."
"Yes—it is Greenwood," observed the merchant, putting his glasses up to his eyes:
      "or rather the shadow of Greenwood, I should take it to be."
"Ah! ha! ha!" chuckled the stockbroker.
"You are disposed to be facetious, gentlemen," said the object of this intended witticism
      but really galling insult: "I presume that my long absence from the usual City haunts——"
"I can assure you, Greenwood," interrupted the stockbroker, "that the City has got on
      uncommonly well without you. The Bank hasn't stopped payment—bills are easy of discount—money
      is plentiful——"
"And yet," said Greenwood, determined to receive all this sarcasm as quietly as a poor devil
      ought to do when about to make a proposal requiring an advance of funds,—"and yet a certain
      capitalist—a very intimate friend of mine, in Birchin Lane—assured me just now that money was
      very scarce."
"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed the stockbroker.
"He! he! he!" chuckled the merchant.
"Why, the fact is, Greenwood," continued the broker, "your very intimate friend the
      capitalist was here only a quarter of an hour ago; and he delighted us hugely by telling us
      how you called upon him this morning with a scheme that would make millions, and ended by
      wanting to borrow fifty pounds of him."
"He! he! he!" again chuckled the merchant.
"Ha! ha! ha!" once more laughed the stockbroker; and, taking his friend's arm, he led him
      into his private office, the two continuing to laugh and chuckle until the door closed behind
      them.
Greenwood now became aware of the gratifying fact that every clerk in the counting-house was
      laughing also; and he rushed out into the street, a prey to feelings of the most agonising
      nature.
But the ignominy of that day was not yet complete in respect to him.
As he darted away from the door of the insolent stockbroker's office, he came in collision
      with two gentlemen who were walking arm-in-arm towards the Bank.
"'Pon my honour, my good fellow——" began one, rubbing his arm which had been hurt by the
      encounter.
"Greenwood!" cried the second, stepping back in surprise.
The ex-member for Rottenborough raised his eyes at the sounds of those well-known voices,
      and beheld Mr. Chichester, with his inseparable friend the baronet, both eyeing him in the
      most insulting manner.
"Ah! Greenwood, my dear fellow," exclaimed Sir Rupert; "I am really quite delighted to see
      you. How get on the free and independent electors of Rottenborough? Egad, though—you are not
      quite the pink of fashion that you used to be—when you did me the honour of making my wife
      your mistress."
"Greenwood and Berlin-wool gloves—impossible!" cried Chichester. "Such a companionship is
      quite unnatural!"
"And an old coat brushed up to look like a new one," added the baronet, laughing
      heartily.
"And bluchers——"
Greenwood stayed to hear no more: he broke from the hold which the two friends had laid upon
      him, and darted down an alley into Coleman Street.
