
CHAPTER CXXV. THE RECONCILIATION.
IN the meantime the Earl of Warrington drove to the hotel in Dover Street, where Diana
      Arlington lay; and, upon inquiry, he ascertained that a nurse and the medical attendant were
      with her.
He desired to be conducted to a private room, and then despatched the waiter to request the
      professional gentleman to step thither for a few moments.
"What name shall I say, sir?" asked the servant, who was unacquainted with the earl's
      person.
"It is needless to mention any name," replied the nobleman; "I shall not detain the
      gentleman five minutes."
The servant disappeared, and in a few moments returned, followed by the medical
      attendant.
The waiter introduced him into the apartment, and then withdrew.
"I believe, sir," said the earl, "that you are attending upon the lady who experienced so
      severe an accident last night?"
"I was by chance passing through Dover Street when the flames burst forth," was the reply:
      "and I gave an immediate alarm to the police. I remained upon the spot to ascertain if my
      professional services could be rendered available; and it was well that I did so."
"The lady then is much injured?" said the earl, in a tone expressive of emotion.
"Seriously injured," answered the surgeon; "and as I live at some distance from this
      neighbourhood, I considered it proper to remain with the patient all night. Indeed, I have not
      left her for a moment since the accident occurred."
"Your attention shall be nobly recompensed, sir," said the earl. "Here is my card, and I am
      your debtor."
The surgeon bowed low as his eye glanced upon the name of the individual in whose presence
      he stood.
"And now," continued the nobleman, "answer me one question—candidly and sincerely. Will your
      patient be scarred by the effects of the fire?"
"My lord, that is more than I can answer for," returned the surgeon. "Fortunately, medical
      assistance was rendered the moment after the accident occurred; and this circumstance should
      inspire great hope!"
"Then I will hope," said the earl. "How long an interval do you imagine must elapse
      ere she may be pronounced convalescent? Or rather, I should have asked, is she in any positive
      danger?"
"There is always danger—great danger in these cases, my lord. But, should the fever subside
      in a few days, I should recommend the removal of the patient to some quiet neighbourhood—afar
      from the bustle of the West End."
"You said that you yourself resided some distance from hence?" observed the earl, after a
      few moments' reflection.
"My abode is in Lower Holloway, my lord," answered the surgeon; "and my name is
      Wentworth."
"Holloway is quiet and retired," said the earl; "but is not the air too bleak there at this
      season?"
"It is pure and wholesome, my lord; and the spot is tranquil, and devoid of the bustle of
      crowds and the din of carriages."
"Wherever Mrs. Arlington may remain until her recovery," said the Earl, "she must receive
      all the attentions which can be lavished upon her; and in nothing must she be thwarted where
      gold can procure her the gratification of her wishes."
"I would offer to place my house at the lady's disposal, my lord—and the attention of Mrs.
      Wentworth would be unremitting—but——"
"Name the obstacle," said the earl. "Perhaps you consider that the position of the lady with
      regard to myself,—a position the nature of which you may have divined,—is somewhat too
      equivocal to permit your wife——"
"No, my lord; medical men have no scruples of that kind. I hesitated because I feared that
      my abode would be too humble——"
"Then let that obstacle vanish this moment," interrupted the earl. "It is my wish that Mrs.
      Arlington should be removed to your house so soon as the step can be taken with safety to
      herself: you will then devote yourself to her cure; and on you I place my reliance. I have
      been unjust to her, Mr Wentworth," continued the nobleman, pressing the surgeon's hand, and
      speaking in a low but hurried tone,—"I have been unjust to her—but I will make her ample
      reparation—that is, provided you can
       preserve her beauty,—for we are all mortal—and I confess to a weakness,—but no
      matter! Say—you will do your best!"
"My lord, I am poor, and struggling with the world," answered the surgeon, "and, I may say
      without vanity—because I possess certificates from eminent medical men under whom I have
      studied—that I am not ignorant of my profession. My lord, I have every inducement to devote
      all the knowledge I possess to the aim which you desire. My attentions shall be unwearied and
      unremitting; and if I succeed——"
"If you succeed in restoring her to me in that perfection of beauty which invested her when
      I took leave of her yesterday,—without a mark, without a scar,—your fortune shall be my care,
      and you will have no need to entertain anxiety relative to the future, with the Earl of
      Warrington as your patron."
"At present, my lord, all I can say is—I will do my best," rejoined Mr.
      Wentworth.
"And at present I can ask no more," exclaimed the earl: then, after a moment's pause, he
      said, "May I be allowed to see your patient for a few moments?"
The surgeon hesitated.
"I know why you dislike this proposal," observed the nobleman: "you are afraid that, when I
      contemplate the altered countenance of that woman who was lately so beautiful, I shall despair
      of her complete cure."
"Such is, indeed, my impression," answered Mr. Wentworth. "Those symptoms and appearances
      which are most alarming to persons unacquainted with the medical art, are frequently the least
      causes of alarm to the professional man."
"Then let me speak to her, and not see her," said the earl.
"I understand your lordship: in a few minutes I will return."
And the surgeon withdrew.
During his absence the earl paced the room in an agitated and excited manner, which was
      quite inconsistent with the usual equanimity and even gravity of his temperament.
Ten minutes had elapsed when the surgeon came back.
"Will your lordship follow me?"
Mr. Wentworth led the way to the chamber in which Diana Arlington lay.
The shutters were closed, and the curtains were drawn around the bed: the room was nearly
      dark, a few straggling gleams of light alone forcing their way through the chinks in the
      shutters.
When the earl entered the apartment, the surgeon remained in the passage outside: the nurse
      had already been directed to retire for a short time.
The nobleman approached the bed, and seating himself in a chair by the side, said, "Diana,
      can you forgive me for my cruelty of yesterday?"
"I never entertained a feeling of resentment, my lord, and therefore have nothing to
      forgive," was the answer, delivered in a low and plaintive tone.
"I did you a serious wrong, Diana," continued the earl; "but I am not too proud to confess
      my error. I trembled at the idea of ridicule: hence the hastiness of my conduct. And then,
      there was a suspicion in my mind—a suspicion which made me uneasy, very uneasy—but which is
      now dispelled. I have read your letter which accompanied the bank-note addressed to Sir Rupert
      Harborough; and I am satisfied in respect to the integrity—nay, the generosity of your
      motives."
"It was kind of you, my lord, to take the steps necessary to reinstate me in your good
      opinion," murmured Diana from her couch, in a tone evidently subdued by deep emotion.
"There was no kindness in the performance of an act of justice," returned the earl. "When I
      read in this morning's newspaper the sad account of that terrible accident of last night, my
      heart smote me for my conduct towards you. Then I reflected upon all the happiness which I had
      enjoyed in your society, and I was moved—deeply, profoundly moved! I despatched a servant to
      this hotel to inquire if you were really so seriously injured as the journal represented; and
      he brought me back word that your life was no longer in positive danger, but——"
"But that I shall be a hideous object for the remainder of my days," added Diana, with
      somewhat of bitterness in her manner.
"God forbid!" cried the earl, energetically: "Mr. Wentworth seems to promise——"
"Alas! the medical art prompts its professors to console the mind in order to heal the body;
      but I am not foolish enough to yield to a hope so baseless!"
These words were uttered in a tone of the most profound melancholy.
"Diana, you must hope," exclaimed the Earl of Warrington: "you will recover—yes,
      you will recover; and even if a slight trace of this accident——"
"A slight trace!" almost screamed Diana—and the earl could hear her roll herself
      convulsively over on her pillow: "a slight trace, my lord! I shall be disfigured for life:
      nothing can save me! My countenance will be seared as with a red-hot-iron—my neck will be
      covered with deep scars—my arms, my entire body will be furrowed with crimson and purple
      marks! O God! it is hard to suffer thus!"
And then she burst into an agonising flood of tears.
The earl allowed her to weep without interruption: he knew that her mind would be relieved
      by that outpouring of feeling.
And he was right: in a few minutes she said, "Pardon me—I am weak, I am foolish. And now
      proceed to tell me how you became possessed of that note which I sent with the money to Sir
      Rupert Harborough."
The Earl of Warrington then related the particulars of his interview with Lady Cecilia.
"And now that I have done an act of justice, and convinced myself of the purity of the
      motives which induced you to act in the manner that created my displeasure," continued the
      earl, "let us talk of yourself. I have made arrangements with Mr. Wentworth which, I hope,
      will meet your approval and conduce to your benefit. When you can be removed with safety, you
      shall be conveyed from the bustle of an hotel in a crowded neighbourhood to the tranquil
      retirement of Mr. Wentworth's abode at Holloway. I am induced to place reliance upon the skill
      and talent of that man—I scarcely know why."
"Oh! yes—he is no doubt very clever," said the patient; "for his treatment of me speedily
      gave me relief from the acuteness of the agony which I at first experienced."
"Every thing shall be done to conduce to your comfort, Diana," resumed the nobleman. "My
      upholsterer shall send down to Mr. Wentworth's house the furniture that may be required for
      the rooms which you are to occupy; and my steward shall supply him with ample funds."
"How kind—how good you are," murmured Diana.
"But I shall not attempt to see you," continued
       the earl, "until your recovery is announced to me—your complete recovery; and
      then——"
He checked himself; and there was a long silence.
Suddenly the earl arose.
"Farewell, Diana—my presence is not calculated to calm you," he exclaimed. "I shall now
      leave you—but, remember, I watch over you from a distance. Farewell!"
"Farewell—till we meet again," said Diana. "But—oh! how shall I dread that day! And—if my
      worst fears should be confirmed—if I really become the horrible, scarred, hideous object which
      I dread,—then—then we shall never meet more,—for I will fly from the world and bury myself in
      some deep solitude whither none who ever knew me in my bright days shall trace me!"
"You will not be forced to adopt such an alternative, Diana—believe me you will not!"
      exclaimed the earl. "At all events—let us hope,—let us both hope!"
The earl hastily withdrew.
In the passage he encountered the surgeon, to whom he reiterated his instructions relative
      to the attention to be shown towards the patient.
"Mr. Wentworth," he said, in an emphatic tone, "remember all that I have told you. Gold
      shall be placed at your disposal with no niggard hand; spare no expense! That lady's complete
      restoration to her pristine beauty is your care: think of naught save that one grand aim!"
"My lord," answered the surgeon, "I can only repeat the words I used just now—I will do
       my best!"
The earl pressed his hand warmly, and hurried away—more affected by the incidents of that
      day than he had been for many, many years.
