
CHAPTER CXXI. HIS CHILD!
MR. GREENWOOD was sitting in his study,—the handsomely fitted-up room which we have before
      described,—the same morning on which the babe was restored to its mother, through the
      admirable feeling of Richard Markham.
Mr. Greenwood was studying speeches for the ensuing session of Parliament. He employed two
      secretaries who composed his orations; one did the dry details, and the other the declamatory
      and rhetorical portions. Each received thirty shillings a week, and worked from nine in the
      morning until nine at night, with half an hour three times a day for meals—which said meals
      were enjoyed at their own expense. And then Mr. Greenwood hoped to reap all the honours
      resulting from this drudgery on the part of his clerks.
The studies of the Member of Parliament were interrupted by the introduction of Mr. Arthur
      Chichester.
"I am off to France to-morrow," said this gentleman, throwing himself lazily upon a sofa;
      "and I called to see if I could do any thing for you on that side of the water."
"No, nothing," answered Greenwood. "Do you propose to make a long stay in France?"
"I shall honour Paris with my presence for about a month," said Chichester.
"During which time," added Greenwood, with a smile, "you will contrive to get rid of all the
      money which Mrs. Viola Chichester so generously supplied."
"Generously indeed!" said Chichester, laughing heartily. "So far from thinking of running
      through the money, I hope to double it. Although the public gambling-houses have been
      abolished in France, there is plenty of play at the private clubs. But you must not imagine
      that I have a perfect fortune in my possession: the means adopted to obtain the cash cost a
      mint of money: then were five hundred pounds to Tomlinson for his assistance; five hundred to
      you for your aid, advice, and advances—(there is a splendid alliteration for you!)—and three
      hundred to poor Anthony Tidkins."
"Poor indeed!" ejaculated Greenwood. "According to what you told me, the miserable wretch
      must be in a blessed state of pecuniary nudity."
"It was perfectly true," said Chichester. "When he came to meet me and Tomlinson on the
      night that Viola was to be released, in the dark alley adjoining his house, he was like a
      furious hyena. It seems that he had awoke up ten minutes before the hour appointed for our
      meeting, and then discovered his loss as I before described it to you."
"I should not like to have such a man as my enemy," observed Greenwood, carelessly.
"Nor I either. Bless me, how he did swear! I never heard such imprecations come from a human
      being's mouth before. He vowed that he would undertake no other business, nor devote himself
      to any other pursuit, until he had traced the woman who had robbed him, and avenged himself
      upon her. Flaying alive, he said, was too good for her! Well, I gave him twenty pounds, poor
      devil, through good nature; and Tomlinson gave him ten through fear; for it appears that this
      Tidkins exercises some extraordinary influence over that cowardly stock-broker—"
"Ahem!" said Greenwood. "And so poor Tidkins," he added, "did not set out on his travels
      after the thief empty-handed?"
      
"By no means. But he is a useful fellow, and one might want him again."
"True," said Greenwood: "he is one of the necessary implements which men of the world must
      make use of at times, to carve out their way to fortune. Hare you heard any thing of your
      beloved wife?"
"Nothing more than what I have already told you," answered Chichester. "She has given up her
      abode at the Cambridge Heath gate, and taken apartments at a house in the very heart of the
      City, and where there are plenty of other lodgers. She is determined to be secure. However,"
      continued Chichester, with a smile, "so long as she holds her tongue about that little
      matter—which she seems inclined to do—she need not fear any further molestation from me."
"I question whether you would have released her that evening, had she not made her escape,"
      said Greenwood.
"Oh, indeed I should," returned Chichester; "I did not wish to push things too far; and I
      really believe that another week's confinement in that terrible place, which I have described
      to you, would have turned her mad in reality. Then again, I should have been afraid of that
      cowardly, snivelling fool, Tomlinson, who insisted upon accompanying me to ensure her release.
      That man has every inclination to be a downright rogue; but he lacks the courage."
"Have you seen your friend Harborough lately?" inquired Greenwood.
"To tell you the truth, he is going with me on my present expedition to Paris. His name, you
      know, sounds well: Sir Rupert Harborough, Bart., son-in-law of Lord Tremordyn,—eh?"
"His name must be somewhat worn out, I should imagine," observed Greenwood, playing with his
      watch-chain. "Have you seen Lady Cecilia?"
"No: she has her suite of apartments, and Sir Rupert has his—they do not interfere with each
      other. Sir Rupert, however, notices that Lady Cecilia has a great many visitors of the male
      sex; and amongst others, an officer of the grenadier guards, seven feet seven inches high,
      including his bear-skin cap."
"Indeed! Lady Cecilia is then becoming a confirmed demirep," observed Greenwood, without
      pausing to think who helped to make her so.
"There is no doubt of that," said Chichester. "But you seem up to your neck in business as
      usual."
"Yes: I am busily engaged in behalf of the Tory party," answered Greenwood. "The future
      Premier has great confidence in me. I have bought him over seven votes from the Whig side
      during the recess; and the moment the Tories succeed to power, I shall be rewarded with a
      baronetcy."
"You are making your way famously in the world," said Chichester, rising to leave.
"Pretty well—pretty well," returned Greenwood, with a complacent smile.
Chichester then shook hands with his friend, and departed.
Half an hour elapsed, during which Mr. Greenwood pursued his studies, when he was again
      interrupted by the entrance of a visitor.
This time it was Mr. Tomlinson, the stock-broker.
After having transacted a little pecuniary business together, Greenwood said, "What have you
      done with the old man?"
"I have taken a lodging for him in an obscure street of Bethnal Green, and there he is
      residing," answered Tomlinson.
"My plan was better," observed Greenwood, dogmatically: "you should have had him locked up
      in one of Tidkins's subterranean cells, and allowed three or four shillings a week for his
      maintenance."
"Impossible!" cried Tomlinson, indignantly. "I could never have acted so unmanly—so
      ungrateful—so atrocious a part."
"Well, just as you please," returned the Member of Parliament: "of course, you know
      best."
"We will not discuss that point," said Tomlinson.
"That is precisely what I said some time since to a deputation from the free and independent
      electors of Rottenborough, when they sent to remonstrate with me on a certain portion of my
      parliamentary conduct," observed Mr. Greenwood.
At this moment Lafleur entered and whispered something in his master's ear.
Tomlinson took his leave, and the valet proceeded to admit Marian into the presence of his
      master.
"Ah!" exclaimed Mr. Greenwood: "any thing wrong, Marian?"
"That may be according to the light in which you view the news I am come to communicate,
      sir," replied the servant. "In a word, Miss Monroe's father and Mr. Markham have discovered
      all."
"All! no—not all!" cried Greenwood, turning deadly pale; "surely Ellen could
      not——"
"When I said all, sir," replied Marian, "I was wrong. Mr. Monroe and my master have
      discovered that Miss Ellen is a mother; and her child is now with her."
"What! at Markham Place?" demanded Greenwood.
"Yes, sir."
"And is it known also who—what person—the father, I mean——"
"Miss Ellen has maintained that a profound secret, sir," said Marian.
"Thank heaven!" ejaculated Greenwood, now breathing freely. "But Mr. Wentworth—the
      surgeon——"
"He has also promised to remain dumb relative to what little he knows. You are best aware,
      sir, whether Miss Monroe has studied your wishes, or your interests, in remaining silent
      herself relative to you, and in recommending Mr. Wentworth, through me, to say nothing that
      may prove that she is really acquainted with the father of her child."
"But how was the discovery made? Tell me all," exclaimed Greenwood impatiently.
"The explanation is short. Mr. Wentworth sent a note relative to the health of the infant,
      last evening, to Miss Monroe; and she inadvertently left it upon the table in the same room
      where her father was sitting."
"And her father—and Richard—Mr. Markham, I mean," said Greenwood, "are acquainted but with
      the bare fact that she is a mother?"
"That is all, sir. But, oh! if you only knew the excuse that Miss Ellen made to avoid
      additional explanations," continued Marian, "you yourself—yes, you, sir, would be
      affected."
"What was that excuse?" demanded Greenwood.
"I can scarcely believe for one moment that it was true," said Marian, musing, rather than
      replying to his question.
"But what was it?" cried the Member of Parliament, impatiently.
"Oh! she spoke of the misery to which her father and herself had once been reduced, and she
       said that, prompted by despair, she had sold her virtue to one whom she knew
      not—whom she had never seen before nor since."
"Ah! she said that," murmured Greenwood. "And were her father and your master
      satisfied?"
"The old man wept well-nigh to break his heart, and Mr. Markham said that henceforth the
      child should stay with its mother in his house. Oh! sir, there lives not a man of nobler
      disposition than my master: he is all that is generous, humane, liberal, and upright!"
Mr. Greenwood turned aside, and appeared to contemplate some papers with deep interest for
      nearly a minute; and then he passed a handkerchief rapidly over his face.
Marian thought, as she afterwards informed Ellen, that he wiped tears from his eyes!
He made no reply, however, to her observations; but rang the bell for his French valet.
When Lafleur entered the room, Mr. Greenwood said, "You will proceed immediately to the
      abode of Mr. Wentworth, at Holloway: you will hand him from me this bank-note for fifty
      pounds; and you will say to him these words: 'As the child has been removed through an
       unforeseen occurrence from your care, its father sends you this as a small token of his
       gratitude for the kindness you have manifested towards it; and he hopes that, should you be
       questioned upon the subject, you will not reveal the fact that you ever had the slightest
       communication from its father.' Go—and return quickly."
Lafleur received the bank-note, bowed, and left the room.
"You can inform Miss Monroe of the step which I have thus taken to ensure the surgeon's
      secrecy," said Greenwood, addressing himself to Marian.
"I shall not fail to do so, sir," answered the servant.
She then withdrew.
When the door closed behind her, Greenwood threw himself back in his chair, murmuring, "My
      child beneath Richard's roof!"
