

CHAPTER CCXLII.   THE AUNT.
Albert Egerton now became the constant companion of the fashionable acquaintances whom he
      had accidentally picked up—or rather, who had cunningly picked up him.
He dined with them at Long's;—he formed with them parties to eat fish at Greenwich and
      Blackwall;—he became a member of Crockford's;—and every day he lost considerable sums to them
      in one shape of gambling or another.
They had ascertained that he was possessed, on coming of age a few weeks previously, of the
      handsome fortune of sixty thousand pounds; and they determined to appropriate the best portion
      of it to their own uses.
The Honourable Colonel Cholmondeley most obligingly acted as his Mentor in the choice of
      magnificent furnished apartments in Stratton Street;—Lord Dunstable was kind enough to
      purchase two thorough-breds for him, the price being only eight hundred guineas—a
      little transaction by which his lordship quietly pocketed three hundred as his own
      commission;—Mr. Chichester thought it no trouble to select a rare assortment of wines at one
      of the most fashionable merchants of the West End, and actually carried his good-nature so far
      as to see them carefully stowed away in the young dupe's cellar;—and Sir Rupert Harborough
      generously surrendered to him his cast-off mistress.
The four friends also conceived so violent an attachment towards Mr. Egerton, that they
      never lost sight of him. They managed matters so well that he had no time for compunctious
      reflections; for they invariably made him drunk ere they took him home to his bed; and when he
      awoke in the morning, the obliging Mr. Chichester was sure to be already there to give him
      sherry and soda-water.
Then Harborough would drop in to breakfast; and while Egerton was performing the duties of
      the toilette, Dunstable and Cholmondeley were sure to make their appearance.
Perhaps Egerton would complain of headach.
"Don't talk of headach, my dear fellow," Lord Dunstable exclaimed: "you were quite sober
      last night in comparison with me. My losses were terrific! A thousand to Cholmondeley—fifteen
      hundred to Chichester—and double as much to Harborough."
"It is very strange that I seldom win any thing," observed Egerton on one of these
      occasions: "and yet we can't all lose. Some one must be the gainer."
"Every one has his turn, my dear boy," cried Harborough. "But what shall we do to-day? Any
      thing going on at Tattersall's, Colonel?"
"Nothing particular," was the reply, lazily delivered. "Suppose we have some claret and
      cigars for an hour or two, and then play a rub of billiards till dinner-time. Of course we all
      dine together this evening."
"Oh! of course," chimed in Lord Dunstable. "What do you think the Duke of Highgate said of
      us all yesterday, Egerton?"
"I know not what he could have said of you," was the answer; "but I am sure he could have
      said nothing of me—for he cannot be aware that there is such a person in existence."
"Nonsense, my dear fellow!" exclaimed Dunstable: "you are as well known now in the
      fashionable world as any one of us. Every body is speaking of you; and it will be your own
      fault if you do not marry an heiress. We must introduce you at Almack's in due course. But I
      was speaking about my friend the Duke. His Grace met me yesterday as I was on my way to join
      you all at the Clarendon: and when I told him where I was going, he said with a laugh, 'Ah! I
      call you five the Inseparables!'—and away he went."
Egerton was profoundly gratified with the absurd
      flattery thus constantly poured in his ear; and as he really possessed a handsome
      person, he saw no difficulty in carrying out the idea of marrying an heiress.
And this same belief has proved fatal to thousands and thousands of young men placed in the
      same situation as Albert Egerton. They pursue a career of reckless extravagance and
      dissipation, buoying themselves up with the hope that when their present resources shall have
      passed away, it will be the easiest thing possible to rebuild their fortunes by means of
      marriage.
A month slipped away, and Egerton found himself on intimate terms with many "men about
      town"—one of the most popular members at Crockford's—a great favourite in certain titled but
      not over-particular families, where there were portionless daughters to "get off," and at
      whose house Lord Dunstable enjoyed the entrée—and the pride and delight (as
      he believed) of his four dear friends who had done so much for him!
And sure enough they had done a great deal in his behalf; for he had already sold out twenty
      thousand pounds, or one third of his entire fortune; but he was purposely kept in such an
      incessant whirl of excitement, pleasure, dissipation, and bustle, that he had no time for
      reflection.
One morning—it was about eleven o'clock—the young man awoke with aching head and feverish
      pulse, after the usual night's debauch; and it happened that none of his dear friends had yet
      arrived.
Egerton rang the bell for some white wine and soda-water to assuage the burning thirst which
      oppressed him; and when his livery-boy, or "tiger," appeared with the refreshing beverage, the
      young rake learnt that a lady was waiting to see him in the drawing-room.
"A lady!" exclaimed Egerton: "who the deuce can she be?"
"She is a stout, elderly lady, sir," said the tiger.
"And did she give no name?" inquired Egerton, beginning to suspect who his visitor was.
"No, sir," was the answer. "I assured her that you were not up yet, and that you never
      received any one at so early an hour; but she declared that you would see her; and I
      was obliged to show her into the drawing-room."
"Ah! it must be my aunt, then!" muttered Egerton to himself. "Bring me up some hot-water
      this minute, you young rascal:"—fashionable upstarts always vent their annoyances upon their
      servants;—"and then go and tell the lady that I will be with her in five minutes."
The tiger disappeared—returned with the hot-water—and then departed once more, to execute
      the latter portion of his master's orders.
Egerton felt truly wretched and ashamed of himself when he surveyed his pale cheeks and
      haggard eyes in the glass, and thought of the course which he had lately been pursuing. But
      then he remembered the flattery of his fashionable friends, and soothed his remorseful
      feelings by the idea that he was on intimate terms with all the "best men about town," was a
      member of Crockford's, and had the entrée of several families of
      distinction.
Moreover, when he was shaved and washed,—oiled and perfumed,—and attired in a clean shirt,
      black trousers, red morocco slippers, and an elegant dressing-gown, his appearance was so much
      more satisfactory to himself that he felt quite equal to the task of encountering his
      relative.
He accordingly proceeded, with a smile upon his lips and an easy unconstrained manner, to
      the drawing-room, where a respectable, motherly-looking, stout old lady was anxiously awaiting
      him.
"My dear Albert," she exclaimed, as he entered the apartment, "what have you been doing with
      yourself this last month, that you never come near us—no, not even on Sundays, as you used to
      do?"
And, while she spoke, the good-natured woman made a motion as if she were anxious to embrace
      her nephew; but he—well aware that it is improper to give way to one's feelings in the
      fashionable world—retreated a step or two, and graciously allowed his aunt to shake the tip of
      his fore-finger.
"Lor, Albert, how strange you are!" exclaimed the baffled relative. "But do tell me," she
      continued, quietly resuming her seat, "what you have been doing with yourself. Why
      did you leave your nice little lodging in Budge Row? why do you never come near us? why have
      you moved up into this part of the town? and why didn't you even write to tell us where you
      was living? If it hadn't been for Storks, your stock-broker, I shouldn't have known how to
      find you out; but he gave me your address."
"Storks!" murmured Egerton, turning very pale. "Did he tell you—any thing——"
"Oh! yes," continued the aunt, speaking with great volubility; "he told me that you had sold
      out a power of money;—but when he saw that I was annoyed, he assured me that it could only be
      for some good purpose. And it is so, Albert dear—isn't it?"
"Certainly—to be sure, aunt—Oh! certainly," stammered the young man, as he glanced uneasily
      towards the door.
"Well, now—I am glad of that, Albert," said the old lady, apparently relieved of a serious
      misgiving. "I said to your eldest cousin Susannah Rachel, says I, 'Albert is a good young
       man—quiet—steady—and firm in his resolve to follow in the footsteps of his dear lamented
       father':—here the aunt wiped her eyes;—'and,' says I, 'if he has sold out
       fifteen or twenty thousand pounds, depend, upon it he has bought a nice snug little estate;
       and he means to surprise us all by asking us to dine with him some Sunday at his
       country-house.' Am I right, Albert dear?"
"Oh! quite right, aunt," exclaimed the young man, overjoyed to find that his dissipated
      courses were unknown to his relatives. "And that was the reason why I did not go near you—nor
      yet write to you. But have a little patience—and, in a few weeks, I promise you and my cousins
      a pleasant day——"
"Well, well—I don't want to penetrate into your little secrets, you know," interrupted the
      aunt. "But how late you get up. Why, it is near twelve, I declare; and I rose this morning
      before day-light."
"I was detained last evening——"
"Ah! by your man of business, no doubt," cried the voluble old lady. "Many papers to read
      over and sign—contracts to make—leases to consider—deeds to study—Oh! I understand it all; and
      I am delighted, Albert, to find you so prudent."
"It is quite necessary, my dear aunt," said Egerton, in a hurried and nervous tone, for a
      thundering
      double-knock at that moment reverberated through the house. "But I am afraid—that
      is, I think—some one is coming, who——"
"Oh! never mind me, dear Al," observed the old lady. "I shall just rest myself for half an
      hour or so, before I take the omnibus back to the Pavement."
"Certainly, my dear aunt—but——"
The door opened; and Lord Dunstable entered the room.
"Ah! my dear Egerton!" he exclaimed, rushing forward, with out-stretched hand, to greet his
      young friend: but, perceiving the lady, who had risen from the sofa, he stopped short, and
      bowed to her with distant politeness—for it struck him at the moment that she might be a
      washerwoman, or the mother of Egerton's servant, or a shirt-maker, or some such kind of
      person.
"How d'ye do, sir?" said the aunt, in acknowledgment of the bow; and, resuming her seat, she
      observed, "I find it very warm for the time of year. But then I was scrooged up in an omnibus
      for near an hour—all packed as close as herrings in a barrel; and that's not pleasant—is it,
      sir?"
"By no means, madam," answered Dunstable, in a cold tone; while Egerton bit his lips—at a
      loss what to do.
"Well—it is not pleasant," continued the garrulous lady. "And now, when I think of
      it, I have a call to make in Aldgate to-day; and so, when I leave here, I shall take a
      Whitechapel 'bus. Nasty place that Aldgate, sir?"
"Really, madam, I never heard of it until now," said Lord Dunstable, with marvellous
      stiffness of manner.
"Never heard of Aldgate, sir?" literally shouted the lady. "Why, you must be very green in
      London, then."
"I know no place east of Temple Bar, madam," was the cold reply. "I am aware that there
       are human habitations on the other side; and I could perhaps find my way to the
      Bank—but nothing more, madam, I can assure you."
And he turned towards Egerton, who was pretending to look out of the window.
"Well—I never!" exclaimed the lady, now eyeing the nobleman with sovereign contempt.
"My dear aunt," said Egerton, desperately resolved to put an end if possible to this awkward
      scene; "allow me to introduce my friend Lord Dunstable: Lord Dunstable—Mrs. Bustard."
"Oh! delighted at the honour!" cried the nobleman, instantly conquering his surprise at this
      announcement of the relationship existing between his young friend and the vulgar lady who
      complained of having been "scrooged up in an omnibus:"—"proud, madam, to form your
      acquaintance!"
And his features instantly beamed with smiles—a relaxation from his former chilling manner,
      which appeared like a sudden transition from the north pole to the tropics.
On her side, the aunt had started up from the sofa, quite electrified by the mention of the
      magic words—"Lord Dunstable;" and there she stood, cruelly embarrassed, and bobbing
      up and down in a rapid series of curtseys at every word which the nobleman addressed to her.
      For this was the first time in her life that she had ever exchanged a syllable with a Lord,
      unless it were with a Lord Mayor on one or two occasions—but that was only "cakes and
      gingerbread" in comparison with the excitement of forming the acquaintance of a real Lord
      whose title was not the temporary splendour of a single year.
"I really must apologise, my dear madam," said the nobleman, now speaking in the most
      amiable manner possible, "for having affected ere now not to know anything of the City. I
      cannot fancy how I could have been so foolish. As for the Mansion House, it is the finest
      building in the world; and Lombard Street is the very focus of attraction. With Aldgate I am
      well acquainted; and a pleasant spot it is, too. The butchers' shops in the neighbourhood must
      be quite healthy for consumptive people. Then you have Whitechapel, madam;—fine—wide—and open:
      the Commercial Road—delightful proof of the industry of this great city;—and, best of all,
      there is the Albion in Aldersgate Street,—where, by the by, Egerton," he added, turning
      towards his friend, "we will all dine to-day, if you like."
"Oh! yes—certainly," said Egerton, smiling faintly.
But Dunstable was too good a judge to show that he even perceived the honest vulgarity of
      his friend's aunt: he accordingly seated himself near her upon the sofa, and rattled away, in
      the most amiable manner possible, upon the delights of the City. He then listened with great
      apparent interest to the long story which the old lady told him,—how she kept a haberdashery
      warehouse on the Pavement, and did a very tidy business,—how she had five daughters all
      "well-edicated gals as could be, and which was Albert's own first cousins,"—how her late
      husband had once been nearly an alderman and quite a sheriff,—how she and her deceased partner
      dined with the Lord Mayor "seven years ago come next November,"—how she had been lately
      plundered of three hundred pounds' worth of goods by a French Marchioness, who turned out to
      be an English swindler,—and how she strongly suspected that young Tedworth Jones, the only son
      of the great tripe-man in Bishopsgate Street Without, was making up to her third daughter,
      Clarissa Jemima.
To all this, we say, Lord Dunstable listened with the deepest interest; and, at the
      conclusion, he expressed a hope that if the anticipated match did come off between Mr.
      Tedworth Jones and Miss Clarissa Jemima Bustard, he should have the honour of receiving an
      invitation on the happy occasion.
Even Egerton himself was rendered more comfortable by the distinguished politeness with
      which his aunt was treated; but he was not the less delighted when she rose and took her
      departure.
As soon as the door was shut behind her, Dunstable hastened to observe, "There goes an
      estimable woman—I can vouch for it! What would England's commerce be without such industrious,
      plodding, intelligent persons as your aunt? Egerton, my boy, you ought to be proud of her—as I
      am of her acquaintance. But there is Chichester's knock, I'll swear!"
In a few moments the gentleman alluded to made his appearance; and the scene with the aunt
      was soon forgotten.
The day was passed in the usual profitless manner; and the greater portion of the night
      following was spent in gaming and debauchery.
