
CHAPTER CCXXXIX.   THE RESURRECTION MAN'S RETURN HOME.
As the Resurrection Man hurried through the fields, amidst the darkness of the night, he
      vented in horrible imprecations the rage he experienced at the failure of a scheme to which he
      had devoted so much time and trouble.
He knew that the blank acceptance which he had extorted from Vernon, and which he had looked
      upon as the safe guarantee of the speedy acquisition of three thousand pounds, was now but a
      valueless slip of paper; and he cursed himself for having been foolish enough to advance some
      two or three hundred guineas of his own money to furnish his late employer with the supplies
      necessary for his purposes.
But as a set-off against these disappointments he had one consolation—a consolation which to
      a less avaricious mind would have been more than commensurate with the losses that Tidkins
      deplored. He was possessed of Lady Ravensworth's valuable casket of jewels, which he had
      removed, a few days
      after he had obtained it in the manner already described, to his house in Globe
      Town.
And it was to this den that he was now repairing. He was as yet unacquainted with the fate
      of Gilbert Vernon; but, supposing it probable that justice might already have that individual
      in his grasp, he at once determined to provide for his own safety. Abandoning, therefore, all
      his long-nourished schemes of vengeance against the Prince of Montoni, the Rattlesnake, and
      Crankey Jem, Tidkins was now intent only on securing his treasure, and taking his departure
      for America with the least possible delay.
It was about two o'clock in the morning when the Resurrection Man, sinking with the fatigues
      of his long and circuitous journey round all the northern outskirts of London, arrived at his
      own house.
Wearied as he was, he wasted no time in snatching a temporary repose: a glass of spirits
      recruited his strength and invigorated his energies; and, with his bunch of keys in his hand,
      he repaired from his own chamber to the rooms on the ground-floor.
It will be remembered that on a former occasion,—on his return home, in the middle of the
      month of March, after his escape from the Middlesex House of Correction,—the Resurrection Man
      had perceived certain indications which led him to imagine that the step of an intruder had
      visited the ground-floor and the subterranean part of his house. His suspicions had fallen
      upon Banks; but an interview with this individual convinced him that those suspicions were
      unfounded; for although he did not question him point-blank upon the subject, yet his
      penetration was such, that he could judge of the real truth by the undertaker's manner.
Since that period Tidkins had visited his house in Globe Town on several occasions—indeed,
      as often as he could possibly get away from Ravensworth Hall for the greater portion of a day;
      and, perceiving no farther indications of the intrusion of a stranger, he became confirmed in
      the belief which had succeeded his first suspicions, and which was that he had been influenced
      by groundless alarms.
But now, the moment he put the key into the lock of the door in the alley, he uttered a
      terrible imprecation—for the key would not turn, and there was evidently something in the
      lock!
Hastily picking the lock with one of those wire-instruments which are used for the purpose
      by burglars, he extracted from it a piece of a key which had broken in the wards.
Fearful was now the rage of the Resurrection Man; and when he had succeeded in opening the
      door, he precipitated himself madly into that department of his abode.
But what pen can describe his savage fury, when, upon lighting a lantern, he saw the trap
      raised, and the brick removed from the place in the chimney where it covered the secret means
      of raising the hearth-stone?
Plunging desperately down into the subterranean, at the risk of breaking his neck, Tidkins
      felt like one on whose eyes a hideous spectre suddenly bursts, when he beheld the door of a
      cell—the very cell in which his treasure was concealed—standing wide open!
Staggering now, as a drunken man—and no longer rushing wildly along,—but dragging himself
      painfully,—Tidkins reached that cell.
His worst fears were confirmed: the stone in the centre was removed from its place;—and his
      treasure was gone!
Yes:—money-bags and jewel-casket—the produce of heaven only knows how much atrocity and
      blackest crime—had disappeared.
This was the second time that his hoarded wealth was snatched from him.
Then did that man—so energetic in the ways of turpitude, so strong in the stormy paths of
      guilt,—then did he sink down, with a hollow groan, upon the cold floor of the cell.
For a few minutes he lay like one deprived of sense and feeling, the only indications of
      life being the violent clenching of his fists, and the demoniac workings of his cadaverous
      countenance.
Cadaverous!—never did the face of a wretched being in the agonies of strangulation by
      hanging, present so appalling—so hideous an appearance!
But in a short time the Resurrection Man started up with a savage howl and a terrible
      imprecation: his energies—prostrated for a period—revived; and his first idea, when arousing
      from that torpor, was vengeance—a fearful vengeance upon the plunderer.
But who was that plunderer? whose hand had suddenly beggared him?
His suspicions instantly fixed themselves upon two persons—the only two of his accomplices
      who were acquainted with the mysteries of the subterranean.
These were Banks and the Buffer.
He was about to turn from the cell, and repair forthwith—even at that hour—to the dwelling
      of the undertaker, when his eyes suddenly fell upon some letters scrawled in chalk upon the
      pavement, and which the position of the lantern had hitherto prevented him from observing.
He stooped down, and read the words—"James Cuffin."
The mystery was solved: his mortal enemy, Crankey Jem, had robbed him of his treasure!
Dark—terribly ominous and foreboding—was now the cloud which overspread the countenance of
      the Resurrection Man.
"Had I ten times the wealth I have lost," he muttered to himself, with a hyena-like growl,
      "I would not quit this country till I had wreaked my vengeance upon that man! But this is now
      no place for me: he has tracked me here—he may set the traps upon me. Let us see if the Bully
      Grand cannot discover his lurking hole."
With these words,—and now displaying that outward calmness which often covers the most
      intensely concentrated rage,—the Resurrection Man quitted the subterranean, carefully securing
      the doors behind him.
He purposely broke a key in the lock of the door leading into the dark alley, so as to
      prevent the intrusion of any of the neighbours, should their curiosity tempt them to visit the
      place; for he made up his mind not to return thither again so long as Jem Cuffin was alive and
      able to betray him.
Having provided himself with a few necessaries, he closed the up-stairs rooms, and then took
      his departure.
He bent his steps towards the house of the undertaker in Globe Lane; and, knocking him up,
      obtained admittance and a bed.
When he awoke from a sound sleep, into which sheer fatigue plunged him in spite of the
      unpleasant nature of his thoughts, it was broad-day-light.

He immediately rose and despatched one of Banks's boys for the morning newspaper;
      and from its columns he learnt the fate of the Honourable Gilbert Vernon.
"Better so than that he should have remained alive perhaps to repent, as these sentimental
      humbugs in high life usually do, and then blab against me," murmured Tidkins to himself. "The
      whole business at the Hall is evidently wrapped in considerable mystery; and there I hope it
      will remain. But now let me devote myself heart and soul to my search after that scoundrel
      Crankey Jem."
