
CHAPTER LI. DIANA AND ELIZA.
ON the morning following the events just narrated, Mrs. Arlington was seated at breakfast in
      a sweet little parlour of the splendid mansion which the Earl of Warrington had taken and
      fitted up for her in Dover Street, Piccadilly.
It was about eleven o'clock; and the Enchantress was attired in a delicious
       deshabillé. With her little feet upon an ottoman near the fender, and her fine form
      reclining in a luxurious large arm-chair, she divided her attention between her chocolate and
      the columns of the Morning Herald. She invariably prolonged the morning's repast as
      much as possible, simply because it served to wile away the time until the hour for dressing
      arrived. Then visits received, filled up the interval till three or four o'clock, when the
      carriage came round to the door. A drive in the park, or shopping (according to the state of
      the weather) occupied the time until six or seven. Then another toilet in preparation for
      dinner. In the evening a tête-à-tête with the Earl of Warrington, who had, perhaps,
      arrived in time for dinner,—or a visit to a theatre, the Opera, or a concert,—and to bed at
      midnight, or frequently much later.
Such was the routine of the Enchantress's existence.
The Earl of Warrington behaved most liberally towards her. On the first day of every month
      he enclosed her a cheque upon his banker for two hundred guineas. He supplied her cellar with
      wine, and frequently made her the most splendid presents of jewellery, plate, cachmeres,
      etc. The furniture for her mansion had cost fifteen hundred pounds; and all the bills were
      paid in her name. She was not extravagant, as women in her situation usually are; and
      therefore, so far from incurring debts, she saved money.
We cannot say that the Earl of Warrington positively loved her. His first
      affections in life had experienced such a blight, that they might almost be said to have been
      interred in the grave of defeated hopes and aspirations. He could therefore never
       love again. But he liked Mrs. Arlington; and he had every reason to believe
      that she was faithful to him. He was charmed with her conversation and her manners: he saw in
      her a woman who gave herself no airs, but, on the contrary, exerted herself in every way to
      please him;—she never attempted to excite his jealousy, nor affected gusts of passion merely
      for the sake of asserting her independence or of proving the hold which she possessed over
      him;—and in her society he forgot the cares of
       politics (in which he was profoundly interested) and all those other little
      annoyances, real or imaginary, to which every one in this world is subject, be his condition
      never so prosperous!
And Diana was faithful to him. She was a woman naturally inclined to
      virtue:—circumstances had made her what she was. She looked upon the Earl of Warrington as a
      benefactor; and, although she did not actually love him more than he loved her, she
       liked him upon pretty nearly the same principles that he liked her. Her vanity was
      flattered by having captivated and being able to retain a handsome man, whose wealth and high
      rank rendered him an object of desire on the part of all ladies situated as was Diana;—she
      moreover found him an agreeable companion, kind, and indulgent;—and thus their
       liaison continued upon a basis which nothing appeared to threaten, nor even to
      weaken.
They never spoke of love in reference to their connection. The earl was never upon his knees
      at the feet of his mistress; nor did he repeat vows of constancy and fidelity every time he
      saw her. She acted on the same principle towards him. There was a great amount of real
      friendship and good feeling between those two;—but not an atom of mawkish sentimentality. The
      earl could trust Diana: he consulted her upon many of his plans and proceedings,
      whether in regard to his political career or the management of his estate; and she invariably
      tendered him the advice which appeared most consistent with his interests. He therefore placed
      the fullest confidence in her;—and hence have we seen her carrying out all his generous plans
      with reference to Eliza Sydney.
But to continue.
Mrs. Arlington was seated at breakfast, as we have before stated, when a servant entered and
      informed her that Miss Sydney requested a few minutes' conversation with her. Diana
      immediately ordered Eliza to be admitted.
"Pardon this early and unceremonious visit, my dear friend," said Eliza, affectionately
      grasping the hand that was stretched out to welcome her.
"I am always at home to you, Eliza," answered the Enchantress. "But how pale you are!
      Come—sit down here—close by me—and tell me in what way I can be of service to you."
"My dear friend," continued Eliza, "I have a secret to reveal to you—and a deed of infamy to
      narrate——"
"Oh! you alarm me, Eliza! Has any harm happened to yourself?"
"No, thank heavens! The compunction of one man saved me from disgrace and ruin. But read
      this—it will explain all."
With these words, Eliza handed to Mrs. Arlington the letter which Stephens had thrust under
      the stair-carpet at the villa on the preceding evening.
Diana perused the letter with attention; and a flash of indignation animated her fine
      countenance, as she thus made herself acquainted with the atrocious plot contrived by
      Greenwood against the honour of Eliza Sydney.
"Such is the villany of George Montague!" cried Diana at the termination of the perusal of
      that letter.
"Forgive me, dearest friend," said Eliza, taking the hand of Mrs. Arlington and pressing it
      between her own;—"forgive me if I have kept back one secret of my life from your knowledge.
      That George Montague—I once loved him!"
"You!" exclaimed Mrs. Arlington in surprise.
"Yes, Diana—I once loved that man—before the fatal exposure which led to my
      imprisonment;—but he behaved like a villain—he endeavoured to take advantage of my
      affection;—and I smothered the feeling in my bosom!"
"Oh! you did well—you did well thus to triumph over a passion which would have been fatal to
      your happiness;—for never would your hopes have been fulfilled—with honour to yourself," added
      Mrs. Arlington, sinking her voice almost to a whisper.
"Alas! you are right! I stood upon the brink of a precipice—I escaped;—but Montague, or
      Greenwood,—whichever he may choose to call himself,—pursues me with a view of accomplishing my
      dishonour."
"The crimes of that man are unlimited, and his perseverance is unwearied," said Diana.
"What plan can I adopt," demanded Eliza, "to escape his machinations? What system can I
      pursue to avoid his persecution? Conceive my affright when upon awaking this morning, I
      remembered that I had not retired to bed last evening of my own accord—that I could think of
      nothing that had occurred since supper-time! Then I found that the bell-rope in my
      sleeping-room was cut, and that a weapon which I have been in the habit of keeping beneath my
      pillow ever since I first dwelt in the villa, had disappeared! Oh! I was alarmed—I shuddered,
      although it was broad day-light, and every thing was calm and silent around. At length I
      summoned the servant—and she entered, bearing a letter which she had discovered a few moments
      before beneath the stair-carpet. That letter is the one you read ere now;—and it explained
      all. Tell me—tell me, Diana, how am I to avoid the persecution, and combat the intrigues of
      this man?"
"Alas! my dear friend," replied Mrs. Arlington, after a few minutes' consideration, "I know
      of no effectual method save that of leaving London."
"And if I leave London, I will leave England," said Miss Sydney. "But I can do nothing
      without the consent of him to whom I am under such deep obligations."
"You mean the Earl of Warrington," observed Mrs. Arlington. "I admire the sentiment of
      gratitude which animates you. The earl will do all he can to forward your views and contribute
      to your happiness. You shall pass the day with me, Eliza; here at least you are safe;—and I
      will immediately write a note to the earl, and request him to call upon me without delay."
"His lordship will be perhaps annoyed——"
"Fear nothing, Eliza. I will see the earl in another room. And let not this disinclination
      to meet you on his part, cause you pain: you well know the motive of his conduct. The memory
      of your mother——"
"I am well aware he can have no antipathy towards me, on my own account," interrupted Eliza;
      "else he could not have acted towards me in a way which claims all my gratitude!"
Mrs. Arlington dispatched the note to Lord Warrington, and then hastened to dress to receive
      him.
In an hour the earl arrived.
He and Mrs. Arlington were then closeted together for a considerable time.
It was four o'clock when the nobleman took his departure, and Diana returned to the room
      where she had left Eliza Sydney.
"The Earl of Warrington," said the Enchantress, whose countenance was animated with joy,
      "has listened with attention to the tale of atrocity which I have related to him in respect to
      George Montague Greenwood. His lordship and myself—for he does me the honour to consult
      me—have debated upon
       the best means of ensuring your tranquillity and safety; and we have decided
      that you had better quit England for a time. The perseverance of that bold bad man, backed by
      his wealth, may succeed in effecting your ruin—you yourself remaining innocent of guilty
      participation! The earl has recommended Italy as the country most likely to please you—and the
      more so because he himself possesses a charming villa in the State of Castelcicala."
"How kind of his lordship!" exclaimed Eliza, tears of gratitude starting into her eyes.
"Some years ago," continued Diana, "the earl set out upon a continental tour, and passed two
      years at Montoni, the capital of the Grand Duchy of Castelcicala. So charmed was he with that
      delightful city, that he purchased a small estate in the suburbs, with the idea of spending
      the summer from time to time amidst Italian scenery and beneath an Italian sky. The idea has,
      however, been displaced by others arising from new occupations and fresh interests; and for a
      long period has the villa at Montoni remained uninhabited, save by an old porter and his wife.
      The house is situate upon the banks of the river which flows through Montoni, and commands the
      most delicious views. That villa is to be your residence so long as it may be agreeable; and
      the earl will make arrangements with his London bankers so that your income may be regularly
      paid you by their agents at Montoni. His lordship has moreover instructed me to supply you
      with the necessary funds for your travelling expenses."
"Oh! my dearest friend, how can I ever testify my gratitude——"
"Not a word—not a word!" interrupted Mrs. Arlington, playfully closing Eliza's lips with her
      hand. "The earl conceives that he is performing a duty, sacred to the memory of his deceased
      uncle, in thus caring for you, who are the offspring of that uncle's daughter; and, on my
      part, Eliza—on my part, it is a pleasure to do you a service. But I have not yet finished. The
      earl has gone straight to Richmond, to call upon a certain Count Alteroni—a noble exile from
      the Grand Duchy of Castelcicala—with whom it appears the earl was acquainted in Italy. His
      object is to obtain for you a few letters of introduction to some of the best families of
      Montoni, so that you may not want society."
"I shall live in so retired a manner," said Eliza, "that this additional act of kindness was
      scarcely necessary."
"The earl will have his own way; and perhaps those letters may prove useful to you—who can
      tell?" exclaimed Mrs. Arlington. "But I must observe that I cannot think of parting with you
      any more until you leave England altogether. In three or four days the necessary preparations
      for your journey will be completed: meantime you must remain here as my guest. The earl
      himself recommended this step; that is," added Mrs. Arlington, "if my house be agreeable to
      you, and my society——"
"Oh! how can you entertain a doubt on that head?" cried Eliza, embracing Diana with the most
      grateful fervour. "Ah! it is but a few hours since I said how happy I should be to call you by
      the endearing name of Sister!"
"And would you not blush, Eliza, to call me your sister?" said Mrs. Arlington, in a tone
      deeply affected.
"Blush to call you my sister!" exclaimed Miss Sydney, as if she repelled the idea with
      indignation: "Oh! no—never, never! You are the most noble-hearted of women, and as such, I
      love—I revere you!"
"We will then be sisters in heart, although not in blood," said Diana, warmly returning her
      friend's embrace; "and perhaps our affection towards each other will be more sincere than that
      existing between many who are really the offspring of the same parents."
Mrs. Arlington gave directions to her servants that she was not "at home" to a soul, save
      the Earl of Warrington; and the ride in the park—the shopping—the theatre in the evening—all
      were sacrificed by Diana to the pleasure of Eliza's society.
Miss Sydney dispatched a note to the villa at Upper Clapton, announcing her intention of
      staying a few days with Mrs. Arlington. In the evening, Louisa, who had just returned from the
      journey on which the fictitious letter written by Stephens had sent her, made her appearance
      in Dover Street, with clothes, etc. for her mistress, and she then received instructions
      relative to the intended departure for the Continent.
