
CHAPTER CCXLVI.   THE PARTY AT RAVENSWORTH HALL.
During Albert Egerton's absence, the conversation in the drawing-room had at first turned
      upon the subject of the old gardener's statements respecting the ghost.
Lord Dunstable, Mr. Chichester, and Sir Rupert Harborough expressed their firm belief in the
      truth of the story—simply because they were anxious to serve their friend Egerton, and get the
      aunt and cousins back again to London as speedily as possible. For they feared that if an
      exposure were to take place, and if the deception relative to the ownership of the Hall were
      by any accident to transpire, the remonstrances, reproaches, and accompanying advice which
      Egerton's relations were certain to lavish upon him, might have the effect of reclaiming him
      entirely—a prospect by no means pleasant to the minds of those adventurers, who were resolved
      to pluck him to his very last feather.
Colonel Cholmondeley, although completely agreeing with his friends in all matters of this
      nature, nevertheless proclaimed his total disbelief of the ghost story. This he did simply
      because it would have appeared too pointed had all Egerton's friends combined unanimously in
      recommending that the party should return to London immediately after the collation.
"For my part," said Mr. Tedworth Jones, "I believe every word that the old man uttered.
      Love, poetry, and ghosts seem to me to go together. For what is love, unless the lover who
      loses her whom he loves, can soothe the agony of his mind by the conviction that she—the dear
      lost one—is ever near him in the shape of a disembodied spirit?"
And, having delivered himself of this splendid proof of his poetic mind, Mr. Tedworth Jones
      glanced triumphantly around him.
"How sweet you do talk, to be sure, my dear Tedworth!" murmured the enraptured Clarissa
      Jemima. "It was your conversation," she added, in a loving whisper, "that first made an
      impression upon my heart."
"And did my poetry have no influence, dearest?" asked Mr. Jones, in a tone of increasing
      mawkishness, and so far above a whisper that the words were overheard by Mr. Chichester.
"Ah! now I have found you out, Mr. Jones!" cried this gentleman, who most probably had
      certain reasons of his own for playing the amiable towards the wealthy tripeman's heir:
      "you're a poet—eh? Well—I thought so from the very first. In fact you have the air of a
      poet—you wear your collar like a poet—you look altogether like a poet."
Now, although Mr. Tedworth Jones looked at that precise moment, and at most other moments
      also, more like an ass than a poet, he nevertheless felt the compliment in its most flattering
      sense; and after a considerable degree of whispering on his part with Clarissa, and giggling
      and whispering also on hers, it transpired that Mr. Tedworth Jones had addressed to his
      beloved a great variety of poetical compositions.
"And I can assure you that they are very pretty too," cried Mrs. Bustard, who was by no
      means an indifferent spectatress of this scene.
"But you should print them, my dear sir—you should print them," exclaimed Mr. Chichester.
      "Let the world welcome you at once as a great poet."
"Well," said Mr. Tedworth Jones, his whole countenance becoming as red as his hair, so that
      it seemed as if he were about to go off in a state of spontaneous combustion; "I did venture
      to print little piece a few weeks ago."
"Indeed!" said Chichester, apparently much delighted at this announcement: "in some
      periodical, I presume?"

"No—it was to have been struck off on a few sheets of gilt-edged paper—just to
      circulate privately amongst my friends, you know," replied Mr. Jones: "but really the
      compositors made such an awful mull of the first proof that I never had the courage to let
      them go on!"
"That was a very great pity," observed Chichester.
"I can show you the original copy and the first proof, if you like," continued Mr. Jones;
      "and you may then judge for yourself how far I was justified in being angry with the
      printers."
Mr. Chichester of course expressed the utmost curiosity to see the poem and the proof; and
      the favour was conceded by Mr. Jones, after some slight opposition on the part of Clarissa,
      who thought that such a display was improper in respect to a lady "in her situation."
The papers were, however, handed over to Mr. Chichester, who began by reading aloud the
      following manuscript copy of verses:—

TO CLARISSA JEMIMA.
Oh! sweet Clarissa—ever dearest love!
What palpitations does my fond heart prove
When thy coy hand I press!
Who can depict th' ineffable delight
 With which thy glances break upon the night
 Of my sad loneliness? 
True as the Boreal Lights unto the Pole,
Those looks shed lustre on my sadden'd soul,
And bid sweet visions rise
To cheer me in my wandering path, and give
A plea to nurse the thought that I may live
To bask in thy bless'd eyes!
Yes—dark as seemeth this wide world to me,
Perverse as human hearts appear to be,
Thou art all truth and joy!
For thee the incense of my altar burns;
To thee my grateful memory ever turns
With bliss that ne'er can cloy!

These verses were received with great applause by all present; but during the reading of
      them Clarissa had thought it quite becoming for a young lady "in her situation" to burst into
      tears, and throw herself in a sort of hysterical frenzy into her mamma's arms.
This little bit of tragedy was, however, soon got over; and, the manuscript copy of the
      verses having been disposed of, Mr. Chichester proceeded to read aloud the first proof of the
      stanzas in print:—

TO ALRISSA GEMINI.
Oh! sweet Alrissa—ever cleanest bore!
What fluctuations does my proud heart pour
When thy toy's hand I guess!
Who can defect th' inexorable delight
With which thy flounces break upon the sight
Of my bad loveliness?
Trim as the Rascal Sights unto the Pole,
Those locks shed bistre on my padded soul,
And bid smart onions rise
To churn me in my mantling path and give
A flea to nerve the thought that I may live
To bask in thy blear'd eyes!
You bark as smelleth this vile work to me,
Peruse as human beasts appear to be,
Then act all trash and gag!
For thee the nonsense of my utter brims;
To thee my platefull simmering ever trims
With flies that now can't bag!

"I think you will grant that the printers made a slight mull of my writing?" said Mr. Jones,
      when Chichester had brought this specimen of typography to a conclusion.
"Yes—a slight mull, as you observe," returned this gentleman, who, together with his own
      friends, was scarcely able to repress a boisterous outbreak of mirth. "But it is impossible to
      feel any annoyance at that strange assemblage of misconceptions on the part of the printer,
      since the original itself is so perfectly beautiful."
"Oh! yes—so very charming!" whispered Clarissa Jemima to her lover.
Mr. Jones looked a complete encyclopædia of tender emotions; and the happy couple,
      forgetting that other persons were present, continued their discourse in whispers.
"Well, I declare," said Miss Susannah Rachel, after a pause, "I don't think I shall ever
      again be able to sleep without a light in the room, after all that has been told us about the
      ghost."
"And I shall always cover my head over with the clothes," lisped another female specimen of
      the Bustard race.
"I've been told," remarked the fourth daughter, "that a horse-shoe nailed to the door of a
      room will prevent evil spirits from passing the threshold."
"Or sleep with a Bible under your pillow," said the fifth Miss Bustard.
"That's all very well, gals," observed the parent of this most interesting family; "but
      ghostesses won't be kept away by such means as them. Where there's evil spirits, there evil
      spirits will be."
"Nothing can possibly be clearer, madam," exclaimed Lord Dunstable.
"And if they must walk, they will walk," continued Mrs. Bustard.
"Your arguments are really admirable, madam."
"And so it's of no use bothering oneself about it—beyond getting away as soon as possible
      from the place where ghostesses are," added the lady.
"Were you of the other sex, madam, I should say you had graduated at Oxford," remarked the
      nobleman; "for you reason with all the logic of Euclid."
"Is Mr. Euclid such a very clever man, my lord?" asked Mrs. Bustard.
Dunstable was suddenly seized with a violent fit of coughing:—at least so it appeared to the
      good-natured old lady; inasmuch as he was forced to keep his handkerchief to his mouth for a
      considerable time.
Egerton now re-appeared, and suggested a ramble about the grounds, while the collation was
      being spread. Mrs. Bustard was anxious to go over the mansion; but Egerton negatived that
      proposal by stating that as he had not yet compared the contents of the various rooms with the
      inventory, it would not be fair to institute any such examination unless attended by the
      persons in charge of the place; and they were too busy with the preparations for the luncheon
      to spare time for that purpose.
The ramble was accordingly agreed to; and the party descended to the gardens.
"Well, my dear Albert," said Mrs. Bustard, as they roved through the grounds, "I admire the
      edifisk and I admire the gardens very much; but I don't like the evil spirit. You'll never be
      happy
      in this lonely place until you marry, and have a companion."
"Marry!" exclaimed Egerton, into whose head the idea had only entered as one suggesting a
      means to repair his fortunes, when they should be completely shattered.
"Yes—marry, to be sure!" continued his good-natured but garrulous relative. "Let me see—I
      think I could make up an excellent match for you. What should you say to Miss Posselwaithe,
      the great paviour's daughter?"
"Oh! my dear madam," exclaimed Lord Dunstable, "your nephew may look somewhat higher than a
      paviour's daughter. I intend that he shall marry a lady of title as well as of
      fortune. Only think how well it will sound in the Morning Herald—'Mr. and
       Lady Egerton, of Ravensworth Park.'"
"So it would—so it would!" cried the aunt, delighted with the prospect thus held out.
And in this way they chatted until the bell on the roof of the Hall rang to summon them to
      the collation.
The table was spread in "the haunted room;" and the company took their places with a
      determination to do ample justice to the excellent cheer.
We have already given the reader to understand that there was a most liberal supply of
      eatables provided for this occasion: we should also state that the wine was equally plentiful
      and good; and the champagne soon circulated with great freedom. Mrs. Bustard permitted Lord
      Dunstable to fill her glass as often as he chose; and that was very often indeed. As for her
      daughters, they one and all declared to the gentlemen who respectively sate next to them, that
      they really could not possibly think of taking more than a quarter of a glass; but it happened
      that, after a great deal of simpering, giggling, and blushing, they managed to toss off each a
      bumper; and somehow or another their eyes were averted when their glasses were being refilled;
      and on the third occasion of such replenishment, they took it as a matter of course.
Things went on so comfortably, that Egerton's spirits rose to as high a state of exuberance
      as if he were really the owner of the splendid mansion in which he was entertaining his
      relations and friends:—Mrs. Bustard declared that she never had seen any thing so pleasant
      since the day when her poor deceased husband and herself dined with the Lord Mayor;—Mr.
      Tedworth Jones insisted upon singing a song which he had himself composed to his intended, and
      the two first lines of which delicately eulogised the fair "Clarissa," and plainly stated how
      grieved the poet would be to "miss her;"—and even the young lady herself was so happy and
      contented that she forgot to reproach her lover for thus publicly complimenting one "in her
      situation."
Dunstable flattered the old lady: Cholmondeley, Harborough, and Chichester made themselves
      agreeable to the young ones; and every thing was progressing as "merry as a marriage bell,"
      when the old gardener rushed franticly into the room, carrying his paper cap in one hand, his
      wig in the other, and bawling at the top of his cracked voice, "A corpse! a corpse!"
Every one started from his seat around the table, and surveyed the gardener with looks of
      astonishment.
For a moment Egerton and his four fashionable friends imagined that this was some scheme of
      the gardener to break up the party, and was therefore to some extent a stratagem in favour of
      Egerton himself: but a second glance at the horror-struck countenance of the old man convinced
      them that his present conduct was far different from a mere feint.
"A corpse! a corpse!" he repeated, casting haggard looks around.
"What in the name of heaven do you mean?" demanded Egerton, now advancing towards him.
The gardener sank, trembling all over, upon a seat; and Egerton made him swallow a glass of
      wine.
In a few minutes he grew more composed, put on his wig,—which, it seemed, bad fallen off as
      he was rushing up the stairs,—and then related in his characteristic round-about manner the
      causes of his ejaculations and his alarms.
But it will perhaps suit the convenience of the reader much better if we explain the whole
      affair in our own language, and as succinctly as possible.
It appeared, then, that while the company in the drawing-room were discussing their wine,
      and the gardener, his wife, and the servants in attendance upon the vehicles, were dining off
      the remains of the banquet in the kitchen, a stout, hearty, decently dressed man, of about
      eight-and-forty years of age, was passing through a field near Ravensworth Hall. He was
      accompanied by a beautiful terrier, with which he amused himself by throwing a small stick to
      as great a distance as he could, and making the dog fetch it back to him. The little animal
      was very sagacious, and performed its duty well: until at last the man threw the stick into a
      certain part of the field where the dog persisted in remaining, instead of hastening back to
      its master. Vainly did the man whistle and call from a distance: the dog would not obey him,
      but kept scratching in a particular spot from which it would not stir. Thither did the man
      accordingly proceed; and, on reaching the spot, he found the dog working away with its little
      paws in a hollow which had doubtless been caused by the recent rains. At the same time a
      nauseous effluvium assailed the man's nostrils; and, on examining the spot more attentively,
      he discovered—to his indescribable horror—a human hand protruding from the soil!
It was almost a skeleton-hand; but the black and rotting flesh still clung to it, and the
      fibres were not so far decomposed as to cease to hold the joints of the fingers together.
Seizing the dog in his arms, the man tore the little animal away from the spot where so
      appalling a spectacle appeared; and, without farther hesitation, he hurried to the Hall.
      Having found his way to the servants' offices, he communicated his discovery to the old
      gardener and to the servants who had accompanied Egerton's party to the mansion. The first
      impulse of Abraham Squiggs was to hurry up stairs and alarm the guests with the strange news
      thus brought; but Lord Dunstable's lacquey suggested the impropriety of disturbing the
      company, and proposed that the spot should be first examined by means of mattocks and
      spades.
This plan was immediately assented to: and, the gardener having procured the implements
      required, the owner of the dog hastened to lead the way to the place where the human hand
      appeared above the ground. Mrs. Squiggs protested against being
      left behind: she was accordingly allowed to form one of the party.
On reaching the spot, the news which the stranger had imparted were found to be correct; and
      the exposed member was viewed with looks of horror and alarm.
"Some foul deed has been committed," said the stranger; "but I have always heard and read
      that God will sooner or later bring murder to light."
"Ah! and that's true enow, I'll warrant!" exclaimed the old gardener. "The body which that
      hand belongs to, was no doubt buried deep; but the rains overflowed yonder pond, and the water
      made itself a way along here, you see—so that it has hollered the earth out several foot."
"Well—it's of no use talking," said the stranger: "but make haste and dig down here, old
      gentleman—so that we may see whether the hand has an arm, and the arm a body."
The gardener took the spade, and set to work; but he trembled so violently that he was
      unable to proceed for many minutes. The stranger accordingly snatched the spade from his
      hands, and addressed himself resolutely to the task.
While he was thus employed, the others stood by in profound silence; but the dog ran in a
      timid manner round the spot, sometimes barking—then whining mournfully.
His master worked speedily, but carefully; and as each shovel-full of earth was thrown up,
      and as the proofs that an entire human body lay beneath became every instant more apparent,
      the spectators exchanged glances of augmenting horror.
But when at length the entire form of a human being was laid bare scarcely two feet below
      the bottom of the hollow,—when their eyes fell upon the blackened flesh of the decomposing
      head, the features of which were no longer traceable,—and when the rotting remnants of attire
      showed that the being who had there found a grave was of the female sex, a cry burst
      simultaneously from every lip.
"Here's work for the Coroner, at all events," observed the stranger, after a long pause. "We
      must move the body to the big house there——"
"Move the body to the Hall!" cried the old gardener and his wife, in the same breath, and
      both looking aghast at this announcement.
"Yes—most certainly," answered the stranger. "Would you leave a Christian—as I hope that
      poor woman was—to be devoured by rats and other vermin? I might have done so once: but, thank
      God! I have become a better man since then. Howsomever, get us a plank or two, old gentleman;
      and we'll do our duty in a proper manner."
The gardener retraced his way, in a sulky mood, and with much mumbling to himself, to the
      Hall, and presently returned with a couple of planks and two stout pieces of wood to serve as
      cross-beams to form the bier. The corpse was then carefully placed upon the planks, but not
      without great risk of its falling to pieces while being thus moved; and, the bier having been
      hoisted on the shoulders of the stranger, Dunstable's lacquey, the seedy coachman, and Colonel
      Cholmondeley's groom, the procession moved towards the Hall, the gardener and his wife at the
      head.
But when the party arrived, with its appalling burden, near the mansion, the old man and
      woman began to exchange hasty whispers together.
"What is the matter now?" asked the stranger.
"Why, sir," replied the gardener, in a hesitating manner, "me and my wife has been
      a-thinking together that it would be as well to put the remains of that poor creetur as far
      from our own rooms as possible: 'cos what with a sperret here and a dead body there——"
"Well, well—old man," interrupted the stranger, impatiently; "this load is heavy, and I for
      one shall be glad to put it down somewhere. So leave off chattering uselessly—and tell us in a
      word what you do mean."
"To be sure," returned the gardener: "this way—this way."
And, as he spoke, he opened a small door at the southern end of the building, by means of a
      key which he selected from a bunch hanging beneath his apron.
"We never can get up that staircase, old gentleman," said the stranger, plunging his glances
      through the door-way.
"It's easier than you think—the stairs isn't so steep as they seem," returned the gardener;
      "and what's more," he added, doggedly, "you may either bring your burden this way, or leave it
      in the open air altogether."
"To be sure," chimed in the old woman: "if you don't choose to put the body in the very
      farthermost room from our end of the building, you may take it back again; and them stairs
      leads to the room that is farthermost off."
The stranger, who was a willing, good-natured man, and who seemed to study only how he
      should best perform a Christian duty, offered no farther remonstrance; but, respecting the
      prejudices of the old people, succeeded, by the aid of his co-operators, in conveying the bier
      up the staircase. On reaching the landing, the gardener opened the door of a room the shutters
      of which were closed; but through the chinks there streamed sufficient light to show that the
      apartment was a bed-chamber.
"Put it down there—on the carpet," said the gardener, who was anxious to terminate a
      proceeding by no means agreeable to him.
The bier was conveyed into the room, and placed upon the floor.
At that moment—while the gardener and his wife remained standing in the passage—the old man
      suddenly caught hold of the woman's arm with a convulsive grasp, and whispered in a hasty and
      hollow tone, "Hark! there's a footstep!"
"Yes—I hear it too!" returned his wife, in a scarcely audible tone: and, through very
      fright, she repeated, "There—there—there!" as often as the footstep fell—or seemed to
      fall—upon her ears.
"At the end of the passage——" murmured the gardener.
"Do you see any thing?" asked his wife, clinging to him.
"No—but it's certain to be the sperret," returned the man.
And they leant on each other for support.
At the next moment the four men came from the interior of the room where they had deposited
      the corpse; and the two old people began to breathe more freely.
The gardener hurried his wife and companions down the narrow staircase, and pushed them all
      hastily from the threshold of the little door, which he carefully locked behind him.
Then, having given the stranger a surly kind of
      invitation to step in and refresh himself, he led the way to the offices at the
      opposite extremity of the building.
But scarcely had the party gained the servants' hall, when the old gardener, whose mind was
      powerfully excited by all that had just occurred, hastened abruptly away; and, rushing up the
      great staircase, he burst into the drawing-room, exclaiming, "A corpse! a corpse!"
