
CHAPTER CCXXIV.   MR. BANKS'S HOUSE IN GLOBE LANE.
The evening appointed by Katherine, in her note to Mr. Banks, for the purchase of the papers
      relating to her birth, had now arrived.
It was nearly eight o'clock.
The undertaker was at work in his shop, the door of which stood open; and several idle
      vagabonds were standing near the entrance, watching the progress that was made in bringing a
      new coffin to completion. Somehow or another, people always do stop at the doors of
      undertakers' workshops—doubtless actuated by feelings of the same morbid nature as those which
      call crowds of faces to the windows in a street along which a funeral is passing.
Mr. Banks had laid aside his coat, and appeared in his dingy shirt sleeves: he wore a paper
      cap upon his head; and a long apron was tied very high up above his waist—reaching, indeed,
      almost to the waistcoat pockets. As the gas was not laid on in his establishment, he was
      working by the light of a couple of tallow candles, that flickered in a most tantalising
      manner with the draught from the open door—leaving Mr. Banks every other minute in a state of
      exciting suspense as to whether they were about to be extinguished or to revive again. Still
      he did not choose to adopt the very natural precaution of closing the shop-door, because he
      considered it business-like to have a group of idlers collected at the entrance.
And there was an air of business about Mr. Banks's establishment. There were
      shining white coffin-plates hanging along one row of panes in the window; and black japanned
      ones suspended along another row. At a central pane hung a miniature coffin-lid, covered with
      black cloth, and studded with nails in the usual manner. The shop itself was crowded with
      coffins, in different stages towards completion: the floor was ankle deep in shavings and
      sawdust; and carpenters' tools of all kinds lay scattered about. But, pre-eminently
      conspicuous amongst all those objects, was a glass-case standing upon a little shelf, and
      enclosing that very miniature model of the patent coffin which he had displayed at the
      farm-house near Hounslow.
Mr. Banks was busily employed in fitting a lid to a coffin which stood upon trestles in the
      middle of the shop; and his two eldest boys, one fifteen and the other thirteen, were
      occupied, the first in planing a board, and the second in sawing a plank.
"Well," mused Mr. Banks to himself, as he proceeded with his work, "I hope Miss Kate won't
      fail to keep her appintment—partickler as Tidkins seems so sure of the job. That other feller
      which came yesterday to look at my first floor front as is to let, never returned. And yet he
      appeared to like the blessed place well enow. Goodness knows he asked questions by the dozen,
      and looked in every cranny about the house. What did he want to bother his-self like that as
      to whether there was a good yard for his missus to hang her clothes in on washing days? He
      should have sent her to see all about that. Then he would see where the yard-wall looked—and
      whether there was a yard or a street t' other side—and all about it. I raly thought he would
      have taken the rooms. But p'rhaps he didn't like the coffins: p'rhaps his missus don't fancy
      that there constant hammering. Ah! it's a sinful world!"
And, as if deeply impressed by this conviction, the undertaker shook his head solemnly.
He then continued his employment for some time without musing upon any one topic in
      particular.
At length he broke silence altogether.
"Now, Ned," said he to his eldest-born (he had five or six smaller specimens of the Banks'
      breed indoors), as he raised his head from his work, and looked severely round towards the
      lad; "that's quite planing enow: the board'll be veared as thin as a egg-case before it's
      used. Make it on economic principles, boy—economic principles, I say, mind!" added Mr. Banks,
      sternly.
"It ain't economic principles to turn out coffins as rough as if they didn't know what
      planing is," returned the youth; "'cause the friends of the defuncks'll only send them back
      again."
"The friends of the defuncts will do no such a thing to a 'spectable furnisher of funerals
      like me, as has lived, man and boy, in the same house for fifty year, and paid his way
      reglar," responded Mr. Banks. "If we adopts economic principles, we can't waste wood or time
      either."
"And do you mean to say, father," cried the boy, "that this here plank is planed enow? Pass
      your hand along it, and it'll get kivered with splinters—stuck all over like a porkipine."
"It will do exceeding well for the blessed carkiss that'll rejice in such a lid as that
      board will help to make him," said Banks, sweeping his horny palm over the plank. "That's good
      enow—that's economic principles."
"Then economic principles is a fool and a humbug," returned the lad, sulkily: "that's all I
      can say about the matter."
"Oh! that's it—is it?" cried Banks, assuming a threatening attitude.
"Yes—with a wengeance," added his son.
"No—that's the wengeance," said Mr. Banks, coolly, as he dealt his heir a tremendous box on
      the ear, which forced the young man nearly over the plank that had caused the dispute; but as
      the lad was not quite floored, his father bestowed on him a kick which, speedily succeeding
      the slap, levelled the youthful coffin-maker altogether.
"Brayvo!" shouted the idlers at the door.
The discomfited son of Mr. Banks got up, retreated to the farther end of the shop, and was
      about to discharge a volley of insolence at his father when
      a gentleman and lady suddenly appeared on the threshold of the shop.

"Ah! Miss Wilmot," exclaimed Mr. Banks: "punctual to the time! Your most obedient, sir," he
      added, turning towards Kate's companion, whom he did not know personally, but who was really
      Richard Markham. "Walk in, Miss—walk in, sir."
Then, without farther ceremony, the undertaker banged the door violently in the faces of the
      loungers at the shop-entrance.
"Please to come this way," he said, again turning to his visitors. "Take care of that lid,
      Miss; it'll soon cover a blessed defunct as a widder and seven small childern is now a-weeping
      for. I'm doing it cheap for 'em, poor things—eighteen-pence under the reg'lar charge, 'cause
      they had to sell their bed to pay for it—in adwance. This way, sir: mind them trestles. Ah! a
      many coffins has stood on 'em—all made on the newest and most economic principles; for my
      maxim is that a cheap and good undertaker is a real blessin' to society—a perfect god-send in
      this world of wanity and wexation. What would the poor sinful wessels in this neighbourhood do
      without me?—what indeed?"
Thus talking, and shaking his head in a most solemn manner, Mr. Banks led the way to a
      parlour behind the shop: and when his two visitors had entered it, he closed the door to
      prevent the intrusion of his sons.
"Pray, sit down, Miss—sit down, sir," said the undertaker, doing the honours of his abode
      with all the politeness of which he was master. "I am truly glad to behold your blessed
      countenance again, Miss;—for it's a sinful world, and blessed countenances is scarce—wery
      scarce. And this gentleman is Mr.—Mr.—ahem!—I haven't the pleasure of knowing him."
"It's no matter who I am," said Richard. "The agreement between Miss Wilmot and yourself was
      that she should visit you, accompanied by a friend:—I am that friend. Let us now proceed to
      business."
And as he spoke, our hero coolly produced a brace of pistols, which he laid upon the
      table.
"Sir—Miss Kate—I—I hope——" stammered the undertaker, turning pale, and recoiling in
      alarm.
"Fear nothing," said Markham: "it is merely a necessary precaution. This young lady and
      myself
      are in a strange neighbourhood:—I have about me a considerable sum of money, for
      the purpose of buying certain papers which you profess to have; and you will pardon me if I
      have thought fit to adopt every precaution—yes, every precaution," he added
      emphatically, "to guard against treachery."
"But surely that dear creetur, Miss Katherine, with her angelic countenance," said Banks,
      "must have told you, sir, that I'm a 'spectable man as was well known to Mr. Smithers, and
      that I should scorn to act dishonourable to any blessed living wessel."
"We will not dispute upon the point, sir," returned our hero, in an authoritative tone. "I
      have my reasons for acting with caution. If you intend us no harm—none can befall you. Where
      are these papers?"
"The papers, sir? Oh! the papers is safe enow," said Banks, still hesitating; "but them
      pistols——"
"Will remain there until the bargain is concluded," added Markham. "Again I say that I mean
      fairly if you do."
Thus speaking, he drew forth a pocket-book, and, opening it, displayed to the undertaker's
      eager eyes a number of Bank notes.
"Business—it looks like business," murmured Banks; "in spite of them bles——cussed pistols.
      You see, dear pretty Miss—and you, good sir,—that a man moving in such a important speer as
      myself sees so much of the pomps and wanities——"
"A truce to these unnecessary observations, Mr. Banks," said Markham, somewhat sternly; "or
      you will compel me to think that you are only talking to gain time—which could not be for any
      proper motive. In one word, then—have you the papers which relate to this young lady's
      parentage?"
"I have, sir—I have indeed," returned the undertaker.
With these words, he slowly unlocked an old walnut-wood desk, which stood in a recess; and
      thence he took a brown-paper parcel, tied round with coarse string and sealed in several
      places.
"This is just as I received the blessed dokiments from my friend," he said, leisurely
      advancing towards the table: then, taking a seat, he handed the parcel to Markham, observing,
      "You may break it open, and satisfy yourself that its contents is geniwine. Two minutes will
      be enow for that—and two minutes is all my friend told me to give for the purpose. I haven't
      read a line of them myself; and I know nothink of what they say;—but my friend is as sharp a
      feller as here and there one; and he assures me they're going dirt cheap—like workus
      coffins."
While Banks was thus indulging his garrulity, Markham had opened the parcel by the aid of a
      pair of scissors which lay upon the table; and the first thing which struck him was a letter
      addressed to "Mr. Markham, Markham Place."
Katherine, who watched him attentively, without, however, looking at the papers herself,
      observed him start as if with sudden surprise: then he tore open the letter with almost a wild
      precipitation, and glanced rapidly over the contents. As he read, his countenance became
      flushed, and his features expressed mingled joy and astonishment—joy the most fervent,
      astonishment the most profound.
"My God!" he exclaimed, throwing down the letter, ere he had fully perused it: "how wondrous
      are thy ways! Katherine, dearest girl—come to my arms—for you are my sister—my own
      sister!"
"Your sister, Richard!" murmured the young maiden, as she sank almost fainting upon her
      brother's breast.
"Yes—my sister, Kate—my own sister!"—and he embraced her tenderly. "Compose yourself, dear
      girl—compose yourself: this is no place for explanations! But you are not the less my
      sister—and I thank God for it! I have now a natural right to be your protector—and a protector
      as well as an affectionate brother will you ever find me!"
"Oh! Richard—this sudden—this unexpected happiness is too much!" exclaimed Katherine,
      weeping through varied but ineffable emotions. "Is it possible that he whom I have known as a
      benefactor is indeed a brother!"
"I cannot doubt it—I do not wish to doubt it," returned Markham. "No—I am happy that I have
      found a sister in her whom I already loved as one!"
And again he embraced her tenderly.
"And I to find a brother in the noblest and best of men!" murmured Katherine: "it appears to
      be a dream—a delicious dream!"
"It is a reality," said Richard; "and we shall now all be happier than ever. Oh! what a
      surprise for those at home!"
"Then you perceive, my lord, that the dokiments is of some wally," observed Mr. Banks,
      wiping his eyes with the limp ends of his cravat, as if deeply affected by the scene. "I
      knowed they was; and I now begin to think that I have found out your name. I'm sure it's a
      unspeakable honour that a great lord and prince like you has done my poor house by setting
      foot in it—and all amongst the coffins too!"
"Let us now conclude this business, sir," exclaimed Richard, with whom the undertaker's
      remarks passed unheeded, so absorbed were his thoughts in the signal discovery which he had
      just made. "These papers are mine; and this pocket-book is yours. You may examine its
      contents."
"Oh! I've no doubt they're all right, my lord," said Banks, grasping the treasure now handed
      to him; "but I'll just look over 'em—merely for form's sake. It's more business-like. And nice
      new flimsies they are, too," continued the undertaker, as he scrutinised the notes one by one.
      "Ah! what miserable wessels we should be without money, my lord—in this wicked world;—and what
      would become of us if our friends had no cash to buy us nice coffins when we are blessed
      defunct carkisses? It's awful to think of! Four fifties—two hundreds—and ten tens: that's five
      hundred—sure enow."
And Mr. Banks proceeded to lock up the pocket-book, with its valuable contents, in his
      desk.
Richard and Katherine rose, as if to depart.
"May be, your lordship and this pretty young lady will just wash your mouths out," said Mr.
      Banks, attempting a pleasant smile. "A leetle drop of wine—one glass; and I'll step myself to
      the public-house to fetch it."
"Do so," returned Markham, throwing a sovereign upon the table.
Katherine looked at her brother in astonishment; but he affected not to perceive the
      impression which his strange conduct had thus created.
Banks seemed overjoyed at the affability of the
      nobleman; and gathering up the piece of gold, the change out of which he already
      considered as his own perquisite, he hastened to execute the commission;—but not without
      trying the lid of the desk ere he left the room, to convince himself that it was securely
      locked.
He passed through the shop, which was empty; and, muttering to himself something about "his
      unnat'ral boys who had gone off to the public without finishing the economic coffins," opened
      the street door and went out.
The moment he was gone, Richard seized his pistols, and saying in a hurried tone to
      Katharine, "Remain here, dear sister, for a few moments," hastened from the room by a door
      leading to the inner part of the dwelling.
He rushed down a passage, and entered the yard—as if well acquainted with the undertaker's
      premises.
The moment he set foot in the yard, he whistled in a peculiar manner.
"Damnation!—treachery!" cried a man, darting forward from the corner near the window.
"Stand—or I fire!" exclaimed Markham, advancing towards him, and presenting a pistol.
"Fool!" said the man; and he threw himself with desperate fury upon our hero.
But Richard, maintaining his footing gallantly, closed with his assailant, and threw him to
      the ground, his pistol going off with the shock—without, however, inflicting any injury.
And at the same moment three police-officers leapt over the wall, in time to put an end to
      the struggle between Markham and his opponent, the latter of whom they made their prisoner and
      immediately bound with strong cords.
"Is your Highness hurt?" asked one of the officers.
"No, Benstead," was the reply: "a little bruised, perhaps—but it is nothing. Bring the
      prisoner this way."
The whole transaction,—from the moment when Richard left the undertaker's parlour to that
      when he re-entered it, followed by the policemen with the captive,—had not occupied two
      minutes.
He found Katherine reclining back in her chair—half fainting and paralysed by terror, so
      deeply had the report of the pistol and the concomitant scuffle in the yard alarmed her.
But the moment she heard her brother's voice, she started up, gazed wildly around, and threw
      herself into his arms.
"You are not hurt, Richard? Oh! tell me—that pistol!" she exclaimed, terror still depicted
      on her countenance.
"No, dear sister—I am not hurt," exclaimed Richard. "Calm yourself. Every thing has resulted
      according to my expectations. Look, Kate—that terrible man is at length in the hands of the
      officers of justice."
Katherine turned a rapid glance towards the group on the other side of the room, and beheld
      the sinister and ferocious countenance of the individual whom she had seen in the company of
      the old hag near Bennet's farm.
At this moment the door communicating with the shop opened, and Mr. Banks made his
      appearance, carrying a bottle in his hand.
He started back in astonishment and alarm when his eyes encountered the police-officers,
      with his friend Anthony Tidkins securely bound in the midst of them.
But as his glances wandered from one to another, he suddenly appeared to recollect
      something; and, fixing his eyes on Benstead, he exclaimed, "Ah! now I twig it all. What a
      cussed fool I was not to know a trap even in plain clothes! But I was blind, 'cause I thought
      I'd got a 'spectable man coming as a fust floor lodger. No wonder you poked your nose in every
      hole and corner—'specially the yard. I was a idiot—a ass—a addle-pated old wessel! But p'rhaps
      the gen'lemen will take a glass of wine, since they're here?" added Mr. Banks, with a smirking
      countenance.
This semi-pleasantry on his part was only assumed; for his own life had not been so
      immaculate as to preclude the existence of certain fears when he found himself in the
      dangerous vicinity of the police.
He was, however, speedily reassured on this head.
"Keep your wine, sir," exclaimed Markham, "for those who can enjoy it in your company; and
      consider yourself fortunate that, in becoming the agent of that man,"—pointing with deep
      disgust towards Tidkins,—"you have not committed yourself in any way which at present
      endangers your safety. I see that you glance uneasily at your desk:—you need not fear that I
      shall attempt to deprive you of the sum which you have extorted as the purchase-money for the
      papers now in my possession. No:—although I do not envy you the feelings which could prompt
      you thus to lend yourself to make a market of secrets so sacred as those which the documents
      contain, I cannot question your right thus to act, seeing that the papers were in your
      possession. And were I compelled to pay a thousand times the sum given to obtain them, I
      should consider they were cheaply bought, inasmuch——But you cannot understand such
      feelings!" he added, addressing these words to the undertaker, but glancing affectionately
      towards Katherine.
"I hope there's no offence, my lord," said Banks, shaking in every limb with vague fears and
      suspicions. "I'm a poor man, which tries to live honestly by undertaking on the most
      economic principles; and there isn't a carkiss as goes through my hands that wouldn't sign a
      certifikit in my favour if it could."
Richard turned his back contemptuously upon Mr. Banks, and, addressing himself to Benstead,
      asked where he intended to lodge the prisoner for the night.
"There isn't a station-house in London that would be safe to put such a desperate feller
      in," was the reply. "He'd get out as sure as my name is Morris Benstead. I shall take him
      direct to Coldbath Fields, where the keeper will be sure to give him accommodation. To-morrow
      your Highness will be so kind as to appear against him at Lambeth Street."
Markham promised compliance with this request. A cab was sent for; and the Resurrection Man,
      who had maintained a moody silence, although he never ceased from looking vindictively upon
      our hero, from the moment he was arrested, was now removed in safe custody.
The Prince then conducted Katherine to the carriage that was waiting for them in another
      street; and shortly after ten o'clock they reached Markham Place.
We shall pass over all elaborate details of the
      surprise and joy with which Isabella, Ellen, and Mr. Monroe received the
      intelligence that Katherine was our hero's sister,—his sister without what the world calls the
       stigma of illegitimacy! Suffice it to say, that the discovery produced the most
      unfeigned pleasure in the breasts of all, and that Kate became the object of the sincerest
      congratulations.
Richard then related as succinctly as possible,—for he longed to peruse the precious
      documents in his possession,—the capture of the Resurrection Man and the scheme by which he
      had placed that villain in the hands of the officers of justice.
"I felt persuaded," he said, "that Tidkins did not put implicit confidence in Banks, and
      that he intended to watch the negotiation. His avarice engendered suspicions and got the
      better of his prudence. I communicated my views yesterday morning to a faithful officer whom I
      know; and Morris Benstead—the person to whom I allude—visited the undertaker's house on a
      pretence of hiring apartments which were to let. By those means he was enabled to
       reconnoitre the premises, and adopt measures accordingly. The result has answered my
      anticipations; and that consummate villain, who twice attempted my life, and whose atrocities
      are numerous as the hairs on his head, is at length in custody."
"Ah! dearest Richard," said Isabella, "wherefore should you have thus perilled your precious
      life?"
"Do not chide me, Isabel," exclaimed the Prince, kissing her tenderly. "I only performed a
      duty that I owed alike to society and to myself. Let us now examine these documents which have
      already made so strange, and yet so welcome a revelation."
The members of that happy party drew round the table; and Richard began by reading the
      various letters that accompanied the old woman's narrative. But as those epistles merely
      corroborated the main points of her tale, we shall not quote them.
The narrative itself will explain all; and that important document may be found in the
      ensuing chapter.
