

CHAPTER CLXVI.   THE THAMES PIRATES.
Moored at a wharf at the Rotherhithe side of the river Thames, nearly opposite Execution
      Dock, were several lighters and barges, all lying together.
Along the upper part of the buildings belonging to the wharf were painted, in rude but
      gigantic letters, the following words:—"Mossop's Wharf, where Goods are Received, Housed,
       or Carted."
Mr. Mossop, the sole proprietor of this wharf, was by no means particular what goods he thus
      received, whence they came when he housed them, or whither they were going when he carted
      them. He asked no questions, so long as his commission and charges were duly paid.
For the convenience of his numerous customers, he kept his office constantly open; and
      either himself or his son Ben Mossop was in constant attendance.
Indeed, Mr. Mossop did more business by night than by day. He was, however, a close man: he
      never put impertinent questions to any one who called to patronise him; and thus his way of
      doing business was vastly convenient for all those who used his wharf or his store-houses.
If a lighter arrived at that wharf, ostensibly with a freight of hay, but in reality with
      divers bales of cotton or other goods concealed beneath the dried grass, Mr. Mossop did not
      seem to think that there was any thing at all strange in this; and if next day he happened to
      hear that a barge at a neighbouring wharf had been robbed of divers bales of cotton during the
      night, Mr. Mossop was too much of a gentleman to question the integrity of his
      customers. Even if every wall in Rotherhithe, Horselydown, and Bermondsey, were covered with
      placards announcing the loss of the bales, describing them to a nicety, and offering a reward
      for their recovery, Mr. Mossop never stopped to read one of them.
On two or three occasions, when a police-officer called at his wharf and politely requested
      him just to honour the nearest magistrate with a visit, and enter into an explanation how
      certain goods happened to be found in his store-rooms, the said goods having been lost by
      other parties in an unpleasant manner, Mr. Mossop would put an enormous pair of spectacles
      upon his nose and a good face on the matter at the same time; and it invariably happened that
      he managed to convince the bench of his integrity, but without in any way
      compromising those persons who might be in custody on account of the said goods.
His son Ben was equally prudent and reserved; and thus father and son were mighty favourites
      with all the river pirates who patronised them.
Moreover, Mossop's Wharf was most conveniently situate: the front looked, of course, upon
      the river; the back opened into Rotherhithe Wall; and Mossop's carts were noted for the
      celerity with which they would convey goods away from the warehouse to the receivers in Blue
      Anchor Road or in the neighbourhood of Halfpenny Hatch.
The father and son were also famous for the regularity and dispatch with which they executed
      business on pressing occasions. Thus, while Mossop senior would superintend the landing of
      goods upon the wharf, Mossop junior was stationed at the back gate, where it was his pleasing
      duty to see the bales speedily carted as they were brought through the warehouses by
      the lumpers employed.
Mossop senior was also reputed to be a humane man; for if any of his best customers got into
      trouble (which was sometimes the case) and were short of funds, a five pound note in a blank
      envelop would reach them in prison to enable them to employ counsel in their defence; and this
      sum invariably appeared as "money lent" in Mossop's next account against them when
      they were free once more, and enabled to land another cargo at the wharf.
But to continue our narrative.
It was the evening after the one on which Morcar had called at Markham Place; consequently
      the evening of that day when the gipsy was to meet our hero on the Tower wharf.
Over the particulars of that meeting we, however, pass; as the plans then arranged will
      presently develop themselves.
It was now about nine o'clock.
The evening was beautiful and moonlight.
Myriads of stars were rocked to and fro in the cradle of the river's restless tide; and the
      profiles of the banks were marked with thousands of lights, glancing through dense forests of
      masts belonging to the shipping that were crowded along those shores.
At intervals those subdued murmurs which denoted that the river was as busy and active as
      the great city itself, were absorbed in the noise of some steamer ploughing its rapid way
      amidst the mazes of vessels that to the inexperienced eye appear to be inextricably entangled
      together.
Then would arise those shouts of warning to the smaller craft,—those rapid commands to
      regulate the movements of the engines,—and those orders to the helmsman, which, emanating from
      the lips of the captain posted on the paddle-box, proclaim the progress of the steamer winding
      its way up the pool.
A wondrous and deeply interesting spectacle, though only dimly seen, is that portion of the
      Thames on a moonlight night.
Then indeed is it that even the most callous mind is compelled to contemplate with mingled
      astonishment and awe, one of the grandest features of the sovereign city and world's emporium
      of trade.
The gurgling water, and the countless masts,—the vibration of mighty engines on the stream,
      and the myriads of twinkling lights along the shores,—the cheering voices of the mariners, and
      the dense volumes of smoke which moving colossal chimneys vomit forth,—the metallic grating of
      windlasses, and the glittering of the spray beneath revolving wheels,—the flapping of heavy
      canvass, and the glare from the oval windows of steamers,—the cries of the rowers in
      endangered boats, and the flood of silver lustre which the moon pours upon the river's
      bosom,—these form a wondrous complication of elements of interest for both ear and eye.
The barge that was farthest off from Mossop's wharf, of all the lighters moored there, and
      that could consequently get into the stream quicker than any other near it, was one to which
      we must particularly direct our readers' attention.
It was called the Fairy, and was large, decently painted, and kept in pretty good
      order. It had a spacious cabin abaft, and a smaller one, termed a cuddy, forward. The mast,
      with its large brown sail that seemed as if it had been tanned, was so fitted as
      to be lowered at pleasure, to enable the vessel to pass under the bridges at high
      water. The rudder was of enormous size; and the tiller was as thick and long as the pole of a
      carriage.
The waist, or uncovered part of the lighter in the middle, was now empty; but it was very
      capacious, and adapted to contain an immense quantity of goods.
On the evening in question two men were sitting on the windlass, smoking their pipes, and
      pretty frequently applying themselves to a can of grog which stood upon the deck near
      them.
One was the Resurrection Man: the other was John Wicks, better known as the Buffer.
"Well, Jack," said the Resurrection Man, "this is precious slow work. For the last four days
      we've done nothing."
"What did I tell you, when you fust come to me and proposed to take to the river?" exclaimed
      the Buffer. "Didn't I say that one ought to be bred to the business to do much good in
      it?"
"Oh! that be hanged!" cried the Resurrection Man. "I can soon learn any business that's to
      make money. Besides, the land was too hot to hold me till certain little things had blown
      over. There's that fellow Markham who ran against me one night;—then there's Crankey Jem. The
      first saw that I was still hanging about London; and the other may have learnt, by some means
      or another, that I didn't die of the wound he gave me. Then again, there's those gipsies whose
      money I walked off with one fine day. All these things made the land unsafe; and so I thought
      it best to embark the gold that I took from old King Zingary, in this barge, which was to be
      had so cheap."
"I suppose we shall do better in time, Tony," said the Buffer, "when we get more acquainted
      with them light and heavy horsemen that we must employ, and them lumpers that gives the
      information."
"Of course. When you set up in a new business, you can't expect to succeed directly,"
      returned the Resurrection Man. "The regular pirates won't have confidence in us at first; and
      as yet we don't know a single captain or mate that will trust us with the job of robbing their
      ship. How do they know but what we should peach, if we got into trouble, and tell their
      employers that it was all done with their connivance? But old Mossop begins to grow more
      friendly; and that, I'm sure, is a good sign that he thinks that we shall
      succeed."
"So it is," said the Buffer. "Besides, this barge is so good a blind, that business
       must come. What should you say to getting into the skiff presently, and taking a
      look out amongst the shipping for ourselves?"
"Well, I've no objection," answered Tidkins. "But we've already a connexion with several
      lumpers; and they have put us on to all that we have done up to the present time.
      P'rhaps we should do better to wait for the information that they can give us. They begin to
      see that we pay well; and so they'll only be too anxious to put things in our way."
"True enough," observed the Buffer.
At this period of the conversation, a woman's head appeared above the cabin hatchway.
"Supper's ready," she said.
"We're coming, Moll," returned the Buffer.
The two villains then descended into the cabin, where a well-spread table awaited them.
Scarcely had the trio concluded their repast, when a man, who had come from the wharf and
      had walked across the barges until he reached the Fairy, called to Tidkins, by the
      appellation of "Captain," from the hatchway.
"Come below," answered the Resurrection Man.
The person thus invited was the foreman in Mr. Mossop's employment. He was short, stout, and
      strongly built, with a tremendous rubicundity of visage, small piercing grey eyes, no
      whiskers, and a very apoplectic neck. His age might be about fifty; and he was dressed in a
      light garb befitting the nature of his calling.
"Well, Mr. Swot," said the Resurrection Man, as the little fat foreman descended the ladder;
      "this is really an unusual thing to have the honour of your company. Sit down; and you, Moll,
      put the lush and the pipes upon the table."
"That's right, Captain," returned Mr. Swot, as he seated himself. "I came on purpose to
      drink a social glass and have a chat with you. In fact, my present visit is not altogether
      without an object."
"I'm glad of that," said the Resurrection Man. "We want something to do. It was only just
      now that I and my mate were complaining how slack business was."
"You know that Mossop never has any thing to do with any schemes in which chaps of your
      business choose to embark," continued Mr. Swot: "he receives your goods, and either keeps them
      in warehouse or carts them for you as you like; but he never knows where they come from."
"Perfectly true," observed the Resurrection Man.
"But all that's no reason why I should be equally partickler," proceeded Swot.
"Of course not," said the Resurrection Man.
"Well, then—we are all friends here?" asked Swot, glancing around him.
"All," replied Tidkins. "This is my mate's wife; she answers to the name of Moll, and is
      stanch to the back-bone."
"Well and good," said Swot. "Now I've as pretty a little idea in my head as ever was born
      there; but it requires two or three daring—I may say desperate fellers to carry it
      out."
"You couldn't come to a better shop for them kind of chaps," remarked the Buffer.
"And if it's necessary, I'll deuced soon dress myself up like a lighterman and help you,"
      added Moll.
"I am very much pleased with your pluck, ma'am," said Mr. Swot; "and I drink to your
      excellent health—and our better acquaintance."
Mr. Swot emptied his mug at a draught, lighted a pipe, and then continued thus:—
"But now, my fine fellers, s'pose I was to start some scheme which is about as dangerous as
      walking slap into a house on fire to get the iron safe that's full of gold and silver?"
"Well—we're the men to do it," said Tidkins.
"That is," observed the Buffer, "if so be the inducement is equal to the risk."
"Of course," returned Mr. Swot. "Now one more question:—would you sleep in the same room
      with a man who had the cholera or the small-pox, for instance—supposing you got a thousand
      pounds each to do it?"
"I would in a minute," answered the Resurrection Man. "Nothing dare, nothing have."
"So I say," added the Buffer.
"And you wouldn't find me flinch!" cried Moll.

"Now, then, we shall soon understand each other," resumed Swot, helping himself to
      another supply of grog. "Please to listen to me for a few minutes. A very fine schooner, the
       Lady Anne of London, trades to the Gold and Slave Coasts of Guinea. She takes out
      woollens, cottons, linen, arms, and gunpowder, which she exchanges for gold dust, ivory, gums,
      and hides. A few days since, as she was beating up the Channel, homeward bound with a fine
      cargo, something occurs that makes it necessary for her to run for the Medway, instead of
      coming direct up to London. But the night before last it blew great guns, as you may
      recollect; and as she was but indifferently manned, she got out in her reckoning—for it was as
      dark as pitch—and ran ashore between the mouth of the Medway and Gravesend. Now, there she
      lies—and there she's likely to lie. She got stranded during spring-tide; and she does not
      float now even at high water. The gold dust would be very acceptable; the gums, ivory, hides,
      and such like matters, may stay where they are."
"Then the fact is the owners haven't yet moved out the cargo?" said the Resurrection Man,
      interrogatively.
"No—nor don't intend to, neither—for the present," answered Swot. "And what's more, there's
      a police-boat pulling about in that part of the river all day and all night; but I can assure
      you that it gives the schooner a precious wide berth."
"Well, I can't understand it yet," said the Buffer.
"The fact is," continued Swot, "the Lady Anne was on its way to Standgate Creek in
      the Medway, when it got ashore on the bank of the Thames. Do you begin to take?"
"Can't say I do," answered the Resurrection Man. "Is the crew on board still?"
"The crew consisted this morning, when I heard about it last, of three men and a boy,"
      returned Swot; "and one of them men is a surgeon. But the Lady Anne has got the
      yellow flag flying;—and now do you comprehend me?"
"The plague!" ejaculated the Resurrection Man and the Buffer in the same breath.
"The plague!" repeated Moll Wicks, with a shudder.
"Neither more or less," said Swot, coolly emptying his second mug of grog.
There was a dead silence for some moments.
It seemed as if the spirits of those who had listened with deep attention to the foreman's
      narrative, were suddenly damped by the explanation that closed it.
"Well—are you afraid?" asked Swot, at length breaking silence.
"No," returned the Resurrection Man, throwing off the depression which had fallen upon him.
      "But there is something awful in boarding a plague-ship."
"Are you sure the gold dust is on board?" demanded the Buffer.
"Certain. My information is quite correct. Besides, you may get the newspapers and read all
      about it for yourselves."
"The thing is tempting," said Moll.
"Then, by God, if a woman will dare it, we mustn't show the white feather, Jack," exclaimed
      the Resurrection Man.
"That's speaking to the point," observed the foreman. "You see there's a guard on land, to
      prevent any one from going near the vessel on that side; and the police-boat rows about on the
      river. The plan would be, to get down to Gravesend to-morrow, then to-morrow night, to drop
      down with the tide close under the bank, and get alongside the vessel."
"All that can be done easy enough," said the Resurrection Man. "But we want more hands. Of
      course you'll go with us?"
"Yes—I'll risk it," answered Mr. Swot. "It's too good a thing to let slip between one's
      fingers. If you'll leave it to me I'll get two or three more hands; because we must be
      prepared to master all that we may meet on the deck of the schooner, the very moment we board
      it, so as not to give 'em time even to cry out, or they'd alarm the police-boat."
"Well and good," said the Resurrection Man. "But you don't mean to go in the lighter?"
"No—no: we must have a good boat with two sculls," answered Swot. "Leave that also to me. At
      day-break every thing shall be ready for you; and I shall join you in the evening at
      Gravesend."
"Agreed!" cried Tidkins.
Mr. Swot then took his departure; and the three persons whom he left behind in the lighter,
      continued their carouse.
In this way the Resurrection Man, the Buffer, and Moll Wicks amused themselves until nearly
      eleven o'clock, when, just as they were thinking of retiring for the night,—Tidkins to his bed
      in the after cabin where they were then seated, and the other two to their berth in the cuddy
      forward,—the lighter was suddenly shaken from one end to the other by some heavy object which
      bumped violently against it.
