<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Camera Fiend by E.W. Hornung</title><author>Hornung, Ernest William (1866-1921)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1911</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
WHAT THE THAMES GAVE UP
 Phillida was prepared for anything when she beheld a motor-car at the gate, and the escaped
     schoolboy getting out with a grown man of shaggy and embarrassed aspect; but she was not
     prepared for the news they brought her. She was intensely shocked and shaken by it. Her grief
     and horror were not the less overwhelming for the shame and fear which they replaced in her
     mind. Yet she remained instinctively on her guard, and a passionate curiosity was the only
     emotion she permitted herself to express in words. 
 “But have they no idea who did it? Are they quite sure he didn't do it himself?” 
 Mr. Upton broke through his heavy embarrassment with no little relief, to dispose of the
     question of suicide once and for all. 
 “It's the one thing they are sure about,” said he. “In the first place no weapon was to be
     found, and we saw no sign of a camera either, though this boy tells me your uncle had his with
     him when he went out. That's more or less conclusive in itself. But there was a doctor on the
     spot before we left, and I heard him say the shot couldn't have been fired at very close
     quarters, and that death must have
      been instantaneous. So it's no more a suicide than the case in Park Lane
     yesterday or the one in Hyde Park last week; there's evidently some maniac prowling about at
     dawn, and shooting down the first person he sees and then vanishing into thin air as maniacs
     seem to have a knack of doing more effectually than sane men. But the less we jump to
     conclusions about him—or anybody else—the better.” 
 The girl was grateful for the covert sympathy of the last remark, and yet it startled her as
     an index of what must have passed already between father and son. It was a new humiliation that
     this big bluff man should know as much as the boy whom she had learnt to look upon as a comrade
     in calamity. Yet she could not expect it to be otherwise. 
 “What must you think!” she cried, and her great eyes filled and fell again. “Oh! what must
     you think?” 
 “It's no good thinking,” he rejoined, with almost a jovial kindness. “We're all three on the
     edge of a mystery; we must see each other through before we think. Not that I've had time to
     hear everything yet, but I own I can't make head or tail of what I have heard. I'm not sure
     that I want to. I like a man's secrets to die with him; it's enough for me to have my boy back
     again, and to know that you stood by him as you did. It's our turn to
      stand by you, my dear! He says it wasn't your fault he didn't come away long ago;
     and it shan't be mine if you stay another hour alone in this haunted house. You've got to come
     straight back with us to our hotel.” 
 They happened to be all three standing in the big back room, a haunted chamber if there was
     one in the house. With his battle-pictures on the walls, his tin of tobacco on the
     chimney-piece, and the scent of latakia rising from the carpet, the whole room remained
     redolent of the murdered man; and the window still open, the two chairs near it as they had
     been overnight, and the lamp lying in fragments on the path outside, brought the last scene
     back to the boy's mind in full and vivid detail. Yet the present one was in itself more
     desolate and depressing than any in which Dr. Baumgartner had figured. It might be that the
     constant menace of that portentous presence had thrown his simple middle-class surroundings, at
     the time, into a kind of reassuring relief. But it was the case that the morning had already
     clouded over; the sunshine of the other mornings was sadly missing; and Phillida looked only
     too eager to fly from the scene, until she declared she never could. 
 “But that's absurd!” cried Mr. Upton bluntly. “I'm not going to leave a young girl like you
     alone
      in the day of battle, murder and sudden death! You needn't necessarily come with
     us, as long as you don't stay here. Have you no other relatives in London?” 
 “None anywhere that I know much about.” 
 “That doesn't matter. It's time they knew more about you. I'll hunt them up in the motor, if
     they're anywhere within a hundred miles, but you simply must let me take their place
     meanwhile.” 
 He was a masterful man enough; it did not require the schoolboy's added supplications to
     bring about an eventual compromise. The idea had indeed been Pocket's originally, but his
     father had taken it up more warmly than he could have hoped. It was decided that they should
     return to their hotel without Phillida, but to send the car back for her later in the morning,
     as it would take her some time to pack her things and leave the deserted house in some
     semblance of order. 
 But her packing was a very small matter, and she left it to the end; most of the time at her
     disposal was spent in a hurried investigation of the dead man's effects, more especially of his
     store of negatives in the dark-room. The only incriminating plates, however, were the one she
     had already seen on its discovery by Pocket the day before and another of a man lying in a heap
     in the middle of a road. This one had been put to dry openly
      in the rack, the wood of which was still moist from the process. Phillida only
     held it up to the light an instant, and then not only smashed both these negatives, but poured
     boiling water on the films and floated them down the sink. The bits of glass she put in the
     dust-bin with those of the broken lamp, and had hardly done so when the first policeman arrived
     to report the fatality. He was succeeded by a very superior officer, who gained admittance and
     asked a number of questions concerning the deceased, but in a perfunctory manner that suggested
     few if any expectations from the replies. Neither functionary made any secret of his assumption
     that the latest murder was but another of the perfectly random series which had already
     thrilled the town, but on which no light was likely to be shed by the antecedents of the
     murdered men. A third official came to announce that the inquest was to be opened without
     delay, at two o'clock that afternoon, and to request Phillida to accompany him to the mortuary
     for the formal identification of the deceased. 
 That was a dread ordeal, and yet she expected a worse. She had steeled herself to look upon
     a debased image of the familiar face, and she found it startlingly ennobled and refined. Death
     had taken away nothing here, save the furrows of age and the fires of madness, and it had given
     back the
      look of fine courage and of sane integrity which the girl was just old enough to
     associate with the dead man's prime. She was thankful to have seen him like this for the last
     time. She wished that all the world could see him as he was, so noble and so calm, for then
     nobody would ever suspect that which she herself would find it easier to disbelieve from this
     hour. 
 “You do identify him, I suppose, miss?” the officer whispered, impressed by her strange
     stare. 
 “Oh, yes!” said Phillida. “But he looks as I have not seen him look for years. There are
     worse things than death!” 
 She said the same thing to Mr. Upton at luncheon in his private sitting-room at the hotel,
     whereupon he again assured her that he had no desire to know a dead man's secrets. He had found
     his boy; that was quite enough for him, and he was able to deliver himself the more freely on
     the subject since Pocket was not at table, but in bed making up for lost sleep. Not only had he
     succeeded in finding his son, but he had found him without the aid of police or press, and so
     not more than a dozen people in the world knew that he had ever disappeared. Mr. Upton
     explained why he had deemed it essential to keep the matter from his wife's ears, and added
     almost equally good reasons for continuing to hush it up on the boy's account
      if only it were possible to do so; but would it be possible to Phillida to
     exclude from her evidence at the inquest all mention of so recent a visitor at her uncle's
     house? Phillida promised to do her best, and it proved not only possible but easy. She was
     questioned as to the habits of the deceased so far as they explained his presence on the
     Embankment at such a very early hour, but that was all. Asked if she knew of a single person
     who could conceivably have borne such a grudge against Dr. Baumgartner as to wish to take his
     life, the witness answered in the negative, and the coroner bowed as much as to say that of
     course they all knew the character of the murder, but he had put the question for form's sake.
     The only one which caused her a moment's hesitation arose from a previous answer, which
     connected the doctor's early ramblings with his hobby of instantaneous photography. Had he his
     camera with him that morning? Phillida thought so. Why? Well, he always did take it out, and it
     certainly was not in the house. Mr. Upton wiped his forehead, for he knew that his boy's name
     had been on the tip of the witness's tongue. And there was a sensation in court as well; for
     here at last was a bone for the detectives, who obtained a minute description of the missing
     camera, but grumbled openly that they had not heard of it before.
     

 “They never told me they hadn't got it,” explained Phillida to the coroner, who made her his
     courteous bow, and permitted her to leave the court on the conclusion of her evidence. 
 On the stairs Mr. Upton paid her compliments that made her wince as much as the crude grip
     of his hand; but he was tact itself compared with his friend Mr. Thrush, who sought an
     interview in order to ply the poor girl there and then with far more searching questions than
     she had been required to answer upon oath. She could only look at Mr. Upton in a way that
     secured his peppery intervention in a moment. The two men had scarcely seen each other since
     the morning, and the ironmaster thought they had enough to say to each other without bothering
     Miss Platts just then; they accordingly adjourned to Glasshouse Street, and Phillida was to
     have gone on to the hotel; but she made them drop her at a shop near Sloane Square on the
     pretext of seeing about her mourning. 
 Phillida had promised to drive straight back to Trafalgar Square and order tea for herself
     if Tony had not appeared; but she did not drive straight back. She had a curious desire to see
     the place where the murder had been committed. It had come upon her at the inquest, while
     listening to the constable who had found the body, her predecessor
      in the witness-box. She had failed to follow his evidence. He had described that
     portion of his beat which had brought him almost on the scene of the murder, almost at the
     moment of its commission. It included only the short section of Cheyne Walk between Oakley
     Street and Cheyne Row. The houses at this point are divided from the Embankment by the narrow
     garden which contains the Carlyle statue. He had turned up Cheyne Row, at the back of the
     statue, but before turning he had noticed a man on the seat facing the river on the far side of
     the garden. The man was sitting down, but he was said to have turned round and watched the
     policeman as he passed along Cheyne Walk. There might have been a second man lying on that
     seat, or crouching on the flags between the seat and the parapet, but he would have been
     invisible from the beat. Not another creature was in sight anywhere. Yet the policeman swore
     that he had not proceeded a dozen yards up Cheyne Row before the shot was fired. He had turned
     round actually in time to see the puff of smoke dispersing over the parapet. It was all he saw.
     He had found the deceased lying in a heap, nearer the seat than the parapet, but between the
     two. Not another soul did he see, or had he seen. And he had not neglected to look over the
     parapet into the river, and along the foreshore in both
      directions, without discovering sign or trace of human being. 
 Such was the story which Phillida found so hard to credit that she proceeded to the spot in
     order to go over the ground for her own satisfaction. This did not make it easier to
     understand. It had come on to rain heavily while she was in the shop; the shining Embankment
     was again practically deserted, and she was able to carry out her experiment without exciting
     observation. She took a dozen steps up Cheyne Row, pretended she heard the shot, turned sharp
     round, and quite realised that from where she was the body could not have been seen, hidden as
     it must have been by the seat, which itself was almost hidden by the long and narrow island of
     enclosed garden. But a running man could have been seen through the garden, even if he stooped
     as he ran, and the murderer must have run like the wind to get away as he had done. The gates
     through the garden, back and front of the statue, had not been opened for the day when the
     murder took place, so Phillida in her turn made a half-circuit of the island to get to the spot
     where the body had been found, but without taking her eyes off the spot until she reached it.
     No! It was as she had thought all along; by nothing short of a miracle could the assassin have
     escaped observation if the policeman had eyes in his head and had acted
      as he swore he had done. He might have dashed into the garden, when the policeman
     was at his furthest point distant, if the gates had been open as they were now; but they had
     been locked, and he could not have scaled them unobserved. Neither would it have been possible
     to take a header into the river with the foreshore as described by the same witness. Yet the
     murderer had either done one of these things, or the flags of the Embankment had opened and
     swallowed him. 
 The girl stood on the very spot where the murdered man must have fallen, and in her utter
     perplexity it was no longer the tragedy but the problem which engrossed her mind. What had
     happened, had happened; but how could it have happened? She raised her umbrella and peered
     through the rain at a red pile of many-windowed flats; had that Argus of the hundred eyes been
     sleeping without one of them open at the time? Her own eyes fell as far as the black statue in
     the narrow garden, standing out hi the rain, like the greenery about its granite base, as
     though the blackened bronze were polished marble. How lifelike the colossal scholar in his
     homely garb! How scornful and how shrewd the fixed eternal gaze across his own old Father
     Thames! It assumed another character as the girl gazed in her turn, she seemed to intercept
     that stony stare, to distract it from the river to herself, and to
      her fevered fancy the grim lips smiled contemptuously on her and her quandary. He
      knew—he knew—those grim old eyes had seen it all, and still they stared and
     smiled as much as to say: “You are looking the wrong way! Look where I am looking; that way
     lies the truth you are poor fool enough to want to know!” 
 And Phillida turned her back towards the shiny statue, and looked over the wet parapet,
     almost expecting to see something, but never dreaming of what she actually saw. The tide, which
     must have been coming in that early morning, was now going out, and between the Embankment
     masonry and the river there was again a draggled ribbon of shelving foreshore, black as on some
     volcanic coast; and between land and water, at a point that would necessarily have been
     submerged for the last eight or nine hours, a small object was being laid more bare by every
     receding wavelet. It was black and square, perhaps the size of two large cigar-boxes side by
     side; and it had one long, thin, reddish tentacle, finishing in a bulb that moved about gently
     in the rain-pocked water. 
 Phillida felt the parapet strike cold and wet through her rain-coat sleeves as she leant far
     over to make doubly sure what she object was; but indeed she had not a moment's doubt but that
     it was the missing camera of the murdered man. 

</div></body></text></TEI>