<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Camera Fiend by E.W. Hornung</title><author>Hornung, Ernest William (1866-1921)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1911</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
SECOND THOUGHTS
 Pocket had been dreaming again. What else could he expect? Waking, he felt that he had got
     off cheaply; that he might have been through the nightmare of battle, as described by one who
     had, and depicted in the engravings downstairs, instead of on a mercifully hazy visit to the
     Chamber of Horrors at Madame Tussaud's. The trouble was that he had seen the one and not the
     other, and what he had seen continued to haunt him as he lay awake, but quite horribly when he
     fell back into a doze. There was nothing nebulous about the vile place then; it was as light
     and bright as the room in which he lay. The sinister figures in the panelled pens were swathed
     in white, as he had somewhere read that they always were at nights. Their evil faces were
     shrouded out of sight. But that only made their defiant, portly figures the more humanly
     inhuman and terrifying; it was as though they had all risen, in their winding-sheets, from
     their
      murderer's graves. Better by far their beastly faces, that you knew were wax! So
     he reasoned with himself, and screwed up his courage, and laid hands on one of the shorter
     figures that he could reach. It rocked stiffly in its place, a most palpable and reassuring
     waxwork. He unwound the cerements from the hollow and unyielding head; and the face was new to
     him; it had not been there the other afternoon. It was a young face like his own, as
     ill-mounted on high shoulders, with thickish lips ajar, and only a pair of intelligent eyes to
     redeem an apparent heaviness: one and all his own identical characteristics. And no wonder, for
     the last recruit to the waxen army of murderers was a faithful model of himself. 
 There was no awaking from this dream: the dreamer was not positive that he had been asleep.
     The veiled sunlight in his room was just what it had seemed in that deserted dungeon of
     swaddled malefactors. The boy shuddered till the bed shook under him. But after that he still
     lay on, facing himself as he had seen himself, and his deed as others must see it soon or late.
     Not the actual accident in the Park; but this hiding in the heart of London, this skulking
     among strangers, this leaving his own people to mourn him as the dead! 
 The thought of them drew scalding tears. Never had they seemed so dear to him before. It was
     not
      only Lettice and their parents. Fred and Horace, how good they had been to him at
     school, and how proud he had been of them! What would they think of him if he went on skulking
     like this? What would they have done in his place? Anything but lie low like that, thought
     Pocket, and resolved forthwith to play the game as preached and practised by his brothers. It
     was strange that he should have been so dense about so plain a duty overnight; this morning he
     saw it as sharp as an image in perfect focus on the ground-glass screen... To think that a mad
     photographer should have talked him into an attitude as mad as his own! This morning he saw the
     common sense of the situation as well as its right and wrong. Nothing would happen to him if he
     gave himself up, but anything might if he waited till he was caught. As for the consequences to
     his poor mother, surely in the end suspense and uncertainty would eat deeper into the slender
     cord of her life than the shock of the truth would cut. 
 Having made up his mind, however, as to the only thing to do, the boy behaved
     characteristically in not hastening to do it. The ordeal in front of him, beginning in certain
     conflict with Baumgartner, and ending in a blaze of wretched notoriety, was a severe one to
     face; meanwhile he lay in such peace and safety as it was only human to prolong
      a little. That night, for all his moral innocence, he might lie in prison; let
     him make the most of a good bed while he had one, especially as he was still mysteriously free
     from asthma. The last consideration took his mind off the ethical dilemma for quite a little
     time. He remembered the doctor at home telling him that he himself had suffered from chronic
     asthma, but had lost it after a carriage accident in which he was nearly killed. 
 “My accident may have done the same for me,” thought Pocket—and was bitterly ashamed next
     moment to catch himself thinking complacently of any aspect of his deed. Its other aspects were
     a sufficient punishment. 
 To get up, and raise the green linen blind, flooding with sunshine the plain upstairs room
     to which Baumgartner had conducted his guest, was to conjure uncomfortable visions of the
     eccentric doctor, with his ferocious meerschaum, his bloodthirsty battle-talk, and all his
     arguments in favour of the course which Pocket had now determined to abandon. The boy fully
     realised that he had been given his chance, and had refused it. And of all the interviews
     before him, that with Dr. Baumgartner was the one that he most dreaded, and would have given
     most to escape. 
 Could he escape it? That was an idea; others came of it. If he did escape, and did give
     himself
      up for what he had done, there was no reason why he should involve Baumgartner in
     that voluntary confession. Suppose he hailed the first cab he saw, and drove over to St. John's
     Wood to borrow money (they could scarcely refuse him that), and then took the first train home
     to tell his father everything in the first instance, that father would never hear of his
     incriminating a stranger who had befriended him according to his lights. He himself need never
     say where he had spent the twenty-four hours after the tragedy, even if he were ever to know.
     And so far he had no notion, thanks to the ridiculous posture prescribed by Baumgartner in the
     cab; he could only suppose the motive had been to keep him out of sight, the benefit to his
     breathing a mere pretext; and yet it was a curious result that after a day and a night he
     should still be in total ignorance of his whereabouts. 
 He opened his window and looked out; but it was a back window, and the sunny little strip of
     garden below was one of many in a row. Old discoloured walls divided them from each other and
     from the gardens of a parallel block of bigger houses, whose slates and chimneys towered above
     the intervening trees. The street in front of those houses was completely hidden, but the hum
     of its traffic travelled pleasantly to the ear, and
      there were other reassuring sights and sounds. In one of the contiguous gardens a
     very small boy was wheeling a doll's perambulator; on the other side, where the fine, warm
     gravel reminded Pocket of the carroty kind at home, a man was mowing an equally trim lawn.
     Pocket listened to the murmur of the machine, and watched the green spray playing over the
     revolving knives, and savoured the curiously countrified smell of cut grass; the combined
     effect was a still stronger reminiscence of his father's garden, where his own old pony pulled
     the machine in leather shoes. 
 Because such associations filled his eyes again, there seemed no end to them. Somebody was
     playing the piano near some open window, and playing almost as well as Lettice did, and playing
     one of her things! Pocket could not bear to listen or look out any longer, and he dressed as
     quietly as he could. He had almost resolved to slip out without a word, whatever else he did,
     if the opportunity offered. It simply never occurred to him, until he made the discovery, that
     anybody would dare to lock him in his room! 
 Yet they had done it; that infernal old German doctor had had the cheek to do it; and the
     effect on the boy, who so expressed the situation to himself, was rather remarkable. A wholly
     ineffectual tug or two told him he was on the wrong
      side of the door for applying mere bodily strength, that either he must raise an
     ignominious shout for freedom or else achieve it for himself by way of the window. Unathletic
     as he always had been, he was sportsman enough not to hesitate an instant between the two
     alternatives; and on again looking out of the window, saw his way down at a glance. 
 Immediately underneath was another window, opening on a leaded balcony over the bow-window
     in the drawing-room. To shift his bedstead with the least possible noise, to tie a sheet to it,
     and to slide down the sheet till he had but a few feet to drop into the balcony, was the work
     of a very few minutes to one as excitedly determined as Pocket had become on finding himself a
     prisoner. Thought they would lock him in, did they? They would just find out their mistake! It
     was exactly the same mood in which he had scaled the upright palings in defiance of the
     policeman who said he might not sleep in the Park. 
 The balcony window was open, the room within empty. It was obviously Baumgartner's bedroom.
     There was a camp bedstead worthy of an old campaigner, a large roll-top desk, and a waste-paper
     basket which argued either a voluminous correspondence or imperfect domestic service; it would
     have furnished scent for no short paper-chase. Otherwise the room was tidy enough, and
      so eloquent of Baumgartner himself, in its uncompromising severity, that Pocket
     breathed more freely on the landing. And in the hall he felt absolutely safe, for he had gained
     it without the creaking of a stair, and there on the pegs hung his hat, but neither the cloak
     nor the weird wide-awake affected by his host. 
 Baumgartner out. That was a bit of luck; and it was just like Pocket to lose a moment in
     taking advantage of it; but the truth was that he had made an interesting discovery. It was in
     that house the piano was being played. He heard it through the drawing-room door; he had heard
     it on the balcony up above; it had never stopped once, so silent had he been. It was that
     Phillida, with the large dark eyes, and she was playing something that Lettice sometimes
     played, and very nearly, though naturally not quite, as well. Pocket would have said that it
     was Mendelssohn, or Chopin, “or something,” for his love of music was greater than his
     knowledge. But it was not exactly the music that detained him; he was thinking more of the
     musician, who had shown him kindness, after all. It would be only decent to thank her before he
     went, and the doctor himself through his niece. If she knew he had been locked in, and he had
     to tell her how he had made his escape and yet not a sound—well, she would not think the less
     of him at
      all events, and so they would part for ever. Or perhaps not for ever! The
     juvenile instinct for romance was not to be stifled at such a stimulating moment. The girl
     would be sorry for him when she knew all; she might know enough to be sorry for him as it was;
     in any case it was the game to say goodbye. 
 The girl sprang from the music-stool in extraordinary excitement. Her large eyes were larger
     than ever, as it were with fear, and yet they blazed at the intruder. Pocket could not
     understand it, unless she already knew the truth. 
 “I'm so sorry for starting you,” he apologised. “I just came in to say goodbye.” 
 And he held out a hand which she never seemed to see. 
 “To say goodbye!” she gasped. 
 “Yes, I've got to go. I'm afraid the doctor's out?” 
 “Yes, he is. Won't you wait?” 
 “I'm afraid I can't.” 
 She was shrinking from him, shrinking round towards the door. He stood aside, to let her
     bolt if that was her desire. And then she in turn took her stand, back to the door. 
 “He'll be very sorry to miss you,” she said more firmly, and with a smile. 
 “And I'm very sorry to miss him,” said Pocket,
      unconscientiously enough for anybody. “He's been most awfully good to me, and I
     wish you'd tell him how grateful I am.” 
 “I'm afraid he won't believe me,” the girl said dryly, “if he finds you gone.” 
 “I must go—really I must. I shall get into an awful row as it is. Do you mind giving him one
     other message?” 
 “As many as you like.” 
 “Well, you might tell him from me that I'll give myself away, but I'll never give him! He'll
     know what I mean.” 
 “Is that all?” 
 She was keeping him very cleverly, putting in her word always at the last moment, and again
     refusing to see his hand; but again it was the boy who helped to waste his own golden
     opportunity, this time through an indefensible bit of boyish braggadocio. 
 “No; you may tell the doctor that if he wanted to detain me he went the worst way about it
     by locking me into my room!” 
 She looked mystified at first, and then astounded. 
 “How did you get out?” 
 “How do you suppose?” 
 “I never heard anything!” 
 “I took care you shouldn't.” 
 And he described the successful adventure with
      pardonable unction in the end. After that he insisted on saying goodbye. And the
     young girl stood up to him like a little heroine. 
 “I'm very sorry, but I can't let you go, Mr. Upton.” 
 “Can't let me?” 
 “I really am sorry—but you must wait to see my uncle.” 
 He stood aghast before the determined girl. She was obviously older than himself, yet she
     was only a slip of a girl, and if he forced his way past—but he was not the fellow to do it—and
     that maddened him, because he felt she knew it. 
 “Oh, very well!” he cried, sarcastically. “If you won't let me out that way, I'll go this!” 
 And he turned towards the tiny conservatory, which led down into the garden; but she was on
     him, and there was no hesitation about her; she held him firmly by the hand. 
 “If you do I'll blow a police-whistle!” she said. “We have one—it won't take an instant. You
     shan't come out the front way, and you'll be stopped if you climb the wall!” 
 “But why? Do you take me for a lunatic, or what?” he gasped out bitterly. 
 “Never mind what I take you for!” 
 “You're treating me as though I were one!” 
 “You've got to stay and see my uncle.”
     

 “I shan't! Let me go, I tell you! You shall you shall! I hate your uncle, and you too!” But
     that was only half true, even then while he was struggling almost as passionately as though the
     girl had been another boy. He could not strike her; but that was the only line he drew, for she
     would grapple with him, and release himself he must. Over went walnut whatnots, and out came
     mutterings that made him hotter than ever for very shame. But he did not hate her even for what
     she made him say; all his hatred and all his fear were of the dreadful doctor whose will she
     was obeying; and both were at their highest pitch when the door burst open, and in he sprang to
     part them with a look. But it was a look that hurt more than word or blow; never had poor
     Pocket endured or imagined such a steady, silent downpour of indignation and contempt. It
     turned his hatred almost in a moment to hatred of himself; his fear it only increased. 
 “Leave us, Phillida,” said Baumgartner at last. Phillida was in tears, and Pocket had been
     hanging his head; but now he sprang towards her. 
 “Forgive me!” he choked, and held the door open for her, and shut it after her with all the
     gallantry the poor lad had left. 
</div></body></text></TEI>