
4. A Minnow amongst Tritons

"Boys are capital fellows in their own way among their mates; but they are unwholesome
     companions for grown people."—Essays of Elia.
For some time after they were fairly started the Doctor read his evening paper with an air of
     impartial but severe criticism, and Mr. Bultitude as he sat opposite him next to the window,
     found himself overwhelmed with a new and very unpleasant timidity.
He knew that, if he would free himself, this utterly unreasonable feeling must be wrestled
     with and overcome; that now, if ever, was the time to assert himself, and prove that he was
     anything but the raw youth he was conscious of appearing. He had merely to speak and act, too,
     in his ordinary everyday manner; to forget as far as possible the change that had affected his
     outer man, which was not so very difficult to do after all—and yet his heart sank lower and
     lower as each fresh telegraph post flitted past.
"I will let him speak first," he thought; "then I shall be able to feel my way." But there
     was more fear than caution in the resolve.
At last, however, the Doctor laid down his paper, and, looking round with the glance of
     proprietorship on his pupils, who had relapsed into a decorous and gloomy silence, observed:
     "Well, boys, you have had an unusually protracted vacation this time—owing to the unprecedented
     severity of the weather. We must try to make up for it by the zest and ardour with which we
     pursue our studies during the term. I intend to reduce the Easter holidays by a week by way of
     compensation."
This announcement (which by no means relieved the general depression—the boys receiving it
     with a sickly interest) was good news to Paul, and even had the effect of making him forget his
     position for the time.
"I'm uncommonly glad to hear it, Dr. Grimstone," he said heartily, "an excellent arrangement.
     Boys have
      too many holidays as it is. There's no reason, to my mind, why parents should be
     the sufferers by every snowstorm. It's no joke, I can assure you, to have a great idle boy
     hanging about the place eating his empty head off!"
A burglar enlarging upon the sanctity of the law of property, or a sheep exposing the
     fallacies of vegetarianism, could hardly have produced a greater sensation.
Every boy was roused from his languor to stare and wonder at these traitorous sentiments,
     which, from the mouth of any but a known and tried companion, would have roused bitter
     hostility and contempt. As it was, their wonder became a rapturous admiration, and they waited
     for the situation to develop with a fearful and secret joy.
It was some time before the Doctor quite recovered himself; then he said with a grim smile,
     "This is indeed finding Saul amongst the prophets; your sentiments, if sincere, Bultitude—I
     repeat, if sincere—are very creditable. But I am obliged to look upon them with suspicion!"
     Then, as if to dismiss a doubtful subject, he inquired generally, "And how have you all been
     spending your holidays, eh!"
There was no attempt to answer this question, it being felt probably that it was, like the
     conventional "How do you do?" one to which an answer is neither desired nor expected,
     especially as he continued almost immediately, "I took my boy Tom up to town the week before
     Christmas to see the representation of the 'Agamemnon' at St. George's Hall. The 'Agamemnon,'
     as most of you are doubtless aware, is a drama by Æschylus, a Greek poet of established
     reputation. I was much pleased by the intelligent appreciation Tom showed during the
     performance. He distinctly recognised several words from his Greek Grammar in the course of the
     dialogue."
No one seemed capable of responding except Mr. Bultitude, who dashed into the breach with an
     almost pathetic effort to maintain his accustomed stiffness.


"I may be old-fashioned," he said, "very likely I am; but I—ah—decidedly disapprove of taking
     children to dramatic exhibitions of any kind. It unsettles them, sir—unsettles them!"
Dr. Grimstone made no answer, but he put a hand on each knee, and glared with pursed lips and
     a leonine bristle of the beard at his youthful critic for some moments, after which he returned
     to his Globe with a short ominous cough.
"I've offended him now," thought Paul. "I must be more careful what I say. But I'll get him
     into conversation again presently."
So he began at the first opportunity: "You have this evening's paper, I see. No telegrams of
     importance, I suppose?"
"No, sir," said the Doctor shortly.
"I saw a report in to-day's Times," said poor Mr. Bultitude, with a desperate
     attempt at his most conversational and instructive manner, "I saw a report that the camphor
     crop was likely to be a failure this season. Now, it's a very singular thing about camphor,
     that the Japanese——" (he hoped to lead the conversation round to colonial produce, and thus
     open the Doctor's eyes by the extent of his acquaintance with the subject).
"I am already acquainted with the method of obtaining camphor, thank you, Bultitude," said
     the Doctor, with dangerous politeness.
"I was about to observe, when you interrupted me," said Paul, "(and this is really a fact
     that I doubt if you are aware of), that the Japanese never——"
"Well, well," said the Doctor, with some impatience, "probably they never do, sir, but I
     shall have other opportunities of finding out what you have read about the Japanese."
But he glanced over the top of the paper at the indignant Paul, who was not accustomed to
     have his information received in this manner, with less suspicion and a growing conviction that
     some influence during the
      holidays had changed the boy from a graceless young scapegrace into a prig of the
     first water.
"He's most uncivil"—Mr. Bultitude told himself—"almost insulting, but I'll go on. I'm rousing
     his curiosity. I'm making way with him; he sees a difference already." And so he applied
     himself once more.
"You're a smoker, of course, Dr. Grimstone?" he began. "We don't stop anywhere, I think, on
     the way, and I must confess myself, after dinner, a whiff or two—I think I can give you a cigar
     you'll appreciate."
And he felt for his cigar-case, really forgetting that it was gone, like all other incidents
     of his old self; while Jolland giggled with unrestrained delight at such charming
     effrontery.
"If I did not know, sir," said the Doctor, now effectually roused, "that this was ill-timed
     buffoonery, and not an intentional insult, I should be seriously angry. As it is, I can
     overlook any exuberance of mirth which is, perhaps, pardonable when the mind is elated by the
     return to the cheerful bustle and activity of school-life. But be very careful."
"He needn't be so angry," thought Paul, "how could I know he doesn't smoke? But I'm afraid he
     doesn't quite know me, even now."
So he began again: "Did I hear you mention the name of Kiffin amongst those of your pupils
     here, Doctor? I thought so. Not the son of Jordan Kiffin, of College Hill, surely? Yes? Why,
     bless my soul, your father and I, my little fellow, were old friends in days before you were
     born or thought of—born or thought of. He was in a very small way then, a very small—— Eh, Dr.
     Grimstone, don't you feel well?"
"I see what you're aiming at, sir. You wish to prove to me that I'm making a mistake in my
     treatment of you."
"That was my idea, certainly," said Paul, much pleased. "I'm very glad you take me,
     Doctor."
"I shall take you in a way you won't appreciate soon, if this goes on," said the Doctor under
     his breath.


"When the time comes I shall know how to deal with you. Till then you'll have the goodness to
     hold your tongue," he said aloud.
"It's not a very polite way of putting it," Paul said to himself, "but, at any rate, he sees
     how the case stands now, and after all, perhaps, he only speaks like that to put the boys off
     the scent. If so, it's uncommonly considerate and thoughtful of him, by Gad. I won't say any
     more."
But by-and-by, the open window made him break his resolution. "I'm sorry to inconvenience
     you, Dr. Grimstone," he said, with the air of one used to having his way in these matters, "but
     I positively must ask you either to allow me to have this window up or to change places with
     you. The night air, sir, at this time of the year is fatal, my doctor tells me, simply fatal to
     a man of my constitution."
The Doctor pulled up the window with a frown, and yet a somewhat puzzled expression. "I warn
     you, Bultitude," he said, "you are acting very imprudently."
"So I am," thought Paul, "so I am. Good of him to remind me. I must keep it up before all
     these boys. This unpleasant business mustn't get about. I'll hold my tongue till we get in.
     Then, I daresay, Grimstone will see me off by the next train up, if there is one, and lend me
     enough for a bed at an hotel for the night. I couldn't get to St. Pancras till very late, of
     course. Or he might offer to put me up at the school. If he does, I think I shall very possibly
     accept. It might be better."
And he leant back in his seat in a much easier frame of mind; it was annoying, of course, to
     have been turned out of his warm dining-room, and sent all the way down to Market Rodwell on a
     fool's errand like this; but still, if nothing worse came of it, he could put up with the
     temporary inconvenience, and it was a great relief to be spared the necessity of an
     explanation.
The other boys watched him furtively with growing
      admiration, which expressed itself in subdued whispers, varied by little gurgles
     and "squirks" of laughter; they tried to catch his eye and stimulate him to further feats of
     audacity, but Mr. Bultitude, of course, repulsed all such overtures with a coldness and
     severity which at once baffled and piqued them.
At last his eccentricity took a shape which considerably lessened their enthusiasm. Kiffin,
     the new boy, occupied the seat next to Paul; he was a nervous-looking little fellow, with a
     pale face and big pathetic brown eyes like a seal's, and his dress bore plain evidence of a
     mother's careful supervision, having all the uncreased trimness and specklessness rarely to be
     observed except in the toilettes of the waxen prodigies in a shop-window.
It happened that, as he lay back in the padded seat between the sheltering partitions,
     watching the sickly yellow dregs of oil surging dismally to and fro with the motion in the lamp
     overhead, or the black indistinct forms flitting past through the misty blue outside, the
     pathos of his situation became all at once too much for him.
He was a home-bred boy, without any of that taste for the companionship and pursuits of his
     fellows, or capacity for adapting himself to their prejudices and requirements, which give some
     home-bred boys a ready passport into the roughest communities.
His heart throbbed with no excited curiosity, no conscious pride, at this his first important
     step in life; he was a forlorn little stranger, in an unsympathetic strange land, and was only
     too well aware of his position.
So that it is not surprising that as he thought of the home he had left an hour or two ago
     which now seemed so shadowy, so inaccessible and remote, his eyes began to smart and sting, and
     his chest to heave ominously, until he felt it necessary to do something to give a partial vent
     to his emotions and prevent a public and disgraceful exhibition of grief.
Unhappily for him he found this safety-valve in a series of suppressed but distinctly audible
     sniffs.


Mr. Bultitude bore this for some time with no other protest than an occasional indignant
     bounce or a lowering frown in the offender's direction, but at last his nerves, strung already
     to a high pitch by all he had undergone, could stand it no longer.
"Dr. Grimstone," he said with polite determination, "I'm not a man to complain without good
     reason, but really I must ask you to interfere. Will you tell this boy here, on my right,
     either to control his feelings or to cry into his pocket-handkerchief, like an ordinary human
     being? A good honest bellow I can understand, but this infernal whiffling and sniffing, sir, I
     will not put up with. It's nothing less than unnatural in a boy of that size."
"Kiffin," said the Doctor, "are you crying?"
"N—no, sir," faltered Kiffin; "I—I think I must have caught cold, sir."
"I hope you are telling me the truth, because I should be sorry to believe you were beginning
     your new life in a spirit of captiousness and rebellion. I'll have no mutineers in my camp.
     I'll establish a spirit of trustful happiness and unmurmuring content in this school, if I have
     to flog every boy in it as long as I can stand over him! As for you, Richard Bultitude, I have
     no words to express my pain and disgust at the heartless irreverence with which you persist in
     mimicking and burlesquing a fond and excellent parent. Unless I perceive, sir, in a very short
     time a due sense of your error and a lively repentance, my disapproval will take a very
     practical form."
Mr. Bultitude fell back into his seat with a gasp. It was hard to be accused of caricaturing
     one's own self, particularly when conscious of entire innocence in that respect, but even this
     was slight in comparison with the discovery that he had been so blindly deceiving himself!
The Doctor evidently had failed to penetrate his disguise, and the dreaded scene of elaborate
     explanation must be gone through after all.


The boys (with the exception of Kiffin) still found exquisite enjoyment in this extraordinary
     and original exhibition, and waited eagerly for further experiment on the Doctor's
     patience.
They were soon gratified. If there was one thing Paul detested more than another, it was the
     smell of peppermint—no less than three office boys had been discharged by him because, as he
     alleged, they made the clerks' room reek with it,—and now the subtle searching odour of the
     hated confection was gradually stealing into the compartment and influencing its
     atmosphere.
He looked at Coggs, who sat on the seat opposite to him, and saw his cheeks and lips moving
     in slow and appreciative absorption of something. Coggs was clearly the culprit.
"Do you encourage your boys to make common nuisances of themselves in a public place, may I
     ask, Dr. Grimstone?" he inquired, fuming.
"Some scarcely seem to require encouragement, Bultitude," said the Doctor pointedly: "what is
     the matter now?"
"If he takes it medicinally," said Paul, "he should choose some other time and place to treat
     his complaint. If he has a depraved liking for the abominable stuff, for Heaven's sake make him
     refrain from it on occasions when it is a serious annoyance to others!"
"Will you explain? Who and what are you talking about?"
"That boy opposite," said Paul, pointing the finger of denunciation at the astonished Coggs;
     "he's sucking an infernal peppermint lozenge strong enough to throw the train off the
     rails!"
"Is what Bultitude tells me true, Coggs?" demanded the Doctor in an awful voice.
Coggs, after making several attempts to bolt the offending lozenge, and turning scarlet
     meanwhile with confusion and coughing, stammered huskily something to the effect that he had
     "bought the lozenges at a
      chemist's," which he seemed to consider, for some reason, a mitigating
     circumstance.
"Have you any more of this pernicious stuff about you?" said the Doctor.
Very slowly and reluctantly Coggs brought out of one pocket after another three or four neat
     little white packets, made up with that lavish expenditure of time, string, and sealing-wax, by
     which the struggling chemist seeks to reconcile the public mind to a charge of two hundred and
     fifty per cent. on cost price, and handed them to Dr. Grimstone, who solemnly unfastened them
     one by one, glanced at their contents with infinite disgust, and flung them out of window.
Then he turned to Paul with a look of more favour than he had yet shown him. "Bultitude," he
     said, "I am obliged to you. A severe cold in the head has rendered me incapable of detecting
     this insidious act of insubordination and self-indulgence, on which I shall have more to say on
     another occasion. Your moral courage and promptness in denouncing the evil thing are much to
     your credit."
"Not at all," said Paul, "not at all, my dear sir. I mentioned it because I—ah—happen to be
     peculiarly sensitive on the subject and——" Here he broke off with a sharp yell, and began to
     rub his ankle. "One of these young savages has just given me a severe kick; it's that fellow
     over there, with the blue necktie. I have given him no provocation, and he attacks me in this
     brutal manner, sir; I appeal to you for protection!"
"So, Coker" (Coker wore a blue necktie), said the Doctor, "you emulate the wild ass in more
     qualities than those of stupidity and stubbornness, do you? You lash out with your hind legs at
     an inoffensive school-fellow, with all the viciousness of a kangaroo, eh? Write out all you
     find in Buffon's Natural History upon those two animals a dozen times, and bring it to me by
     to-morrow evening. If I am to stable wild asses, sir, they shall be broken in!"


Six pairs of sulky glowering eyes were fixed upon the unconscious Paul for the rest of the
     journey; indignant protests and dark vows of vengeance were muttered under cover of the
     friendly roar and rattle of tunnels. But the object of them heard nothing; his composure was
     returning once more in the sunshine of Dr. Grimstone's approbation, and he almost decided on
     declaring himself in the station fly.
And now at last the train was grinding along discordantly with the brakes on, and, after a
     little preliminary jolting and banging over the points, drew up at a long lighted platform,
     where melancholy porters paced up and down, croaking "Market Rodwell!" like so many Solomon
     Eagles predicting woe.
Paul got out with the others, and walked forward to the guard's van, where he stood shivering
     in the raw night air by a small heap of portmanteaux and white clamped boxes.
"I should like to tell him all about it now," he thought, "if he wasn't so busy. I'll get him
     to go in a cab alone with me, and get it over before we reach the house."
Dr. Grimstone certainly did not seem in a very receptive mood for confidences just then. No
     flys were to be seen, which he took as a personal outrage, and visited upon the station-master
     in hot indignation.
"It's scandalous, I tell you," he was saying: "scandalous! No cabs to meet the train. My
     school reassembles to-day, and here I find no arrangements made for their accommodation! Not
     even an omnibus! I shall write to the manager and report this. Let some one go for a fly
     immediately. Boys, go into the waiting room till I come to you. Stay—there are too many for one
     fly. Coker, Coggs, and, let me see, yes, Bultitude, you all know your way. Walk on and tell
     Mrs. Grimstone we are coming."
Paul Bultitude was perhaps more relieved than disappointed by this postponement of a
     disagreeable interview, though, if he had seen Coker dig Coggs in the
      side with a chuckle of exultant triumph, he might have had misgivings as to the
     prudence of trusting himself alone with them.
As it was he almost determined to trust the pair with his secret. "They will be valuable
     witnesses," he said to himself, "that, whoever else I may be, I am not Dick."
So he went on briskly ahead over a covered bridge and down some break-neck wooden steps, and
     passed through the wicket out upon the railed-in space, where the cabs and omnibuses should
     have been, but which was now a blank spectral waste with a white ground-fog lurking round its
     borders.
Here he was joined by his companions, who, after a little whispering, came up one on either
     side and put an arm through each of his.
"Well," said Paul, thinking to banter them agreeably; "here you are, young men, eh? Holidays
     all over now! Work while you're young, and then—— Gad, you're walking me off my legs. Stop; I'm
     not as young as I used to be——"
"Grim can't see us here, can he, Coker?" said Coggs when they had cleared the gates and
     palings.
"Not he!" said Coker.
"Very well, then. Now then, young Bultitude, you used to be a decent fellow enough last term,
     though you were coxy. So, before we go any further—what do you mean by this sort of
     thing?"
"Because," put in Coker, "if you aren't quite right in your head, through your old governor
     acting like a brute all the holidays, as you said he does, just say so, and we won't be hard on
     you."
"I—he—always an excellent father," stammered Paul. "What am I to explain?"
"Why, what did you go and sneak of him for bringing tuck back to school for, eh?"
     demanded Coker.
"Yes, and sing out when he hacked your shin?" added Coggs; "and tell Grimstone that new
     fellow was blubbing? Where's the joke in all that, eh? Where's the joke?"


"You don't suppose I was bound to sit calmly down and allow you to suck your villainous
     peppermints under my very nose, do you?" said Mr. Bultitude. "Why shouldn't I complain if a boy
     annoys me by sniffing, or kicks me on the ankle? Just tell me that? Suppose my neighbour has a
     noisy dog or a smoky chimney, am I not to venture to tell him of it? Is he to——"
But his arguments, convincing as they promised to be, were brought to a sudden and premature
     close by Coker, who slipped behind him and administered a sharp jog below his back, which
     jarred his spine and caused him infinite agony.
"You little brute!" cried Paul, "I could have you up for assault for that!"
But upon this Coggs did the very same thing only harder. "Last term you'd have shown fight
     for much less, Bultitude," they both observed severely, as some justification for repeating the
     process.
"Now, perhaps, you'll drop it for the future," said Coker. "Look here! we'll give you one
     more chance. This sneaking dodge is all very well for Chawner. Chawner could do that sort of
     thing without getting sat upon, because he's a big fellow; but we're not going to stand it from
     you. Will you promise on your sacred word of honour, now, to be a decent sort of chap again, as
     you were last term?"
But Mr. Bultitude, though he longed for peace and quietness, dreaded doing or saying anything
     to favour the impression that he was the schoolboy he unluckily appeared to be, and he had not
     skill and tact enough to dissemble and assume a familiar genial tone of equality with these
     rough boys.
"You don't understand," he protested feebly. "If I could only tell you——"
"We don't want any fine language, you know," said the relentless Coggs. "Yes or no. Will you
     promise to be your old self again?"


"I only wish I could," said poor Mr. Bultitude—"but I can't!"
"Very well, then," said Coggs firmly, "we must try the torture. Coker, will you screw the
     back of his hand, while I show him how they make barley-sugar?"
And he gave Paul an interesting illustration of the latter branch of industry by twisting his
     right arm round and round till he nearly wrenched it out of the socket, while Coker seized his
     left hand and pounded it vigorously with the first joint of his forefinger, causing the
     unfortunate Paul to yell for mercy.
At last he could bear no more, and breaking away from his tormentors with a violent effort,
     he ran frantically down the silent road towards a house which he knew from former visits to be
     Dr. Grimstone's.
He was but languidly pursued, and, as the distance was short, he soon gained a gate on the
     stuccoed posts of which he could read "Crichton House" by the light of a neighbouring
     gas-lamp.
"This is a nice way," he thought, as he reached it breathless and trembling, "for a father to
     visit his son's school!"
He had hoped to reach sanctuary before the other two could overtake him; but he soon
     discovered that the gate was shut fast, and all his efforts would not bring him within reach of
     the bell-handle—he was too short.
So he sat down on the doorstep in resigned despair, and waited for his enemies. Behind the
     gate was a large many-windowed house, with steps leading up to a portico. In the playground to
     his right the school gymnasium, a great gallows-like erection, loomed black and grim through
     the mist, the night wind favouring the ghastliness of its appearance by swaying the ropes till
     they creaked and moaned weirdly on the hooks, and the metal stirrups clinked and clashed
     against one another in irregular cadence.
He had no time to observe more, as Coker and Coggs joined him, and, on finding he had not
     rung the bell,
      seized the occasion to pummel him at their leisure before announcing their
     arrival.
Then the gate was opened, and the three—the revengeful pair assuming an air of lamb-like
     inoffensiveness—entered the hall and were met by Mrs. Grimstone.
"Why, here you are!" she said, with an air of surprise, and kissing them with real kindness.
     "How cold you look! So you actually had to walk. No cabs as usual. You poor boys! come in and
     warm yourselves. You'll find all your old friends in the schoolroom."
Mr. Bultitude submitted to be kissed with some reluctance, inwardly hoping that Dr. Grimstone
     might never hear of it.
Mrs. Grimstone, it may be said here, was a stout, fair woman, not in the least intellectual
     or imposing, but with a warm heart, and a way of talking to and about boys that secured her the
     confidence of mothers more effectually, perhaps, than the most polished conversation and
     irreproachable deportment could have done.
She did not reserve her motherliness for the reception room either, as some schoolmasters'
     wives have a tendency to do, and the smallest boy felt less homesick when he saw her.
She opened a green baize outer door, and the door beyond it, and led them into a long high
     room, with desks and forms placed against the walls, and a writing table, and line of
     brown-stained tables down the middle. Opposite the windows there was a curious structure of
     shelves partitioned into lockers, and filled with rows of shabby schoolbooks.
The room had been originally intended for a drawing-room, as was evident from the inevitable
     white and gold wall-paper and the tarnished gilt beading round the doors and window shutters;
     the mantelpiece, too, was of white marble, and the gaselier fitted with dingy crystal
     lustres.
But sad-coloured maps hung on the ink-splashed walls, and a clock with a blank idiotic face
     (it is not
      every clock that possesses a decently intelligent expression) ticked over the gilt
     pier-glass. The boards were uncarpeted, and stained with patches of ink of all sizes and ages;
     while the atmosphere, in spite of the blazing fire, had a scholastic blending of soap and
     water, ink and slate-pencil in its composition, which produced a chill and depressing
     effect.
On the forms opposite the fire some ten or twelve boys were sitting, a few comparing notes as
     to their holiday experiences with some approach to vivacity. The rest, with hands in pockets
     and feet stretched towards the blaze, seemed lost in melancholy abstraction.
"There!" said Mrs. Grimstone cheerfully, "you'll have plenty to talk to one another about.
     I'll send Tom in to see you presently!" And she left them with a reassuring nod, though the
     prospect of Tom's company did not perhaps elate them as much as it was intended to do.
Mr. Bultitude felt much as if he had suddenly been dropped down a bear-pit, and, avoiding
     welcome and observation as well as he could, got away into a corner, from which he observed his
     new companions with uneasy apprehension.
"I say," said one boy, resuming the interrupted conversation, "did you go to Drury Lane?
     Wasn't it stunning! That goose, you know, and the lion in the forest, and all the wooden
     animals lumbering in out of the toy Noah's Ark!"
"Why couldn't you come to our party on Twelfth-night?" asked another. "We had great larks. I
     wish you'd been there!"
"I had to go to young Skidmore's instead," said a pale, spiteful-looking boy, with fair hair
     carefully parted in the middle. "It was like his cheek to ask me, but I thought I'd go, you
     know, just to see what it was like."
"What was it like?" asked one or two near him languidly.
"Oh, awfully slow! They've a poky little house in Brompton somewhere, and there was no
     dancing, only
      boshy games and a conjurer, without any presents. And, oh! I say, at supper there
     was a big cake on the table, and no one was allowed to cut it, because it was hired. They're so
     poor, you know. Skidmore's pater is only a clerk, and you should see his sisters!"
"Why, are they pretty?"
"Pretty! they're just like young Skidmore—only uglier; and just fancy, his mother asked me
     'if I was Skidmore's favourite companion, and if he helped me in my studies?'"
The unfortunate Skidmore, when he returned, soon found reason to regret his rash hospitality,
     for he never heard the last of the cake (which had, as it happened, been paid for in the usual
     manner) during the rest of the term.
There was a slight laugh at the enormity of Mrs. Skidmore's presumption, and then a long
     pause, after which some one asked suddenly, "Does any one know whether Chawner really has left
     this time?"
"I hope so," said a big, heavy boy, and his hope seemed echoed with a general fervour. "He's
     been going to leave every term for the last year, but I believe he really has done it this
     time. He wrote and told me he wasn't coming back."
"Thank goodness!" said several, with an evident relief, and some one was just observing that
     they had had enough of the sneaking business, when a fly was heard to drive up, and the bell
     rang, whereupon everyone abandoned his easy attitude, and seemed to brace himself up for a
     trying encounter.
"Look out—here's Grimstone!" they whispered under their breaths, as voices and footsteps were
     heard in the hall outside.
Presently the door of the schoolroom opened, and another boy entered the room. Dr. Grimstone,
     it appeared, had not been the occupant of the fly, after all. The new-comer was a tall,
     narrow-shouldered, stooping fellow, with a sallow, unwholesome complexion, thin
      lips, and small sunken brown eyes. His cheeks were creased with a dimpling
     subsmile, half uneasy, half malicious, and his tread was mincing and catlike.
"Well, you fellows?" he said.
All rose at once, and shook hands effusively. "Why, Chawner!" they cried, "how are you, old
     fellow? We thought you weren't coming back!"
There was a heartiness in their manner somewhat at variance with their recent expressions of
     opinion; but they had doubtless excellent reasons for any inconsistency.
"Well," said Chawner, in a low, soft voice, which had a suggestion of feminine spitefulness,
     "I was going to leave, but I thought you'd be getting into mischief here without me to watch
     over you. Appleton, and Lench, and Coker want looking after badly, I know. So, you see, I've
     come back after all."
He laughed with a little malevolent cackle as he spoke, and the three boys named laughed too,
     though with no great heartiness, and shifting the while uneasily on their seats.
After this sally the conversation languished until Tom Grimstone's appearance. He strolled in
     with a semi-professional air, and shook hands with affability.
Tom was a short, flabby, sandy-haired youth, not particularly beloved of his comrades, and
     his first remark was, "I say, you chaps, have you done your holiday task? Pa says he shall keep
     everyone in who hasn't. I've done mine;" which, as a contribution to the general liveliness,
     was a distinct failure.
Needless to say, the work imposed as a holiday occupation had been first deferred, then
     forgotten, then remembered too late, and recklessly defied with the confidence begotten in a
     home atmosphere.
Amidst a general silence Chawner happened to see Mr. Bultitude in his corner, and crossed
     over to him. "Why, there's Dicky Bultitude there all the time, and he never came to shake
     hands! Aren't you going to speak to me?"


Paul growled something indistinctly, feeling strangely uncomfortable and confused.
"What's the matter with him?" asked Chawner. "Does anyone know? Has he lost his tongue?"
"He hadn't lost it coming down in the train," said Coker: "I wish he had. I tell you what,
     you fellows—He—here's Grim at last! I'll tell you all about it up in the bedroom."
And Dr. Grimstone really did arrive at this point, much to Paul's relief, and looked in to
     give a grip of the hand and a few words to those of the boys he had not seen.
Biddlecomb, Tipping, and the rest, came in with him, and the schoolroom soon filled with
     others arriving by later trains, amongst the later comers being the two house-masters, Mr.
     Blinkhorn and Mr. Tinkler; and there followed a season of bustle and conversation, which lasted
     until the Doctor touched a small hand-bell, and ordered them to sit down round the tables while
     supper was brought in.
Mr. Bultitude was not sorry to hear the word "supper." He was faint and dispirited, and
     although he had dined not very long since, thought that perhaps a little cold beef and beer, or
     some warmed-up trifle, might give him courage to tell his misfortunes before bedtime.
Of one thing he felt certain. Nothing should induce him to trust his person in a bedroom with
     any of those violent and vindictive boys; whether he succeeded in declaring himself that night
     or not, he would at least insist on a separate bedroom. Meantime he looked forward to supper as
     likely to restore geniality and confidence.
But the supper announced so imposingly proved to consist of nothing more than two plates
     piled with small pieces of thinly-buttered bread, which a page handed round together with
     tumblers of water; and Paul, in his disappointment, refused this refreshment with more firmness
     than politeness, as Dr. Grimstone observed.
"You got into trouble last term, Bultitude," he said
      sternly, "on account of this same fastidious daintiness. Your excellent father has
     informed me of your waste and gluttony at his own bountifully spread table. Don't let me have
     occasion to reprove you for this again."
Mr. Bultitude, feeling the necessity of propitiating him, hastened to take the two largest
     squares of bread and butter on the plate. They were moist and thick, and he had considerable
     difficulty in disposing of them, besides the gratification of hearing himself described as a
     "pig" by his neighbours, who reproved him with a refreshing candour.
"I must get away from here," he thought, ruefully. "Dick seems very unpopular. I wish I
     didn't feel so low-spirited and unwell. Why can't I carry it off easily as—as a kind of joke?
     How hard these forms are, and how those infernal boys did jog my back!"
Bedtime came at length. The boys filed, one by one, out of the room, and the Doctor stood by
     the door to shake hands with them as they passed.
Mr. Bultitude lingered until the others had gone, for he had made up his mind to seize this
     opportunity to open the Doctor's eyes to the mistake he was making. But he felt unaccountably
     nervous; the diplomatic and well-chosen introduction he had carefully prepared had left him at
     the critical moment; all power of thought was gone with it, and he went tremblingly up to the
     schoolmaster, feeling hopelessly at the mercy of anything that chose to come out of his
     mouth.
"Dr. Grimstone," he began; "before retiring I—I must insist—I mean I must request—— What I
     wish to say is——"
"I see," said the Doctor, catching him up sharply. "You wish to apologise for your
     extraordinary behaviour in the railway carriage? Well, though you made some amends afterwards,
     an apology is very right and proper. Say no more about it."
"It's not that," said Paul hopelessly; "I wanted to explain——"


"Your conduct with regard to the bread and butter? If it was simply want of appetite, of
     course there is no more to be said. But I have an abhorrence of——"
"Quite right," said Paul, recovering himself; "I hate waste myself, but there is something I
     must tell you before——"
"If it concerns that disgraceful conduct of Coker's," said the Doctor, "you may speak on. I
     shall have to consider his case to-morrow. Has any similar case of disobedience come to your
     knowledge? If so, I expect you to disclose it to me. You have found some other boy with
     sweetmeats in his possession?"
"Good Heavens, sir!" said Mr. Bultitude, losing his temper; "I haven't been searching the
     whole school for sweetmeats! I have other things to occupy my mind, sir. And, once for all, I
     demand to be heard! Dr. Grimstone, there are, ahem, domestic secrets that can only be alluded
     to in the strictest privacy. I see that one of your assistants is writing at his table there.
     Cannot we go where there will be less risk of interruption? You have a study, I suppose?"
"Yes, sir," said the Doctor with terrible grimness, "I have a study—and I have a cane. I can
     convince you of both facts, if you wish it. If you insult me again by this brazen buffoonery, I
     will! Be off to your dormitory, sir, before you provoke me to punish you. Not another word!
     Go!"
And, incredible as it may appear to all who have never been in his position, Mr. Bultitude
     went. It was almost an abdication, it was treachery to his true self; he knew the vital
     importance of firmness at this crisis. But nevertheless his courage gave way all at once, and
     he crawled up the bare, uncarpeted stairs without any further protest!
"Good night, Master Bultitude," said a housemaid, meeting him on the staircase: "you know
     your bedroom. No. 6, with Master Coker, and Master Biddlecomb, and the others."


Paul dragged himself up to the highest landing-stage, and, with a sick foreboding, opened the
     door on which the figure 6 was painted.
It was a large bare plainly papered room, with several curtainless windows, the blinds of
     which were drawn, a long deal stand of wash-hand basins, and eight little white beds against
     the walls.
A fire was lighted in consideration of its being the first night, and several boys were
     talking excitedly round it. "Here he is! He's stayed behind to tell more tales!" they cried, as
     Paul entered nervously. "Now then, Bultitude, what have you got to say for yourself?"
Mr. Bultitude felt powerless among all these young wolves. He had no knowledge of boys, nor
     any notion of acquiring an influence over them, having hitherto regarded them as necessary
     nuisances, to be rather repressed than studied. He could only stare hopelessly at them in
     fascinated silence.
"You see he hasn't a word to say for himself!" said Tipping. "Look here, what shall we do to
     him? Shall we try tossing in a blanket? I've never tried tossing a fellow in one myself, but as
     long as you don't jerk him too high, or out on the floor, you can't hurt him dangerously."
"No, I say, don't toss him in a blanket," pleaded Biddlecomb, and Paul felt gratefully
     towards him at the words; "anyone coming up would see what was going on. I vote we flick at him
     with towels."
"Now just you understand this clearly," said Paul, thinking, not without reason, that this
     course of treatment was likely to prove painful; "I refuse to allow myself to be flicked at
     with towels. No one has ever offered me such an indignity in my life! Oh, do you think I've not
     enough on my mind as it is without the barbarities of a set of young brutes like you!"
As this appeal was not of a very conciliatory nature they at once proceeded to form a circle
     round him and, judging their distance with great accuracy, jerked
      towels at his person with such diabolical dexterity that the wet corners cut him
     at all points like so many fine thongs, and he span round like a top, dancing, and, I regret to
     add, swearing violently, at the pain.
When he was worked up almost to frenzy pitch Biddlecomb's sweet low voice cried,
     "Cave, you fellows! I hear Grim. Let him undress now, and we can lam it into him
     afterwards with slippers!"
At this they all cast off such of their clothes as they still wore, and slipped modestly and
     peacefully into bed, just as Dr. Grimstone's large form appeared at the doorway. Mr. Bultitude
     made as much haste as he could, but did not escape a reprimand from the Doctor as he turned the
     gas out; and as soon as he had made the round of the bedrooms and his heavy tread had died away
     down the staircase, the light-hearted occupants of No. 6 "lammed" it into the unhappy Paul
     until they were tired of the exercise and left him to creep sore and trembling with rage and
     fright into his cold hard bed.
Then, after a little desultory conversation, one by one sank from incoherence into silence,
     and rose from silence to snores, while Paul alone lay sleepless, listening to the creeping
     tinkle of the dying fire, drearily wondering at the marvellous change that had come over his
     life and fortunes in the last few hours, and feverishly composing impassioned appeals which
     were to touch the Doctor's heart and convince his reason.
