
CHAPTER II.
ON the English side of the Channel, which our heroine was about to cross, a
     different scene was passing in the early life of one of the opposite sex.
A young man, four years older than Elinor (who was just seventeen), had passed that summer a
     triumphant Examination at Oxford, and heaped on himself every honour which it was possible for
     its young members to obtain. He had been accustomed to success ever since he became a
     school‐boy; and he was so far from satiated by it, that he already looked upon all his
     achievements as mere marks of past progress, and on himself as now about to begin the career
     which contained objects really worthy of his ambition.

He was an orphan, never acquainted with father or mother; wholly unconscious of tender
     influences on his boyhood, and of domestic sympathy with his successes and desires. He had come
     not to want them; disappointment he had not had, and the hard measure of public applause suited
     him better than the fond exaggerations of home, to which he had not grown up, nor been bettered
     by them. Life was a fine, hard reality to him; he knew it, for evil and good, and while he
     destroyed every illusion as fast as they courted him, he looked keenly to its enjoyments and
     rated them by the vast power of pleasure within him which he shared with most healthy and
     active human beings.
He was passing some weeks at a country house, where his late very hard work gave zest to the
     summer repose in which the old place lay buried. Long, solitary, morning walks in the heavenly
     beauty of a hot July did his thinking faculties good, after their late stretch upon other men’s
     thoughts. The society of well educated women, their music,
      their vivacity, their fancies; the riding parties, the
     evenings when there was dancing, or the garden by moonlight, and the pleasure of pretending to
     feelings, and, as it were, acting them, for they were no better to him than a play, these
     things suited him for a little while, till the moment should come for executing the projects in
     his head which would drive all the present scene far away.
He had everything to recommend him to the world. A fine person, full of health and strength,
     a fortune and a place which were competent to ordinary wishes, and had been augmented by all
     the savings of a well managed minority; a high reputation for ability; and natural claims on
     certain great names for assistance in entering on his career. His manner was more taking than
     winning, he took hold on society as if it were his due place, and his admirable tact made him
     hold it gracefully, and to the delight of his companions.
These qualities and advantages had made a strong impression on the fancy of the
      young lady who presided over the house. She was the owner’s
     sister, a few years older than my hero (whom I will call Leslie, though I do not assert that
     such was indeed his name); she was handsome, rich, and hitherto courted by all whom she had a
     mind should do so. But it was not so with her present guest; he often seemed on the brink of
     fascination, and then, like Sampson, burst the withies like burnt flax and was as free as ever.
     The irritation of this state of things was excessive; she longed to break through the feminine
     restraints which bound her, and ask him if indeed he cared for her or not. The absolute
     impossibility of thus setting herself free was a galling chain, for ever working on the wounded
     place; and the necessity of a smiling face, and disengaged manner, at times when she was
     fretting at her heart’s core, acquainted her with a torment which the daughters of Eve
     sometimes heavily endure.
“Let us ride this afternoon,” she said, one hot but cloudy day; “the air of the house burns
     one.”

“With all my heart,” said Leslie; “but we shall have a storm.”
“I am not afraid,” said Laura.
“Would I were quite sure that, in fact, you have no fears!”
“Oh! I would tell them. I am very frank, I hate concealment. It is very hard on women that
     they are required to be liars and deceivers.”
“But that’s not the case,” said Leslie, “what is so delightful to a man as a frank, open
     nature which prints its thoughts as fast as they come into the mind.”
“So you say, but you know it is not so—at least, not unless a woman has no thought whatever,
     except the price of a dress or the hope of a ball.”
“Oh, that would not pay the expense of printing or reading either,” said Leslie; “but what
     has this to do with your first plan of riding? Shall we go?”
“Yes; Mrs. Axross, you will ride? and Captain Bertham—ring; the horses are ready in case we
     should want them. Come and put on your habit.”

When they got on horseback, Leslie perversely kept with Mrs. Axross, a timid horsewoman, and
     in consequence of being occupied with genuine fear, a rather dull companion. They fell behind
     the others, whose horses stepped out freely under lightly held bits, nor did Miss Chanson know
     how to alter the order of their progress. When she contrived, under pretence of pointing out a
     view, or a remarkable tree, to get back to the loiterers, she still found that Leslie adhered
     to his first companion, and suffered her again to get before him.
“How I hate a horse that can’t walk,” she said, at last, impatiently striking her own, which
     bounded at the unjust assault and tossed his head angrily.
“Well, then let us gallop,” said Leslie, laughing, for he read her heart exactly. “My
     companion,” he added, as they went off, “thinks only of keeping her seat. When she gets home
     safe, she will have fulfilled the sole purpose of riding out.”
“Well, I’m better than that,” said Laura, her spirits rising instantly, “I can enjoy all
      when there is anything to enjoy—but Captain Bertham is so
     stupid.”
Leslie laughed again, for he knew that Captain Bertham did not deserve a reproach of which he
     felt himself to be the indirect cause.
“How can anyone be dull with you for a companion,” said he, again, as they increased their
     pace and went gaily along. Laura was pleased, she did not consider that she had provoked the
     compliment, and that it is only voluntary attentions from a man that tell.
“Here come the great raindrops,” said Leslie, as the first of the storm fell one by one.
“Oh, no! it is only the last of a shower. See, it is blowing over.”
“I don’t see it at all, but if you order me to see it, I will.”
“I do, then,” said Laura, gaily; “so let us go on.”
“Was that lightning or not?” said Leslie, as a flash startled their horses, and thunder
     rolled at a distance.

“It was not,” said Laura; “come on.”
“On, on, to the end of the world under your guidance.”
But now the rain at once arrived and poured upon them.
“What will Mrs. Axross do,” said Laura, laughing; “she will walk her horse all the way home,
     for fear he should jump at the storm. We must turn back and look for them.”
Leslie rather wondered she should do so, instead of profiting by her present tête‐à‐tête with him; but presently he understood the manœuvre. When
     they came to a cross road, she examined the footmarks on the road, and declared it was most
     extraordinary, but certainly their companions had gone the wrong way.
“They will get lost in the wood,” she said; “and what will Mr. Axross say, if we go home
     without his wife? Let us canter up here and set them right. We shall overtake them in a
     minute.”
“You will be wet through,” said Leslie. “No, no, canter home!”

“I don’t care; go home if you like.”
“No, I am yours, to the very skin” said Leslie, venturing on a brutality.
Miss Chanson did not look angry, and on they went, away from home. Presently a little
     farmhouse appeared in sight.
“They have taken shelter there,” said the lady, “no doubt. Come, let us see if they are to be
     found;” and arriving at the door, she jumped from her horse, saying to the farmer, who came out
     at the sound of horses, “My friends are here, are not they? Come, Mr. Leslie.”
He followed, after first putting the horses into the stable, and giving them over to the care
     of the farmer’s boy, and found, his companion standing before the kitchen fire, her hat off,
     her hair let down to dry, and her habit open.
“The weather is too bad to stay in, is not it?” she said, as he came in. “Let us wait till
     the storm goes by;” and she pulled her dress together.
“A lucky storm for me,” said Leslie, glancing at her disarranged toilette. “Why
      are these lovely tresses locked up in ribbon and garlands—not
     always thus delightfully visible?”
Laura affected embarrassment, and hastily twisted them in her hands, but yielded to slight
     impulse from Leslie to release them. Finally she placed herself in a very picturesque attitude
     on what is called the settle, by the fire, and Leslie carried on briskly the conversation she
     affected.
“All this time,” said he, at last, when the flirtation became a little wearisome, “what is
     become of Mrs. Axross?”
“I had almost forgotten her,” said Laura, softly, with a smothered sigh.
“I had quite done so,” said Leslie, sighing also.
“Only you recollected her,” said Laura, a little reproachfully.
“Nay, the storm is over. It is getting late. I would not have you catch cold for the world—I
     would not be responsible for the anxiety your absence will create—I would not have you exposed
     to further rain—I would ......”

“Get home in time for dinner,” interrupted Laura, very impatiently. Then checking herself,
     she added, as gaily as she could, “which would be an excellent thing, for I am very
     hungry.”
“Then heaven forbid you should wait!” said Leslie. “I’ll fetch the horses in a moment.”
Accordingly he went himself to the stable, and forgot to lament the loss of the beautiful
     curls, which were twisted under the hat when he came back; and placing Laura on her horse, they
     rode home together, the lady feeling in herself that hollowness in her satisfaction which comes
     when the foundation of a very gay and promising structure wants perfect solidity.
“How very handsome he is,” she said to herself, as she ran up the house‐steps; “how
     agreeable—and I don’t feel sure he will make himself agreeable next time—that makes one curious
     to be with him again.”
The butler stopped her in the hall, and said, “Miss Elinor Ladylift was arrived.”
“Ha! our little nun,” said she, turning
      back to Mr. Leslie; “we did not expect her till to‐morrow.
     Come and see her.”
He followed her into the room, and saw standing by the table a young figure, perfectly
     enveloped in a gray cloak, while a veil concealed her features from any one at a little
     distance. The only characteristic which he could observe was, that the flowers on the table
     trembled, as if the hand which rested on it gave them that motion.
“Oh! my dear, I did not know you would be here to‐day. I beg your pardon for not being here
     to receive you. You forgive me, don’t you?”
“Yes!” said a low, timid voice.
Miss Chanson laughed. “That’s all right! Then come along with me, for I am wet through: you
     would not have me die of cold, would you?”
“No!” said the voice.
“Right, again! I’ll show you your room —but first I’ll present Mr. Leslie to you. This is Mr.
     Leslie, my dear.”
“Is it?” said the voice again.
“Yes, indeed!” and again Laura laughed,
      looking up at the young man sportively, and taking the girl’s
     arm went out of the room with her. “There’s no fear that she will captivate any one whom
      I choose for myself, especially such a man as that, so brilliant himself, and so
     fond of intellect and manner,” thought she.
That perfect security at first sight generally ends in a total contradiction. I have remarked
     it as often as the case of security has taken place.
“She is tired and frightened, and won’t come to dinner,” said Miss Chanson, as she entered
     the drawing‐room after dressing. “No wonder! the inside of a convent is all she knows of
     life.”
“What does she look like?” asked her brother, a man five‐and‐twenty years older than the
     bright Laura, and an indifferent, idle bachelor, who disregarded his appearance, and looked yet
     ten years older than he was, in consequence.
“She is a pale, slight girl,” said Laura, “and expects to be devoured by all of us. She has
     the least possible French accent, and moves about like a mouse.”
