
CHAPTER IX.
THAT evening, Sir Peter knocked at the door of his cousin’s sitting‐room, when he
     came in an hour before dinner.
“Have you got some tea, Laura?” he asked; “let me have a cup with you, if you are going to
     have any.”
“Come in, come in!” said Laura, ringing the bell at the same time, and ordering tea for him
     and her. “Well, what have you shot?”
“Six pheasants, and a woodcock,” said Sir Peter; “I just went into that outside cover, you
     know, below the lime kiln.”
“And quite enough,” said Laura, “for a distant part, scarcely preserved.”
“Yes, it is a good way off,” said Sir
      Peter; “and do you know, Leslie had taken your ward walking
     all that way.”
“He had?”
“Yes, and they looked as like real lovers as ever you saw any two people. Now, Laura, I want
     you to answer me one question; are you quite certain there is nothing between them, quite
     certain? Because if there is, I would not put myself in their way for the generalship of the
     Indian army—no, not to be made knight banneret on the field of battle.”
“Have not I told you,” said Laura, “how matters stand.”
“Yes; but he may be a fool, and he may have taken up with the little idiot; and if the
     flirting is not on her side, I will have nothing to do with making her break her little
     heart.”
“It is all, all on her side; but for her intrigues I should be happy—and I can be happy—I am;
     what is that man to me?”
“Nothing, Laura; that’s right, don’t throw away a thought upon him, if he has been such an
     ass.”

“But he has not!” said Laura, struggling mentally against the doom, as one does bodily
     against the great weight that is pressing the lungs together, so as to stop breath. “It is
     merely that a child is artful enough to deceive him, is thoughtless enough to hazard her own
     character, and ruins my peace.”
“Nay, if it is so ......”
“I tell you it is.”
“Swear!” said Sir Peter, crossing the forefingers of his two hands, playfully, yet in his
     heart looking seriously to such an appeal as safe to procure him the truth. Laura did not think
     nor hesitate for a moment. She laid her hand on his crossed fingers—
“ I swear!” she said. She hated her cousin for making her do this, but she had no doubt,
     nevertheless, about doing it.
“Very well, then, I will serve you loyally and zealously to the extent of my power, and that
     extent is limited, for I must go on Thursday.”
“Yes, yes, go on Thursday,” said Laura,
      “and before that time, let Leslie merely see whether or not
     her pretended passion for him is true, only let her show herself in her true colours, that is
     all I ask.”
“As how?”
“Well, if she appoints you to meet her? If she tampers with you, as she does with
     Leslie?”
“Oh! in that case.”
“You will let him know it?”
“No, I shall not tell him—that’s quite impossible.”
“He can find it out then,” said Laura.
“It would be better for him if he did; would lose a trifle and gain a treasure. Oh! Laura, I
     wish I were but older, wiser, or of more value in the world, I would fling myself at your feet,
     though Crœsus and Lycurgus were in the way.”
“And I would not have you,” said Laura, peevishly, then correcting herself, she added, “what
     a hoary pair to offer to a young lady; you would have a much better chance my
     Pet.”
Sir Peter went on talking nonsense,
      which he much preferred to plotting against Elinor, for of
     that employment he was getting rather tired, and Laura was afraid to weary him entirely of the
     subject, for upon his co‐operation all her remaining hopes depended. She therefore treated the
     subject as lightly as she could, only insisting on some display of despair on his part at his
     approaching separation from Elinor, and contriving to amuse him with details, each of which she
     hoped would be a blow against the security in which she saw that Leslie was fortified.
She herself conducted the assault this evening. Leslie gave her occasion; he told her that he
     must very soon announce to her brother the engagement into which his ward had entered; and
     Laura, now thoroughly on her guard assented, proposing that the end of the week should be the
     time chosen. Leslie agreed, and Laura had gained one point, for did not the Thursday of Sir
     Peter’s departure come between?

“I shall be glad when he is gone for your sake,” said Laura to Leslie.
“Why so?”
“Nay, I think you deserve all the walks and talks and little appointments to yourself.”
“Oh, I am not uneasy about that,” said Leslie; “such fancies trouble me not. As King Pericles
     says, ‘Falseness cannot dwell in thee!’”
“Falseness in me?” said Laura, startled.
“In her, I ought to have said, but I was too conscientious to misquote Shakespeare. Oh! no,
     that trouble is quite over.”
“Then why did she and my cousin find themselves at the stone quarry that day she had the
     sudden headache, and could not drive with us?”
“I’m sure I don’t know,” said Leslie; “the best way would be to ask her.”
“Do, if you think the truth so easy to be had.”
“Only I don’t care to know,” said Leslie.
“Oh! very well. I am sure I don’t,” said Laura.

She turned away, and proposed music to one of the party, but her eyes did not fail to observe
     that Leslie took advantage of the opportunity to stand talking with Elinor at the open window,
     and she persuaded herself was asking the explanation she intended him to seek. There was some
     little pre‐occupation in his way of carrying on the beginning of the conversation, a shade of
     embarrassment, and a questioning air. Elinor coloured deeply, and hesitated to answer him, and
     Laura believed that the headache which she herself had ordered Elinor to remember, and the
     silence which she herself had ordered Elinor to keep about the stone quarry walk, were throwing
     the appearance of double‐dealing over the entangled girl. Leslie’s fond look at last she could
     not so well interpret. She did not think he was satisfied with respect to the walk, yet
     “perhaps” (thought she), “he believes a woman cannot speak the truth, and forgives her—forgives
      her; yes, but he would not forgive me.”

Laura was not much out in her interpretation of Leslie’s looks; in fact, he was disposed to
     believe and to excuse in Elinor, the manœuvres which he fancied the inexperienced young girl
     had been led to practise before her present engagement with him; but at all events, as things
     were now, he determined to put a stop to all proceedings of the kind, and would fain have
     warned and set Elinor on her guard, as her mother would have done, had she ever known her
     mother.
“Nobody may interrupt me now,” he said, “in the happiness of such walks as we had yesterday.
     Nobody has any claim on you now, when I claim you. You have given me that right, remember.”
“Mr. Chanson said I must go with him to see his greyhounds fed,” said Elinor; “but I will
     not.”
“Oh! Mr. Chanson. Yes, you may go with him.”
“Miss Chanson also said I was to carry the hymn books to the school. She wants
      to show me how to teach them to sing. I will tell her I
     cannot do it.”
“No, no; you must do what she asks till you leave her altogether.”
“But you said I was to walk with you only.”
“I mean it is not fit for a young girl to let an idle young man like Bicester, meet and
     follow her.”
“So my Reverend Mother told me, and I did not, till you laughed, and made me laugh too, about
     it.”
“Well, well, yes; but a man says things he does not mean; you should be aware that
      he does not even remember many things he says, and if a girl does, and believes
     it is all true, she gets into a very awkward position.”
“You are a young man,” said Elinor, smiling; “am I to believe you?”
“Oh! it is quite a different thing with me. What I say now, does not apply to me. Only I
     don’t want you. to let that puppy talk to you. He can, only mean
      mischief, and you had better be on your guard.”
“So the Reverend Mother said,” repeated Elinor; “and I will obey her and you.”
“Next Thursday he goes away,” said Leslie; “and do you know, dearest and gentlest Elinor,
     that I am going too? Chanson has got a project in his head about visiting some property he
     bought not long ago; and he says his sister thinks it will be a good opportunity to do so when
     young Bicester leaves the house, and before fresh guests come in. He wants me so very much to
     be his companion, that I have consented. We shall not be away above a few days, and during
     those days I will tell him that his ward is his ward no longer, but that it is I who have to
     answer for her in future.”
“Do,” said Elinor.
Leslie looked at her, and half laughed. “You will not tell him the contrary?” said he.
“Oh! no, no,” said Elinor; “no more, surely, will he? I am sorry though that I did not ask
     him first if I might, for the
      Reverend Mother told me it was my guardian who must settle
      that.”
“And I told you not; very true. But you do not think I told you to do anything
     wrong?”
“I hope not,” said Elinor, “for I have no right or wrong in my head now, except what I learn
     from you.”
“Ay! trust me, then ...... Oh! I could not mislead you.”
“No, I am sure of that,” said Elinor, lifting her eyes to his. He thought of the morning at
     breakfast, when he could not get one glimpse of those shy eyes; and he thought also of the many
     things between that moment and the one in which her innocence had converted all his thoughts
     into pure projects like itself. In his heart he worshipped the creature who held so strong, yet
     so silken a dominion over him, and in his enjoyment of the prospect now before him, he
     instinctively tried to forget the cruel one which he had entertained and abandoned.
Laura had no time to spare, or she would
      have let things work more gently than she could now afford.
     This was Saturday evening; and the evening of Sunday she destined to commence a plot which must
     explode before Thursday, or all her schemes would be at fault. The course of Sunday contented
     her well enough. The usual duties of the day went forward, and however mechanically to Laura,
     there was no outward dereliction. She would have had a vague uneasiness at absenting herself
     from the village church, but no word that she heard there struck her as forbidding—no word she
     uttered there, struck her as renouncing—the secret purposes she meditated. Once, as a very
     young child, instructed to lay by every secular employment on the Sabbath day, it chanted that
     her mother, who led a usually secluded life, was invited by a very great house to very great
     feast on a Sunday; and the mother went, not because she thought and explained that there was no
     harm in it, but because the temptation was so strong. Laura had opportunities enough to melt
      down the impression which this fact made on her; nor did it,
     probably, in itself produce much effect, but her nature had that bias which caused it to select
     and feed upon this and various similar incidents which the tide of things presented to her,
     until at length led away by selfishness and by uncontrolled passions, she had come to be, as
     one may say, two Lauras, the one who professed in theory whatever was good, and the one whose
     actions regarded simply what was convenient. It is a very common character.
This Sunday, therefore, saw her in the family pew with her guests; saw her take the school
     report from the hand of the curtseying schoolmistress, and rebuke the child who was shown up
     for inattention. She let the horses and servants rest to‐day, and proposed merely a walk by way
     of amusement. Before she could prevent him, Leslie drew Elinor away, and by the side of the
     waterfall and up the banks of the brook, they passed the afternoon hours.
Laura had got a present for her cousin
      Peter, a travelling bag, fitted in the smallest compass with
     the most numerous articles, and called him to her sitting‐room to give it.
Sir Peter was rather melancholy and sentimental. He was going to the other side of the world,
     and was pleased to do so, and yet it touched him to feel that nobody was much interested in his
     departure except himself; his place would close over at once, and it was he only who cared or
     reflected that he was going. Laura’s care, therefore, to procure a present for him, gave him
     pleasure. He employed himself in examining and admiring every article, and in obtaining from
     Laura a few words in her own hand, declaring herself the giver of the bag, and the well‐wishing
     cousin of the recipient.
“And you will think of me once or twice, will you?” said Sir Peter; “when my thoughts are
     travelling homewards they will now and then meet yours coming out to Ceylon.”

“To be sure they will; and many others will be on the same journey, anxious to know what you
     are about.”
“No, Laura, no. My mother, if she were alive, would have let no post go by without a letter.
     I have a green bag stuffed with those she wrote to me at school, and so would a sister,
     perhaps, if I ever had one, but nobody else ever cares for a young man more than for one grain
     of wheat rather than another in a sack full.”
“Oh! indeed, I do,” said Laura, “and I am not the only one.”
“Who else?”
“Nay, I don’t think I shall tell you. It is such nonsense.”
“You don’t mean the little nun?”
“No, no; of course not.”
“You do,” said Sir Peter, starting up, and forgetting his melancholy; “what did she say?”
“Oh! nothing—I forget—nothing worth hearing.”
“Nay, Laura, you shall tell me, or I will ask her. Where is she?”

“In her own room, I should think. You can’t go there and ask her.”
“I thought she was walking with Leslie.”
“Not very likely after what she said to me. If she is walking with Mr. Leslie her coquetry
     passes all allowable bounds.”
“Why, what did she say?”
“Nay, you will be so vain.”
“Not vainer than I am,” said Sir Peter, smiling gaily.
“True; that’s hardly possible,” said Laura; “well, well, she is very demure, and does not
     talk much you know, to me at least, but she said this morning in her sudden way, as if her
     words broke out of her thoughts, ‘Sir. Peter smokes every evening, does not he?’”
“What an unsentimental meditation!” said Sir Peter.
“I did not think so,” said Laura.
“As how, is it not?”
“When you smoke, you walk out; when you walk out you can be met.”
“Nay, is that it? nice little girl!”
“I don’t know that it is that, but it would
      be easy to make the experiment. If it is so, and she likes
     you Peter, do take her with you to Ceylon. I use no concealment. I should be glad if she were
     gone.”
“Thanks, thanks, dear cousin, but I can’t be quite so convenient as that, for I suppose you
     would have her my wife.”
“Peter!”
“But if she do think of morning walks with Leslie, and moonlight walks with me, at least
      he will never marry her.”
“Never, never, never!” said Laura.
Dinner was not over till the evening was dark, for October was at the end of its first week.
     The rooms were bright with lamps and candles, but the windows were open to the shadowy scene
     without, for the weather was very hot, even as though summer were abroad masquerading in the
     splendidly coloured robes of the aged year.
“Let us walk down the garden,” said Laura to Elinor, who was the only lady beside herself of
     the party; “the air is oppressive, further from the house it will be cooler.”

They went together along the garden paths, and reached the avenue of great Scotch firs which
     terminated it, and which at its other extremity had a wicket opening into the park.
“I wonder,” said Laura, “whether Eliza Mosterick has had the broth she wanted; did you hear
     anything about it?”
“No, I did not.”
“But you knew she was ill. Did you call to inquire about her when you were out this
     morning?”
“No,” said Elinor.
“You might just as well have done so, and put the Sunday to some better purpose than merely
     amusing yourself,” said Laura; “poor woman, perhaps she has been waiting vainly all day. I wish
     I could go as far before my brother comes into the drawing‐room; he does not like me to be
     absent.”
Elinor was silent; whatever she might say she felt would bring down a rebuke.
“Could you go, Elinor?” said Laura, at last.

“Certainly,” said Elinor, who was accustomed at the convent to wait on the sick, and to be
     employed about their errands. “Shall I?”
“Well, if you will. You know the house; it is the underkeeper’s—you know, just fifty yards
     from the end of the avenue on the right—she was very ill—unless she is better—and I meant to
     send her some broth and things ....... Stay, take her five shillings will you, in case she
     wants to buy anything. Here, put my scarf over your head. It is as good as a bonnet.”
Elinor did all she was bid, and Laura, when she was disappearing like a white spirit down the
     gloomy avenue, turned hastily and ran to the house, where she gave thanks (like Shylock when
     his enemies’ ships are lost, and he says, “Thank God, I thank God!”) to see that the time for
     evening Sunday prayers was not more than a quarter of an hour distant, at which epoch of the
     evening the absence of any member of the party must become conspicuous. Both Leslie and Sir
     Peter glanced round
      the room as soon as they came in, for Elinor. Both looked at
     Laura to account for her absence. A faint smile, and a slight elevation of her eyebrows
     informed the latter that Elinor would be found where he expected, and Sir Peter vanished to
     keep the imaginary rendezvous on his side. Leslie asked in a low voice, where was Elinor.
“Is not she here?” said Laura, looking round; “I have been in the garden, but she refused to
     come. I think she said she was going to write a letter.”
Leslie was obliged to content himself; and taking up a book, sat watching the door which,
     every time it opened drew his eager eyes, till the appearance of some uninteresting figure
     caused them to be impatiently cast down again. Laura’s attention went nervously to the clock,
     which ticked on so composedly, and would not hasten towards half‐past nine. Nor even when the
     half‐hour had leisurely lifted up its voice twice, to denote that it was come, did the outer
     bell sound for prayers, till another full minute had gone by; and yet
      further, several seconds, which seemed like hours (as they
     do to a man under the surgeon’s hands, or hanging on the edge of a precipice while relief is
     coming), passed by, before the butler threw open the door, and announced, after the manner of
     butlers, “Prayers is ready.” Laura rose at once, and with a bland smile, walked alone out of
     the room followed by her brother, by Leslie, and by the few men who were guests in the house.
     Nothing could have answered better, for as they crossed the ante‐room, which opened on the
     garden, Elinor came hastily in, the veil on her head, and Sir Peter following closely. Laura
     saw Leslie’s start of displeased surprise; he went to her and offered his arm, regardless who
     observed him, or what they thought.
“Where have you been?” he said, in a very low voice.
“Miss Chanson took me into the garden and sent me on an errand.”
Leslie had just heard that Miss Chanson bad been alone in the garden, and that Elinor had
     said she was going to her own room.

“But you are not alone,” said Leslie.
“I could not help it,” said Elinor; “he came out to smoke and met me.”
“He always smokes in the garden at night. You knew it?”
“Indeed, indeed, I did not.”
“Dear, dear Elinor, do not .......”
They had now crossed the hall and entered the parlour where the servants were assembled. The
     necessary outer decorum prevailed, but stormy was Leslie’s bosom, sad and frightened was
     Elinor’s, while holy words and pious attitudes alone appeared to the public ear and eye. Laura
     hastened Elinor away with her after prayers, saying that they must be punctual to‐morrow at
     breakfast in order to be ready for an expedition which she had arranged, and however early it
     was they would now go to bed to prepare for it. Leslie was so much in love that he did not
     venture on being offended with Elinor; he no longer assumed an authoritative manner with her,
     that was too paternal, too like a guardian, but he had a grieved look and way towards
      her, wholly natural and unpremeditated, which brought the
     tears into her eyes. He saw them, and they atoned for everything.
“She is sorry,” he said to himself; “she knows she has been wrong. No doubt it is his fault
     more than hers. Still, why did she use the worn out plea to Laura of writing letters. Why did
     she, to me, invent the pretext of being sent on a message. And she tells these little lies so
     innocently, she would deceive any man, if he were fool enough to think there is a woman in the
     world who does not lie.” He stamped the unoffending boards of his room as he came to this
     conclusion, and walked up and down till he reflected there was such a thing as going to
     bed.
And now came Monday, the day on which the drawing, the needlework, the gardening, the
     professional duties, if there be any, or the gun and the dogs, the fishing rod and ride if
     there be none, are resumed after one day’s suspension. There has been the village church
     changing the disposal of the
      morning and afternoon from the six days’ course; there has
     been, perhaps, a different style of books read, an abstinence from some favourite employment,
     and, at all events, there has been the sight of the poor man’s holiday; twenty‐four hours, in
     short, in some way different from other similar periods, and a consequent mark left upon Time.
     Laura awaking, saw before her three wretched days, in which she had to fight against the
     natural order of things in order to bring about a base purpose of her own; a purpose liable in
     a high degree to failure, she was disinclined to get up and do this iniquitous battle, although
     it was not that the iniquity struck her, but her own hard fate in being unable to obtain the
     object necessary to her happiness without such a struggle.
“And why is it?” thus her thoughts came over her, but not worded; “why is it that I love him
     thus?—he is not eager to please me, as others are. I am obliged to cultivate conversation
     before it runs freely between us. He does not seek out my
      wishes as my poor brother does, and as William Mansfield and
     the other man did whom I could not bear. No! I must sacrifice plans and comforts to him. If he
     once loved me, if I once knew that he would be sorry to go away, then I could renounce
     him—perhaps—but if he went now, he would forget me to‐morrow. I should think of him, and he
     would not think of me; he is so commanding among men, he cares so little what is thought of
     him; he is so acceptable in society, so beautiful—if I could but know I had power over
     him—shall another?—she ......?”
Laura sprang out of bed and took up her self‐imposed burthen. How carefully were all the
     minute cares of her person attended to, and how mechanically; but as for her mind, its habits
     were not those which led her to be true with herself; hence all was slurred and burred within,
     and she had a most imperfect view of what she herself was doing. But at half‐past nine she
     descended clean as a white pebble from a running brook, neat as a rose‐bud still bound
      by its unfolding calyx; agreeable, attentive, handsome; but
     within, there was a heart constantly conscious in its way of beating that something was wrong;
     there was a dry mouth which disliked the business of talking, and hated that of eating; there
     was the sense of hearing strained to catch one voice, and rebelling because that voice was not
     addressed to her. There was fear over all, that some of the many words might be said which
     would reveal those secrets which lay so near the surface, and which any chance might lay bare
     from the covering she was able to draw over them.
Chance did not show itself favourable to‐day; for her plan had been to keep the lovers apart
     by dividing the party between carriage and horseback, and to visit a show place in the
     neighbourhood, of which the possessors were friends of hers, and their society and chaperonage
     round their house and garden, would prevent the formation of tête‐à‐têtes. But before breakfast was over, the clouds let fall their
     long‐threatening torrents, and in a very short time Mr.
      Chanson declared the expedition impossible.
“It will be too late, even if the rain stops by mid‐day,” said he; “you must do something
     else. Come, we’ll have a game of billiards first, and then, when you two women have written a
     dozen letters, and worked your frills, or your kettle‐holders, you shall help me to change the
     shells out of the library to the new cases. I want the labels neatly written, and little card
     boxes made. I am glad it rains.”
“I will be glad too, for your sake,” said Laura; “Elinor, will you help?”
“Oh, yes!” said Elinor.
“You can’t want to write more letters!” said Laura, availing herself of the shot which
     accident opened to her.
“No,” said Elinor.
“Have you finished all?” asked Leslie, in a low voice.
“I have not,” said Elinor, in a voice still lower; “but say nothing. I shall be so glad to do
     Mr. Chanson a little service.”

“His sister believed that you were employed in writing last night,” said Leslie.
“How could she,” said Elinor; “I went to bed by her desire as soon as we were upstairs.”
“Equivocator!” thought Leslie.
Evening came, and with it a change in the weather. Before setting, the sun shone brightly
     out, and it left the autumnal garden in a gentle haze of warm air, where the smell of the fresh
     earth and the excited flowers, and the air renovated with moisture, flattered every sense of
     eye and ear.
“How delicious,” said Laura, when she and Elinor stood again outside the window which opened
     on the walk; “let us take our bonnets and walk for ten minutes.”
They did so, and at the end of that time, Laura said she must return to the house. “Elinor,
     will you be so good as to go as far as the clerk’s, and ask him to look in our pew for my
     prayer book? the one in vellum, you know, which my brother gave me. I forgot to bring it away,
     and I want
      to gum down the label on the back before it gets rubbed
     off.”
“I can’t do that to‐night,” said Elinor.; “in the morning if you like.”
“Why not?” said Laura, turning full round upon her.
“Sir Peter does not allow me to walk alone.”
Laura burst into laughter. “What, must Sir Peter shut himself up every time it pleases you to
     take the air?”
“I don’t mean that” said Elinor.
“Oh! you fancy he means to assassinate you, or take hold of your hand ...... or ......”
“No!”
“Or that his sole object in walking out is to share the delights of your conversation, and
     wait upon your presence. Upon my word his sole object is, rather, to smoke his pipe.”
“Oh! yes.”
“Which object he pursues in the garden and the fir‐grove. Therefore, even though that
     frightful young man were to amuse his leisure with the sin of tobacco, you
      would be quite safe my dear in walking to the church. Now
     go, will you, Elinor?”
“No,” said Elinor, “I cannot. Mr. Leslie does not choose I should.”
“Oh! now it comes out. She’s afraid of beiing scolded, is she? What! she has been scolded
     already, and has cried and said she would never do so no more, no! never. What a good
     child!”
Elinor stood with tears in her eyes. “Yes,” she said, when Laura scornfully waited for an
     answer; “I said I never would do what he disliked.”
“I never heard anything so babyish in my life. Why you are no more fit to be a married woman
     than an infant. If you let a man tyrannize over you in that way while he is your lover, he will
     be cruel as a husband, and sick to death of you in six months.”
Elinor stood silent: her colour rose under the hard words and fearful prophecy, but she did
     not credit it, and yet would not contradict the utterer.
“Now, my dear child,” said Miss Chan‐
      son, “for your own sake let me entreat you to behave a
     little more like a woman. Have a little independence, just enough to make him think you his
     equal. If he finds fault with things right and innocent, don’t mind him, go your own way. Stand
     up to him. Men like to be stood up to.”
“Very well,” said Elinor, smiling, “I will remember what you say.”
“And go to the church for me,” said Laura, smiling also, “there’s a good girl.”
Elinor shook her head.
“You will not?”
“I cannot.”
“Say will not at once, if you mean it. Well?”
“Indeed I cannot, I will not.”
“That will do. Then will you be so very obliging as to go in and tell my brother, that I am
     obliged to go on an errand, because you will not, and that I ...... and that you
     ...... what you choose.”
Laura turned her back, and set out hastily; but in a few seconds she stopped, and looked
     back, she had expected that the
      gentle girl would have run after her, but there was Elinor,
     standing quite still, watching her. Laura ran back—
“What! will you do neither one nor the other, do you defy me? am I to be defied in my own
     house? ridiculed? go to the church directly, or let me believe you are the most ungrateful of
     women.”
“I will not walk alone this evening,” said Elinor.
“Will you do this, then?” said Laura, commanding her voice to the lowest and calmest tone.
     “Will you pass this evening in your own room?”
“I am very sorry I have offended you,” said Elinor, “I will do whatever you bid me,” and she
     turned away, and went straight into the house, and upstairs, while Laura dashed the tears of
     passion from her eyes, and inveighed against the cruelty of the young girl, for triumphing in
     her victory over the lover of her benefactress.
When she reached the drawing‐room it was still empty. She opened a book of drawings on the
     table, and composed her
      agitated frame. A few minutes brought in her brother and his
     guests, and then the first inquiry was for Miss Ladylift.
“She told me she was going to write letters,” said Miss Chanson, demurely.
Sir Peter instantly glanced at his cousin, and smiled. Mr. Leslie caught the smile, and his
     eye turned in the same moment upon Laura, but she was looking straight forward, as innocent as
     a bird. He perceived, however, that young Bicester was swallowing a scalding cup of coffee, and
     that lounging apparently from one window to another, he silently opened the door, and
     disappeared. Leslie, with no attempt at mystery, went out directly after. The evening was
     growing very dusky, but he saw the man he deemed his rival, entering the avenue, and hastily
     followed him. Sir Peter was alone; and that he was alone, surprised Sir Peter. But that the
     person who joined him should be Leslie, thoroughly annoyed him, and Leslie on his part was
     equally angry at finding the young soldier thus apparently awaiting a
      rendezvous. The one overtook the other, and they walked
     together a few yards in silence.
“Are you going into the park?” said Sir Peter, at last.
“No; are you?”
“No.” Again there was silence; then Sir Peter began again.
“I never knew you choose this walk before.”
“Did not you?”
“No.”
Sir Peter shook the ashes from his cigar bitterly, and then turned suddenly, and walked in
     the opposite direction. Leslie, who seldom smoked, took out a cigar, in order to give himself
     some reason for being here, and puffing with undue vigour, excited a great smoke, and marched
     to the end of the avenue; here he turned, and about mid‐way, the two young men met, and crossed
     each other, each sending out a large gale of tobacco, and looking as happy as he could. How
     long this was to go on, Leslie did not like to conjecture but at all
      events he did not intend to leave the ground while his rival
     occupied it, even though they should walk thus till morning. Sir Peter it seemed was not so
     persevering, for before they came across each other a third time, he stepped on one side of the
     path, and left the avenue by a wicket which led by a back way to the house. Leslie immediately
     stood still and flung his cigar as far as its weight would carry it, and then collected his
     thoughts with more form than the presence of Sir Peter had allowed.
“It is too plain, that he expected her,” he said to himself; “then he has already met her.
     Yet I warned her—besought her—but he is a villain, availing himself of her untaught, guileless,
     nature—inexperienced, bewildered, humble as she is! If he knew my claim upon her, she would be
     safe. Yet impossible! shall the silly coxcomb know that it is my promised wife, whom he has
     hoped would come at midnight to meet him? Impossible! He is going, thank heaven! to the other
     side of
      the world ...... tempest, fever, sword, and shot, pursue
     him!”
Thus he stormed within, standing beside one of the stern fir‐stems, which threw a steadfast
     shadow on the turf from its branches between the moonlight and the ground. Nearly half an hour
     passed, in which time Sir Peter felt fully persuaded that his rival must have been tired of his
     suspicion, and have left the avenue. He himself had been to the saloon, where still the fair
     Elinor was not, and with some hope, rekindled from the malicious eyes of Laura, he returned
     again to try his fortune. Slowly he paced down the avenue, and failed to perceive the dark
     figure beneath the fir‐tree. As he came on, it advanced suddenly from the shadow. Sir Peter
     started slightly.
“I forgot something,” said he.
“Did you,” said Leslie.
“Yes!” said Sir Peter, and again they passed each other, and Sir Peter proceeding to the end
     of the avenue, opened the gate, and went finally out. “What right
      has he to act dragon?” said the young man, as
     he returned home.
Next morning, Tuesday, Leslie and Miss Chanson were walking together through the garden to
     the conservatory. Elinor looking from her window saw them, and was pleased that her angry
     guardianess should be in company with one who she felt would speak even better of her than she
     deserved. So warbling some low notes with her melodious throat, she turned away to put in order
     part of her simple wardrobe, with skilful fingers well versed in the arts of hemming and
     darning.
“She told me,” said Leslie, to Miss Chanson, “that you sent her to her room last night.”
Laura started, not knowing how much of their interview had been repeated, and looked Leslie
     inquiringly in the face.
“If I did ...... ”she began, and paused.
“Tell me one thing,” said Leslie, “did you do so from any idea that it was better not to
     leave her walking alone?”

“Why do you ask me?” said Laura, quite at ease again; “what does it matter?”
“No, no, it does not matter ...... very much,” said Leslie; “only is it possible, do you
     think that she intended to join ...... that is ...... to meet ......”
“Only that could have justified me,” said Laura, candidly. Leslie was silent. “I
     told you long ago,” said Laura, at last, “that I hoped your confidence was not misplaced.”
“No, no, it is not,” said Leslie, “but she has been in an unnatural atmosphere. She came here
     full of innocent mistakes, and we undeceived her too hastily; she has lost the landmark for all
     minor proprieties.”
“Then I wonder,” said Laura, “that she should think it necessary to conceal them, by such
     complicated statements.”
Leslie again was silent. “She is bewildered,” said Leslie, at last, “by the admiration she
     excites; I have not flattering words so freely at command as others, and per‐
      haps, she is better amused by those who have them, than by
     me.”
“That’s quite impossible,” said Laura, very quickly; then as if frightened at what she
     herself had said, she added hastily, “perhaps she wants character, she is like most women
     ......”
“Oh no!” said Leslie, sighing, “she has a firm purpose, hidden under her soft exterior. I
     will talk to your brother the moment we are alone, on Thursday, and I will make her mine before
     any other candidate dare come between my treasure and me.”
It was now Laura who was silent. To hear a purpose announced which directly contradicts the
     secret object of one’s endeavours and desires, is like a blow struck right upon the heart. Why
     cannot the blinded eye of our companion see and choose the path which we perceive so plainly is
     the one fit for him?
Leslie was out of spirits, and when he had gone through the flowers of the conservatory
     mechanically with Laura and
      the gardener, he walked back with her, till they came in
     sight of the house again, and then turned into the park, and wandered away alone, whither he
     did not care.
Laura proposed twenty things in order to entangle Elinor with her cousin, but was baffled in
     all. Elinor would not take a lesson in billiards, would not learn to sit the pony, would not
     teach Sir Peter a duet, would not lend him a book of her own—she declined all, even before they
     were fully proposed; and at last, upon the arrival of some morning visitors, attached herself
     to the mother of the party, who did not choose to walk far, and never left her side the rest of
     the morning.
Laura did not venture upon any scheme for the evening, but she saw with bitter pleasure, that
     Leslie, by seeming accident sat by another than Elinor at dinner, and that when they were all
     assembled in the drawing‐room, he and Elinor seemed to want subjects of conversation, and were
     grave and embarrassed in place of that joyful glee which Leslie’s face had so often
      assumed, to Laura’s anguish, when listening to, and talking
     with Elinor.
Wednesday was come, and now Laura had her last blow to strike, the one that must undo her if
     it did not succeed. There was a feeling in the house about seeing the last of Sir Peter, since
     after to‐day, he could be seen and heard no more. He was not to go shooting alone, nor to take
     a solitary gallop; he was to walk with Laura and the rest, he was to visit the stables with Mr.
     Chanson. Even if those who were not to be travellers had something better to do, there would be
     time for that to‐morrow, when there would be no more time available for Sir Peter. Mr. Chanson,
     Leslie, and Sir Peter, were all to set out early on the morrow. They were to drive together to
     the neighbouring town, and there to separate, the two first to pursue their way to Mr.
     Chanson’s property, and the young soldier to go on to London where his final preparations would
     be made. Leslie, in a doubtful state of mind, was looking out for offence and cause of
      unhappiness; Elinor, in an humble one, was unconsciously
     giving it. She was accustomed to the discipline of a conventual school education, and had
     learned a degree of patience, which made her take Leslie’s absence as an unavoidable trouble,
     of which she must not complain. He also had been accustomed to the natural teaching of school,
     but had acquired a different lesson, for his spirit had been one of those which make others
     yield to them, and had gratified every wish as it arose. Her meekness, therefore, in resigning
     him for a certain number of days seemed indifference in his eyes, mystified as he was by Laura;
     and though he loved her the more anxiously for her coldness, he imagined that it gave him
     greater reason to suspect that another occupied part of his place in her heart. Elinor felt
     there was something wrong, though she knew not what, and Leslie was conscious of a restraint,
     unlike those happy days—the few days—when he and she wandered among the fields and woods.

“So now it is come to the last evening,” said Sir Peter, as he and Laura sat together an hour
     before dinner, in her own apartment. “I have had a very pleasant visit, and I shall not forget
     it.”
“And what remembrances do you carry away from our nun?” said Laura.
“Oh! hang the little nun, I am tired of her; I can make nothing of her, and really I believe
     our meetings have all been either my own doing, or accident. She cares for nobody but
     Leslie.”
“She does not care for him,” said Laura; “he is half offended, that she should
     take his departure so quietly.”
“Did he tell you so?”
“No—not in so many words—but words are not always necessary to explain meanings.”
“You are so clever, Laura! you see everything.”
“Women have that faculty, you know. Now, I would venture to lay a wager, that if this last
     day, you were to write, soliciting one last interview, the interview would
      be granted, or you would get a kind excuse for not granting
     it.”
“Oh! it is too much trouble.”
“Where is the trouble? there is pen and ink, and I will tell you what to write.”
“But it is hardly fair.”
“Fair indeed! as if any measures were to be kept with her. What has she done by me?”
“You! oh, I can’t keep in my head that you can possibly have any regard for a person who does
     not adore you.”
“No, it is most unworthy,” said Laura. “I will do better ...... there, there ...... shake him
     off—forget him. But that little girl I should like to unmask, nevertheless; come play out the
     play, write her a little love‐letter.”
Laura now took her portfolio on her knees, drew the little writing table close, and laughing
     and coquetting, composed a note which amused Sir Peter, and which he copied at Laura’s side,
     and promised to remit to Elinor. Laura agreed that he should do so, but just as he was leaving
      the room, recalled him, and told him to trust it to her
     care, for that she could manage it much better than he. Sir Peter tossed her the note, which
     she caught in a very pretty attitude, and kissed the tips of her fingers to him as he paused at
     the door, to give her a last look.
It was ten o’clock that night when a woman wrapped over her head and whole figure in a cloak,
     brushed by Sir Peter, as he walked in the avenue, and as she passed thrust a note into his
     hand. He caught the hand that gave it, but it told nothing except that it was enveloped in a
     glove. Rather than be detained by him, the hand slipped out of the glove, and the figure darted
     into the thick shade, and disappeared. The glove was merely a concealment for the hand, for it
     had plainly been held loosely, as a measure prepared beforehand to avoid detention; but it was
     a woman’s glove, of delicate size, and was finished with a plaited ribbon, such as Elinor
     frequently employed herself in fashioning. Sir Peter laughed as he recognised it, and placing
      it in his bosom, proceeded by the light of the moon to
     decipher, though with great difficulty, these words—
“I cannot come to‐night, Mr. Leslie forbids me to go out.—ELINOR LADYLIFT.”
Poor Elinor’s ill starred billet!
