<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
"ENGLISH BENEVOLENCE.
"There is, perhaps, no class of men so cruelly misrepresented as the manufacturers of
				Great Britain; surrounded on all sides by a population of labourers, crowded
				together exactly in proportion to the quantity of work the neighbouring factories
				are able to furnish — they are continually reproached both with giving to many hours
				of employment to their poor neighbours on the one hand, and with the poverty which
				is the inevitable lot of operatives with large families on the other.
 "That all manufacturers, however, are not the cruel mercenary tyrants they are so
				often, and so unjustly described to be, was shown within the last few days by an
				incident which occurred near the town of Ashleigh, not a hundred miles from D — I —
				g L — d — e. The owner of that splendid mansion, while escorting the amiable Lady —
				round his grounds, had occasion to remark some symptoms of a very noble disposition
				in one of the children belonging to a neighbouring factory on his estate. On making
				inquiries, he discovered him to be the son of a poor widow, whose failing health
				made her, and her orphan children peculiarly eligible as objects of charity. This
				fact having been satisfactorily ascertained, Sir M — th — w D — l — g gave way to
				the warm impulses of his generous heart, and adopting the little orphan among his
				own children, at once gratified the gentle feelings of his amiable nature, and set
				them an example which it is impossible they should ever forget. It is more easy for
				the recorder of this charming anecdote  to relate thus the principal
				circumstances of it, than to enter into any detail of the numberless delicate traits
				of character exhibited by Sir M. D — l — g in the course of the transaction. Those
				who know him thoroughly, will, however, be at no loss how to supply these; and those
				who do not, would scarcely understand the description, were it given with all the
				detail possible." 
The value and the accuracy of the statements contained in this announcement, belonged
				wholly to the author of it; the phraseology to a private MS. digest of newspaper
				eloquence, the result of many years of steady research, during which no morsel of
				fine writing that might assist in such occasional addresses to the public as the
				present, had been ever suffered to flow down the stream of time, and perish, without
				having been first carefully noted in the knight's repertory of fine periods.
Having concluded this business, Sir Matthew Dowling rang his bell. As it was only the
				study-bell, it was answered, as usual, by one of the housemaids.
"Where is the little boy, my dear, that I sent into the servants' hall last night?"
				inquired Sir Matthew.
"Upon my word, Sir Matthew, I can't tell," she replied; adding, in that tone of
				familiar confidence which her master's condescension encouraged, "but if you sent
				him into the hall, Sir Matthew, he never got there, nor never will, you may take my
				word for that, as long as Madam Thompson reigns."
The housemaid was not a beauty — none such, as was before stated, ever made part of
				Lady Dowling's household; but she was a wit, and Sir Matthew was to clever himself
				not to feel the value of cleverness in others; he, therefore, raised his eyebrows in
				a comic grimace, very good-humouredly chucked the maid under her ugly chin, and
				instead of putting himself in a rage, as might have happened under other
				circumstances, he only said, "And how was that my dear? Come, tell me all about it —
				I like your stories, Peggy, they are always so funny."
"Whose stories wouldn't he funny, Sir Matthew, if they told of the airs and graces of
				Mother Thompson!" replied the jively damsel; "she's for all the world like an old
				owl, as sits winking his eyes and trying to look wise."
"But she's a prime favourite with my lady, Peggy, and into the bargain, knows a thing
				or two about soups and hashes; so we must be very respectful, my dear, in talking of
				her — but as to her daring to say, that the boy I ordered into the hall was to be
				turned out of it, that's rather more than possible, I think."
"That's because you don't know Mrs. Thompson, Sir Matthew. I only wish you had heard
				and seen 'em last night, she, and the butler, and Mrs. Fine Airs, my lady's maid,
				and Mr. Fine Airs, my lady's footman! If it was not enough to make one sick, I wish
				I may never see you again, Sir Matthew."
 "They are a confounded impertinent set of rubbish," replied Sir Matthew; but still
				without losing his good humour. "However,  all people of fashion, that
				is, rich people, Peggy, always do have a confounded impertinent set of servants
				about 'em. That's one of the great differences between high people and low." 
"To be sure you must know best, Sir Matthew," replied the saucy grisette, but with a
				look and accent somewhat ironical. "I don't mean to doubt that in the least, I'm
				sure; but in the places I've lived at — Lord Wilmot's, Lord Crampton's, and such
				like, I never did hear of my lord's commands being treated in that fashion.
				They might have their jokes in the hall, and the housekeeper's room too, no doubt of
				it, and impudent enough if you like it; but for downright flat disobedience, I never
				did hear of such a thing."
Sir Matthew on hearing this, became rather white about the lips, and red about the
				forehead; but Peggy knew the rising storm was not at all likely to fall on her, so
				nothing daunted, she went on.
"I don't think I should have taken much notice about it, Sir Matthew, if it hadn't
				been for not liking to see you treated with disrespect; for I'm not over and above
				partial to beggar children myself; but that sort of natural dislike was nothing in
				comparison to my feelings about you, sir: and if I had been placed in power, instead
				of having none, your will would have been obeyed, if every servant in the house had
				flowed at me for it."
"You're an excellent girl, Peggy," replied the knight, approaching her very
				condescendingly. "You know well enough that you are a favourite, and I know well
				enough, my dear, that you deserve to be so; and I tell you what, Peggy, I'll take
				care to let those animals, my servants, know that I am master here, as well as in
				the factory — and that my word's law!"
"And so it ought to be, Sir Matthew," replied the obedient domestic. "I hope I know
				my duty too well to dispute my master's will in any thing;" and as she spoke she
				very meekly yielded herself to receive the condescending salute, with which Sir
				Matthew was pleased to reward her excellent sentiments.
"You are an excellent good girl, Peggy!" he resumed after this little interruption;
				"and don't fear but I shall find means to reward you. But you must give me your
				help, my dear, to confound the impertinence of these fellow-servants of yours; if I
				don't make 'em wait upon that beggar's brat as if he was their lord and master,
				never trust me with a kiss more. Where is the little factory vermin, Peggy?"
"I ain't able to answer you, Sir Matthew; all I know is, that Mrs. Thompson marched
				us all out of the kitchen where she sat in judgment on him, last night, and there he
				was left with the kitchen-maid and the fat cook; but what's come of him since, I am
				no ways able to say."
On hearing this, Sir Matthew raised his hand towards the bell, but suddenly
				recollecting himself, he smiled and said, "No, no, that won't do, Peggy, will it?
				Go, my dear, and ask where the boy is, and then come back and tell me."
 The damsel, in return, furtively smiled too, in acquiescence and 
				approval of his discretion; and upon leaving his study for the purpose of
				prosecuting her inquiries among the servants, she encountered the object of them, as
				he entered the back-door, on his return from visiting his mother's cottage. 
"Soh! here you are then? Well, you must come along this minute to Sir Matthew," said
				she, addressing him somewhat gruffly, and not too well pleased, perhaps, at this
				interruption to the confidential conversation with her master, which it had been her
				purpose to renew. But to the ears of Michael, the name of Sir Matthew was sufficient
				to render all other words indifferent; and conscious only, that into his dreaded
				presence he must go if commanded to do so, he followed the girl with a beating
				heart, and in a few minutes stood pale, and almost breathless, before the awful
				countenance of the great man.
Sir Matthew gazed at him for a moment with a sort of sneer, which, if interpreted
				skilfully, would have been found to address itself inwardly. Sir Matthew could not
				choose but sneer at the whimsical arrangements of accidents, which had converted him
				into a Mr. Allworthy. The sneer, however, as far as it concerned himself, had no
				mixture of contempt in it. "Had another done this thing," thought he, "should I not
				have called him fool? and is it not ninety-nine chances to a hundred, that thereby I
				should have described him truly? May the same be said of me? No! By the living God,
				it may not! How now, little boy? you have made yourself smart, I see — vastly fine,
				indeed! An inch of clean dowlas, a piece of span-new green baize for a patch, a pair
				of bony legs without stockings, and magnificent shoes — I did not say a pair, Peggy
				— but very magnificent shoes; one I suppose won in battle from a giant, and the
				other from a dwarf . Fine as a prince! isn't he, Peggy?"
As he thus jeered the little fellow, his eye wandered with malignant jocularity over
				his person, which was, in truth, the very model of make-shift poverty; while the
				child, as if he felt his eye palpably crawl like a reptile over him, shuddered he
				knew not why.
Then, changing his tone so suddenly, as to make even the confiding Peggy start, he
				continued, "You horrid lump of rags stand back — stand back! back! back! behind that
				high chair — d'ye hear? Stand close and stand still — if he does not make me as sick
				as a dog, Peggy, let me never smell musk more!"
"He does smell horrid bad to be sure, Sir Matthew!" replied the girl. "Hadn't I
				better take him back to Molly the kitchen-maid, and make her scour him?"
"No, hang him — that won't take it out of him — I know 'em all. No, Peggy, let the
				scouring alone, and just go up stairs to the nursery-maids, and tell them to send me
				down a good handsome suit of clothes, complete, of Master Duodecimus's — he is the
				nearest in size to this scaramouch; and I will dress him, Peggy, as if he were the
				son of a duke. It will be fun, capital fun, and will it not be generous, Peggy?"
 "Generous, Sir Matthew? It will be past all belief! What?  Him to be
				dressed up in the clothes of Master Duodecimus? oh, my! Sir Matthew, you must
				sure-ly be joking." 
"I'm as serious as an undertaker, girl. Get along with you, and do what I bid you —
				the longer you're about it, mind, the longer I shall have to sit in the same room
				with the ragamuflin in his own full dress — so make haste, if you please."
This was said in a manner to remove all doubts as to the munificent knight's being in
				earnest; and the active Peggy went and returned with as little delay as was
				consistent with the necessity she felt herself under, of entering into some short
				explanation with the nursery ladies; one and all of whom seemed much inclined, on
				the first opening of her mission, to treat the whole business as a hoax. When at
				length, however, she had succeeded in making it apparent that Sir Matthew was
				waiting for the suit of clothes in a most monstrous outrageous passion of a hurry,
				the messenger's arms were speedily loaded in exact conformity to the orders she had
				brought, and she returned to the knight's study with all that was needful to convert
				the rude exterior of little Michael into the nearest resemblance that nature would
				permit, to the elegant and accomplished Master Duodecimus.
Considering the loathing and disgust manifested by Sir Matthew towards the person and
				the poverty of his protegé , it was extraordinary to see the amusement he
				seemed to derive from dressing him up. Though the alert and obedient Peggy stood
				close by to do his pleasure, it was his own large hands that thrust the little limbs
				of Michael into the clothing he chose they should wear, and it was amidst shouts of
				laughter from both, that the ludicrous metamorphosis was completed.
But somehow or other when they had finished their masquerading work, the result was
				not altogether what Sir Matthew anticipated. The clothes were very handsome,
				well-made clothes, and as poor Michael, notwithstanding his leanness, was a very
				handsome, wellmade boy, the incongruity between them seemed to vanish in the most
				unaccountable manner, as the operation drew towards a conclusion.
Peggy, however, was not such a fool as not to understand what was expected of her; so
				when the knight, catching up his son's tasselled cap, pressed it down upon the
				little curly head as a lusty packer of worthless goods thrusts down the cover that
				is to enclose them, and then pushed the child towards her with an impulse that
				nearly brought him upon his nose, she very judiciously renewed her noisy laughter,
				exclaiming, "Did any one ever see such a little quiz!"
"Quiz, girl?" replied Sir Matthew, eyeing him with no very fond expression. "It would
				be well for the scamp if that was the worst you could say of him — I know a thing or
				two Peggy, and that boy will be lucky if he gets drowned. I'll bet a hundred guineas
				that with a few lessons, he would forge any writing you could show him; and before
				he is twenty, he will have taken as many shapes as Turpin. That boy was born with a
				halter round his neck, I want no gipsy to tell me that."

During the whole of the undressing and redressing operations, the boy's cheeks had
				been dyed with blushes, and his eyes so fixedly nailed to the floor, that neither
				Sir Matthew nor his maid had been able to enjoy their embarrassed expression; but as
				this dark prophecy fell on him, he looked up, and it was well for him that his
				munificent patron at the same instant turned his mocking glances towards the
				servant, as he said, "There — gather up his rags, girl, and be sure you wash well
				after it;" for, had he met that speaking young eye, he could hardly have
				misunderstood the scorn that shot from it. As it was, however, he saw nothing but
				the patched garments that were scattered round, and once more sneering as he looked
				at them, he added, "Lead the little blackguard through the servants'-hall, and into
				Mrs. Thompson's parlour — d'ye hear, Peggy, up to her very nose, and tell her that I
				have sent him to pay her a visit, and when she has had enough of the compliment,
				lead him round to Mademoiselle's room, and we'll have a little fun among the
				children."
By no means displeased with an errand which permitted her to affront with impunity
				the autocrat of all the offices, Peggy gathered together Michael's discarded
				wardrobe and then clutching hold of his hand, led him, bon gré mal gré , to
				the presence of the imperious housekeeper.
Mrs. Willis, my Lady Dowling's own maid, and Mr. Jennings, my Lady Dowling's own man,
				were enjoying with that important functionary a slight morning repast of fruit,
				cakes, and wine, and at the moment Peggy and her charge entered, they were enjoying
				some very excellent jokes together. But, Mr. Jennings no sooner cast his eyes on the
				little factory-boy, than he arose, looking rather abashed at being caught by a
				drawing-room guest of even nine years old, with a glass of claret in one hand, and a
				slice of pineapple in the other.
Peggy, to whom the conciliatory smiles of this gay gentleman did not descend, enjoyed
				his mystification exceedingly; and relaxing her rough hold of Michael's wrist, she
				led him respectfully towards the table saying, "My master has sent this young
				gentleman to pay you a visit, Mrs. Thompson; perhaps he would like a little fruit.
				There, my dear, that's the housekeeper Sir Matthew told you of, and if you will
				please to go and sit down by her, I dare say she will give you something nice."
Mr. Jennings immediately placed a chair beside the gracious Mrs. Thompson, who, after
				filling and setting before the young gentleman a plate with whatever she supposed
				would be most agreeable, said in a half whisper to his conductor, "Who is it, Peggy?
				I didn't hear never a carriage."
Before she could, or at least before she would answer, Michael, who had not accepted
				the chair offered to him, took his cap from his head, and with considerably more
				courage than he had yet shown said, "I am Michael Armstrong, the factory-boy."
"Who! What?" screamed the housekeeper; "what bold joke is this, Mrs. Peggy Perkins?
				Do you think you have got a patent for your place, that you dare play such tricks as
				this?"

"if I keeps my place, I don't think I shall have to thank you for it, ma'am," replied
				the favoured housemaid, with very little civility. "My master ordered me to bring
				the boy to pay you a visit; those was his very words, Mrs. Thompson, and as
				I was bid, so I have done."
"There's some people as will do every thing and any thing they are bid," observed
				Mrs. Willis, again drawing out her favourite smelling-bottle, while with the other
				hand she extended a wine-glass to Mr. Jennings, for a little Madeira, which she felt
				was absolutely necessary to support her in this very disagreeable emergency.
				"Master, or no master, Sir Matthew Dowling doesn't know how to behave himself — it's
				I says it, and I don't care who repeats it to him."
Mr. Jennings started at the factory-boy for a full minute very attentively, and then
				gave a long low whistle, at the same time turning his eyes with a look of much
				intelligence full in the face of the housekeeper.
"He isn't at all like any of 'em, Mrs. Thompson," said he.
Mrs. Thompson shook her head. "There is nothing at all in that, Mr. Jennings, I'm
				sorry to say. But remember I do desire, and insist, that the subject is never
				alluded to in my presence again. When I lived with his grace, I always made it a
				rule that none of the household should ever discourse in my presence of any thing
				that it was not decent to hear."
"Well, ma'am," said Peggy; "when you have done looking at him, he is to go into
				Momsell's room for the children to see him."
The housekeeper, the lady's-maid, and the footman, all simultaneously lifted up their
				hands and eyes to heaven.
"Please to let me put on my old clothes and go home," said Michael.
"You little ungrateful wretch!" exclaimed Peggy; "when Sir Matthew dressed you up
				himself with his own hands. What d'ye mean by that, you bad boy?"
"They'll laugh at me," said Michael, resolutely; "and I don't like it."
"You don't? Isn't that a good one?" said Mr. Jennings, clapping his hands in ecstasy.
				"Oh, Lord! pray let us have him back again, Mrs. Peggy, that is to say if Sir
				Matthew can bear to part with him. He's the finest fun I've got sight of this many a
				day."
"You must find fun for yourself, Mr. Jennings, for I shan't be at the trouble of
				bringing you none," replied the self-satisfied Peggy, again seizing the hand of
				Michael, and leading him off.
"Well, for a broom-maid, I hope she's saucy enough," said Mr. Jennings; but the
				subject of his remark was already beyond hearing, threading her way through the long
				stone passages which conducted to the opposite wing of the mansion, the whole of
				which was appropriated to the younger branches of the Dowling family.

</div></body></text></TEI>