<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
 CHAPTER XXXI. 
A FRIENDLY CONSULTATION — A DANGEROUS EMBASSY — LADY CLARISSA RECEIVES SOME
				DISAGREEABLE INTELLIGENCE — AN AWKWARD CONTEST — UNPLEASANT VISIONS — A FITTING
				TERMINATION TO THE CONFIDENTIAL UNION BETWEEN MASTER AND MAN.

				Such was the state of affairs in the bedroom of Sir Matthew
				Dowling, when Dr. Crockley entered it. Were all the words which Mrs. Gabberly then
				uttered in explanation of what she had done, why she had done it, and how her doings
				had answered, to be written down here, my waning pages would hardly suffice to
				contain them. Dr. Crockley nodded, winked, approved, and applauded a great deal,
				joked a little, and finally felt the patient's pulse, observing at the same time
				that it was necessary at any rate to bring him round sufficiently to get a little
				talk on business out of him, before he popped off for good and all.
"Very right and proper if you can manage it, doctor," sagaciously observed Mrs.
				Gabberly. "But you may depend upon it, that — " and here she whispered something,
				that it was especially intended Martha should be neither the better nor the worse
				for. The doctor nodded and winked, and nodded again; and then turning to the poor
				girl who was not only the one who alone in that presence cared any thing for the
				prostrate millocrat, but the one of all created beings who would alone have felt his
				death to be a cause of mourning. Dr. Crockley turned to her, and with very little of
				even the external decency of sympathy said, "Do you think you can manage to get some
				mustard, my dear, out of the clutches of the bailiffs? — because that is what we
				want here."
Without answering, Martha moved towards the door; and Michael, not conceiving that
				the physician's words were but a brutal jest, and fancying that Martha might really
				have to petition those who now held authority in the household for the article
				wanted, stepped after her, to request that he might execute the commission in her
				place.
"You shall come down with me, Michael," she replied, "and I doubt not you will be
				able to procure what we want without difficulty. But alas! Michael, it will avail
				nothing — I am sure by their whispering, that they both know it will avail nothing!
				Nevertheless it shall be tried. But is it not dreadful that of all his numerous
				family there should be only one to receive his dying breath? O God!" she added with
				clasped hands and streaming eyes, "if it be a judgment, let it atone for all that
				has been wrong! For surely it is a heavy one!"
 On reaching the hall, the pitying Michael, who in the sufferings of his friend
				forgot all the cruelty of his enemy, insisted upon going alone into the thronged and
				noisy offices, while she sat down to wait for his return. He did his errand
				promptly, and was by her side again  in a minute or two; but he found
				that she had left the chair on which he had placed her, and was now pacing up and
				down the hall in violent agitation. 
"I am overpowered, I am borne down by all this horror — this deep and bitter grief!"
				she exclaimed. "And there is not a single human being near me, but your ill-used
				self, Michael, from whom I am likely to find any real kindnessl The conduct of all
				with whom I have had intercourse since my poor father's distresses came upon him,
				has been such as to make me wish rather to shun, than seek them at this awful
				moment, yet I want some one to tell me how I ought to act. I know that fearful man
				Parsons, who is greatly in his confidence, had business of importance to settle with
				him; for again and again my father has said to me, since the execution has been in
				the house, that let what would happen, he must find time to speak to him. Ought I
				not then to send to him in this extremity?"
"Would to Heaven I were fitter to advise you, my dear Miss Martha!" replied Michael,
				with equal respect and tenderness. "Certainly if such were your father's words, it
				is very right to remember them. Shall I go to the factory and summon Mr. Parsons
				hither?"
"Oh! It is hateful to me," replied poor Martha, "to call such a being to his
				deathbed! But it may be that the interests of others are at stake, and when I recall
				my father's earnestness as he spoke of the necessity of seeing him, I tremble at the
				idea of disobeying him. Go then, Michael! hasten to the factory, and tell this man
				that his master is very ill, but that if he recovers his senses and his speech, it
				is probable he may wish to speak to him."
Michael lost no time in obeying her; and on reaching the mills found the
				superintendent, as usual, at his post. At the first glance he did not recognise the
				messenger, for the appearance of the young man was greatly changed by the style of
				equipment which, under the advice of Mr. Bell, had been provided for him. No sooner
				did Michael speak, however, than the man started, as if he had been shot.
"Sir Matthew send you? " he exclaimed, "what mountebank tricks are you got
				at now, you young villain? What! did you think that this fine toggery could
				bamboozle me? Has it really bamboozled him? Have you, faith and troth, contrived to
				pass yourself off upon your dearly-beloved benefactor as a gentleman of fashion and
				fortune who was come to make him a visit of condolence upon his misfortunes? A
				capital fellow, ain't you? or, perhaps, my nice young grandee, you fancy his
				grinders are drawn, and that he can't, or won't, maybe, have any thing to do, now
				that he has fallen into trouble, with putting such an elegant young gentleman to
				inconvenience? Is that it? But it is just possible that other people may be more at
				leisure. Who knows?"
 "Never mind me now, Mr. Parsons," replied Michael, utterly indifferent, at that
				moment, to any thing, and every thing, that his old enemy might attempt for the
				purpose of annoying him. "Never think of me or my affairs, at such a time as this.
				You have given me no  opportunity to speak, or you would have
				understood that it was not Sir Matthew who sent me here, but his daughter. Sir
				Matthew was too ill, when I left the house, to know any thing about it; but Miss
				Martha thinks that, if he recovers his speech and senses, he may wish to speak to
				you." 
"Like enough!" replied the superintendent with a sneer. "Sir Matthew's troubles have
				nowise changed his nature. The young lady is quite right: but I shouldn't have
				thought as he'd have told her any thing about it, either. Not but what she might
				approve the job, too, if she had got any spirit in her. But she is but a poor,
				puling sort of a cretur, much as she was when she used to cosset you, my beautiful
				master runaway apprentice. However, never mind that now, as you say, my pretty
				master; there's a time for all things. You may just step in here while I change my
				coat. It bean't the first time as you have entered this pleasant building, Master
				Mike, is it?"
Michael was going to obey him; but, at the moment he was about to pass the threshold,
				something in the eye of the superintendent made him pause. He recollected full well
				the ready lock of that once hated door; and it struck him, as by no means
				impossible, that his old acquaintance might turn it upon him, if he put it in his
				power to do so.
Fears for his own personal safety, he certainly had none, being quite aware that he
				was no longer in danger of being kidnapped as heretofore; but the idea of Martha
				being left, at this her utmost need, in want of any little service he could afford,
				was quite enough to make him cautious, and with something of an involuntary smile,
				he stepped back, saying, "There is no occasion for me to wait for you, Mr. Parsons;
				I have delivered my message, and you may obey it or not, as you please. At any rate,
				you cannot want me to show you the way to Dowling Lodge," And so saying, he turned
				round, and walked out of the yard.
"Pestilent young viper!" muttered the superintendent between his closed teeth. "That
				I should live to see him strut off before me in that fashion! But I'll have a try if
				I can't plague him yet. Fool that I was, when I had him snug by myself on Ridgetop
				Moor, not to give him one farewell thrashing with the horsewhip! If I had put out a
				joint or two, it would have been no great matter; and then I should have been spared
				the d — d sight of him now, marching off — hang him! like a peacock before me! As to
				changing my coat, that's fudge. People don't trouble themselves to change their
				coats, when they are going to pay their compliments to an apoplectic bankrupt."
Having fairly got beyond all the bolts and bars immediately within the jurisdiction
				of Mr. Parsons, Michael slackened his pace, being rather inclined to have the
				society of his former tyrant, than not. "Sir Matthew appears to be in a very
				dangerous state, Mr. Parsons," said he, as soon as the sulky superintendent came up
				to him.
"Perhaps your right honourable greatness has been studying medicine, since I had the
				pleasure of taking that little drive with you into Derbyshire?"

"I have studied many things since that time, Mr. Parsons," replied Michael, laughing;
				"and one is the nature and use of locks."
The tone in which this was answered was so brutal, that the young man, rather from
				disgust than anger, walked on faster than his foe could follow him; and reaching the
				house some minutes before him, made his way again without ceremony — for it was no
				time for it — into the apartment of Sir Matthew. A considerable change had taken
				place in the condition of the patient since he left it. The cataplasms had so far
				succeeded as to restore animation and consciousness: Sir Matthew, still surrounded
				by Martha, Mrs. Gabberly, and the doctor, was gazing upon them with widely-opened
				eyes, which, though wild and wandering in expression, were evidently not devoid of
				speculation. Michael had entered very gently, but not without being heard by the
				sick man; for he turned his eyes full upon him as he approached. The sight of him,
				however, no longer seemed to produce any emotion; for after looking quietly at him
				for a moment, Sir Matthew turned his gaze upon Mrs. Gabberly, who from being in the
				act of leaning over him, brought herself particularly within his sight.
"Is Parsons come?" said Martha in a whisper.
"He must be in the hall by this time," replied Michael: "shall I tell him to come
				up?"
"My dear father has not yet spoken," she said; "but, perhaps, he may understand me. —
				Parsons is here, papa," she added, taking her father's hand, and leaning over him —
				"should you like to see him?"
"He is in London, my dear," replied the knight very distinctly.
"Thank God!" exclaimed Martha, tenderly kissing him — "Thank God! His speech is not
				in the least affected!"
"Rather wandering, though," said Dr. Crockley, winking his eye at Mrs. Gabberly.
"I should say, bleed him again, if you want to get any thing out of him;" observed
				Mrs. Gabberly, looking sagaciously at the doctor.
"Perhaps I may, in an hour or two," he replied, applying his finger to the patient's
				pulse.
Sir Matthew fixed his eyes upon him, and laughed a horrid, rattling, ghastly sort of
				laugh, that seemed to come from his throat. "You haven't quite done with me yet,
				have you, Crockley?" said he.
"Done with you, my dear friend? God forbid!" replied the physician, rather startled
				at the apparently healthy state of his patient's intellect, and affectionately
				smoothing his pillows, and settling the bedclothes about him.
"Would you like to see Parsons, dear papa?" said Martha, gently, and again bending
				over him.
"Oh, yes!" he replied eagerly; "I'll see Parsons now, directly — I should be very
				sorry not to see Parsons. I may live, or I may die, you know; but I must see
				Parsons.
 Martha immediately left the room, intending to explain to the superintendent, before
				she brought him into it, the state in which her father lay, and the necessity of
				receiving any orders he might wish to  give, with as little disturbance
				to him as possible. On reaching the hall, however, she saw him not, and was on the
				point of returning up stairs to inquire of Michael where he had left him, when she
				caught the sound of his voice from Sir Matthew's study. On entering this room she
				perceived not only Mr. Parsons but Lady Clarissa, who, standing before the commode
				in which, as she happened to know, her husband was accustomed to keep papers of
				importance, as well as money, appeared to have been very assiduously examining its
				contents; for every recess had evidently been visited, and, as one of her hands was
				tightly clutched over a pocket-book, it seemed that her researches had not been
				wholly in vain, and that she had not privately obtained possession of his keys for
				nothing. 
"I was sent for, my lady," said Parsons, apparently replying to some question of her
				ladyship's, which, to judge by her angry frown, and the vexed expression of her
				countenance, had not been a civil one.
"My father wishes to see Mr. Parsons directly," said Martha.
"And by your ladyship's leave I must take that green pocket-book with me," said
				Parsons.
"What pocket-book, you rude fellow?" replied Lady Clarissa, indignantly.
"That one as your ladyship now holds in your left hand," replied the confidential
				superintendent.
"I wonder, sirrah, that you do not ask me to give you the rings off my fingers!"
				cried the angry mistress of the mansion. "Go to your master, fellow, if he has sent
				for you, and I shall go too. So you need not trouble yourself about the
				pocket-book."
And with these words she pushed past both Martha and Mr. Parsons, preceding them to
				the sick man's chamber. By the time they entered it his eyes were again closed, but
				he appeared to breathe without difficulty, though rather more audibly than usual,
				and Martha fancied that he was asleep.
"Hush!" said she. "Do not disturb him. He is sleeping."
Dr. Crockley and Mrs. Gabberly had withdrawn to a window, and were evidently in
				consultation; but whether on the symptoms of apoplexy, or bankruptcy, might be
				doubtful. Michael, however, was standing close beside the bed, and in answer to
				Martha's observation shook his head, saying, "No! not asleep."
"Then he'll manage to hear what I've got to say to him," said Parsons, advancing, and
				throwing a glance of spiteful vengeance at Lady Clarissa, "because it is just what
				he wants to know."
At the sound of Parsons's voice Sir Matthew opened his eyes, and made an effort to
				raise himself, but this was beyond his power, and it was only by being lifted with
				as little effort as possible on his own part, as if he were already dead, that he
				was placed in the attitude he seemed to desire, and in which he was supported by
				pillows, and by the arms of poor Martha, who had placed herself on the bolster
				behind him.

It was a frightful and awful expression which then took possession of his sunken
				features, nevertheless a hateful sort of smile made part of it.
"Parsons! that's you, isn't it? That's Parsons that stands there?" he said, directing
				his misty eyes full upon the superintendent.
"Yes, Sir Matthew, 'tis me," replied the man.
"Have you done my bidding, Parsons?" demanded the knight, with a sort of gasping
				which seemed to threaten that his breath was about to leave him.
"Yes, Sir Matthew, it's all regularly made out," replied Parsons, "nobody can mistake
				now about times or dates in any way."
"And isn't that the Honourable Lady Clarissa?" said the sick man, directing his eyes
				towards her.
"Yes, Sir Matthew," replied Parsons, with something like a titter.
"Then — then — then," panted the dying man, "let her ladyship know what was the last
				business that I gave you instructions about."
"A very fitting business for an honourable gentleman to attend to, when his affairs
				are in confusion, and he not in an over good state of health," replied the
				confidential servant, turning himself round, so as exactly to face her ladyship. "No
				less a matter than restoring three good thousand pounds a year, for ever, towards
				clearing scores with his creditors."
Now three thousand pounds a year was exactly the sum, for the settlement of which
				upon herself, a daughter of the noble house of Highlandloch had condescended to
				assume the name of Dowling, and the mention of the often-meditated sum roused her
				ladyship's attention so effectually that her face involuntarily protruded itself
				beyond her body, till her nose very nearly reached that of the individual who was
				addressing her.
"Go on!" said Sir Matthew, positively chuckling, though his chin dropped on his chest
				as he spoke.
"Well then," resumed Parsons, leering aside at Dr. Crockley, who with Mrs. Gabberly
				had drawn near to listen to this very interesting disclosure, — "well then, justice
				is justice; and Sir Matthew, let him die when he will, won't have it upon his
				conscience that he defrauded his creditors to make a settlement upon any lady in the
				land, gentle or simple; because you see he has left proof, plain and clear, that he
				had committed more than one act of bankruptcy before he made the settlement upon her
				ladyship, and for that good and excellent reason her ladyship will have no right to
				one single penny that he leaves behind him; and that is a comfort to an honest man
				like me, who likes to see justice done to high and low."
"Villain!" screamed Lady Clarissa, "it is false!"
"No, no, no, no!" issued from the pillows, in a voice that shook with ghastly
				laughter. "True, all true; and now she may go to Scotland."
 "Just ask her to give you your green pocket-book, Sir Matthew,  before
				she goes," said Parsons, grinning. "I saw her ladyship take it out of your bureau,
				and if she will be pleased to open her hand, I think it will tumble out of it." 
With a look of inexpressible rage, Lady Clarissa turned away from him and made
				towards the door.
"Stop her, Crockley!" cried Sir Matthew, feebly, adding with panting difficulty, "and
				— you — shall — have — it."
Dr. Crockley had a great respect for the peerage, and would, beyond all question,
				have preferred snatching a pocket-book from nine hundred and ninety-nine untitled
				ladies in succession, rather than from one Lady Clarissa; but he felt that this was
				no moment for ceremony, and obeying what was very likely to be the last behest of
				his patron, he rolled his fat person after her with extraordinary muscular exertion,
				and grasping the lady's robe with one hand, seized on her rigidly clenched fist with
				the other, in such a sort, that, according to the prophecy of Mr. Parsons, the green
				pocket-book dropped out of it.
Unfortunately, however, the attitude in which this feat was performed, was one which
				could not be retained by the ill-balanced person of the doctor, after the supporting
				form of the lady on whom he had thrown himself had escaped from his grasp, and,
				struggling with as much anxious care as Cæsar to fall well i.e. upon the
				pocket-book), he measured his length upon the ground.
Parsons, though certainly not hoping for so lucky an accident, had, with the same
				sort of instinct which brings the crow beside a sickly sheep, followed closely the
				retreating steps of her ladyship, and adroitly jerking the coveted pocket-book with
				his foot, so that it should escape the being buried under the stumbling physician,
				prepared himself to dip and catch it. But the success of the manoeuvre was less
				perfect than its ingenuity deserved; for ere his tall rigid person had bent itself
				sufficiently for him to reach the ground, Mrs. Gabberly, who had become one of the
				group at the same instant with Dr. Crockley, was in possession of it, and ere the
				prostrate Crockley or the stooping Parsons could raise their eyes, the prize had
				dropped into the deepest recesses of a prodigious pocket, which reached nearly to
				the bottom of her little petticoat.
 It is probable that both inquiry and search might have been instituted in
				consequence of this, had not the condition of the patient at that moment rendered it
				impossible. Sir Matthew's ghastly eyes had fixed themselves on Lady Clarissa during
				the foregoing scene, but as if, though they had still the power of discerning
				objects, they had lost that of moving after them, he appeared to lose sight of her
				as she approached the door, and the heavy orbs seemed seeking for something on which
				to rest themselves without any change of position. It chanced that Michael, who,
				quite aware that the last moments of Sir Matthew were approaching, determined not to
				leave the premises till he had learned the wishes and intentions of Martha, was at
				that moment moving from the corner he had occupied near a window, not within sight
				of the bed, to a table exactly at the foot of it, on which  was placed
				a flacon of Cologne water, which poor Martha, almost exhausted by the
				painful attitude necessary to sustain the pillows, had made him a sign to get for
				her. This movement brought him within the range of Sir Matthew's eyes, and something
				in his aspect as he cautiously bent to take the bottle, or else the thick-coming
				fancies of a brain diseased, though not paralyzed, suddenly produced a terrible
				effect upon the dying man, and he uttered a cry so harsh and terrible as to
				constrain the attention even of the preoccupied group at the door. 
"There's a dead body walking about the room!" he ejaculated in an unnatural and
				frightful accent. "He is come for me! and I must go!" The shriek which followed
				these words was terrible. In a minute or two he spoke again, but almost in a
				whisper. "One? No! — it is not one, it is five hundred! Take them! — take them away
				from me, I tell you! They are all dirty, beastly factory-children. Their arms and
				legs are all broken and smashed, and hanging by bits of skin. Take them away, I tell
				you, Crockley! Their horrid joints will drop upon me! They are dangling and loose, I
				tell you!" and then again he shouted with so fearful a cry, that even Parsons
				pressed his hands upon his ears to save them from the sound.
"Calm him! calm him!" cried the trembling Martha. "Can you not give him something
				that may still this dreadful agony, Doctor Crockley?"
"It is not a very easy symptom to master, Miss Martha," replied the physician drily.
				"However, it is not likely that it will last long. All the life that's left is just
				about the heart and brain, which is always unlucky if there happens to be any thing
				particular upon the mind."
"Parsons!" cried the dying man, again raising his voice, but without looking towards
				the person he addressed. "Parsons! are you not ashamed of yourself to turn the whole
				set of them out upon me at once in this way? You that have paid, and bribed, and
				tipped so often! Rascal! Take them off me, I tell you! Do you mean that they shall
				stifle me? They will stifle me? — they will, they will. I cannot breathe for them!
				Parsons! — I tell you they will stifle me!"
"Papa! my dear, dear papa!" cried Martha, bending forward till her cheek touched that
				of her father. "Compose yourself! It is only that you are unwell and fancy things.
				There are no children here, papa, but your own Martha."
Her tender caresses, and her gentle voice together, seemed to reach, and quiet for a
				moment his wandering intellect. He made an effort to turn his head towards her, but
				that was impossible; and Michael, who had, upon his first frightful cry, removed
				himself to the head of the bed, where the eye of the wretched man could not reach,
				silently offered to take Martha's place, that she might station herself where it
				could. She quickly understood him, and in a moment stood where that dying eye could
				gaze upon her. His hand, with its glittering ring, still lay upon the bed; she took
				it in hers, and fondly chafed and kissed it. But it was stiff and cold as
				marble!
 "Father! dearest father!" she said, "speak one word to me!"  But it was
				too late; his lips never opened more. For some hours longer he continued to breathe,
				but, on again feeling his pulse, Dr. Crockley declared that its faint pulsations
				must inevitably cease before night. 
"I suppose your old servant Betty Parker is still in the house, Miss Martha?" said
				he. The poor girl bowed an affirmative, but had no power to speak.
"Well, then," said the doctor, "I should recommend that you should put her to sit
				here; it is no good for any of us to stay any longer, for it's all over just as much
				as if he was already in his coffin. You had better go away, and see what you can
				pack up to get off with, Miss Martha, that's all that is left to be done, as far as
				I can see. Come, Mrs. Gabberly," he added, "I have got a friendly word or two to say
				to you, so your boy shall mount my pony and I'll drive your donkey for you." And so
				saying, he took the little woman under his arm and trudged off, without waiting for
				her to inform him whether she approved his proposal, or not. Mr. Parsons, giving one
				scowling look at the silent bed, followed them, and Martha and Michael were left
				together beside the dying man.
Upon perceiving the totally unconscious state into which Sir Matthew had fallen,
				Michael had gently withdrawn himself from behind his pillows, and now stood, almost
				as silent and motionless as himself, beside the bed, respectfully waiting to receive
				from the desolate and weeping martha some hint or instruction respecting his staying
				where he was, or leaving her. Never, when the poor dependant of her family, had the
				young heart of Michael been impressed with a feeling of respect so profound as he at
				that moment felt for the unhappy girl. In truth the feeling was so powerful as to
				interfere with his usefulness, for he shrank from appearing to put himself forward
				too presumptuously by giving her advice, or venturing in any degree to dictate what
				it might be best for her to do. But when, after remaining thus bashfully silent for
				a quarter of an hour, he perceived that she gave no other sign of life than by tears
				that flowed incessantly, and sighs that seemed to heave her breast "almost to
				bursting," — when he saw this, he began to think that some degree of seeming
				presumption on his part might be better and more profitable for her, whom he would
				really have died to serve, than the continuance of a degree of deference, which must
				render him useless. Approaching, therefore, to the chair on which she had thrown
				herself, he ventured to say, "Miss Martha! where can I find your old servant Betty
				Parker? I remember her very well — she used to be always in the nursery. If you
				would tell me where she is likely to be, I will go for her."
Poor Martha for a moment ceased to weep, and looked up at him. "Michael Armstrong!"
				she replied, "I am not conscious of ever having injured any human being but
				yourself; and yet you are the only one who is near to support and help me at this
				dreadful hour. God bless you for your kindness, my good boy! Do not go away, Michael
				— that is, I mean, do not leave the house till all is over — indeed, I think you may
				be useful to me!"

"Miss Martha," he returned, "will you trust me to sit here, while you yourself summon
				whomever you may wish to keep you company. I will keep out of sight in case — " and
				here he stopped.
"His eyes will never open more, Michael!" she replied, while the tears again burst
				forth, "and thank God their last look at me was gentle! But I almost fear to leave
				the room, Michael — I would not that he should breathe his last, and I not by him."
				But Michael, unskilful as he was, felt that the scene was too awful a one for the
				poor girl to be left alone in, and he therefore persisted to declare with the
				authority which such subduing sorrow gives to all around who will take the trouble
				to exercise it, that he would watch by the bedside of her father while she sought
				the old woman mentioned by Dr. Crockley.
Reluctantly, and unresistingly she consented, and giving a look at the bed that
				seemed to wring her very heart, she quitted the room, leaving Michael Armstrong
				alone with the motionless mass of still living clay, before which he had so often
				trembled.
How strangely eventful had been the interval between those well-remembered days, and
				the one actually present with him! How extraordinary the change in the circumstances
				of both parties! It was not triumph, but it was thankfulness, which Michael felt, as
				the sense of this came fully upon him during these moments of profound stillness;
				and the result of all the moving thoughts that crowded upon his mind was an earnest
				prayer to Heaven that he might never be placed in any circumstances likely to harden
				his heart, and make him the cause of suffering to others, — a fearful and a dreadful
				crime, which he felt, as he gazed with trembling awe on the sunken features of the
				living corse before him, must in the sight of God be held as one of the most daring
				rebellion to his heavenly will of which man is capable.
 Solemn and solitary as was Michael's position in the chamber of Sir Matthew, the
				interval of Martha's absence did not seem long. She returned accompanied by the old
				servant who had been nursery attendant, though never raised to the dignity of nurse,
				from the birth of the eldest child of the family, and who was the only one remaining
				of all the numerous household who retained the slightest feeling of attachment to
				any of them. To her, habit stood in the place of preference, and she might perhaps
				be said to love all the Dowling children, from the eldest to the youngest; a
				sentiment which led her to conceive, as in duty bound, a most hearty detestation of
				their stepmother. It was, therefore, with something very like pleasure that she
				obeyed a summons so solemn and so peremptory as to justify her, even in the judgment
				of Mrs. Saunderson, for laying aside the ironing-box, which she had been playing
				incessantly for two whole days upon the frills and furbelows of Lady Clarissa, in
				order to obey it. On perceiving the condition in which her master lay, Betty Parker
				strongly advised poor Martha to retire, urging the uselessness of her remaining to
				look upon what was so grievous, when a baby might see at half a glance that the poor
				gentleman could not tell friend from foe. But  Betty Parker knew little
				of the intensity of Martha's pertinacious love for her unworthy parent, if she
				fancied that her very reasonable remonstrance would produce any effect. Martha
				attempted not even to answer it, but placing herself in a chair close beside the
				bed, remained nearly as motionless as the faintly breathing figure that lay upon it. 
Poor Michael knew not too well what he ought to do next. He felt that he was useless
				there; he knew that he should be stared at, as a very incomprehensible intruder, if
				he descended to the offices. Yet he remembered that his benefactress had bid him not
				to go, and he could not have felt himself more strongly bound to remain, had the
				crime of high treason been involved in his departure. Yet there was something in the
				stupid puzzled look with which Betty Parker regarded him, that vexed his spirit. He
				was conscious that he had no business in that room, and therefore at such a moment
				he ought not to be there. After a few moments of reflection he approached Martha,
				and making so profound a reverence as to convince Betty, that let him be who he
				would, he was a very well-behaved young gentleman, he said, "I will now, Miss
				Martha, go to the inn for an hour or two, and then return to take your orders." A
				look of gratitude was all her reply, and Michael departed.
It was three o'clock in the afternoon when he entered the little inn, where the
				postboy, who had driven him from Fairly in the morning, was still waiting his
				orders. "I cannot tell you yet, my lad, when I shall be ready to return," he
				replied, in answer to the boy's questionings.
"It's all one to me, master," said the driver. "In course I shall be paid
				accordingly."
"Certainly you will," returned Michael: and he was then left to eat his solitary
				dinner with what appetite he might.
For three long melancholy hours he employed himself in pacing backwards and forwards
				on the high-road before the little inn, and was beginning to think that time enough
				had elapsed to justify his returning to inquire how matters were going on at Dowling
				Lodge, when the sound of a carriage approaching as it seemed from the park-gates,
				cause him to stop abruptly to listen, and to look.
The equipage that drew near was a handsome travelling-carriage, though its appearance
				was considerably disfigured by the prodigious quantity of luggage, which was
				fastened by ropes and chains to every part of it. The imperial only formed the
				foundation for a pyramid of trunks and bandboxes, which were piled upon it. The
				servant's-seat behind was loaded to its very utmost capacity with more trunks and
				bandboxes, while, chained below it, was a massive coffer, that looked very like a
				plate-chest, having suspended round its sides, bundles, baskets, and bags
				innumerable. Nor was the interior by any means reserved for live lumber alone, for
				although the rigid figures of Lady Clarissa Dowling, and her waiting-woman,
				Saunderson, were visible in the midst, it appeared to be crammed with every
				imaginable species of property which such a conveyance could transport.

Michael watched the overloaded vehicle roll by with great satisfaction. "Whatever
				happens," thought he, "Miss Martha must be better without her." Relieved by knowing
				that he should not again run the risk of encountering her delectable ladyship,
				Michael immediately took his way to the magnificent mansion she had forsaken, and
				perceiving that the hall-doors stood wide open, preferred passing through them to
				encountering again the motley throng that had taken possession of the offices. But
				instead of finding this portion of the house as quiet and forsaken as he had left
				it, he was startled by hearing, as he mounted the steps of the stately portico, a
				multitude of voices in violent altercation.
At first he felt disposed to turn away and seek another entrance, but the vehemence
				of the sounds he heard excited his curiosity, and he went on. Instead of one,
				half-a-dozen strangers might have entered without running any risk of having their
				right there challenged; so great was the confusion that reigned; and Michael might
				have passed up the great stairs, and into the chamber which it was his purpose to
				visit, without any difficulty. But he was prevented from taking immediate advantage
				of this, by hearing words which excited new fears for the unfortunate Martha; and,
				ere he had listened many minutes, he became aware that a new creditor had reached
				the lodge after he left it, who had come, armed with proper authority, to arrest the
				knight, dead or alive. Nor did the discussion of this event cause all the uproar;
				for the agents of the parties who had previously sent in the execution were
				threatening with all sorts of punishment, several of the servants, whom they accused
				of having been bribed to assist Lady Clarissa in the removal of many valuables which
				she had no right to take. It was not this part of the tumult, however, that
				interested him; and, having obtained but too clearly the information that Sir
				Matthew was arrested, he once more sought for the unhappy Martha in the dismal
				chamber where he had left her. And there he found her; but with such frightful
				adjuncts to her natural grief, that the state of quiet decent sorrow in which he had
				left her, seemed a condition positively enviable compared to that in which he found
				her now.
Sir Matthew had breathed his last, and the corpse was already arranged with decency
				upon its stately bed; but, on each side of it stood an officer, whose duty it was to
				violate by their presence the solemn sanctity of that dismal chamber, and to prevent
				the body's being carried to the grave, till the claims of their employer were
				satisfied. In front of her father's corpse, with her troubled eyes (no longer bathed
				in the healing dew of natural sorrow), turning from it to its rude guardians, and
				back again to all that was left of the sinful being she had so fondly, blindly
				loved, — stood the wretched daughter, so sad a spectacle of woe, that it was evident
				the men themselves turned their hard eyes studiously away, because they felt a pang
				of pity as they looked upon her.
 "Come with me, Miss Martha!" cried Michael, unceremoniously seizing her arm. "You
				must not, you cannot remain here. You can do no good, Miss Martha; all is over now!
				You must come  away, you must indeed." The only answer that poor Martha
				gave, was forcibly shaking off the hand that held her, and then pointing, first to
				her father's body, and afterwards to the two unseemly attendants who stood beside
				it. 
"It is no use, young man, to strive with her," said Betty, who was still occupied in
				completing some of her lugubrious operations about the bed: "I know her better than
				you do. She will stay here watching him till she is as dead as he is, rather than go
				away, and leave his body to be tended by such as those."
For a moment Michael really felt all the enervating effects of despair, and stood
				perfectly incapable of even imagining any means of help for the agony which it wrung
				his heart to witness. But, as the old woman pursued her ghastly occupation, she went
				muttering on, expatiating on the sinful and unchristian outrage that was thus
				committed. "And what will the rogue get by it?" she said. "Does he mean to show the
				corpse for a farthing a head to his factory black-guards? Isn't he as big a fool as
				he is knave?"
"No, mistress, no, by no means," said the friendly defender of Mr. Joseph Parsons: —
				for it was at his suit that the body of Sir Matthew had been arrested. — "You may
				call the superintendent rogue, or knave, or what you will of that kind, and I don't
				suppose that there's many as would contradict you; but, as to his being a fool,
				especially as to the doing what he has done here, that he is not. 'Twas his only
				chance."
"And how much do you think he'll make of it?" demanded old Betty with a sneer.
"Why, just the four hundred and sixty-seven pounds as is due to him," replied the
				man.
To all this poor Martha appeared not to pay the slightest attention, and, in truth,
				neither understood nor heard a word of it; but Michael did, and with sudden
				animation stepped up to the man who had spoken, and whispered in his ear, "Perhaps
				we may be able to settle this business without any further difficulty. Step out of
				the room with me, will you, for a moment: your companion can do all that is
				necessary without you." — "Neither I nor my employer are people to make
				difficulties," replied the man; "and I am quite ready to hear you, young master, if
				you have got any thing to say upon the subject." They accordingly retired together;
				and in a wondrously short space of time the uninitiated Michael was made to
				understand all the circumstances of the case, the most important of which was that
				if, as Mr. Parsons hoped and expected, Miss Martha could find ready money enough
				quietly to pay his little private account with the late Sir Matthew, the arrest
				would be immediately withdrawn, and the body left for her to dispose of it at her
				pleasure.
"And the sum," said Michael, "is — how much?"
"Four hundred and sixty-seven pounds," replied the man, "with some little matter, not
				exceeding four or five pounds more, for costs,"
"Withdraw the arrest," said Michael, "and the money shall be instantly
				forthcoming."

"Let us see the money forthcoming," replied the fellow, grinning, "and the arrest
				shall be instantly withdrawn."
"Here is the money, sir," said Michael, taking out the pocket-book containing
				Martha's generous donation, and drawing from it notes to the amount demanded.
"Then the business will be soon settled, young gentleman. May I take the liberty to
				ask your name?"
"My name is of no consequence whatever, sir," replied Michael. "But lose no time in
				giving me the discharge. Only first enter that chamber with me once again, withdraw
				your companion from his frightful watch, and tell the poor young lady that it is
				over."
The man readily obeyed, and the mourning, but thankful Martha was once more left with
				her old servant, to watch beside her father's corpse.
</div></body></text></TEI>