<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
 CHAPTER XI. 
MISS BROTHERTON PUSHES HER INQUIRIES FURTHER — A WELL-ARRANGED SCHEME DISAGREEABLY
				DEFEATED — A VISIT, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

				Mary Brotherton certainly did not return home that night with any
				doubts on her mind respecting the nature of Sir Matthew Dowling's benevolence; but
				the fever of spirits which had seized her was greatly increased by the information
				she had gained.
 There was a vast deal of energy and strength of purpose in the mind of Mary
				Brotherton, but hitherto all this had lain latent and  inert. The
				sentiment which in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred is the first to awaken the
				female heart to strong emotion seemed to be totally powerless to her. She had never
				yet felt the slightest approach to the passion of love; nor was it very likely she
				should, for one among her many peculiarities of character was the persuasion that
				every man who paid her attention was in pursuit of her fortune, an idea, which to
				such a temper as hers was calculated to act as a sevenfold shield against all
				amatory attacks upon her heart. 
Most truly therefore, up to this time, had she continued "In maiden meditation, fancy
				free." But this could be said no longer; neither fancy nor any other faculty could
				be termed free in one whose thoughts fixed themselves by night and day upon one
				single subject, while feeling that to it she was ready to sacrifice every thing else
				in life.
On re-entering her house on the memorable night of the Dowling Lodge theatricals,
				Miss Brotherton retired to her apartment without even the intention of sleeping. She
				laid her head upon her pillow deliberately determined not to close her eyes in sleep
				till she had made up her mind as to the best way of rescuing the pale trembling
				child, whose voice and form haunted her, from the horrible bondage of Sir Matthew
				Dowling's charity.
The question was not altogether an easy one. She could hardly doubt that very strong
				indignation would follow any open effort on her part to interfere with a child
				publicly held up as the favoured object of Sir Matthew's loudly-vaunted benevolence,
				and moreover, privately marked out by his vindictive nature as a victim to his
				hatred.
Whether as a rival in his munificence, or a champion against his hate, it was pretty
				certain that her interference would render her obnoxious to her pompous neighbour's
				displeasure, and this she had no inclination to encounter if she could help it. For
				though at this moment she felt within her a strength and firmness of purpose not
				easily shaken, the poor girl knew that she stood alone in the world, with no friend
				to support her more powerful than nurse Tremlett, and nothing but her two hundred
				thousand pounds' worth of this world's trumpery to enable her to have her way, and
				her will, in many matters that she feared might turn out rather difficult to
				manage.
So she determined to avoid quarrelling with Sir Matthew Dowling as long as she could,
				and though the image of Michael struggling with his tears, and the plaintive sound
				of his voice as he pleaded for leave to labour again, absolutely haunted her memory,
				she determined upon being cautious, wise, and very deliberative in any measures she
				might eventually take to ensure his release.
 Under the influence of these prudential resolutions, Miss Brotherton for the present
				abandoned her purpose of seeking a conversation with the child himself, and
				determined to find her way to the cottage of his mother instead. Yet even this she
				felt must be done with caution. Her carriage and her liveries were about as splendid
					 and conspicuous as carriage and liveries could be, and though she
				knew not precisely in what direction the widow Armstrong might be found, it was easy
				enough to guess that did she make use of her ordinary mode of conveyance in reaching
				her abode, let it be where it might, she would attract more attention than she
				desired. 
It was to Mrs. Tremlett that she determined to apply in this dilemma, and at their
					tête-à-tête breakfast on the following morning, she once more led the
				conversation to the factories.
"You must not scold me, dear friend," said she, "if you find that I have, as I told
				you I would, disobeyed your advice altogether, about thinking no more of the factory
				people, for I cannot get them out of my head, nurse Tremlett."
"I am sorry for it, my dear," replied the good woman, gravely; "because I am quite
				sure that you will only vex yourself, and do no good."
"You ought to know me better by this time, Mrs. Tremlett, than to fancy that your
				manner of speaking on this dark subject is the way to check my curiosity. It was
				pretty effectually awakened perhaps before; but had it been otherwise, what you say
				would be quite enough to set me upon inquiring into it. Nurse Tremlett, I WILL know
				every thing that the most persevering inquiry can teach me respecting the people to
				whose labours all the rich people in this neighbourhood owe their wealth, and myself
				among the rest. And when I tell you that at the present moment this is the only
				subject upon which I feel any real interest, I think you are too wise to attempt
				turning me from it, by saying, 'My dear you will only vex yourself.'"
"I do indeed, my child, know you too well to fancy that if you have set your mind
				upon it, you will give it up; so I have nothing more to say, Miss Mary."
"Well then, my dear woman," replied Mary, taking her hand, "if, through all the years
				we have passed together, I have shown such a determined spirit for no reason in the
				world but only to get my own wanton silly will, do me the justice to anticipate that
				I shall not be less obstinate in this one thing, that I believe to be right, than in
				all the many wherein it was most likely I suspected myself to be wrong. I do
				believe, nurse Tremlett, that it is my duty to understand this matter better than I
				do; and if this be so, I will trust to God to make up to me for all the
					vexation your prophecy threatens it will bring."
"If that is the way you think of it, my dear child, Heaven forbid that I should seek
				to hinder you. But rich as you are, dear Mary, if you was to give it all, and ten
				thousand times as much besides, what good could it do? The mills would go on just
				the same you know."
 "I don't want to stop the mills, nurse Tremlett. Why should I? Industry, ingenuity,
				science, enterprise, must of course be all brought into action by this flourishing
				cotton-trade, and, beyond all doubt, it would be equally wicked and wild to wish its
				destruction. That is not the notion I have got hold of, good nurse, very, very far
				from it, I assure you. What I want to find out is whether, by the nature of things,
				it is impossible to manufacture worsted and cotton wool into  articles
				useful to man, without rendering those employed upon it unfit to associate with the
				rest of their fellow-creatures? This seems to me so gross an absurdity that I cannot
				give faith to it, and therefore I suspect that the depravity and wickedness you and
				Miss Martha Dowling talk about, must arise from these people having too much money
				at their command. This, perhaps, may lead to intemperance and extravagance. Don't
				you think this may be the case, Mrs. Tremlett?" 
"Good gracious, no, Miss Mary! Why they are all the very poorest starving wretches
				upon earth."
"But they may be poor because they are extravagant, nurse. They must get a most
				monstrous quantity of money, for though none of the gentlemen ever talk much of
				their factories, I have repeatedly heard allusion made to the enormous sums paid
				every week to the work-people. And it is quite clear that all the families must get
				a great deal, because all the little children work, which can hardly be the case
				elsewhere. Now, I cannot help thinking, nurse, that a great deal of good might be
				done by teaching them a little economy, and inducing them to lay by their
				superfluous money in a savings-bank. That is one great reason why I want to get
				acquainted with the people themselves. Now, for instance, that poor sick widow
				Armstrong — the mother of the little boy that Sir Matthew Dowling has taken; I am
				quite sure that she can have no wickedness to hurt me — and I am determined, nurse,
				to go and call upon her."
"Well, my dear, that can't do no great harm, certainly; and, if you like it, I can go
				in the carriage with you."
"Most certainly I should like you to go with me, but not in the carriage, Mrs.
				Tremlett. I don't want to have all the people in her neighbourhood staring at me, or
				at her either; and that they would be sure to do if we went in the carriage. I mean
				to walk, nurse."
"Do you know where the woman lives, my dear?"
"No; I must leave you to find that out."
"What is her name, Miss Mary?"
"Armstrong. She is a widow, and lives somewhere in Ashleigh. Let us walk into the
				garden, and while I am looking after my seedlings, you can inquire of one of the
				under-gardeners, or the boy. And if you manage the matter well, the next prime
				blossom that I get from my experiment-bed, shall be called the Tremlett
				geranium."

While this conversation was going on at Millford Park, the residence of Miss
				Brotherton, Dr. Crockley arrived to enjoy a tête-à-tête breakfast with Sir
				Matthew in " the study " at Dowling Lodge. This room, though not so
				splendid as some of its neighbours under the same roof, could, nevertheless, be made
				very snug and comfortable upon occasion, and an excellent breakfast was spread
				before them; while the two gentlemen sat in judgment upon little Michael's
				contumacy, and consulted on the best method of bringing him into better order.
 "Confound the imp!" exclaimed Sir Matthew, as he selected his 
				favourite dainties, "is it not provoking, Crockley, that I should have taken such an
				aversion to him? Upon my soul, I never hated any thing so much in my life. In the
				first place it is disgusting to see him dressed up, walking about the house like a
				tame monkey, when I know that his long fingers might be piercing thousands of
				threads for two shillings a week; and it is neither more nor less than loathsome to
				see him eat, at luncheon, sometimes when we have had him in before company, exactly
				the very same things that my children eat themselves; and then upon the back of it
				all, to know that the ungrateful little viper hates the very sight of me. I don't
				believe, Crockley, that any good can come of all this, equal to what it makes me
				suffer in the doing. It is perfectly unnatural to see him close within an inch of my
				own legs. I'd rather have a tame toad crawling about by half. I must give it up,
				Crockley — I must, upon my soul." 
"You are the master, Sir Matthew. I can't stop you, if do it you will; but I can tell
				you this, I have been calling at fifty different houses, at the very least,' since
				this job began, and I pledge you my sacred honour that in every one of them the only
				thing talked of was your benevolence and generosity. 'Such an example!' cried one;
				'So heavenly-minded!' said another; 'It is enough to bring a blessing upon the whole
				country,' whined a third; and, 'It is to be hoped that such goodness will be
				rewarded in this world and the next,' observed a fourth. Think, Sir Matthew, how all
				this will tell against the grumblings about Miss Nance Stephens and her sudden
				demise."
"That's true — devilish true, Crockley — and yet it's no cure for my being sick at
				the stomach every time I see him."
"I don't know about that; I should think it was, or, at any rate, if you'll only bear
				it a little longer I should not be at all surprised if you were to be relieved by
				some other great capitalist setting up in the same way, and as your name has been
				sung out, that would do just as well. Upon my soul, I'm in earnest; I should not the
				least wonder if, before the end of three months, every one of your first-rates were
				to have a tame factory-child in their houses, to act like the hedgehogs we get to
				eat black-beetles for us. And they'd do their work well too, Sir Matthew: all the
				nasty, creeping, multiplying plagues, in the shape of evil tales against the factory
				system, would be swallowed up by the clearing-off effects of these nice little
				hedgehog gentry."
"You are as keen as your own lancet, Crockley; and I never turn a deaf ear to any
				thing you say. But it's monstrous hard though, that I can't walk about my own house
				without running the risk of seeing this odious little grub. By the way, Crockley,
				why could not my lady take a factory-girl in by way of charity? Some of the little
				wenches are sightly enough before they have worked down their flesh too far; and,
				though I can't say I am particularly tender over the lanky idiot looking slatterns
				that we mostly get at the mill, I'll bet what you please that I should never hate
				the sight of a girl, as I do the sight of this boy."
 "Very likely not, Sir Matthew," replied the doctor, laughing immoderately.  "But what would my lady say? And what would all the other ladies say?
				No, no, leave that alone, and make up your mind to let the boy have the run of the
				house for a month or two; after which you may send him to the devil if you will; for
				the good will be done, and the boy himself forgotten." 
"That's all vastly easy for you to lay down, chapter and verse, wise man that you
				are," replied the knight. "But if I tell all, I can let you into a secret, Crockley,
				that would make you change your mind, perhaps. The long and the short of it is, that
				I can't keep my hands off him, and if the young black-hearted scamp — I know he is
				black-hearted, I'm quite sure of it on account of a look he has got with his eyes,
				that makes one always feel so uncomfortable — if he were to take it into his vile
				ungrateful head to go about the country telling every thing that I may have happened
				to say and do to him, when his nasty ways have pushed me further than I could bear,
				I don't think the history of the charity job would do much good,
				doctor."
Doctor Crockley gave a long low whistle; and then, after a minute's meditation, said,
				"That's a bore."
"I know it is," sharply responded his patron, "a devilish bore. But you don't suppose
				that I am to stand bursting with rage, and not take the liberty of speaking my mind
				to a factory grub, do you?"
"Heaven forbid! A whole factory full of wenches may all drop down dead, I hope,
				before it comes to that," replied his friend. "But what you have stated is worth
				attention, Sir Matthew. I don't like the notion of that child's having tales to
				tell. It spoils all."
"I know it," returned the vexed knight. "Martha told me just now, not ten minutes
				before you came, that Miss Brotherton said she should like very much to talk to the
				boy: she is as sharp as a needle, you know, and I'll answer for it would find out
				all he has got to tell, and a devilish deal more, perhaps, in no time. Pretty work
				that would make! would it not? Augustus is sure of her, he tells me; and just fancy
				such a match as that spoiled by the forked tongue of this little viper! The very
				notion makes one mad."
"A cure must be found for that mischief, let it cost what it may," replied Crockley;
				"and for the future it might be better, perhaps, for your charity, Sir Matthew, to
				show itself some other way. You are too honest-hearted, that's the fact. A fine bold
				intellect, like yours, can't descend to the paltry patience belonging to inferior
				minds. Is there no getting rid of the boy? No possibility of sending him 'prentice
				some where or other?"
 "'Prentice?" said Sir Matthew, looking with a very singular expression into the face
				of his friend. "Prentice?" he repeated, and stretching out his hand, he seized upon
				that of Doctor Crockley, which he shook with extraordinary ardour. "Send him as a
				'prentice! Upon my soul, Crockley, if you had laid down five hundred pounds upon the
				table, I should not have considered it as of one half as much worth as that one word
				'PRENTICE. Yes, by Jove! he shall be a 'prentice. Oaf that I was for not thinking of
				it before! You don't know half the good you have done me by  that word.
				'Tis but lately, my dear fellow, that you and I have come to understand one another
				thoroughly; and I have never yet talked to you about one or two points particularly
				interesting to all our capitalists. I never mentioned to you, did I, the Deep Valley
				Mills, not far from Appledown Cross, in Derbyshire?" 
"Never, Sir Matthew, as far as I can recollect," was the reply.
"Well, then, I will tell you something about them now, that will make you perceive
				plainly enough what a capital good hit you have made in talking of apprenticeship
				for my young darling. Deep Valley Mill, Crockley, is the property of my excellent
				friend Elgood Sharpton. He is one of the men born to be the making of this country.
				A fine, manly, dauntless character, who would scorn to give up his notions before
				any act of parliament that ever was made. His idea is, Crockley, — and I should like
				to see the man who would venture to tell me that it was not a glorious one, — his
				idea is, that if we could get rid of our cursed Corn-laws, the whole of the British
				dominions would soon be turned into one noble collection of workshops. I wish you
				could hear him talk; upon my soul, it's the finest thing I know. He says that if his
				system is carried out into full action, as I trust it will be one of these days, all
				the grass left in England will be the parks and paddocks of the capitalists.
				Sharpton will prove to you as clearly as that two and two make four, that the best
				thing for the country would be to scour it from end to end of those confounded idle
				drones, the landed gentry. They must go sooner or later, he says, if the corn-laws
				are done away with. Then down goes the price of bread, and down goes the operative's
				wages; and what will stop us then, doctor? Don't you see? Isn't it plain as the nose
				on your face that when the agricultural interest is fairly drummed out of the field,
				the day's our own? Who shall we have then spying after us to find out how many hours
				a day we choose to make our hands work? D'ye see, Crockley? If we choose to work the
				vitals out of them, who shall say we shan't?"
"I never heard a finer, clearer line of argument, in my life, Sir Matthew," replied
				the attentive listener. "That man, that Elgood Sharpton, seems born for a
				legislator. But I question not that when you two get together you act like flint and
				steel upon one another. Is not that the case?"
 "Pretty much I believe," replied Sir Matthew; "and I promise you, Crockley, I give
				no bad proof of my confidence in your honour and friendship, by letting you into a
				few of our notions, for matters are by no means quite ripe for us to speak out, as
				yet. Our policy is, you must know, to give out that it is the operatives who are
				clamouring for the repeal of the corn-laws, whereas many among them, saucy rogues,
				are as deep as their betters, and know perfectly well, and be hanged to 'em, that
				our only reason for trying to make ' down with the corn-laws ,' the popular
				cry is, that we may whisper in their ears, 'down with the wages' afterwards. Ay,
				doctor, if we can but manage this England will become the paradise of manufacturers!
				— the great workshop of the world! When strangers climb our chalk cliffs to get  a peep at us, they shall see, land at what point they will, the
				glowing fires that keep our engines going, illuminating the land from one extremity
				of the island to the other! Then think how we shall suck in — that is we the
				capitalists, my man — think how we shall suck in gold, gold, gold, from all sides.
				The idea is perfectly magnificent! The fat Flemings must give up all hopes of ever
				getting their finical flax to vie with our cotton again! — Crockley," but here Sir
				Matthew paused for a moment, as if half doubtful whether he should go on. The
				confidential impulse within him, however, worked so strongly in favour of the
				friendly smiling physician, that all reserve grave way, and winking his eye at him
				with a truly comic expression, he proceeded — "Crockley, they don't understand
				spinning in Flanders: they don't know yet how many baby sinews must be dragged, and
				drawn out to mix as it were with the thread, before the work can be made to answer.
				No, no, we have fairly given Master Fleming the go by in his own trade, so for the
				future he must just be pleased to go on hand-digging, and sewing every inch of his
				dung-muxen, till it teems with corns for exportation. That's what he's fit for;
				whereas science has put us rather in advance of all that, my good doctor. Our
				friends in Poland, too, shall plough away to the same tune, and Russia, from end to
				end, will become one huge granary at our service. Where will your aristocratic
				landholders be then, Crockley? Perhaps you can't tell? but I suspect I can. They'll
				just be in the factories, sir. Your manors and your preserves (we can get game
				enough from abroad), your manors and your preserves will be covered with factories,
				except just here and there, you know, where we capitalists may have taken a fancy to
				my Lord This-thing's grounds, or the Duke of T'other-thing's mansion, for our own
				residences. And this I maintain is just as it should be; and the reason why, is
				plain. We have got before all the world in machinery, and so all the world must be
				content to walk behind us. By Jove, if I had my way, Crockley, I'd turn France and
				the Rhine into a wine-cellar, Russia into a corn-bin, and America, glorious America,
				north, south, east, and west, into a cotton plantation. Then should we not flourish?
				Then should we not bring down the rascals to work at our own prices, and be thankful
				too? What's to step us? Trust me there is not a finer humbug going, than just making
				the country believe that the operatives are rampant for the repeal of the
				corn-laws." 
"It is a treat to hear you, Sir Matthew. I should be at a loss to name any man that I
				thought your equal in the gift of eloquence. But, nevertheless, we must not forget
				business. We must not forget Master Michael Armstrong, Sir Matthew.
 "No, no, my good friend, we will not forget him. Be patient for a moment, and I will
				make you understand how my friend Elgood Sharpton, and my darling protégé
				have been mixed up in my mind together. Sharpton's factory at Deep Valley is one of
				the most perfect institutions, I take it, that the ingenuity of man every produced.
				It is perfect, sir, — just perfect. In the first place it is build in a wild
				desolate spot, where the chances are about ten thousand to one against 
				any of the travelling torments who take upon themselves to meddle and make about
				what does not concern them — it is a hundred thousand to one against their ever
				catching sight of it. You never saw such a place in your life, Crockley. 'Tis such a
				hole that I don't believe the sunshine was ever known to get to the bottom of it. It
				was made on purpose, you may depend upon it. Well, sir, Sharpton, who whatever he
				udnertakes is sure to get over the ground faster than any other man, for he never
				lets any thing stop him, Sharpton felt quite convinced, you see, that the only way
				to carry on the work to any good purpose was to UNDERSELL. And how was this to be
				done without loss instead of gain? That's a question I promise you that has puzzled
				many a man that was no fool — but, egad, it did not puzzle him. He knew well enough
				that it was not the material — that came cheap enough — nor yet the machinery,
				though Heaven knows that's dear enough; but 'tis the labour, sir, the damnation
				wages going on, on, on, for evermore that drains the money away. And what then does
				he do, but hit at once upon the very perfectest scheme that ever entered a man's
				head to lessen that ruinous burden. He knew well enough, for he has a most
				unaccountable deal of general information, that there were lots of parishes in
				England that didn't know what on earth to do with their pauper brats. There's many,
				you know, that say this one thing, this nasty filthy excess of pauper population is
				the very mischief that is eating up the country, and destroying our prosperity. But
				who's the greatest political economist, Crockley, the man who talks of the evil, or
				he who sets about finding a remedy? The political economists of the nineteenth
				century ought to erect a statue to Elgood Sharpton; and so they will, I have no
				doubt, when the subject come to be more perfectly understood. For just mark what he
				has done. First he finds out this capital spot for the job, and builds a factory
				there; next he either goes himself, or sends agents, good, capable, understanding
				men, to all the parishes that he finds are overburdened with poor. Then, sir, he
				enters philosophically into the subject with the parish authorities, but of course
				with proper discretion, and proves to them that in no way could they do their duty
				by the parish children, particularly the orphans, or those whose parents don't
				trouble them, so well as by apprenticing them to a GOOD TRADE." 
Here Sir Matthew paused, and a merry glance was exchanged between him and his
				companion.
 "Well, Crockley, it is a good trade, you know, a devilish good trade, isn't it? At
				any rate I promise you that so many parishes felt convinced of it, that Elgood
				sharpton had soon got Deep Valley factory as full of young hands as it could cram.
				Now it is since that, you must know, that old Sir Robert took in into his head that
				little children must not be overworked. He it was, I believe, that first set up that
				nonsensical cry to any purpose; and to be sure, nothing ever was so absurd in a
				country where every body knows that if the young pauper spawn could but be made to
				die off, every thing would go on well. Is it not strange now, that old Peel could
				not be contented to  grow rich, and hold his tongue? but no, he got bit
				by some poisonous humanity notion or other, and a devilish shake he gave to the
				system just at first, by his absurd bill for the protection of infant paupers; but
				such men as Sharpton are not to be knocked down like ninepins, either by law-makers,
				or law; and to say the truth, old Sir Robert Peel's bill was to all intents and
				purposes a dead letter within two years after it was passed. Bless your soul, it was
				the easiest thing in the world to keep the creatures so ignorant about the bill,
				after first talk was over, the they might have been made to believe any thing and to
				submit to any thing. In fact the question for them always lies in an egg-shell. They
				must either do what the masters would have them, OR STARVE. That fact is worth all
				the bills that ever were passed: and another thing is, that as long as there's
				nothing to prevent our own friends and relations from being among the magistrates,
				even if complaints are made, we can manage them." 
"How true it is, Sir Matthew, that there is no inequality of accidental condition
				that can equal the inequality produced by a decided superiority in the intellectual
				powers," said Dr. Crockley. "At this moment I give you my sacred honour that I look
				upon, you and your friend Mr. Elgood Sharpton also, as standing in a much more
				commanding position than any duke in the country. What's a long descent compared to
				a long head, Sir Matthew? I'll tell you what the difference is. A long descent
				pretty generally helps a man to empty his purse, whereas a long head will never fail
				to help him fill it. It is as clear to me, as that the sun's in heaven, Sir Matthew,
				that the game is in your own hands. I know — for I have made some curious
				experiments that way — I know what a dog may be taught to do by hunger, and you may
				rely upon it that it is just as powerful in a man. Egad, Sir Matthew, it is a very
				fine subject for scientific experiments. It is difficult to say how far it might go.
				If a dog, for example, may be taught tricks by hunger, that approach in ingenuity to
				the powers of man, why may not man, skilfully acted upon by the same principle, be
				brought to rival the docility of a dog?"
"I see nothing in nature to stop it, doctor," replied Sir Matthew, with an air of
				great animation. "But remember, my dear Crockley, this is not a point to be touched
				upon in the book we were talking of. The public, you know, can have nothing on earth
				to do with the private regulation of our affairs. People have just as much right to
				inquire at what o'clock my lord duke expects his valet to get up, and moreover what
				the valet eats for breakfast when he is up, as they have to know what hours our
				hired laborers keep, and what they feed upon. It is a gross inquisitorial
				interference, Crockley, and ought not to be though of in a free country."
 "That's a first-rate idea though, Sir Matthew," said the doctor, taking out his
				pocket-book and pencil. "I must book that. It is turning the parliament into an
				office of the inquisition. The canters may call it a holy office , if they
				will, but the British people will never bear the notion of AN INQUISTION. That's a
				capital idea, I promise  you. As to my parallel, you know, between a
				dog and a man, it is merely between ourselves, or such an out-and-out-friend as Mr.
				Sharpton, and it may be worth thinking about, perhaps, practically and
				scientifically, I mean; but certainly I should never dream of printing it. A hundred
				years hence human intelligent may have reached such a point of improvement that the
				plain good sense and practical utility of the idea may make it properly appreciated.
				but as yet we are not sufficiently advanced in the science emphatically denominated
				" the positive " in contradistinction to " the ideal ." It will
				come though, if we do but go on in the path we are in. But we are generalizing too
				much, Sir Matthew; nevertheless I suspect I have caught you idea. You have thoughts
				of sending your young favoiurite to Deep Valley mill, by way of putting the
				finishing stroke to your benevolent projects in his favour?" 
"Exactly so, my dear friend. But we must have indentures, observe; and there is some
				little difficulty in that."
"I suppose you know best, Sir Matthew; else I should say that indentures cannot be
				necessary. From your description, the locality of this factory, with its romantic
				name, must be like the valley of Rasselas, at least in one particular — namely, that
				without wings the happy dwellers there would find it impossible to excape," replied
				the doctor.
"Difficult, exceedingly difficult, certainly; but not quite impossible; for without
				indentuires a runaway could not be legally pursued. And to tell you the truth,
				friend Crockley, I should not much approve giving a subject for a second part of Mr.
				Osmond Norval's dramma, in which the hero should appear upon the scene after a few
				months's residence in Deep Valley mills."
"That's true. But I don't see under what pretence you are to get the brat apprenticed
				to your friend Sharpton," remarked the cautious counsellor.
"If he is apprenticed to me, it will do just as well," replied the knight, "for I
				could make over the indentures to Sharpton easy enough, but it strikes me I might
				have some difficulty in making the mother consent to it."
"Not if you will be upon your P's and Q's, Sir Knight," said his friend: "you have
				nothing to do but go on sending tit-bits to the sick woman, and the rickety boy that
				you mentioned, and when they have got a little used to it she'll not choose to
				affront her generous benefactor . Remember the dog theory, Sir Matthew,
				they are all alike."
"I dare say you are right. but at any rate I had better keep out of that hateful
				brat's way, or rather take care that he keeps out of mine. But I shall bear the
				sight of him better if I make up my mind to send him to Deep Valley. Taht will wipe
				out old scores between us."
 Having said this, Sir Matthew rose from the breakfast-table, seeming therby to
				indicate that the consultation was at an end. Dr.  Crockley rose too;
				but, though he took up his hat and his riding-whip from the chair on which he had
				placed them, he lingered as if he had still something to say before he took his
				leave. 
Sir Matthew, however, seemed to take no notice of the hint, but stretching out his
				hand said decisively, "Good morning, doctor, good morning. Let us see you again
				soon."
Dr. Crockley upon this stretched out his hand too, but instead of clutching that of
				the knight, he seized upon his button. "One word, Sir Matthew, one word. You are too
				much of a man of business to think me troublesome. Respecting that little
				appointment that you were talking about the other day; I should like to have it
				settled. Because, to say the truth, I shall consider myself as weaking your livery;
				or, to speak more fitly, to be fighting positively under your colors, when this is
				done; and of course you know we ought to understand one another completely."
"No doubt of it, Crockely. I said nothing that I do not mean to stand to. You shall
				have two hundred a year, paid quaterly, for attending to the health and wellbeing,
				and all that, you know, of the factory children. But as I don't want you to give
				them two hundred pounds' worth of physic, remember I shall expect that you will make
				up the deficiency in — in just saying round about the neighbourhood how remarkably
				well every thing goes on at Brookford Factory. I'll peldge you my word that every
				thing does go on capitally well there, Crockley, so you will have nothing on your
				conscience on that score."
"I am not afraid of that, Sir Matthew; I know I may trust you. But I should like a
				bit of a memorandum about my own business, if you please."
"Quite right, quite right, sir. I am too much a man of business to object to that.
				Draw up the engagement, such as you wish it to be, and I dare say I shall make no
				objection to signing it."
After this a cordial hand-shaking was exchanged and the friends parted.
</div></body></text></TEI>