<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">
 CHAPTER XXV. 
THE NARRATIVE RETURNS TO ITS HERO — AND RELATES WHY AND WHEREFORE HE WAS KEPT ALIVE —
				THE BOY GROWS TALL, AND TAKES TO THINKING.

				The answer which Fanny Fletcher had received to her inquiries
				concerning Michael was as false as it was heedless. The little fellow who gave it
				had no intention of uttering what was untrue: he believed that the boy she inquired
				for was dead — so many had died and been borne from the wretched garret where he had
				himself lain, battling with the fever, sometimes delirious, and sometimes asleep,
				that it was no great wonder he should blunder. But Michael Armstrong was not dead,
				though the state in which the malady left him was such, that for weeks the surly old
				woman, hired to supply the place of Mrs Poulet, muttered curses on him for not being
				in a state to be quietly buried out of the way, like the rest.
It was just five days after Fanny Fletcher left the Deep Valley Mills in company with
				Miss Brotherton, that Michael waked from that first sound healing sleep, which often
				announces the conquest of life over death, after a hard-fought struggle between
				them.
The little fellow raised himself upright on his straw pallet, and for a minute or two
				looked about him to make himself quite sure where he was; for so heavy had been his
				sleep that it was not immediately his senses could recover their usual powers of
				perception. But only too soon, alas! he made it all out. He was still in that foul
				den of misery and filth; and the first impulse of his fully-recovered intellect was
				to utter a bitter expression of regret that his life had been spared for further
				suffering, while so many had been mercifully permitted to sink into their peaceful
				graves. But even as he breathed the words, he repented of them. The image of his
				mother seemed to rise before him — he remembered that she had bade him ever to trust
				in God, and let no cause tempt him to take his name in vain. The quiet eye of his
				much-enduring brother rose to his memory, as he had seen it a thousand times fixed
				upon him, while he enjoined patience and submission for their dear mother's sake;
				and the more recently heard precepts of little Fanny, all preaching the same
				righteous, but hard lesson, came in their soft pleading, innocent tone to give him
				strength to bear. Michael crossed his emaciated hands upon his breast, and murmured
				"God forgive me!" — then dropping again into a gentle sleep, awoke not, till the old
				woman shook him rudely, rather for the gratification of her curiosity, than in
				performance of her duty, in order to see whether the "wiry, hard-skinned little
				varment wasn't dead at last."
 She started with a feeling very like terror, when the boy opening  his
				large eyes upon her, asked her to please to be so kind as to give him a drink of
				water. 
"What, then! — you don't mean to die after all? If you bean't born to be hanged, it's
				a mystery. Water? — if you haven't got summut in it after lying this fashion, the
				Lord knows how long, you'll balk the hangman at last!" And with these words the
				crabbed crone retreated, hastening, with the consciousness of having something
				wonderful to tell, into the presence of Mr. Woodcomb.
"There's a boy, sir, as have been lying a dying amost ever since I comed, as is
				actually coming to, now; not but what he must still be within an inch of the grave,
				seeing what he has gone through — and he looks for all the world as if he had been
				buried and dug up again. Howsomever I don't think but what he might come through, if
				so be as I you thought it worth while to give him food. That sort of sleep as I
				waked him out of, shows plain enough as the fever is gone, and then you know, sir,
				as kitchen physic is all the cretur's wants, perhaps, for the sake of preventing the
				burying beginning again, your honour might think it was as well to give him a little
				broth, and meat, too, after a bit, for he won't do without it, that's certain."
"I had clean forgot that there was one left up there, Molly," replied the
				superintendent. "But in Heaven's name, let him be fed, woman — I wouldn't have to
				bury any more of 'em just now, for ever so — he'll come round again, I suppose
				before its very long? We are still very short of piecers, and it's as well to keep
				him alive, you know, as to go after another."
"As for that, sir," replied the old woman, "it won't be to-morrow, nor next day,
				either, as he'll pay for his salt; I'll tell you that beforehand. So you had best
				please to make up your mind at once about the keeping him alive. There's nothing
				will do it but giving him amost a bellyful every day, and maybe a little fresh air
				into the bargain, I'm thinking, seeing the time he's laid stewing up there, with
				such lots dying all round him."
"If it wasn't for the having to open ground for him again, I'd be hanged, drawn and
				quartered, before I'd trouble myself about what sort of air a 'prentice had to
				breath. Howsomever, I have got my own reasons for not choosing to trouble the parson
				again, nor yet for doing the job without him. So cram the brat as much a you like —
				I suppose my leavings is good enough for him?"
"Please master not to talk for my liking to cram 'prentice brats," retorted Molly.
				"Often and often, as I've been back and forward here, for one job or another, nobody
				ever saw me trying to pilfer any thing for their starving stomachs, the low creturs!
				I dispises 'em too much. But I knows what will save life, and what will lose it,
				better, maybe, than most folks, and so now you may do just as you please, without
				putting it upon my likes or dislikes."
 "Don't be so frumpish, Molly Bing," replied Mr. Woodcomb, laughing, "there's nobody
				going to charge you with being such a fool as to make a pet of a factory 'prentice
				while there's a puppy-dog to be had for love or money. Don't you be scared at any
				such notion as that,  for I knows ye a deal better, old woman, than to
				put any such affront upon ye. You just stop the creature from dying, if you can for
				that will suit me a deal best just now." 
The will of Mr. Woodcomb, thus clearly expressed, was acted upon with very implicit
				obedience; the consequence of which was, that Michael Armstrong was not only saved
				from death, put his constitution greatly benefited. Molly Bing had pledged her
				judgment upon the result of his case, and in order to prove it correct, she
				contrived that he should swallow about ten times as much nourishment as fell to the
				share of any other child in the mill. He had grown surprisingly during the period of
				his confinement, and this gave so lengthy a look to his thin person, that Molly more
				than once fancied the audacious little villain would give her the lie at last; so
				she not only fed him, but got leave for him to clean out the pig-sties, scrape up
				the filth from the yard, and sundry other jobs of the same description all which,
				however unsavoury in their nature, bore, as the sharp-witted old woman well knew,
				the balm of health in every movement they enforced, compared to the monotonous and
				grinding slavery of the mill. But in the course of a month or two, another glorious
				proof of England's prosperity reached the Deep Valley, in the shape of a large
				order, and Mr. Elgood Sharpton in communicating the cheering intelligence to his
				manager, enforced the necessity of strenuous exertion in the execution of it, by
				telling him that, sick or well, the children must work long hours, and that it was
				far better that they should a little overwork the hands, than run any risk
				of disappointing so valuable a customer.
In consequence of these instructions, Michael was withdrawn from his out-door
				labours, and once more made to follow the mules. It was then, and then only that he
				discovered the heavy loss he had sustained by the departure of Fanny. While employed
				upon the outof-door tasks assigned to him by the commands of Molly Bings, he had
				been strictly enjoined never to speak to any of the apprentices who might chance to
				pass while he was at work. His meals were eaten in Mr. Woodcomb's kitchen, and the
				place assigned for his lodging by night, was a sort of closet that opened from it.
				No day, no hour had passed, unless in sleep, since he recovered his senses, without
				his thinking of her. At the risk, or rather with the certainty of cuffs and hards
				words, no foot-fall had ever passed within his hearing without causing him to turn
				his head to reconnoitre, and much as he preferred the labour on which he was now
				employed to that of the mill, he would willingly, nay joyfully, have exchanged it in
				the hope of again seeing his little friend. It was therefore with a feeling of
				gladness, instead of regret, that he received orders to turn into the factory.
"That is queer!" thought the little fellow, as he bounded to obey the command, with
				the double energy of recovered health, and awakened hope, "it is queer for me to
				feel glad that I am going back to the factory!"
 As it happened, he was marshalled into the same room in which he  had
				worked before his illness — but alas! when he turned his eyes to the spot which
				Fanny had formerly occupied near him, a singularly ill-favoured boy met his gaze,
				instead of the pretty creature he sought for. This was a death-blow to the joy which
				a few minutes before had given him a gait and an expression of countenance so
				unwonted in a factory-boy returning to his well-known sufferings. Nevertheless,
				though a tear blinded the eyes which at length settled reluctantly on the broken
				threads which awaited his fingers, he remembered that the factory had seven floors,
				and cruel as it was to lose the pleasure of giving his little friend a look or a
				word as they each paced their weary walk, he still thought he might get a sight of
				her at their dismal meals, and fancied that he should not greatly regret exchanging
				scraps of wholesome meat, for musty oatmeal, provided Fanny Fletcher was by to tell
				him not to mind it. But the musty oatmeal came all too soon, for no word or look of
				Fanny's came with it; nor did any uncertainty long remain, on which to hang a
				lingering hope that some unfinished task detained her in the mill, and that he
				should see her soon. His first question, whispered to the girl who sat beside him,
				brought forth the history of Fanny's wonderful departure, at as full length as the
				time and place would permit. At first he listened to it with incredulity. It seemed,
				he thought, like a story made up to deceive him for fun; and little as the blighted
				young spirits of that sad fraternity were given to jesting, Michael clung to the
				belief that such was the case, as long as the meal lasted. But, as usual, a few
				minutes followed, during which they were left alone — an indulgence which
				necessarily arose from the fact, that even the niggardly allowance of time awarded
				by the regulations of Mr. Elgood Sharpton for their meals, was more than the
				famished children required for devouring the the scanty portion set before them. No
				sooner had Mr. Poulet withdrawn himself, after witnessing the orderly consumption by
				each, of the allotted morsel, than such of the miserable crew as had survived the
				pestilence, and remembered the close alliance between Michael and the heroine of the
				marvellous tale which was still in every mouth, all rushed together towards him for
				the purpose of recounting it. Notwithstanding the confusion of tongues, their noisy
				testimony was too consistent to admit of doubt, and Michael remained with the
				astounding belief that his little friend was taken away to be made a great lady of. 
 The heart of Michael Armstrong proved itself to be a very generous one on this
				occasion. "Some natural tears he shed, but wiped them soon." as he remembered that
				the more miserable the situation in which he was left, the more he ought to rejoice
				that Fanny had been taken from it. And he did rejoice; truly, sincerely, and at the
				very bottom of his heart did he rejoice. As day after day the hateful routine of
				unvarying suffering again laid its grasp upon his existence, with a power as
				irresistible as that of the vast engine which within those prison-walls  seemed "lord of all," the generous heart of Michael felt thankful that Fanny
				Fletcher shared in it no longer. It had been quite in vain that he had laboured to
				persuade himself, while listening to the reasonings of his little friend, that they
				ought mutually to rejoice in the probability of each other's death. Though he had
				allowed that as far as he was himself concerned he might easily be brought to think
				that it would be a comfort to die, he could never reach the pitch of sublimity
				necessary to form the wish that Fanny might die before him. But now it was evident
				that this weakness, which had more than once caused his little monitress to shake
				her head and say that he did not love her as well as she loved him, it was now quite
				evident that it was no selfish motive which had caused it. 
By degrees this truly noble feeling, this generous power of living, as it were, in
				the prosperity of another, so strengthened the character of the boy, as perfectly to
				save him from that worst result of youthful suffering, a reckless, desperate
				despair, which by destroying hope, that beautiful mainspring of all our best
				actions, leaves the poor spiritless machine alive only to wretched consciousness of
				its capacity for pain. It is, beyond all question, this bitter hopelessness which
				deteriorates in so remarkable a manner the moral character of operatives under the
				present factory system. In no other situation, excepting only that of slaves
				purchased and paid for like an ox, or an ass, is the destiny of a human being placed
				so wholly and completely beyond the reach of his own control. He is, as Wordsworth
				truly says, "A slave to whom release comes not, And cannot come." 
In no other situation do labouring men, women, and children feel and know that unless
				they submit in all things to the behests of their employer, they must die — and that
				too by a process ten thousand times worse then either the hangman's cord, or the
				headsman's axe — they must die the death of famine. If their lingering hours of
				labour be prolonged beyond the stipulated time for which they are paid, they cannot
				turn and say, "I will not, for it is not in the bond" for the ready answer is, "
					Go . We employ none who make conditions with us." And where are they to
				go? To the parish officers? As ready an answer meets them there: " Go . We
				relieve none who can get work, and refuse it." If they are fined, however unjustly,
				however arbitrarily, if the iniquitous truck system be resorted to for
				payment of of wages, instead of money, if their women be insulted, or their children
				crippled, and remonstrance follow, the same death-dooming reply awaits them: "
					Go . We employ no grumblers here."
 Then to what quarter can they look with hope? Where are they to find that only
				elixir by which human strength is mercifully made for ever equal to sustain human
				suffering? The sparkling draught is not for them! The factory operative alone of all
				to whom God has given the power of thought, is denied the delicious privilege of
				hope. It is this which degrades their nature; it is this which from youth to age  renders one ruinous hour of brutal debauchery more precious, than all
				that steadfast sober industry can promise or bestow. 
It was long, very long, ere this intellectual blight, this smothering mildew of the
				soul fell upon Michael, for he seemed to possess a sort of twofold existance, "the
				worser half of it," being his poor self, while the better was found in the happy
				destiny of Fanny. Countless were the miles that he walked backwards and forwards
				hefore the mules, during which he cheered his fancy by painting her in the midst of
				liberty and green fields. Sometimes he thought that if she were rich, she would
				remember all he had told her about his mother and Edward — that she would find them
				out — would take compassion on their poverty — would talk of him — would sooth and
				comfort them.
All this may seem, to happier beings, but a frail support, under incessant labour,
				accompanied by every species of privation, yet it did Michael service — it kept his
				faculties alive; for it gave a theme, and a pleasant one, on which to fix his
				thoughts, and half the the tedium of his own sad life was forgotten, as he meditated
				on the probable happiness of hers.
Sometimes, it must be owned, — though he always told himself that such thoughts were
				nonsense, — ideas would suggest themselves less abstractedly disinterested; for it
				would now and then come into his head, that Fanny Fletcher knew where Sir Matthew
				had sent him, if nobody else did; and that, perhaps, if she grew to be a great girl,
				with power to do what she liked, she might think of him, and try to do something to
				rescue him. Vague as was this notion, vague as he himself felt it to be, it was a
				blessing to him. When such thoughts arose, his bodily strength seemed to revive, his
				aching knees no longer bent under him, his gait was no longer that of an ordinary
				factory-child, the energy of his mind lent itself to his limbs, and wearily as he
				stretched himself upon his bed of straw, and long and lanky as his half-starved
				person grew, Michael Armstrong did not become a cripple.
But years wore away, and the stout-hearted young prisoner of the Deep Valley began
				again to think that he had better have died of the fever, than have lived so long,
				hoping for some happy chance to set him free, and hoping for ever and for ever in
				vain.
"I am a fool," argued Michael at fourteen, — "I am a fool for thinking so very much
				of one who it is quite plain has never thought of me — nor of mother — nor of my
				poor Edward either; she never gave a thought to either of us! I was a fool to dream
				it! The fine folks that carried her away, took her far enough from sight and sound
				of factory-people. And who can blame her if she never turned her head back again to
				inquire about any of them? Poor little Fanny! She was very kind to me once — and she
				was the very prettiest little girl that ever I happened to see. But other people may
				have found that out by this time, as well as I. Fanny Fletcher is a whole year older
				than me! I will try with all my might and main never to think of her any more!"

This resolution was not very steadily adhered to; but the struggle to do it, which
				was perfectly sincere, made the poor boy moody, and more miserable than ever. His
				dreams perpetually represented to him his mother and helpless brother, suffering
				from some unkindness from Fanny, whom he saw superlatively beautiful, and
				superlatively rich, but more superlatively hard-hearted still. These nervous and
				irritating visitations brought his mother and brother so vividly before him, that
				for weeks he could never, whether waking or sleeping, get them out of his head. He
				fancied himself again running at full speed from Dowling Lodge, with Martha's basket
				on his arm; his mother's little room, decent and orderly in spite of poverty, came
				back upon his mind as if he had left it but yesterday. He saw the soft expression of
				her faded countenance, and felt the welcome of her fond embrace.
"Oh, fool! oh, proud and wicked fool!" he murmured to his tear-stained pillow, as
				these, and a thousand other tender recollections pressed upon him. "Why could I not
				endure the tyrant's cruelty? I might have kissed her now! I might have comforted
				poor Teddy!" The sound of his own voice as he pronounced this dear familiar name,
				though in a whisper too low to awaken the weary sleepers round him, wrung his very
				heart by the vivid recollections which it brought, and though he was now beyond
				fourteen years old, he cried himself to sleep.
Fitful and feverish were the transitions of his mind at this period. Sometimes he
				persuaded himself that his mother was no more, that the loss of him had broken her
				heart, and that she had died, believing him to have gone before her. At other times
				it was Edward whom he wept as dead. His shattered health, his feeble limbs were, as
				he thought, sure evidence that nature meant him not to struggle long against the
				misery of his lot, and there were moments in which this persuasion even soothed
				him.
"Sweet fellow!" thought he. "How calm and beautiful he must have looked in death!
				Even in suffering, even in agony, his countenance was lovely — so patient, and so
				heavenly mild! Better, far better he should die, than live a factory-boy like
				me!"
And then again his mood would change, and he had for ever before him images of the
				most fearful destitution — his mother starving, and Edward slowly perishing beside
				her, because he had been too proud and too impatient to endure sundry
				buffetings and other indignities, which, when put in competition with the thought of
				having injured them, dwindled into petty injuries, which he deserved eternal shame
				for shrinking from.
Dreadful were the hours he thus spent! and, fearful to think of, was the hopeless,
				helpless, joyless, comfortless existence by which he held to earth! His very soul
				sickened as he looked around him, and read in every withered melancholy face the
				history of blasted youth, and the prophecy of premature death.
 But there are spirits which sorrow and suffering cannot quench, and Michael
				Armstrong's was one of them. Nature and accident together  had been
				stronger than the tendency of his employment to cripple his limbs, and he was
				neither deformed nor stunted. This happy exemption from the common lot, was
				doubtless greatly owing to the pertinacity of Molly Bing, in proving to Messrs.
				Woodcomb and Poulet that she was no fool, and knew well enough what she was about.
				This steadfastness on her part, acting in unison with the superintendent's judicious
				objections to Michael's being buried at that particular time, had certainly given a
				very critical and efficient impulse to the vigour of a frame of great natural
				strength and comeliness. The energetic self-sustaining soul within it, had also much
				to do in defying the paralyzing influence of his miserable situation. It was rarely
				that Michael could be seen to drag his limbs along, even in the last hours of
				long-protracted labour, with the same crippled, dipping gait as his companions. A
				broken-spirited child, when his knees are aching, permits them to bend under him;
				and not one in fifty, perhaps, of the half-starved, over-worked apprentices of the
				Deep Valley, reached the term of their captivity, without carrying away with them
				some species of bodily weakness or deformity. But let the reason be what it might,
				Michael was saved from this, and though exhibiting a fabric, composed of little
				besides skin, bone, and sinew, he was, at the age of fourteen years and six months,
				both tall and straight. 
But it seemed as if the inward strength of mental suffering kept pace with this
				vigour of frame; for day by day the bitter consciousness of his own wretched and
				degraded state increased upon him — and day by day his swelling heart grew more
				indignant as he looked around him, and watched the exercise of lawless power and
				coward tyranny upon his miserable companions.
It was after a peculiarly hateful display of this power, by an act of insult too
				disgustiug to relate, upon the unresisting person of a little fellow who seemed
				crawling (only too slowly!) to the grave, that Michael, when every other sufferer in
				the chamber was fast asleep, set himself to meditate gravely and deliberately upon
				his own situation. He had that day been so near trying the power of his bony arms,
				by flying at the throat of the ruffian who had so revoltingly outraged his
				companion, that with more than boyish judgment he became conscious of the growing
				danger that beset him. Though he had felt almost to suffocation the boiling rage
				which nothing but injustice, and the pitiful abuse of adventitious power can
				generate, he was not such a Quixote as to hope that his arm could effectually
				redress the wrongs he witnessed, yet he thought with a sort of trembling exultation,
				that if, he had seized the craven overlooker, as he kicked from him the
				helpless object of his tyranny, he might have held him with a grasp that would have
				stopped his breath for ever!
It was a horrid and a murderous thought! and poor Michael, once the gentlest, fondest
				little heart, that ever nestled to a mother's bosom, did penance for it by a pang of
				self-condemnation, that made him grind his teeth in agony. Yet even then the goaded
				spirit seemed to rise in rebellion against its own remorse.
 "I cannot bear it!" he exclaimed in smothered accents, as he  turned
				his face towards his bed of straw. "I know I cannot bear it long! I have seen two
				attempting to escape, who have been brought back to frightful tortures — to I know
				not what! A solitary cell? the whip? the knotted thong? What matters? Would they
				could slaughter me at once! All would be over then." 
For a long still hour of that feverish night, the boy lay sleepless. A terrible
				conviction that there was something within him which might prove stronger than
				himself — stronger than all his mother's precepts, and the holy fear of God which
				they had left upon his mind — made him feel sick with horror, and shudder in
				abhorrence of his own wickedness. He prayed to God to give him power to turn his
				thoughts from this; and soothed to calmness by the healing act, he meditated without
				passion, and with great acuteness for his years, upon the probable result of
				attempting to escape.
The difficulties of the enterprise were greater than any can imagine who know not the
				locality, and the intricate network of security which surround the imprisoned
				apprentices of Deep Valley on all sides. Of this the elder children, and the few who
				lived to approach their majority, were by no means ignorant. Considerable pains were
				indeed taken to impress upon their minds the certainty of their being caught if they
				succeeded in clearing the walls; together with the important fact that, as
				apprentices, it was illegal to assist them in running away from their master, and
				that it was the duty of every justice of peace to assist in securing and sending
				them back to complete the term fixed in their indentures.
All this Michael knew perfectly well; neither was he at all sanguine in his hope of
				avoiding the toils from which he had never heard that any had escaped. Yet he
				determined to make the attempt, assuring himself, that no change in the treatment he
				received could render him more miserable, and sincerely thinking that it would be
				better and safer for him, should the failure of this desperate attempt lead to such
				a degree of restraint as would render the yielding to such violence of emotion, as
				had that day seized upon him, impossible.
Having come to this conclusion, and firmly pledged his young spirit to the attempt,
				his feverish restlessness subsided, and he dropped asleep.
 The waking of the next morning was unlike any he had ever known before. He no longer
				felt as one among a miserable crew, sharing in common with them starvation, labour,
				and indignity; he felt himself to be one alone, and apart from all. He was on the
				eve of doing that which would involve him in difficulties and dangers altogether new
				and strange to him, and the only termination he could be really said to expect was
				the being dragged back to his prison to suffer all that it was in the power of his
				tyrants to inflict. These were strange materials for meditation which was decidedly
				agreeable; yet such Michael felt it to be, in spite of reason. A sensation of
				active, dauntless courage swelled his breast, which, with all the danger it
				threatened, was well worth the heavy monotony of his ordinary existence. At times,
				too, a gleam of hope would dart across the stern and steady gloom of 
				the prospect; and during the moment that the flash lasted, he saw himself restored
				to his mother and Edward. He could hardly be said to hope this, yet the feeling that
				it was possible sufficed to sustain his spirits through the days and nights which
				preceded the attempt. 
It was exactly by the same exit that poor crazy Sally had made use of some fifty
				years before, that Michael determined to leave the premises. The month or two during
				which he had been employed in cleaning the yard and its appurtenances, had made him
				thoroughly well acquainted with the outward door, and also with the region
				immediately beyond it, for it was thither that he was accustomed to convey all the
				rubbish which it was his office to remove — an office which might have been attended
				with some danger of the escape of him who performed it, had not those in authority
				taken care to inform him that no celerity of step could avail against the
				watchfulness of certain eyes about the factory, which were always on the alert to
				reconnoitre that door, and never far distant from the commodious windows which gave
				them power to do so.
Poor Sally had found this but too surely in making her attempts, and Michael had more
				than once listened to the merry tradition, which was a favourite story with the
				overlookers; of how the silly girl had run in full sight of a dozen watchful eyes,
				till her strength failed, and she sank down among the bushes and was taken, like a
				bird that having been long confined, has no strength of wing left to bear him beyond
				reach of the first hand extended to recapture him.
Yet this open postern was the only one by which it was possible to pass; but the very
				extremity of the danger of passing it, made the attempt easy; for though it was
				always carefully locked at night, and the key placed, together with those of every
				external door on the premises, under the pillow of Mr. Woodcomb, the manager had
				more than once seen a miserable little head peeping through it when left open for
				the passage of the wheelbarrow, without testifying the least alarm.
The time chosen by Michael for passing this terrible door, was that during which the
				dirty herd were commanded to expose their faces and hands for a short moment to such
				cleansing as might be obtained in a huge trough, in company with a score or two of
				competitors. It was constantly a moment of great noise, bustle, and hustling; and it
				was in the midst of this that the young adventurer contrived, unobserved, to push
				back the only bolt which secured the door during the day, leaving it in a position
				to yield noiselessly to a very slight touch. At the sound of a bell, which rang
				about ten minutes after the children were turned out into the court to wash
				themselves, the whole troop hurried back again to the apprentice-house for their
				breakfast. It was then that Michael, often the last to finish the too-short
				operation of washing, remained for a moment behind the rest, and in that moment,
				opening the door just wide enough for his slender figure to pass, he slipped
				through, and closed it after him.
 The interval which elapsed before his departure was suspected, certainly did not
				exceed two minutes; and before the expiration of ten,  the fact was
				completely ascertained and known to nearly every inmate of the mill. 
Mr. Poulet's second wife, to whom he had then been married about three years, was in
				appearance the very reverse of the first, being as remarkably small, as the other
				was large. But what she wanted in muscle, was made up in watchfulness. Nothing
				escaped her restless and malignant little eyes, and either from the incessant danger
				of her spying sharpness, or the propensity of the human mind to think present
				suffering worse than every other, there were many who declared they would be glad to
				have her brutal predecessor back again. It was this woman who first descried the
				absence of Michael from the board.
"Hollo! where is No. 57?" she cried.
No one could answer; and No. 57 was sought for in vain from one end of the premises
				to the other.
"He is gone through the yard-door!" proclaimed the active and intelligent Mrs.
				Poulet, after discovering that the bolt was withdrawn. "Off with you, you stupid old
				fool!" she added, addressing her husband; "what d'ye stand staring there for? If you
				had the wit of a jackass, you might trace him by his feet on the dew — for there are
				the marks plain enough to any body, that has sense enough to look for 'em."
And so in truth there were. A continuous track of footmarks, were easily traced from
				the door to the steep bank behind the factory, where they were lost in the covert of
				bushes, which had of late years been coaxed to clothe its sides for the purpose of
				furnishing fagots. That some one had recently broken through these bushes was
				equally evident, from many boughs having been torn, and the soil beneath them
				trampled. This was enough to direct the pursuit, with so much certainty of being
				right, that Mr. Woodcomb laughed as he gave the orders for it.
"The bushes last for about half a mile," said he, "and then he must take over the
				hills, of course. Fine fellow, isn't he? It will be mighty hard to take him again,
				won't it? There's only three justices of peace for him to be handed to, and only
				every man he meets ready to introduce him. The worst misfortune is, that I don't
				quite see where he is to get his dinner."
Two stout overlookers started accordingly upon the track thus easily hit upon, and
				Mr. Woodcomb awaited the result of their exertions without the slightest anxiety, or
				any irritation of nerves whatever; albeit he knew that, favourite as he was, he
				might run no small risk of losing his place, should one of the apprentices really
				escape — but the thing was impossible; no one could live without eating, not even
				one who had served his apprenticeship to starving as well as piecing at the Deep
				Valley Mill. So Mr. Woodcomb slept soundly, although in ignorance of the fact that
				Michael Armstrong was already within a few feet of his premises.

</div></body></text></TEI>