<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
 CHAPTER XII. 
AN UNFORTUNATE RENCONTRE — AN ADVENTURE — MISS BROTHERTON GROWS WISER EVERY DAY.

				Mrs. Tremlett's inquiries proved successful. Jim Sykes, the
				weeding-boy, knew perfectly well where widow Armstrong lived; and after he had
				repeated his instructions three times, Mary Brotherton and her unresisting chaperon
				set off on their expedition. On one  point only did the self-willed
				heiress yeild to the judgment of her companion. Mary, who knew, that though she
				seldom went beyond the shelter of her own park-paling, she often walked without
				fatigue within it for two or three hours together, wished to set off for Hoxley-lane
				on foot; but Mrs. Tremlett talked so much of the fatigue, that the good-natured girl
				consented to let the carriage convey them to the point at which the lane diverged
				from the high-road. This yielding, however, was wholly from consideration for her
				companion. For herself she believed the precaution quite needless; and she was
				right. However much her temper might have been endangered by the series of spoiling
				processes she had undergone, her health had been taken good care of, and few girls
				of her age in any rank, had greater power and will for exertion than herself. 
Nevertheless, before she had driven half a mile, she heartily rejoiced at having
				sacrificed her own inclination to that of her good nurse; for the road to Ashleigh
				was the favourite ride of the officers quartered in the neighbourhood, and had she
				been seen on foot, it is probable that before reaching Hoxley-lane she would have
				been surrounded by a body-guard of military. So greatly did this danger appal her
				spirits, that the frist moment she found herself free from a white-gloved hand
				either at one window or the other, she stopped the carriage, and ordered the
				coachman to go far enough down the lane to permit her to ge out unoberserved by any
				persons passing by the road.
But poor Mary was this day doomed to disappointment; and the indignant, and almost
				passionate beating of her heart under it, made her more conscious, perhaps, than she
				had ever been before, how deeply the business upon which she was engaged had entered
				into her soul.
Soon after Sir Matthew Dowling had dismissed his breakfast companion, he strolled out
				towards his splendid stables, and perceiving his son loitering among the grooms, and
				himself equipped for the saddle, he inquired whither he was going to ride. "Only to
				Ashleigh, governor," was the reply. "Then wait five minutes, Augustus, and I will
				ride with you."
Whether the youth approved the proposal or not, he was fain to submit to it, and the
				evil star of Mary Brotherton contrived to bring them to the top of Hoxley-lane at
				the moment her carriage was about to turn into it.
"Stop!" cried the young lady, accompanying the word with a very energetic pull at the
				check-string. "Go on to Ashleigh," was the order the followed.
"Was ever any thing so provoking, nurse? Do you see who those hateful men are?"
"Why 'tis Sir Matthew, my dear," replied the gentle old woman.
"The wretch!" muttered Mary between her teeth at the very moment that sir Matthew on
				one side, and his languishing son on the other, besieged her carriage.
 "Not for my right hand would I have him guess where I am going," 
				thought she, as with a face suffused with the deepest carmine that agitation could
				produce, she forced her lips into an unmeaning smile in return to their salutation. 
The father and son came to exactly the same conclusion, and at the same moment. There
				was but one cause that it was possible to assign for her evident emotion. She was
				deeply in love with Augustus, — more deeply then even the young man himself had
				imagined. The thing was plain, no doubt remained, no not a shadow of it on the mind
				of either father or son, but it was the elder gentleman only who at once determined
				to push so fine a game to its close, with as little delay as possible.
Feeling quite sure that there was no liberty he could take at this moment which would
				not be welcome, he made a sign t the coachman to stop, and deliberately dismounting
				he threw his reins to his groom, told Miss Brotherton's footman to open the
				carriage-door, and stepped in with the assumed air of a partially loved friend, who
				knows that no leave need be asked.
Mary shrunk back into her corner with considerably more disgust than if a reptile had
				possessed itself of the seat opposite.
"This is not quite as it should be, is it?" said Sir Matthew, with a leer. "Perhaps
				so me other may have a better right here than I?" And a very expressive smile
				accompanied the words.
"Sir?" said Miss Brotherton.
"Come, come, my dear child, you must not look vexed at any of my little jokes. You
				know how we all dote upon you! Dear creature! How beautiful that sweet blush make
				you look! He, he! there goes poor Augustus looking very much as if he could wring
				his papa's neck off. But his turn, we will hope, may come by and by. and now, my
				dear, I'll tell you what I am come here for. We all want you, and your good Mrs.
				Tremlett too, if she likes it, to come over to us quite en famille
				to-morrow. I don't know what love-powder you have been scattering amongst us, but
				there is not a single individual of the family who does not positively dote upon
				you. Tell me my pretty Mary, do you feel a little kindness for some of us in
				return?"
An attempt to take her hand accompanied this speech; and Mrs. Tremlett, who estimated
				pretty nearly her young lady's affection for Sir Matthew and his race, actually
				trembled for the consequences. But, to her great surprise, Mary answered, after the
				pause of a minute, "Oh, dear Sir Matthew! you are only laughing at me!" in a voice
				so exceedingly chilldish and silly, that it might, under similar circumstances, have
				made the fortune of a comic actress; and though she did not permit him to touch the
				hand he attempted to take, she placed it, together with its fellow, so playfully
				behind her, that Sir Matthew could only laugh and call her, "dear pretty
				creature!"
Meanwhile the carriage proceeded to penetrate through the dirty dismal streets,
				which, in that direction, formed the suburb of Ashleigh.
"I must get out here," said Miss Brotherton, suddenly pulling the check-string.

"Here? Impossible, my dear child!"
"Nothing is impossible t me, that I choose to do, sir," said the young lady,
				springing to the ground the moment the door was opened. The knight was fain to
				follow, the animated Augustus threw himself from his horse at the same instant, and
				Mrs. Tremlett held herself suspended on the step of the carriage to learn what she
				was required to do.
"I wish to know what is the matter with these miserable-looking children," said Mary,
				approaching a half-open door, at each side of which, crouching on the stone step,
				sat a pale and squalid-looking girl. The eldest might be ten years old, the youngest
				was certainly not more than six.
"Gracious Heaven! you are not going to speak to those creatures, Miss Brotherton?"
				exclaimed Sir Matthew, while his son instinctively backed his horse into the middle
				of the street.
"And why not, Sir Matthew?" said Mary.
"You are not aware of what you are doing; I give you my honour you are not. You have
				no conception that these sort of creatures are. My dear, dear Miss Brotherton, get
				into your carriage — get into your carriage, I conjure you!
Mary looked at him, but said not a word in reply.
"What ails you, little girl?" said she, putting her hand upon the shoulder of the
				youngest child.
"Billy-roller," answered the little creature.
"The billy-roller smashed her," said the eldest girl,"but 'twas falling asleep
				against the machinery as lamed me."
"Are you mad, Miss Brotherton!" exclaimed Sir Matthew. "Surely, Mrs. Tremlett, you
				ought to prevent your young lady from exposing herself to such scenes as these."
"Good morning, Sir Matthew, do not let me detain you," said the heiress, suddenly
				assuming the tone and style of a woman of fashion who chose to have her own way.
				"These sick little creatures quite interest me. Besides, I must positively find out
				who Billy Roller is."
"It is an instrument used in the works, Miss Brotherton. You know not to what you are
				exposing yourself — fraud, filth, infection, drunkenness! I give you my sacred
				honour that I think you are very likely to be robbed and murdered if you approach
				the thresholds of such dwellings as these."
"I beg your pardon, Sir Matthew," replied the heiress, "but you must excuse me if I
				obstinately persevere in judging for myself; I know I am a spoiled child, neither
				more nor less; and as such you must either give me up or bear with me. Permit me to
				wish you good morning; I shall do more than approach the threshold of this dwelling
				— I shall enter it."
Having said this, she waited no further parley, but taking a ragged child in each
				hand set her little foot against the door which already stood ajar, pushed it open,
				and walked in.
 Her first idea on looking round her was that perhaps Sir Matthew was in the right.
				Filth she saw; infection might lurk under it; and  who could tell if
				fraud and drunkenness might not enter the moment after, to complete the group? 
But there was little of selfishness and much of courage in the heart of Mary
				Brotherton, so she presently forgot every notion of personal danger, and was thus
				enabled to see things as they really were.
On one side of the small bare chamber, and in some degree sheltered by the door which
				opened against it, stood a rickety machine once intended for a bedstead. Two of the
				legs had given place to brickbats, and instead of a bed the unsteady frame now
				supported only a thin layer of very dirty straw, with the body of a dying female
				stretched upon it. The only other article of furniture in the room was an old deal
				box without a cover, but having a couple of planks, each about three feet long, laid
				across it; serving either for table or chairs as occasion might require. The walls,
				the floor, the ceiling, and the remnant of a window, were all alike begrimed with
				smoke and dirt.
It took not long to make this inventory, and having completed it, the young lady,
				still holding in each hand a staring child, turned towards the inhabitant of this
				miserable den, and said,
"Are you ill, my good woman?"
The being she addressed raised her heavy eyes, and in a voice so low as to be
				scarcely intelligible, answered "Yes."
"Have you no assistance, nobody to nurse you?"
"Nobody but these," pointing to the children.
"Has any doctor seen her?" demanded Mary of the eldest child.
"No ma'am," replied the little girl.
"And how long has she been ill?"
"Ever since she com'd from the mill."
"And how long is that?"
"A twelvemonth," said the little one.
"I don't know," said the elder.
"But, my poor children, you are not the only people that live with her, I suppose?
				Have you got any father?"
"Yes."
"Where is he?"
"At the mill."
"Have you got any body else belonging to you?" said Miss Brotherton, shuddering.
"There's Sophy, and Dick, and Grace," replied the eldest child.
"Where are they all?" again inquired Miss Brotherton.
"At the mill," was again the answer.
"Are Sophy and Grace grown up?"
"Sophy is," answered the child, "and Grace, almost."
"Then why do they not stay at home, one of them at least, to take care of this poor
				woman?"
"'Cause they mustn't. I 'tends mother."
"You are not big enough to take care of her, my poor child. Why don't you go to the
				factory, and let one of the bigger ones stay at home?"

"They won't have me now, 'cause of this." — and as she spake, the child held up a
				little shrivelled right-hand, three fingers of which had a joint deficient. "I can't
				piece now, and so they won't let me come."
"And Sophy won't let me go, 'cause of this," said the little one, slipping her arm
				out of a bedgown (which was the only garment she had), and displaying the limb
				swollen and discoloured, from some violent contusion.
"My poor little creature! how did you do this?" said Mary, tenderly, taking the
				little hand in hers, and examining the frightful bruise.
"'Twas the billy-roller," said the little girl, in an accent that seemed to insinuate
				that the young lady was more than commonly dull of apprehension.
"But how did it happen, my child? Did some part of the machinery go over you?"
"No! — That was me," cried the elder, with a loud voice, and again holding up her
				demolished fingers. "'Twas the stretcher's billy-roller as smalshed Becky."
"'Twas, cause I was sleepy," said the little one, beginning to cry, for she construed
				Mary's puzzled look into an expression of displeasure.
"They beats 'em dreadful ma'am," said the sick woman, evidently exerting herself
				beyond her strength. "She's a good little girl for work; but they will fall asleep,
				all of 'em at times, when they be kept so dreadful long."
"But these bruises could not be the effect of beating," said Mary, again examining
				the arm, "it is quite impossible."
"Why, ma'am, the billy-roller as they beats 'em with, is a stick big enough to kill
				with; and many and many is the baby that has been crippled by it."
There was something so hollow, so sunken in the woman's voice, that Miss Brotherton
				felt terrified. The fact that a child of the size of the baby before her should have
				been beaten with such a weapon, and with such violence, seemed wholly incredible.
				Again she thought of Sir Matthew Dowling's warning, and wished that she were not
				alone.
"I am afraid that you are very ill," said she, "and I know not how I can help you.
				Money I can give, but there is nobody here to make use of it for you."
"Money!" murmured the sinking woman from her layer of straw. "Money, you can give
				money? Oh! give it, give it. Give it to her — give it to the child; she knows what
				it is, she knows I am dying for the want of it. It is too late for me, but give it,
				give it, and may God — "
Here the miserable creature's strength wholly failed; her eyes closed, and to all
				appearance, she was already a corpse.
"Oh! this is very dreadful!" cried poor Mary, wringing her hands, "nurse will know
				better than me," and so saying, she turned eagerly towards the door.

"She be gone, mother, and haven't gived nothing," said the eldest girl, in a voice so
				mournfully expressive of disappointment, that in spite of her alarm, Mary stopped to
				take half-a-crown from her purse, which she put into the child's hand.
She looked at the coin, and in a half-whisper ejaculated, "Oh!" Then creeping to the
				bed, she put it into the palm of her mother's hand, pressing the fingers down upon
				it, and in an accent of interrogation uttered the word "Bread?"
This Mary heard, but not the answer to it, for she had quitted the scene before it
				was uttered. On opening the door of the house, she started at seeing Sir Matthew
				Dowling still within a dozen yards of it; he was standing beside the carriage, with
				one arm extended to keep the door of it open, and the other resting against the
				vehicle on the opposite side of the opening, while his head thrust forward within an
				inch of good Mrs. Tremlett's nose effectually prevented her following her young
				lady, however much she might have wished to do so. He had, indeed, upon Miss
				Brotherton's disappearance reseated the good woman almost by force, and then
				addressed her in such a strain as was rapidly working her up to make an attempt to
				escape from the other side of the carriage, when the reappearance of the young lady
				released her from her thraldom.
"Mrs. Tremlett!" he said, "are you aware of the awful responsibility which will rest
				upon you if any thing unfortunate happens to your amiable, but most headstrong young
				lady? All the neighbourhood know, Mrs. Tremlett, that she has, as it were, placed
				herself for protection in your hands, refusing all other counsel, and shutting her
				ears to all other advice, and it is thus that you perform your duty!"
"Good God, sir! what do you mean?" said the good woman, in great agitation. "Let me
				out if you please, sir. If my young lady is in any danger, it is wicked to keep me
				sitting here. let me out, sir!"
 "I will let you out, Mrs. Tremlett," replied the knight, still firmly retaining the
				position which so effectually kept her in, "I will let you out; but first, for her
				sake and your own, it is my duty to tell you in a few words the sort of place she
				has now thought proper to enter. Don't struggle, Mrs. Tremlett, but hear me. It is
				not possible they can do her any personal injury as long as I am so near the door of
				the house as at present. Be very sure that from some hole or corner of the filthy
				premises, some spying eyes are at this moment watching us. There is no danger of her
				being murdered now, but as sure as you sit there, Mrs. Tremlett, murdered she will
				be, if she goes without the protection of a powerful arm within such dens of sin and
				iniquity as she has entered now. One short moment more, Mrs. Tremlett — one short
				moment, while I tell what the creatures are among whom she has thrown herself. The
				house is notorious as one of the very worst in Ashleigh. The man is an habitual
				drunkard, whom I, and my excellent servant Parsons, have endeavoured in every
				possible way to reform — but in vain. The moment he has got his wages, he goes to
					 the gin-shop, and often and often he won't work at all, which of
				course prevents his family from being in the comfortable easy circumstances which
				they ought to be. If he happens to be in the house now, I dare say there is no
				species of indecent language to which your young lady will not be obliged to listen.
				As to the mother of the family, I believe she is dying in consequence of a life
				passed in all sorts of the most abominable wickedness. Indeed I believe she is now
				half mad, for I have been told by some of my people whom I have sent upon charitable
				visits of inquiry to her, that she lies in her bed inventing the strangest lies
				imaginable. Indeed some think that notwithstanding she is so near death she still
				drinks, and that it is nothing but drunken lies that she makes people listen to." 
"Pray, pray let me get out, Sir Matthew! Being murdered, sir, is not the only thing
				from which I should wish to save Miss Brotherton."
"One word more, Mrs. Tremlett, and I have done. The eldest girl is a notorious
				prostitute. Another, a year or two younger is going the same way. The boy is
				suspected of being an extremely skilful thief, and the two younger girls, for they
				all work at my factory, Mrs. Tremlett, and I know them well, the two younger ones
				are such depraved little wretches, that for the sake of example we have been obliged
				to turn them out of the mill, though we are in great want of young hands to do the
				work. Now, madam, I have done, and I leave it with you to judge how far it will be
				right and proper for Miss Brotherton to continue such frolics as these."
Sir Matthew was in the act of pronouncing the last words of this speech as Miss
				Brotherton opened the door of the house, and stepped out into the street.
On first perceiving her, the knight appeared about to take her hand, for the purpose
				of replacing her in the carriage; but his attention was called to the sound of many
				feet suddenly turning the corner of a street which led from a neighbouring factory.
				It proceeded from the workpeople, who were rushing home in scrambling haste to
				snatch their miserable dinners.
Gentlemen in Sir Matthew Dowling's situation, and enjoying the species of influence
				which belongs to it, take little or no pains to avoid meeting the people they
				themselves employ. They look not in the young eyes to read what sort of blessing
				cowers there, nor heed the crippled gait, or pallid visage of those who exist but by
				the poisonous employment which he gives them. But such gentlemen seldom, if they can
				avoid it, expose themselves to the remarks of any gangs belonging to their
				neighbours, and no sooner did Sir Matthew become aware that the mill in the next
				street was pouring forth its fifteen hundred hands, than he turned from the young
				lady who had passed by without appearing to see him, and taking his horse from the
				hand of the groom who held it, sprung with great activity into the saddle, and
				galloped off the way his indignant son had galloped before him.

Mary Brotherton meanwhile was utterly unconscious of the approaching throng; and
				intent only upon getting Mrs. Tremlett out of the carriage, turned her eyes neither
				to the right nor the left, but seizing her by the arm, exclaimed, "Come to me nurse,
				come to me!"
The good woman who was quite as desirous as herself of the reunion, required no
				second summons, but more quickly than it can be told, was first by the side of her
				young mistress in the street, and then entering with her the low door of the
				dwelling so fearfully described by Sir Matthew.
Had Mrs. Tremlett possessed the power, most assuredly she would have turned the steps
				of her charge the other way, and for ever have prevented her from exposing herself
				to the contemplation of such depravity as she had heard described; but knowing
				perfectly well that no such power was vested in her, the next wish she conceived,
				was to give all the assistance and support she could to the dear wilful girl to whom
				she had devoted herself.
Aware, as she entered the door, that many eyes followed them, nay, that many steps
				were stayed, apparently, to watch the spectacle so rare in Ashleigh of well-dressed
				ladies entering the sordid dwelling of operatives, Mrs. Tremlett herself closed the
				door as soon as they had both passed through it, and looking round upon the
				desolation of the chamber, trembled with an emotion made up of terror and
				compassion, at perceiving to what a scene the delicately-nurtured Mary Brotherton
				had introduced herself.
"This woman is very ill, nurse Tremlett," said the young lady, drawing her close to
				the bed. "For God's sake tell me what we had better do for her?"
"My dear, dear, Miss Mary come away, and send the doctor to her!" answered Mrs.
				Tremlett; positively shaking from head to foot, as she contemplated the ghastly
				countenance of the woman, the filthy rag that imperfectly covered her, and the
				scanty straw upon which her stiffening limbs were stretched. "This is no place for
				you, Miss Brotherton! come with me I say this moment, and we will send the doctor,
				and money, and clothes too, if you like it."
"If I like it! — Do you think I am amusing myself, Mrs. Tremlett? — Feel her hand —
				feel her pulse! I believe she is dying."
These words though spoken very quietly and deliberately, were uttered in a voice so
				unlike what she had ever heard from the young lady before, that the old woman became
				dreadfully alarmed.
"Oh, good God! she is losing her senses!" were the words she uttered as she threw her
				arms round the person of Miss Brotherton, and vainly attempted to remove her from
				the spot on which she stood.
 "Fie upon you, Mrs. Tremlett!" said Mary, sternly, "do you fancy that you are doing
				me any good? Be satisfied that I am not losing my senses, and let me request that
				you will make an effort to recover yours. This woman's head is too low. My dear
				mother asked for pillows." Here the steady voice faltered, but it was now only for a
					 moment. "I want the cushions from the carriage nurse Tremlett,
				will you get them, or shall I?" 
Without answering a word the terrified old woman hastened to obey her, and did so in
				the best manner; for calling to the tall footman, who continued to stand beside the
				open door of the carriage, he obeyed the summons, which he supposed to be
				preparatory to his young mistress making her exit, by very unceremoniously thrusting
				right and left the curious group that still lingered on the threshold.
"Give me the cushions from the carriage, Jones," she said, "make haste, for God's
				sake!"
The man stared at her for an instant in utter astonishment, and then did as he was
				ordered.
"Now get upon the box and bid the coachman drive as fast as he can go, to the nearest
				doctor's — that's Mr. Thomas, I think, in Cannon-street. — Tell him Miss Brotherton
				has sent for him, and desire him to get into carriage directly."
Having uttered these commands as rapidly as she could speak, Mrs. Tremlett carried a
				couple of the carriage cushions to the bed, and with the assistance of Mary and the
				elder child, managed to raise the woman into a position apparently less distorted
				and painful than before.
"Have you any thing to give her?" said Mrs. Tremlett, addressing the child.
The little girl without answering, stepped to a sort of cupboard in the wall, and
				taking thence a pitcher without a spout, and a mug without a handle, contrived to
				tilt up the former so as to make it discharge a portion of its cotents into the
				latter.
"It is water," said Mary, watching the operation. "It will not hurt her, will
				it?"
"Nothing can hurt her, my dear love?" replied Mrs. Tremlett, her eyes filling with
				tears as she listened to the altered voice of her gay-hearted girl, whose smiles and
				frolics she had watched, and indulged, for so many years; but of whose deep feeling
				she had never conceived any idea till now. "I don't think anything can hurt her now,
				Mary. Her pulse flutters, and her forehead is quite damp. I have sent for Mr.
				Thomas, and he will probably be here immediately."
Mary's only answer was silently pressing the hand of her old friend as she took from
				it the broken mug of water, and then, kneeling on the sordid floor, she applied it
				to the pale dry lips of the sufferer.
The poor woman made an effort to meet it, and swallowed a mouthful eagerly; and then,
				relieved probably by the change of posture, and refreshed by the cool liquid, she
				stretched out the hand in which she still held Mary's half-crown, and said, "Go
				Betsy, buy — "
The child she addressed, eagerly seized the money in the hand that had fingers to
				close upon it, and flitted through the door in an instant.
 The poor woman had again closed her eyes; but her breathing was  more
				tranquil, and Mary hoped she had fallen asleep. With this persuasion she stood
				perfectly still and silent beside her, her own hand locked, though she was not
				conscious of it, in the grasp of her deeply affected nurse, while her whole soul
				seemed settled in her eyes as she fixed them immovably upon what she felt to be the
				most awful spectacle that a mortal can gaze upon, namely, the passing of a human
				spirit from life to death. 
The little girl whose swollen and discoloured arm still remained uncovered, probably
				because she feared the pain likely to attend the replacing it in the sleeve, stood
				close beside her mother's head, childishly contemplating the cushions which
				supported it, and apparently as unconscious as they were, of the heavy loss that
				threatened her.
But this stillness did not long remain uninterrupted. All the members of the family,
				who had been named as belonging to the factory, except the father, returned for the
				purpose of taking such rest and refreshment as one hour (nearly half of which was
				consumed by the walk to and from the mill) could permit. The latch was lifted by the
				eldest girl, a delicate featured, but dreadfully dirty creature of about seventeen,
				with a sort of sharp eagerness, denoting the curiosity excited by the sight of the
				carriage stationed before their dwelling. On perceiving the deathlike countenance of
				her mother, made distinctly visible by the noonday light, that streamed through the
				open door, she suddenly stopped, clasping her hands together, and uttering in tones
				that sounded like a shriek — "Oh! God, she is dead!"
"No! not dead!" said Mary solemnly, and without turning her eyes from the object on
				which they were rivetted. "Not dead! — she is sleeping — Hush! — Do not disturb
				her!"
Close following on the heels of the first, came a second girl, about a year her
				junior, but with a countenance much less prepossessing. Dirty she was too, it
				possible more so than the others, and there was a look of stolid stupidity about her
				that, but for the sort of reckless audacity which lurked in her eye, might have
				given the idea of an almost brutal want of animation. A thin consumptive-looking lad
				of about fourteen, followed after her, and closed the door behind him as he
				entered.
"Oh! mother!" he exclaimed as her sunken face caught his eye, "I wish I was alongside
				of ye, and then we'd be buried together!" And without appearing conscious of the
				presence of the strangers, he suddenly threw himself upon the tottering bedstead,
				and nestling his face close to that of the dying woman, kissed her passionately
				again and again.
 "My boy, you may hasten her going by that," said Mrs. Tremlett, gently. "Be still,
				be still all of ye!" But as she spoke, she, and Mary too, whose hand she continued
				to hold, made way for the eldest girl, who now eagerly, but silently pressing
				forward, dropped on her knees beside the bed, and throwing her two arms over the
				emaciated body, remained with streaming eyes that rested piteously on the face of
				her mother. The second girl looked on, till by degrees her heavy countenance
				appeared to stiffen into horror, and she too drew near,  but with
				distended and tearless eyes, that seemed to speak more of fear than love. 
Mrs. Tremlett looked anxiously into the face of her charge. It was deadly pale, and
				wore an expression of solemnity so new and strange, that the good woman threw her
				arms around her in an agony of fond anxiety, exclaiming, "My Mary, my dear, dear
				child! come away! Mary, Mary, come away! you can do no good. This scene is not a fit
				one for you to witness."
"You mistake, nurse. It is fit for me. It is necessary for me. Do not disturb me,
				nurse Tremlett! do not!" Then after a short pause, during which her eyes were
				closed, and her hands crossed upon her breast, she again whispered, "Could hse not
				pray with me? Shall I not ask her to pray with me?"
"My sweet girl, she will not hear you, I think," said the old woman, while the tears
				streamed down her cheeks. "But you shall be satisfied my darling," and approaching
				the bed, and leaning over the girl who knelt beside it, Mrs. Tremlett in a low but
				distinct voice pronounced the words, "Shall we pary with you?"
She was evidently heard and understood, for the hands that for some minutes had lain
				motionless, were with an effort brought together, and clasped in the attitude of
				prayer. Mary who was eagerly watching her every movement, suddenly stepped forward,
				and gliding in between the eldest and the youngest girl, dropped on her knees beside
				them. Mrs. Tremlett following close behind her, knelt also, and then with tremlbing
				lips, and faltering voice, but slowly, distinctly, and most reverentially, Mary
				Brotherton uttered the last and most impressive of those sentences in our litany
				which is followed by the solemn petition for deliverance. it was with a throb of
				pleasure at her heart, and an exclamation of thanksgiving from her tongue, that she
				heard the dying woman answer "Amen!"
Almost at the very instant she did so, the latch was again lifted, and Mr. Thomas,
				one of the three medical practitioners of Ashleigh, entered. Miss Brotherton was not
				conscious of ever having seen him before; but he, like every one else in the
				neighbourhood, perfectly well knew the heiress by sight; and now, even no, in the
				awful chamber of death, bowed low before her.
It would not be easy to describe the feeling with which she turned away from this
				ill-timed demonstration of respect. Yet it was with no harshness; for the struggle
				so often going on within us between our better and our worser natures, was at this
				moment so decidedly in favour of all that was good in her young heart, that there
				was hardly place for any severer feeling than pity within it.
She had risen from her knees as he made his bow, and turning gravely towards him,
				said, "If any thing can be done sir, for this poor woman, let it not be delayed. I
				fear she is very ill."
 "Certainly, ma'am — certainly, Miss Brotherton, my best attention may be depended
				on. But will you first, my dear young lady, give me leave to observe that I would
				much rather see you in your carriage  than here. I really cannot answer
				for it. It is in point of fact impossible to say whether there may not be something
				deleterious, something noxious, in short, to your very precious health in the
				atmosphere of this room." 
"I thank you, sir. Be sure I will take quite sufficient care of myself; but it is not
				for me that your services are wanted — it is here!"
Sophy, the eldest girl seemed unconscious of what was going on, for she remained
				perfectly motionless on the spot where she had first knelt down; while the third
				sister, who had been sent on the poor mother's last errand for bread, and who had
				crept back unobserved into the room during the foregoing scene, occupied the space
				on her right hand, Mary Brotherton having knelt on her left, so that there was
				scarcely space for the approach of the smart apothecary
"Move, my dear girls!" said Mary, gently laying a hand on the shoulder of each.
They both rose; while Mr. Thomas, carefully storing the anecdote in aid of the
				gossiping part of his practice, looked and listened with astonishment to what seemed
				to him the very unnatural conduct of the rich young lady, and internally
				exclaimed, "A clear case of religious mania this, as I ever saw! She won't live
				long, probably. What a match!"
It required no very long examination of the poor patient, to discover that her last
				moment was rapidly approaching.
"Upon my word, Miss Brotherton, I really wish I could persuade you to come away,"
				persisted the medical gentleman as he once more turned towards her. The air is
				becoming more mephitic every instant. "This woman is at the last extremity."
"Nothing, then, can be done for her?" said Mary.
"No, ma'am — nothing in the world. Not the whole college, if they were present, could
				keep soul and body together for another hour, I would venture to say."
On this Miss Brotherton put a fee into his hand, and bent her head in token that his
				business there was ended, and that he might depart. But he did not immediately obey
				the hint, for pocketing the unwonted golden prize, he seemed anxious to remain a
				little longer where such blessings abounded, and returning to the bed, again took
				hold of the poor woman's hand, and then said in a voice of authority — "Let me have
				some water."
It was Mary only who seemed to understand his words, and she immediately obeyed them,
				placing in his hand the broken mug which she had set aside upon the floor. The
				apothecary put the water to the lips of the poor woman, and she again swallowed a
				little of it, after which they saw her lips move as if she was making an effort to
				speak to them.
Mrs. Tremlett lent over her, and then, with a stronger effort she articulated — "Let
				me see William!"
"Who is William?" said Mrs. Tremlett raising herself, "Is it one of the
				children?"
"It be father," said Betsy.

"Where is he to be found?" cried Miss Brotherton, eagerly. "Let him be sought for
				instantly — where is he likely to be?"
"At the gin-shop," replied the ungracious Grace.
"If you know where he is, go for him," said Mary, impressively, "and for God's sake
				let him not delay!"
The girl she addressed stared at her as upon something utterly incomprehensible: but
				she obeyed, and, in so short a time as to show that the gin-shop was at no great
				distance, returned with a man of an exterior as filthy as the rest of his race,
				wretchedly crippled in the legs, and a complexion that spoke both of ill health, and
				intemperance.
"What! — It is come to that, is it, already?" said the man looking wistfully at her
				from the bottom of the bed, but with a countenance whose lines seemed too fixed in
				the expression of hard indifference, to permit its exhibiting much feeling.
"She asked for you, father," said Sophy gently, then taking one of her mother's hands
				in hers she murmured,"Mother! — Dear mother! — open your eyes upon us, father is
				here, and all of us" while large tear-drops fell upon the livid face as she hung
				over it.
The dying eyes were once more opened, and consciousness, and recognition of them all,
				were visible as she suffered them to rest first on one, and then on another. The boy
				only, from his position,she could not see; but even then, there seemed intelligence
				between them, and she certainly knew he was lying beside her, for her head rested
				against his, and she raised her left hand till her fingers touched his cheek. The
				youngest child also when the mother's eyes opened, was too much behind her, but she
				seemed aware of her vicinity,and pronounced the words "Little one!"
				probably her usual appellation,so distinctly as to make the child start, and
				instantly climb upon the bed to kiss her. The last movement was an effort to return
				this kiss; and the next moment Mrs. Tremlett removed the child's clinging lips from
				a corse.
A very awful interval of perfect stillness followed. "Can I be of any further service
				to you, Miss Brotherton?" from the lips of Mr. Thomas,were the first words that
				broke it.
Poor Mary only shook her head, but Mrs. Tremlett replied, "No, thank you sir, nothing
				more;" and with repeated bows, and rather a reluctant step, he departed; turning,
				however, to give another glance at the heiress, as he passed out, for he was not
				without hopes that she might fall down in a fainting-fit. Nothing, however, of the
				kind happened, and he disappeared.
"You will go now, Mary dear" whispered Mrs. Tremlett, "and I will come here to-morrow
				to inquire about them for you."
"Yes, I will go now," replied the young lady,"I cannot comfort them." Then looking
				round upon the steadfast group, as if to discover which of them appeared in the
				fittest state of be spoken to, she fixed upon the little Betsy, and placing a couple
				of sovereigns in her hand, told her to take care of them and give them to her father
				presently, adding, "tell your sister Sophy to come up to my house. This," giving a
				card, "is the place where I live."

She then led the way to her carriage, Mrs. Tremlett followed, and the next moment
				they were driving rapidly from the abode of the most abject misery, to a residence
				which every quarter of the globe had contributed to render luxurious.
It was evident that the heiress felt no inclination to converse; indeed, for by far
				the greater portion of the way her face was concealed by the bandkerchief which she
				held to her eyes, and Mrs. Tremlett had too much real feeling to disturb her. After
				driving, however, through the handsome lodge-gates, and sweeping up to the noble
				entrance of her mansion, where already, at the sound of her approaching carriage,
				two or three servants were seen waiting like a guard of honour to receive her, it
				seemed that her meditations had not been wholly confined to the deathbed scene she
				had witnessed, and that the sordid cabin, with its misery-stamped inhabitants, had
				made a deep impression; for the first, and for many hours the only words she uttered
				after her return, spoken to the ear of Mrs. Tremlett as they walked arm in arm
				together through the hall, were these:
"I too am living by the profit of the factory house. Is the division just? — Oh, God!
				Is it holy?"
The old woman felt that she trembled violently, but knew not what words to utter that
				might compose her.
On arriving at the foot of the stairs, Mary withdrew her arm, and mounting them more
				rapidly than her companion could follow, reached her bedchamber alone, which she
				entered, closing and bolting the door after her.
</div></body></text></TEI>