<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
  CHAPTER XIII.
Sir Patrick, like most men who are gifted with more head than heart, disbelieved in all such
     generous emotions and exalted affections as he had not himself experienced. With a lively
     defiance of received opinions, his vivacity was unchecked by the fear of giving pain or of
     causing offence, being perfectly reckless on that score, provided only he could enliven the
     dull routine of ordinary society. Marion's mingled expression of shyness and animation, her
     light laughter and ardent feelings, were refreshing to a mind so hackneyed as his, and though
     he often checked her sensitive spirit in its full flow of affectionate confidence, by a retort
     courteous, or rather discourteous, he was nevertheless vain of the admiration she invariably
     excited, and read, in the eyes of others, the value he ought to place on her beauty and
     talents.
Agnes' whole mind was so frothed over with folly, and encrusted with selfishness, that unless
     the wheel of fortune touched upon her personal comforts, she was as impervious to all external
     impressions as a tortoise beneath the shell, and it was a useless waste of generous sentiments
     and kind emotions, whenever the heart of Marion was laid open to her. Agnes, who had long since
     adopted a company manner, and even a company voice, persuaded herself that Marion also had very
     cleverly "got up" a character on some imaginary model of excellence, which she acted over to
     the very life. It seemed to her a naked certainty that the refinement and delicacy natural to
     Marion's mind were in reality artificial; and though the radiance of her intellect, and the
     sensibility of her eye, were but in harmony with her actions, all testifying disinterested
     self-denial and invariable affection, still Agnes convinced herself that Marion lived "for
     effect."
If Marion ever acted a part at all, it was only in concealing from those who might have
     ridiculed her, the unfathomable depth of her feelings, since she might as well have asked for
     sympathy from an ice-berg as from Agnes. Knowing that every evidence of sensibility would be
     received with scepticism, she silently and hopefully waited till some scope might be afforded
     her for testifying that all which she might have wished to profess was nothing to what she
     would do or suffer for those she loved; and if ever Marion repined at any one circumstance in
     her lot, it was, that she might perhaps pass through life unknown to those she loved the best,
     because she dared not express, even by a few insignificant words, that affectionate attachment
     to Agnes and Sir Patrick, which she would have thought any sacrifice a pleasure, to evince in
     its full and heartfelt measure.
One privilege of friendship Marion enjoyed in unbounded measure with both her brother and
     sister. She became the usual depositary of their many grievances and disappointments. Marion
     had the art,—or rather the instinct, for to her all art was unknown,—of listening in
     perfection. If Agnes received a dress from her London milliner which did not fit, or if Sir
     Patrick did not obtain an invitation to some jovial party which he had expected to enliven,
     Marion became of immediate importance. The annoyance he felt on such occasions could scarcely
     be exceeded—the death of his nearest relation, or of all his relations together, would have
     been nothing to it; but Marion could always administer some gentle anodyne to the irritated
     sufferer, and displayed a wonderful ingenuity in turning up the best side of everything, for
     the advantage and comfort of others. Nothing melted Marion's heart so entirely as to see Sir
     Patrick for a moment depressed, as the very pride and haughtiness of his spirit rendered it, in
     her estimation, the more affecting when he seemed at all subdued, and on the evening of Lady
     Towercliffe's ball, she could not but fancy, before he set off with Agnes, that there was a
     forced vivacity in his spirits which she had never perceived before, and that the tone of his
     voice had a melancholy modulation when he bid her good night, accompanied by an unusual degree
     of kindness, always the very worst indication of Sir Patrick's spirits, the consciousness of
     which, and a thousand conjectures respecting its cause and extent, dismissed her to bed with an
     anxious mind and a prayer, even more fervent than usual, for his happiness.
In one house, Marion was understood and loved as she wished to be, and all her young
     enthusiasm found its best refuge and welcome in the aged heart of Sir Arthur, who felt
     refreshed and cheered by the companionship of thoughts and feelings as fresh and natural as the
     flowers in spring, while they reminded him of the time when his own had been as buoyant and
     untrodden, as hopeful and gay, as full of kind intentions and generous wishes.
The morning after Marion's arrival at St. John's Lodge, she arose by the peep of the day,
     intent on surprising her uncle with a visit during his early breakfast, and gayly anticipating
     the look of joyful surprise and perplexity with which she would be welcomed, while she
     rehearsed in her own happy mind, how best to increase Sir Arthur's astonishment. The day was
     indeed one of matchless beauty, the sunshine perfectly superb, and all around resplendent with
     light, gayety, and happiness, the white clouds skimming along like swans on the blue sky, the
     air perfumed with blossoms, every leaf spangled with dew, the painted butterflies, like winged
     flowers, hovering over the meadows, and the country people exhibiting looks full of mirth,
     hilarity, and good humor, as they hastened past to their tasks of daily toil, enjoying those
     common gifts of a bountiful Providence, the light breeze, the balmy sunshine, the music of
     birds, the perfume of flowers, and the joy of natural, unfevered spirits.

"And now, while bloom and breeze their charms unite,
And all is glowing with a rich delight,
God! who can tread upon the breathing ground,
Nor feel Thee present, where Thy smiles abound?"

The whole air seemed full of incense and poetry when the light-footed Marion, with a bounding
     and elastic step, set forth on her solitary walk towards Portobello, joyous as a bird in
     spring, pleased with the whole world, and admiring everything with a lightness of heart that
     cast its sunshine on all she saw. Marion delighted in a wild sense of liberty now, when she
     contrasted it with her long years of endurance at Mrs. Penfold's; and equipped in exactly such
     a pink gingham dress as Agnes had censured on Clara Granville, with the free air, like liquid
     sunshine, playing about her glowing cheek, and her light ringlets fluttering in the breeze, the
     excitement of her spirits became such that she could have run with pleasure across the daisied
     meadows, and, "glad as the wild bee on his glossy wing," longed to reach the craggy heights of
     Arthur Seat, or to linger beneath the old thorns already fragrant with blossoms, and steeped in
     dew.
Marion had picked some flowers as fresh and blooming as herself, while she hurried through
     the more inhabited parts of the sanctuary, but when passing beneath the palace windows, her
     steps were arrested for a moment by hearing the sounds of mirth and music. "Can it be!" thought
     she, in astonishment, "Lady Towercliffe's ball is yet at its zenith!"
Pitying the dancers much more than she envied them, Marion looked at the scene of glorious
     beauty around her, and was hurrying forward, humming a light barcarolle in concert with the
     thousand birds in full chorus on every side, when suddenly a loud shout caused her to start and
     turn around. Marion now perceived with astonishment that a window of Lady Towercliffe's
     apartment had been hastily opened, and Sir Patrick stood on the balcony waving his handkerchief
     impetuously for her to stop, and a moment afterwards she saw him eagerly running after her
     across the fields without his hat.
"Marion! you lucky girl! stop there!" exclaimed he with breathless animation. "We are all at
     breakfast, and require one lady more to make up a last quadrille, so come along; you are my
     prisoner! What makes you look so aghast? Who ever heard of a girl not liking her first
     ball?"
"Patrick, you are certainly mad!" said Marion, unable to help laughing at the almost
     delirious eagerness of his manner. "Pray consider! I am not in a ball dress! I am not invited!
     I shall look like a house-maid!——"
"Nonsense! I wish everybody looked half as well! All these reasons, and fifty more, go for
     nothing. I have set my heart upon it, and you shall not stand in your own light, like the man
     in the moon. No, Marion! you are to be published immediately under my auspices. You have often
     expressed a willingness to die for me any day, but that is not necessary just at present. All I
     ask is that you shall dance for me! Now, fling that bonnet off, shake your little forest of
     ringlets, and come along. You will pass muster very well without Cinderella's god-mother to
     make a metamorphosis."
Unable to resist the outburst of her brother's extravagant mirth, yet shrinking and abashed,
     almost ready to cry with vexation, Marion was unwillingly led, or almost dragged by her
     laughing persecutor into the drawing-room, where, with a look of naivete, and an aspect lovely in the first blush and freshness of girlhood, she gazed in
     mute astonishment and almost with dismay at this her first peep into the great world of
     fashion, wishing for her own part that she could have adopted invisibility, and enjoyed the
     scene as if she were in a private box at the theatre, for as yet her feelings were "trop pres de la peine pour etre un plaisir."
A bright sunshine streamed into the room, while the gas lamps still dimly glared over the
     breakfast table, at present surrounded by three or four hot, flushed, dusty-looking young
     ladies, with exaggerated colors, soiled dresses, torn gloves, withered bouquets, and
     exceedingly disordered ringlets, falling in dishevelled masses over their naked shoulders.
     These ladies, assuming forced spirits, and an appearance of over-done gaiety, kept up a
     rattling, flippant dialogue with about twice or three times the number of gentlemen, some in
     glittering uniforms, padded and stuffed to the very chin, and others in plain clothes, but all
     over-heated, over-excited, and over-fatigued, while, in spite of parched lips and blood-shot
     eyes, they were still endeavoring, with all their might, to be fascinating.
To Marion's unaccustomed eye the whole party seemed like a set of second rate actors from the
     theatre, not calculated, by their aspect, to elicit very rapturous applauses, and she privately
     wondered they were not ashamed to look each other in the face when in so ridiculous a plight.
     Even Agnes, her own beautiful sister, looked very unlike Agnes! and she felt astonished to find
     that it might actually be possible to spend an hour in her company and not be admiring her, but
     in Marion's very private opinion, her appearance was now as if some sign post painter had done
     a resemblance of her sister in the very coarsest coloring, and in the most overdone style of
     dress and expression.
Agnes had a great deal to say, and no diffidence to prevent her saying it all, therefore she
     was now plunged into the midst of a very animated dialogue with Captain De Crespigny, talking
     with a look of conscious beauty and conscious success, in the only style she could talk,
     nonsense, and making a lavish expenditure of smiles, attitudes, and exclamations, to give
     herself the appearance of vivacity. Her hair was in a most disastrous state, and her complexion
     everything but what it should be, while her dress had so completely fallen off at the
     shoulders, that she might appropriately have sung her favorite air, "One struggle more and I am
     free."
The expression of Agnes' countenance became at once perfectly natural, when she turned round,
     and for the first time observed, with a start of genuine astonishment, that Marion was beside
     her, looking at the moment like some being of a better world, or like some graceful water lily
     rearing its pure and beautiful head above the turbid pool.
Marion glanced at her sister in a state of smiling embarrassment, as if desirous to claim her
     protection amidst a scene so new and strange, and taking possession, with a confiding look, of
     Agnes' arm, joy seemed rushing out of her bright animated eyes, and dimpling in her cheeks,
     when, under her sister's protection, she gazed around with an expression of timid amusement and
     curiosity.
"Marion, what mad freak is this?" exclaimed Agnes, with a hot red blush of angry surprise;
     "Patrick, do take her home!"
"Not till she has been my vis a vis in this quadrille, and then we
     must all disperse," replied Sir Patrick, with a boyish mischievous laugh, while noticing a
     haughty flash pass swiftly over the brow of Agnes; "I had difficulty enough in getting Marion
     to come at all, so she shall not escape me now. De Crespigny, have you engaged a partner?"
"If I had I would have strangled her!" replied Captain De Crespigny, with an admiring glance
     at Marion, who stood with her downcast eyes shaded with their long deep fringes, while an arch
     young smile played round her mouth, and dimpled her cheek.
"Will you then take the very great trouble of dancing with Marion?"
"I shall be too happy," replied he, throwing a world of expression into his fine animated
     eyes. "I shall do so with all my heart!"
"Marion, your old friend and cousin, Louis De Crespigny. Did you ever see such an ugly
     fellow?"
"That is the very thing I pique myself upon! I am like the Skye terriers, admired chiefly for
     my surpassing ugliness," said Captain De Crespigny laughingly, observing the smile and the
     blush with which Marion listened. "You think me plain; but I wish you saw my uncle!"
"Wear a mask, De Crespigny, if you ever become as hideous! But in respect to looks, the most
     unendurable of all living beings is a handsome vulgar man, like the description I hear of that
     creature Howard, Sir Arthur's pen-and-ink man. I could forgive his vulgarity, if Marion did not
     tell me that he presumes to be handsome, which renders him utterly insufferable! I wish
     somebody would put him to death!"
"The fellow has never yet shown himself to me," replied Captain De Crespigny, carelessly.
     "Now, Miss Dunbar, allow me the honor of the next quadrille with you; and if there be a dozen
     more," added he, with his most ineffable smile, "so much the better! I consider any other
     gentleman who asks you to-night as my personal enemy!"
Marion stole a frightened glance at Agnes, while timidly accepting the offered arm of Captain
     De Crespigny; but her sister had turned away with a look of superb disdain, and was engaged in
     lively conversation with Lord Wigton, a tall stripling, who seemed as if he was never to be
     done growing, and who copied Captain De Crespigny in everything, from the pattern of his
     watch-chain to the choice of his partners.
Agnes felt invariably more astonished at any deficiency of attention, than at the most
     devoted assiduity, having accustomed herself to believe that she was always the first object of
     interest to every gentleman in the room, though diffidence or caution might cause them to
     exercise their self-denial for a time, by keeping aloof; and it was with more commiseration for
     Captain De Crespigny's privation in losing her, than for her own, that she accepted the
     school-boy Peer as a partner, while secretly amused and flattered by the ludicrous expression
     of awe and admiration with which he usually offered himself. Having talked, flirted, and
     laughed, through one quadrille and several reels, the clock struck eight. It was an unspeakable
     triumph to Lady Towercliffe, that her ball had thus been kept up the latest of any during the
     season; and now the whole prepared for retiring to their fevered pillows.
Captain De Crespigny, after uttering, as usual, in his most ingratiating manner, a million of
     absurd nothings, took a sentimental leave of Marion, saying, with his very best smile, and a
     sigh to correspond, "I shall always remember this evening with pleasure—always! Ten minutes of
     unmixed happiness are something in this world to be thankful for. Life has nothing more
     delightful."
These words were said in his usual gay, off-hand tone, while Captain De Crespigny felt
     perfectly charmed to think what an impression they must be making on the heart of his young and
     unsophisticated partner. He was at the same time astonished himself, to find on this occasion
     how much more his heart was on his lips than it had ever been before. Marion was the only girl
     Captain De Crespigny had yet seen whom he did not feel a wish to trifle with; for during the
     last half hour, he had been not only amused, but deeply interested, by discovering in her
     conversation a degree of matured reflection, of naivete, humor, and good
     sense, accompanied by a brightness of expression in her deeply-speaking eyes, much in contrast
     with what he had ever been accustomed to before. Nothing is so rare in manner as to be
     perfectly natural, without a soupcon of affectation; and to this charm
     was added another, quite as new and unexpected to Captain De Crespigny, though by no means so
     acceptable, as he became not only astonished, but piqued, at the gay, indifferent carelessness
     with which Marion heard, as words of course, not more belonging to her than if they had been
     addressed to any one else, his well-turned compliments and insinuated admiration.
Not to be met half-way was new and astonishing to Captain De Crespigny! It seemed perfectly
     unaccountable, little as he knew how long his character for a ruthless flirt had been placarded
     before the eyes of Marion, who no more credited the sincerity of his professions now, than if
     he had been an actor performing on the stage. She considered that it was his part for the
     evening to scatter civilities indiscriminately around him, while his real feelings were, she
     believed, privately consecrated to one, and to one only. Marion's own heart was in armor,
     protected by the belief of Captain De Crespigny being her affianced brother; and therefore she
     received his adieux with a quiet, demure look, succeeded by an arch
     smile, as the idea crossed her mind how completely she was in the secret of his attachment, and
     how little he seemed to guess that she was.
When Captain De Crespigny observed Marion's good-humored, careless manner in taking leave of
     him, he began to fancy it just possible she might still be quite indifferent to his attentions;
     but he rather indignantly resolved that this should not continue long. It would be a
     distinction, he knew, to follow in the train of a young beauty so admired as he saw that Marion
     must be; for a hundred tongues were already talking around him of her matchless loveliness,
     while he alone had yet enjoyed an opportunity of discovering that much as she was to be admired
     by those who saw her, she was still more to be loved by those who knew her; for she seemed to
     unite in herself all that he had ever praised in a thousand others before, though he carried no
     plummet in his mind fitted to measure the depth of hers. Captain De Crespigny had been
     accustomed, hitherto, always to feign more than he felt; but now, for the first time, he found
     it necessary to conceal, even from himself, the extent of his feelings; for it seemed as if the
     last few hours had rendered Marion perfectly known, and for ever dear to him. Slowly strolling
     homewards, therefore, he gave vent to his thoughts, by singing, in a voice like moonlight, soft
     and clear, the words of a favorite song:—

"And fare thee well, my only love
And fare thee well a while!
And I will come again, my love,
Though it were ten thousand mile."

End of volume first
</div></body></text></TEI>