<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="42">
  CHAPTER XLII.
At Florence, Clara Granville lingered and recovered, and lingered again, sleeping little,
     eating nothing, and patiently trying every remedy, though she herself was without hope of
     recovery, till at length, decorated in all the radiant coloring and bright beauty of
     consumption, she sank slowly but surely, evidently hastening to the grave, though still Mr.
     Granville, with the tenacity of affection, continued to hope, and still he told himself that
     she might, perhaps, yet be spared. Day after day he sat beside her couch, reading, conversing,
     and praying with her, while his brotherly attachment seemed to grow only the more engrossing
     and considerate the longer she needed his care; but it became evident to all around, that his
     cares and hopes on her account were drawing to a close, and that his sorrow must soon be
     without hope in a present world, though full of hope in a world to come.
Letters now reached Mr. Granville, announcing that his long-pending law-suit had been at
     length finally decided in his favor, giving him an income more than equal to his utmost
     desires; but letters far more deeply interesting to his feelings still were missing. Often and
     anxiously had he watched for a single line from Marion, yet so well had Sir Patrick arranged
     the measures which, as her guardian, he persuaded himself it might be allowable to take, in
     order to intercept her correspondence, that not a single letter ever escaped the vigilance of
     his emissaries; and Mr. Granville, though he still cherished, as his best earthly treasure, the
     belief of Marion's attachment, felt so painfully perplexed respecting her, and so grieved for
     Clara, that the almost unexpected change in his circumstances appeared scarcely worth a
     thought, while a dense curtain of sorrow seemed gathered around his spirits.
If the vital spark of his own existence had been about to expire, Richard could scarcely have
     felt more deeply than now, beside the dying bed of his young and lovely sister, who took his
     hand in her own one day, while a fixed expression of tenderness and grief appeared in her
     speaking eyes, and there was a melting softness in her voice, when she said:
"My only reluctance to die, is, dear Richard, because I must leave you! This is sorrow; but
     our sorrow shall hereafter be turned into joy. When patience has had her perfect work, you,
     like myself, have a sure and certain hope of a better world, and, unlike me, you have a hope
     also for this life, which contains the best blessing left to man upon earth. Yes, Richard, you
     will soon have a loved and trusted companion, suited in every respect to yourself; and with
     her, I trust, you may enjoy a long course of usefulness and of joy, after I am no more."
Mr. Granville kissed his sister's forehead with deep and solemn affection, while his cheek
     became pale and his lip quivered; but his heart was too full to reply, and Clara proceeded:
"We have saved ourselves much unnecessary anxiety by placing a firm and well-founded
     confidence in dear Marion. Let that remain unshaken, Richard, till you meet," said Clara,
     fixing her large, mournful eyes on him; and slowly closing them as she faintly added, "Tell
     Marion I died without a doubt of her constancy and truth. And now, there is but one wish
     remaining to me in life, Richard—only one——"
Clara hesitated, the hectic color deepened on her transparent cheek, her lip trembled, and
     she became silent, while Richard took her hand in his own, and listened with affectionate
     anxiety for what was to follow; but it came not. With a look of desolate grief Clara turned
     away her head and was silent, while Mr. Granville, using every term of affectionate endearment,
     entreated her not to let him suppose there was a wish of her heart unspoken, or a desire which
     he could grant unfulfilled. After a short struggle, during which he was alarmed by the
     greatness of her emotion, she seemed at length to have entirely conquered her feelings, and
     said in a perfectly calm, unimpassioned voice—
"A letter was conveyed to me last night—I know not how it came—from Sir Patrick. He has been
     some time in Florence; he sends every morning to inquire for me! I am told he even watches
     daily till the doctors come out, and asks how I am!"
"True, dear Clara, and I feel for him deeply."
"Richard!" added she, raising herself up with sudden energy, and clasping his arm, while her
     large, bright eyes became fixed on his, "I wish to see Sir Patrick once again! to have a last
     conversation with him on this side of the eternal world. There is a sacred power in the words
     of a dying friend, and I would summon the whole faculties of my being, to bid him a last and
     solemn farewell. He has always listened to me. If I have any influence, let me use it now.
     Think what a blessed consciousness I yet might carry to the grave, if our unhappy attachment
     were no longer a source of misery to both, but of real and eternal advantage. Let me make a
     final effort of life and of affection, to leave in his heart a thought of immortality. Such a
     hope might almost hold back my spirit from the gates of death! Dear Richard, I shall rise for
     half an hour to-morrow, and then let me see him!"
"It would destroy you, Clara! you are quite unfit for the effort; but give me a message. Say
     what you please; and, painful as it must be, I shall see Sir Patrick, personally. We can
     sympathise with each other now, as we never did before, and I shall deliver your very words.
     You are unfit now, Clara, for any agitation."
"Dear Richard! you never yet denied me anything! Do not now refuse my last—my very last
     request. Whatever be the faults of Sir Patrick, his attachment was disinterested and generous.
     I cannot die in peace without saying that I am grateful—without, at least, endeavoring to
     convince him, for his happiness now, as well as hereafter, how true it is, that 'he sins
     against this life who slights the next.'"
"It might be a work of usefulness and mercy," replied Mr. Granville, in a musing tone; "and
     if there be a pleasure in life you can yet enjoy, dear Clara, I am not the person who could
     withhold it."
"That I know. In this world which has so long been my home, Richard, I have never lived a
     moment without being the happier for your affection, and it will be so for ever. I am now
     counting the last grains of my sand-glass as they fall, and ready to go alone through the
     portals of the tomb. Every sorrow is about to be eternally forgotten, every blessing to be
     eternally enjoyed. Most of my feelings and affections are already transferred to another and a
     better world; while I ought, as a dying Christian, to be like an eagle soaring to the sky, and
     seeing nothing but the sun, yet, Richard, the hope of serving one whom I loved only too well
     still lingers round my heart, and will not be repulsed. Say then, Richard, that we may
     meet;—tell him that, standing on the very brink of eternity, I feel as if, even in another
     world, it would increase my felicity to know, if permitted to look back on earthly scenes, that
     I had not left him without hope or consolation."
"I do not believe, Clara, that the invisible world is very distant; but only that it is hid
     by the grossness of our mortal bodies; and I do believe, my dear sister, that we may both,
     perhaps, yet see the influence of your prayers and of your last words upon one whom I most
     sincerely pity," said Mr. Granville, observing the mild, full, melancholy eyes of his sister
     fixed upon him, while gradually, as he spoke, her countenance became irradiated with peace.
     "The ways of Providence are indeed wonderful! If Dunbar be willing to forget all that has ever
     been amiss between us both, I have forgotten it long ago. If he choose it, we shall become
     friends, till Marion makes us brothers."
"Oh that I could live to see that day, and then close my eyes in peace; but it must not be!
     In a few hours I shall have shed my last tear, endured my last sorrow, and conquered my last
     enemy. Who would not be willing, then, to change time for eternity, the sufferings of earth for
     the joys of heaven, misery for happiness, and a dying life for immortality!"
A lovelier morning never had smiled on the glad earth, than that on which Clara Granville
     received the visit of Sir Patrick alone. On a couch near the window, into which the sun poured
     a flood of light and warmth, propped up by cushions, Clara, with an unearthly brightness
     glittering in her eye, and burning on her cheek, looked more like a celestial spirit than a
     creature of earthly mould; but what passed between them, during the long interview which
     ensued, no one could tell. Clara's features, when it was about to close, betrayed no agitation,
     but continued almost motionless for some time, while the tone of her voice became slow and
     languid. Gradually her words appeared fainter; her voice grew nearly inaudible; the color which
     had tinged her cheek died away; and a death-like paleness succeeded. Not a groan was heaved,
     nor a feature disturbed; but scarcely had Sir Patrick time hastily to summon Mr. Granville, and
     to support her in his arms, before her countenance became rigid as marble, and her ethereal
     spirit had mysteriously fled from its mortal dwelling.

Loveliest of lovely things are they,
On earth, that soonest pass away;
The rose, that lives its little hour,
Is prized beyond the sculptured flower.
Ev'n love, long tried, and cherish'd long,
Becomes more tender and more strong,
At thought of that insatiate grave,
From which its yearnings cannot save.

Sir Patrick's grief and horror now became almost delirious, and he was tortured by a feeling
     of unutterable agony; yet still he seemed resolute to doubt the fatal truth, to hope against
     hope, to believe that by a miracle Clara might at length awaken from her seeming repose; but
     her hand grew cold within his own, and the glassy fixedness of her eye carried death to his
     heart. He felt and knew that all was over, yet he could not allow himself to credit the solemn
     event; till, at length, covering his face with his hands, he groaned aloud in all the anguish
     of a sorrow without hope or resignation.
Mr. Granville, forgetful, apparently, of his own grief, tried now to impart consolation from
     that rich fund of sublime peace and everlasting hope which belongs, at such an hour, to the
     Christian; for, though his own feelings were lacerated and torn with a sorrow that seemed as
     sudden as if he had never till now expected it, still there was a balm for his wounded spirit,
     which soothed the first anguish of his sufferings, and would at last, he knew, bring him daily
     more abundant consolation. No affliction seems to come so directly from the hand of God as the
     death of those who have been so truly loved; and in contemplating the wide gulf which now
     divided him from Clara, the manly spirit of Mr. Granville was overpowered with grief. This
     seemed a moment too awful for vehement sorrow. He had watched the last struggle of existence in
     one with whom every thought and emotion were hitherto shared, and now, while her beloved and
     well-known features remained the same, all intercourse and all sympathy between them had at
     once been closed; and, in the hours of solemn contemplation which followed, Richard felt more
     than ever a desire to learn what is seen and felt when the gloomy curtain of life is withdrawn,
     and the glories of eternity are first revealed; but, checking the speculations of a vain
     curiosity, he opened the pages of holy inspiration, there to find an inexhaustible fund of
     sublime and elevating comfort, convinced that, to have his affliction sanctified, was even
     better than to have it removed.
The sympathy established between Sir Patrick and Mr. Granville now brought them daily
     together, when the young Baronet learned, in such society, to venerate and admire that holy
     faith, which as yet he could neither feel nor comprehend; and every hour he became more
     conscious of its happy effects on the mind and heart of Richard Granville, who seemed always
     ready to forget every selfish thought, when the glory of God or the good of others claimed his
     most arduous and zealous devotion; and even his grief for Clara, deep and agonizing as it was,
     found a vent in the most implicit attention to all her wishes, and especially to her
     injunctions respecting the restoration of his friendly intercourse with Sir Patrick.

The darts of anguish fix not where the seat
Of suff'ring hath been thoroughly fortified
By acquiescence in the will supreme,
For time and for eternity.

</div></body></text></TEI>