<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="17">
  CHAPTER XVII.
From that memorable Sunday when Marion first renewed her friendship and intimacy with Clara,
     her fair young countenance brightened into its sunniest smiles, while day after day she carried
     her work to the little "cottage of contentment," where Clara generally received her in what she
     called her summer drawing-room, a small bowling-green in the garden, bright and shining as an
     emerald, beneath a grove of overhanging lilacs and laburnums. There Mr. Granville frequently
     brought out books, which he read aloud and discussed, developing the lofty aspirations of a
     mind fitted to be high among the highest in learning and intellect, while his thoughts were
     like a well-tuned instrument, from which every chord sounded to the praise of their Divine
     maker, and his conversation was, as Pascal said of the Holy Scriptures, even more addressed to
     the heart than to the head.
When reading aloud, Mr. Granville evinced so much interest, with so quick a consciousness of
     the author's meaning, and so true a sympathy in his sentiments, that it seemed as if he must
     himself have composed every line; and when he occasionally lent Marion any volume that she
     particularly liked, she found his favorite passages marked, and the margin enriched by so many
     interesting notes, that she followed with delight the course of his mind, while at the same
     time storing her own memory with high thoughts and refined sentiments.
There was a degree of soul and spirit in the countenance of Mr. Granville, which marked him
     as no ordinary man, and an indefinite charm in his grave and courteous manner, suited to his
     holy profession, and displaying the calmness and polish of one accustomed to good society. He
     had an energy of expression irresistibly influential, while illustrating with an eloquence
     peculiarly his own, all the highest and holiest principles which can occupy the human heart.
     His master mind conversed of Milton, Spenser, Cowper, Montgomery, and of all the pious authors
     dear to every lover of nature and of highly-wrought genius and devotion, while the most
     phlegmatic must have been roused, and the most passionate become subdued, by the indisputable
     dominion of a great mind, for his genius appeared to look upon the trifles of existence with
     the passing glance of an eagle in its lofty ascent.
Marion and Clara were often entertained by Mr. Granville when he related characteristic
     anecdotes of pious and literary men with whom he had associated, enlivened by original remarks,
     shewing strong powers of observation, and displaying the best side of human life; yet his wit
     and humor were evidently chastened and subdued by a thoughtful estimate of existence, and by a
     continual consciousness of his high vocation, while Marion scarcely knew whether to be most
     astonished at the versatility of his talents, or at the extent of his information. No subject
     seemed strange to him, no country unknown, no science unstudied, no book unread,—while with
     ready memory and practised judgment he spoke as he thought, betraying no reserve or
     affectation: and religion still, like a golden thread, was to be traced running through his
     whole conversation.
Marion's was a heart which required something in those she loved to reverence and look up to;
     but here she had found that in its fullest measure, and under the happiest auspices, among
     friends with whom she had never spent an hour without feeling the happier and the better for
     it. Now for the first time she discovered that there is an aristocracy of conversation, which
     avoids everything low or mean in its origin, while a new world of ideas opened upon her, in
     listening to sentiments of high honor, and to feelings of universal benevolence. The genius of
     Agnes for conversation lay only in the line of scandal, and she was in the habit of sweeping
     away characters like cobwebs, at a single stroke, by remarks full of flippancy, and often using
     her talents as a mimic, while with tricks almost amounting to buffoonery, she rendered the best
     and most estimable of her friends, though above the reach of censure, at all events ridiculous.
     Ill-nature was to her conversation what fuel is to the flame; and Agnes piqued herself on her
     penetration in discovering the motive of others for all they did, while invariably tracing it
     to something mean or contemptible; but with Richard and Clara an equal ingenuity was shewn in
     tracing it to good; and while in the one house every individual discussed was brought down to
     the same level of absurdity or selfishness, it was cheering and gratifying to a heart like
     Marion's, that at Mr. Granville's, the characters and feelings of every one living were
     respected and elevated.
At St. John's Lodge, when Marion heard Sir Patrick and Agnes discuss their acquaintances, she
     could not but wonder sometimes where all good or commendable people had hid themselves, as it
     seemed as if they must have fled from the face of man, or have closed their hearts in disgust
     from all association with the mean and paltry world of fashion and frivolity; but now at last
     she had discovered some whom malice itself could scarcely criticise; and in thus associating
     intimately with the "excellent of the earth," she felt an increasing ambition to resemble
     them.
None were more fitted than Clara and Richard to appreciate the single-hearted excellence of
     Marion's disposition, her utter disregardlessness of self, her anxious desire to please, her
     gay spirits, brilliant without effort, her heart generous without guile, and her thoughts fresh
     and unsophisticated as the gentle summer breeze from the mountains. No one could look at
     Marion, and not wish to be her friend.
There was a tone of frank and entire confidence in her manner, which instantly gained that of
     others in return—a softened sensibility in her expression—a deep fascination in her smile—and
     in her voice a tone of joyous hilarity, indicative of her sunny mind, though, like her
     countenance, it was capable of intense expression, and deepened sometimes, now, into a tone of
     reflection and feeling beyond her years, while before long it appeared evident, in Clara's
     opinion, that she had become all and everything in this world to Richard, and Richard to
     her—that her amiable, single-hearted naivete of disposition had at once
     carried all the outworks of Mr. Granville's affection, and that already she was established not
     only in his friendship, but in something more.
Unsuspicious of Mr. Granville's increasing preference, Marion smiled and talked in his
     society with unembarrassed vivacity, or in their graver moods replied to his remarks as she
     might have done to those of any aged clergyman. The perfect harmony of their tastes, and the
     sympathy of their feelings, produced that gradual communion of thought which is the essence of
     friendship, while heart answered to heart, as if each had a telegraph instantaneously to reveal
     all that passed within. The highest qualities of Mr. Granville's mind, as well as the deepest
     feelings of his nature, were brought into visible exercise, while he who had hitherto lived
     only for others, now felt that there was not a link in the chain of human sympathies and
     affections which had not become sacred and dear to himself. There was even something that might
     be considered romantic in his feelings—a poetry of the heart, which led him to believe that a
     refined and sanctified love, such as men read and write of, but seldom feel, might yet exist on
     the earth—such love as could survive the lapse of time, the withering influence of prosperity,
     the chilling blast of adversity, and the growing infirmities of age, till at length, nourished
     and perfected by every vicissitude of sunshine and storm, it should be transplanted in renewed
     holiness and beauty to another and a better world.
Marion's character was rapidly matured and developed by her intercourse with Mr. Granville,
     who raised in her ardent mind the most enthusiastic interest; and while with timid pleasure,
     but increasing confidence, she joined in the conversation, her voice dwelt on his ear long
     after she ceased to speak, her looks were imprinted on his memory in his most solitary hours,
     and to Marion a new degree of interest and of happiness had suddenly become known, when with a
     vivid blush, and a beaming smile of pleased emotion, day after day, she thought over all that
     had passed, though ignorant yet of the extent to which her heart and feelings were already
     engaged. How much of life's most interesting emotions now passed through her mind during a few
     weeks, the heart of Marion alone could testify; while the attachment of Mr. Granville was
     concealed from common observation, to be only the more ardently testified towards herself; and
     their happiness being the result of no precipitate impulse, they became attracted together by
     that love of excellence, which is the only permanent source of mutual attachment.
Marion's mind had always a propensity to admire, and whether in nature or in art, she found
     it more congenial to her feelings ever to seek for beauties rather than defects, therefore now
     she was delighted to associate with one who not only appreciated everything as she did, but
     pointed out unexpected excellencies in all the objects of animated nature, in all the books she
     read, and even in many of the companions with whom she associated. With Richard and Clara she
     first visited the abodes of poverty; and in attending to the sufferings and sorrows of others,
     she saw that Miss Granville found the best relief from a depression of spirits, under which
     Marion could not but see with surprise and regret, that her friend had recently suffered.
     Clara's piety was testified in deeds much more than in words, for good actions she evidently
     considered as the necessary embellishments of that holy faith which alone can render any mortal
     acceptable in the eyes of his Divine Maker, while salvation by the cross of Christ is the pivot
     on which all depends—the crowning stone to the arch, giving stability and grace to the whole
     fabric of Christian hope.
Miss Granville gave not only her time and money, but her feelings and sympathies to the poor;
     while it evidently cheered her very heart when she could do a kind action; and though ever
     ready, heartily and gratefully, to acknowledge the Divine goodness to herself, whether in joy
     or in sorrow, yet nothing appeared so keenly to stir up her gratitude as any opportunity
     allowed her of doing a benevolent or a friendly action, as she considered that the knowledge of
     religion, without active exertion, testifying our love to God by our love to our
     fellow-creatures, was worse than useless. "The most depraved of sinners," as Mr. Granville
     said, "could repeat the creed, but a Christian only can believe and follow it like Clara."

Graceful and useful in all she does,
Blessing and blest wher'er she goes.

Marion, on returning one day over the hills and through the fields, with Mr. Granville and
     Clara, from a tour of interesting visits to the abodes of chilling poverty and agonised
     wretchedness, such as she had never even imagined, could not but contrast the smiling aspect of
     nature in all the sunny joy and verdure of spring, with the mournful lot of man as she had so
     recently witnessed it.
"How strange," said she, "to take a bird's-eye view, as we do this evening, of that great
     city, all glittering in sunshine, and every window illuminated with a flood of light, as if
     nothing but festivity and joy were there, and yet to know what a world of anxiety, and fear,
     and pain, and sorrow, are all fermenting within its walls! Silent as the whole scene appears,
     yet, for every window we can look upon, there is probably some living being full of schemes,
     hopes, and fevered wishes, dissatisfied with his own lot, and envying that of another! What an
     awful world this is to be born into, when, amidst its many pleasures and its many beauties, we
     yet consider all its solemn responsibilities and fearful trials!"
"Yes," replied Mr. Granville, in that voice, the deep melody of which was like no other
     voice, "we are placed here in a great theatre; and while, as interested spectators, we admire
     the decorations, let us remember, in respect to the actors, that nothing is either ours or
     theirs, but each has his part to perform, for which he is responsible, and all shall then be
     swept away to take an abiding place, according as we are fitted for it, in that real and
     unchangeable scene for which here we are only rehearsing our parts. If actors on the stage were
     to become actually and permanently for life, the great characters they represent, provided only
     they supported the part well for a night, the stake would be nothing in proportion to what a
     Christian shall gain if grace be given him to fulfill his allotted part in this short and
     transitory life, which is but a final rehearsal for eternity."
"Very true," said Clara; "this world is a mere preparatory school, where, like wayward
     children, we become surprised and irritated at the slightest correction, being most unwilling
     to acknowledge that it is either required or deserved."
"Yet," added Mr. Granville, "nothing brings out the best qualities of man like suffering. It
     is a hard rub given to gold, which becomes only the brighter; and I often think how much
     interest and dignity is bestowed on every event of our short lives, by thinking that we are
     trained and disciplined as a part of a mighty plan which has been going systematically on from
     the beginning of time, and must be continued to the very end."
"As you observed yesterday," replied Clara, "we are woven into the web of human life which is
     passing on daily into eternity, carrying us along on its surface with irresistible speed. We
     have no choice allowed either in coming into the world, or in going out of it; but the
     existence thus given to us leads on to an eternity of joy or of insufferable misery, according
     to the state of preparation in which we are found at last. It often occurs to me, as a solemn
     reflection, that the two principles of good and evil are, as long as we live, to continue at
     war in our minds, but that, like fire and water, one of these will finally extinguish the
     other, and that, when death overtakes us, we shall then become either entirely holy or entirely
     reprobate."
"It is a solemn truth," said Mr. Granville, with his usual tranquil dignity of manner. "The
     tide of this world's history rolls on, while generation after generation, like the successive
     billows on a troubled ocean, rises and swells into momentary importance, till it be dashed in
     pieces and followed by another; but one great Omnipotent power directs the whole, and watches
     over each insignificant atom as it is hurried along. He, by whom the very hairs of our head are
     numbered, ordains for our good and for His glory, all events and circumstances, whether great
     or small; and if our wills are implicitly conformed to His, we shall see the trifles of this
     life through a blaze of religious light, which will display us their importance as a means of
     attaining good, but their insignificance if pursued as an end."
"Even now," observed Clara, "the very occupations and habits essential to a Christian life,
     in themselves confer a degree of happiness which the world cannot give, and does not know—a
     faint but pleasing emblem of what is promised in a better state."
"It appears to me," said Mr. Granville, "that those who live for mere amusement, are no wiser
     than if they embarked for a voyage round the world, in a little pleasure-boat, dancing lightly
     on the billows, with its white and flowing sails glittering in the sunbeams, rather than in a
     strong and sturdy vessel, cutting its dignified way with deep, steady and undeviating course,
     in gladness and in safety, through tempest or calm, whether the breeze be adverse or favorable.
     Life is one long struggle, where the Christian must learn to hate much that he naturally loves,
     and to love much that he naturally hates, continually steering his course against nature, to
     advance in grace."
"I have heard it said," observed Marion, "that Paris is the place, of all others, where men
     can most easily do without happiness, because if any one can entirely forget himself in mere
     pleasure, it is there."
"How often have I pitied those who squandered their years abroad on an aimless,
     amusement-seeking life," said Clara. "What a weight of ennui they must
     endure! What a sense of utter worthlessness they must feel! A fever of delirious pleasure is
     probably the best they occasionally enjoy! I have sometimes been astonished lately, when in
     confidential conversation with the gayest, and apparently the happiest of my companions, to
     find that they were actually laboring under the deepest depression of spirits."
"You need never be surprised by such discoveries, for I meet with them continually in my
     clerical visitations," replied Mr. Granville. "The bright sun above our heads was not created
     to look down on scenes of merely selfish enjoyment. It cannot be; and if a thermometer could
     visibly display the relative degree of cheerfulness enjoyed through life by the slave of
     amusement, who consults only the impulse of his own passions, or the servant of God who obeys
     the dictate of reason and revelation, how astonished most men would be at the measureless
     disparity of actual felicity. The one wrapped up in selfishness, yet anxious to escape amidst a
     wild uproar of amusement, from his own thoughts; the other retiring often, voluntarily, to the
     companionship of his reflections, while his heart expands to embrace the true interests of all
     mankind; the one rich in everything but real happiness; the other poor, perhaps, in respect to
     wealth, but yet possessing great riches."
"I am more and more convinced every day," said Clara, "that no living creature has a
     sufficient portion of happiness for himself, unless he shares that of others, while imparting
     his own; and that no kind of traffic brings so large a return to all parties, as that of giving
     and receiving the sympathy and good offices of Christian kindness. It is twice, or rather
     thrice blessed!"
"I often think," said Marion, "if we could step into the chamber of any person's mind, and
     look around us there, how astonishing it would be to survey even that of our most intimate
     friend! Many would appear large and spacious, bright, well furnished, and in good order; while
     others that make a tolerable appearance in society, because they need only show a few samples
     in the window, would turn out to be filled with rubbish, narrow, gloomy, and disordered."
"Some minds," replied Mr. Granville, "resemble a show-house laid out for display, where
     strangers are brought to envy, admire, and exclaim; but home-feelings are the real ornaments of
     life, which I covet for myself, and for those who are dearer to me than myself."
"It would be curious," observed Clara, smiling, "if every human being might choose the sort
     of happiness which, in a future life, he wishes to enjoy! There would be a strange diversity of
     inclination! I suppose a foxhunter, who now finds his best enjoyment in riding six hours a-day,
     would then bespeak a horse which was never, in a long course of ages, to tire, accompanied by a
     fox ready to be killed every three hours. A gourmand would ask for a perpetual dinner, and a
     perpetual appetite; and Captain De Crespigny would wish for a continual succession of young
     ladies, all living on his attentions, and dying of broken hearts when he disappointed
     them."
"Only ask yourself in respect to any earthly pleasure, if you would wish it to be continued
     for ever, and that will convince you more than anything, Clara, that this world is not our
     home," said Mr. Granville. "There is never a moment of our lives in which we could hear with
     any satisfaction that what we then enjoyed was to continue throughout eternity. No! there is a
     mighty vacuum in our souls, which can only be filled by that which 'eye hath not seen, nor ear
     heard,' and which it hath not entered into the heart of man yet to conceive."
There is a free-masonry,—a sort of electrical connection between those who suffer and those
     who sympathise. It was evident to Marion that, beneath the look of calm, deep, and chastened
     composure, which might be traced in the large lustrous eyes of Clara Granville, there was the
     heavy aspect of one who had suffered, as well as thought much. The high arched forehead, in
     which the meanderings of the smallest blue vein was visible, and the ethereal transparency of
     her alabaster cheek, gave an almost poetical, but very melancholy expression to her
     countenance, and there was a subdued tenderness in her voice and manner, most touching to the
     heart.
She seemed like a lily blighted in the storm, and often did Marion wonder what that sorrow
     could be, which shunned all notice, and seemed to bury itself beneath a multitude of thoughts
     and occupations for the good of others.
Once, and only once, Marion observed an alteration in the settled composure of Clara's
     manner, the occasion of which caused her considerable surprise. Hitherto, when she
     inadvertently mentioned Sir Patrick, the Granvilles insensibly changed the subject almost
     immediately, but without the slightest appearance of dislike or resentment, while Marion could
     not but silently blame her own forgetfulness of her brother's conduct to Mr. Granville, which
     she thought might well render his name unacceptable in their family circle. One day, however,
     her eyes were accidentally fixed on Clara, when she mentioned that Sir Patrick had escorted her
     to the chapel door on the previous Sunday, and seemed more than half inclined to enter, but had
     suddenly burst away in a most unaccountable paroxysm, and hurried out of sight.
A deep and sudden blush overspread the pale cheek of Miss Granville, who hastily looked up,
     and meeting Marion's eyes, the color rushed in torrents over her face, arms, and neck, and her
     long eye-lashes became heavy with tears, while her emotion growing evidently uncontrollable,
     she threw down her work, and glided out of the room.
"Clara dislikes him for his rapacious conduct to Mr. Granville. Why can I never learn to
     avoid Patrick's unlucky name," thought Marion. "It comes in a propos to
     everything or to nothing. I am unaccustomed to think before I speak, but this will make me
     remember to forget him in future. I could not have believed that Clara would feel that affair
     so very acutely."
Marion's thoughts now reverted with some anxiety to her brother and sister. They were either
     ignorant of her renewed intimacy with the Granvilles, or indifferent to it, but which might
     turn out to be the case, however important to her own happiness, she scarcely dared to
     investigate, and day after day passed on finding her almost domesticated with her
     newly-restored friend, and scarcely missed apparently by Agnes. Marion was truth itself, and
     would have abhorred any clandestine engagements, but after having mentioned the first few times
     that she was going to call on Clara, the intimation being received by her brother and sister in
     solemn silence, she thought it unnecessary to make a repetition of the announcement; yet, as
     her feelings became more deeply and engrossingly interested, her anxiety became the greater to
     know what Sir Patrick might say or think on the occasion; and to Marion's experience it became
     true as to that of the poet,
"Love's first step is on a rose; the second finds a thorn."
</div></body></text></TEI>