<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
  CHAPTER XIX.
"Well! I do declare! some people have the most marvellous good fortune!" exclaimed Sir
     Patrick next morning turning to Marion, with a newspaper before him. "Here is an account of
     Granville—Richard Granville—being engaged in a splendid adventure. I might live for ever, and
     not meet with such a thing. He has rescued Miss Howard, the heiress, from that mad cousin who
     haunts her with some love-and-murder threats, and who will positively some day assassinate her,
     like the Miss Raes and Miss Shuckburghs of former times. These very good people, like
     Granville, who profess to be quite above the world, are all very fond of money. Ten to one,
     Granville marries Miss Howard in a month."
"So the young lady is to be murdered first, and married immediately afterwards!" said Marion,
     laughing to see her brother's impetuosity. "The heroine of that story is, after all, only my
     old school companion, Caroline Smythe. She has been persecuted by this man, she tells me, ever
     since her childhood, but now he must be put in confinement for life; and—and—as for Mr.
     Granville,—Patrick,—with your leave, I have a very private and particular reason for believing
     he is—previously engaged."
A brilliant blush mounted to Marion's temples, while her brother might have almost heard her
     trembling; but a smile of conscious happiness played round her mouth, while her long eyelashes
     drooped over her burning cheeks when she spoke these words in an accent of pleased but
     tremulous emotion; and Sir Patrick, after gazing in her countenance for a moment with an
     expression of angry perplexity, suddenly started on his feet, crumpling up the newspaper in his
     hand, with a fiery exclamation of rage, saying,
"Speak again, Marion; tell me what this means. The most uncommon thing in this world is a
     direct answer; but your blushes are like no other person's, for they betray everything. Girls,
     from the very beginning of time, have always found out the very last man on earth they ought to
     like, and live in a state of romantic misery till they can marry him. But it shall never be! I
     hate and detest Granville! He has injured me! He has caused all my recent sufferings. He shall
     feel what I have felt. I have the power now, and the will to be revenged. In his sacred
     profession he dare not and cannot marry you without my consent—and never! no never, shall he
     have it. Marion, you are a mere child yet! you do not know your own value, and would let
     yourself go at a mere pepper-corn rent! Granville would become a perfect beggar if he loses our
     law-suit. You ought to be offered the first match in Scotland."
"So I am," replied Marion, in a low and gentle voice. "Mr. Granville scarcely has his equal
     in the world."
"Pshaw! nonsense! I have other views for you! Marion, you have not an idea of the sensation
     you make. My friends are all raving about you. I never understood till now why you cared so
     little about any of them. Let Agnes look to her laurels, for I am in more than one secret
     already that would astonish her. Granville must be allowed to follow up his adventure with the
     heiress. Never mention his name to me again. You may depend upon it, in a month he will be
     ready and willing to marry Miss Howard."
"Let your consent depend upon Richard's constancy, and then I shall be secure," answered
     Marion, with a playful smile. "He shall be at liberty to change his mind on a moment's notice;
     but, in the mean time, Patrick, I have a great idea that he will continue always the same; and
     be assured that I certainly shall."
"Pshaw! nonsense, Marion! You never could be satisfied with the stupid sort of happiness to
     be found in a hum-drum parsonage. Give me no more of your love-in-a-cottage ideas, when I know
     you have a chance of—of, no matter who! somebody worth a dozen Mr. Granvilles, and who could
     buy him up a hundred times over."
"One Mr. Granville is quite enough," replied Marion, smiling. "If he were like the Emperor of
     China, cousin-german to the stars, and uncle to the moon, I could not think more of him. Riches
     are only to be valued for the use people make of them, but he is 'more bent to raise the
     wretched than to rise.' Very little is essential, Patrick, 'when humble happiness endears each
     scene;' and nothing more is indispensable to me than to be so loved by one who is deserving of
     my love in return. How much rather I would live with a poor man who is liberal, than with a
     rich man who is avaricious; and Richard's wealth, though not great, is furnished with wings to
     fly away on a thousand embassies of mercy and liberality."
"I wish mine had wings to come, instead of to go; but say what you will, it bores me to hear
     of Granville, he is so absurdly different from everybody else."
"So much the worse for everybody else," observed Marion, with a good-humored smile. "Is that
     the blackest count in your indictment?"
"And bad enough, too! I'm told there's not a garret nor a dingy cellar-full of misery in the
     city, where Granville is not upon visiting terms. He is a perfect Humane Society in himself. I
     daresay he will receive a public dinner and a piece of plate from the beggars at last."
"Let me entreat, Marion," said Agnes, who had entered during the discussion, "that you will
     not be running about with those Granvilles, in search of typhus fever or small-pox. You really
     ought to be fumigated every time you return from these houses, where the people are all dying
     of dirt."
"When Lady Towercliffe recommended her husband's old castle in the country to me once, for
     the shooting, she finished the catalogue of its many perfections, by saying, 'and we have such
     very pleasant beggars!" observed Sir Patrick, laughing. "I should certainly have been tempted
     to bag a few brace of them! The Irish fellow whom you may remember besetting my door so long in
     Edinburgh, without extracting a sous, came up to me lately, in the
     coolest manner imaginable, and said, 'you must find another beggar, Sir Patrick, for the
     situation here is not worth keeping!' I gave the rascal half a sovereign for his humor, and
     never saw his face again."
"It is all very well, if beggars find us out, to give a trifle, and so get rid of their
     importunity," said Agnes, in her most benevolent accent, "but the idea of setting out on a
     crusade to find them out, is rather too amusing. I am immensely charitable, however, in
     referring cases of distress to my friends, but benevolence is the most expensive of all virtues
     to set up for."
"Better do too much than too little," replied Marion. "We must not suppose every man in want
     is either a knave or a fool, and no remembrance will last so long in our minds as the good we
     have done, or left undone, for we gain the highest happiness to ourselves by dispensing it to
     others. Yesterday, Mr. Granville relieved a poor man from actual starvation, nearly ninety
     years old."
"Was he an orphan?" asked Sir Patrick, in a rallying tone. "What could the old fellow be
     doing in the world so long! but if I might be allowed to give an opinion, which I never do, it
     is, that you should avoid those dens of infection and filth."
"There is no absurd romance in their benevolence, and Clara is never permitted by her brother
     to visit anywhere, till he has personally ascertained that there is no contagion of either the
     scarlet, yellow, or typhus fever in the house," continued Marion; "but we accompanied him last
     week to see a poor woman who was in a darkened room, with her face muffled up, and yet I could
     not but fancy the tone of her voice familiar to me. I was on the point of telling her so when
     the door opened, and who should come in but my uncle's clerk, Mr. Howard, who seemed so caught!
     One seldom can know who are charitable and kind in this world, for I never suspected him of
     being a good Samaritan. He said it must have been a mistake about my ever having heard the poor
     creature's voice before, as to his certain knowledge she has been bedridden these ten years;
     therefore, Clara and I gave her all we could spare and came away. There was only one seat in
     the room, and nothing else but the naked walls!"
"How very indecent!" said Sir Patrick, taking up the newspapers, "those pauvres honteuses have a sad life of it! You will positively draw tears from my
     eyes!"
"Nothing will do that but a mouthful of mustard," replied Marion, with a brilliant smile. "It
     would be more to the purpose if I drew a shilling from your purse! You have no idea, Patrick,
     how many starving people there are in the very houses that you see from these windows!"
"Well, really! I wish everybody had £5,000 a year," observed Agnes, yawning. "If we could
     build an addition to the world it would be a great convenience! There certainly are too many of
     us!"
"That is a most original and interesting remark of yours!" exclaimed Sir Patrick, laughing.
     "We have certainly more cats than can kill mice. I did hear that it was very seriously debated
     at the Speculative Society lately whether the creation of the world had been on the whole an
     advantage to Ireland or not! How the question was decided I forgot to ask!"
"No doubt the existence of every living being must be an advantage, if rightly used,"
     observed Marion, in a gentle, diffident voice, "but if not, then certainly it were better never
     to have been born."
"That is your last new importation of Granville-ism," said Agnes, satirically. "Well, I would
     much rather, Marion, that you took the typhus fever, than that you became a methodist!—Pray do
     not infect me with either the one or the other."
"There is always more contagion in what is evil than in what is good," replied Marion.
     "Fevers are infectious, but health is not. Most of the illness I have seen lately arises from
     bad food, or rather from no food at all."
"It occurs to me," said Sir Patrick, throwing down his newspaper, "that as all rivers are
     formed of drinkable water, it is most unlucky that the ground is not formed of eatable bread!
     What a world of trouble it would save about the corn laws!"
"But in such a case," replied Marion, laughing, "no man would work, and the stones on the
     road might have to break themselves!"
"If the weather, too, were permitted to be regulated by act of Parliament, how droll it would
     be to read a petition from the farmers of Mid-Lothian against the late excessive rains, or from
     the hackney coachmen against a long continuance of fine weather. How I should like to see the
     summer with which any one of my tenants would be satisfied!"
"Of course it is their business to complain, or you would increase their rents. If a farmer
     came to your factor in ecstacies with his crops, and wishing a renewal of his lease, what terms
     would satisfy you? We are all like buckets in a well—what raises one depresses another, ainsi va le monde."
</div></body></text></TEI>