<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">
  CHAPTER XXIV.
Captain De Crespigny remained in his sitting-room till a late hour the following night,
     looking over papers and preparing for his departure to Yorkshire, after which he seated himself
     before the dying embers of his fire to muse, for the twentieth time, on all that had passed
     between himself and Marion. More in love with her than he had ever believed it possible to be
     with any one, he recalled again and again to mind the thrilling tones of her voice, and the
     matchless loveliness of her countenance, till at length his attention being roused by the clock
     striking two, he looked at the candles burning dimly in their sockets, and prepared to wish
     himself good night.
When about to rise, his attention was suddenly arrested by a rustling noise behind. The
     shadow of a figure became visible on the opposite wall; it was distinctly outlined, and began
     slowly to move, when, springing to his feet with an exclamation of astonishment, Captain De
     Crespigny's eye fell on the tall figure of a woman enveloped in dark draperies, who stood like
     a phantom close by his side, without speech or motion. While his eyes were riveted in silent
     consternation on this mysterious apparition, gradually the cloak was thrown aside, the veil
     dropped, and a countenance became disclosed so white and rigid, so soul-stricken in sorrow, so
     utterly without life or motion, that it seemed as if nothing on earth could have looked so
     supernaturally wretched. No moisture flouted over her large dilated eyes, which were glassy and
     fixed, her parted lips were livid as death, a mortal paleness was on her forehead and cheek,
     and not a sound became audible, for the grave itself was not more silent. With her emaciated
     hands riveted together, she stood the very image of woe; while nothing human appeared in her
     face but its expression of mortal anguish.
Captain De Crespigny gazed at this mysterious apparition, unable to believe the evidence of
     his senses. A vital horror thrilled through his heart; his eyes closed as if he would willingly
     have closed his vision against a sight which blasted him; but at length, by a strong effort
     compelling himself to speak, he said, in a low, doubtful tone, "Mary Anstruther! Impossible! I
     was told long ago you were no more."
A few quivering, inaudible murmurs, were for some moments her only reply, as if unable yet to
     command herself, till at length, in a tone so low, hollow, and concentrated, that it seemed
     scarcely human, but resembled a dreary echo from the tomb, she said, fixing a ghastly look on
     Captain De Crespigny,
"No wonder you disown the wreck! I scarcely know myself in mind or body. Ages of misery have
     made me the creature I am! Not want, nor suffering, nor humiliation, though these are what you
     consigned me to, but the bitter agony of being despised and forgotten by yourself,—by you for
     whom I steeped my very soul in guilt! You start!—You would deny this; but when the Abbe
     Mordaunt, to gain possession of his niece's fortune, wished me to assist in getting her driven
     from the house, was it to serve him that I did so? Was it for his offered bribes that I lent my
     aid to that guilty work! Oh no! but her child stood in your way, and therefore I consented. You
     never knew what I had done for your sake; but was it not one of the many promises that you have
     broken, that sooner or later you would declare me—even me, the wretched Mary Anstruther, your
     wife. Madness and despair drove me on! I slandered her to Lord Doncaster—got her driven from
     his house—made my brother believe she had misrepresented me—that she had caused our disgrace
     and banishment—and you know the fearful end of all. I never, never thought of blood! Oh never!
     He was mad then! He has been mad ever since; and who can wonder! Her cry rings for ever in my
     ears, the sharpest on earth—a cry for life. It haunts me night and day! Go where I will, the
     shadow pursues me. A shapeless horror is on my mind! The fear of discovery follows me like a
     spectre! A whispering sound is in my ears, desolate and dreary thoughts, and fearful dreams,
     darkness, poverty, and solitude; my pillow is a pillow of fire; my brain is scorched,—wherever
     I turn, dead eyes are staring in their sockets at me. Oh! if rivers of tears could restore that
     murdered being, I might have peace!"
The wretched creature's words poured out like the rushing of a mighty torrent, while her very
     reason seemed stretched to it utmost verge. She leaned against a table, which quivered beneath
     her trembling form, while her dragged and ghastly features were turned towards Captain De
     Crespigny, and she fixed on him, with a look of dismal meaning, the blackest eyes that ever
     vied with night. Vainly he endeavored to withdraw his gaze from that wild and haggard
     countenance, or to shut his ears against the tempest of her words; but there was a compression
     at his heart, till his very breath seemed difficult to draw, while he listened to her almost
     frenzied ravings. At length, in a voice of deep and solemn import, he addressed her, while the
     color fled from his very lips with agitation, and a cold shudder crept through his frame:
"Tell me, Mary, I adjure you, what all this means! I have sometimes suspected that Henry De
     Lancey might be the natural son of my uncle; never till this moment did I fully imagine that
     the murdered woman was actually married. I must know all. Rather than remain in this suspense,
     I will ask Lord Doncaster himself. I am not a man who would inherit one acre unjustly, or sit
     tamely down under the suspicion that I might be swindling another out of his rights. Vague
     apprehensions have sometimes crossed my mind; but give me only a certainty one way or other. If
     beggary itself be the consequence, I shall act like a man of honor, and let the law take its
     course."
"Ask nothing! suspect nothing! The dark and dreadful story is buried in her grave, never to
     be heard of more. It rests upon the Abbe Mordaunt's conscience, and on him be the curse! Look
     here!" cried she wildly throwing off her cap, while her hair, which streamed like a long banner
     behind, was perfectly white and silvery. "This was the work of a single day, and my heart is no
     less changed. The world itself has altered! Oh! who can tell the unimaginable wretchedness that
     surrounds me! You believed that I was dead! Would that it had been so! I wish it, and well may
     you!" A strange smile gleamed upon her features for a moment, and vanished. "When shall I
     become like the dust I tread on? When shall I find beneath the green turf a chamber of
     darkness, of silence, and perhaps of peace! Often, often do I ask myself why I consent to live,
     when there are a thousand ways of escaping to my only refuge,—death! It is a horrid thought,
     but it will come. There is no future in my life! Houseless, friendless, penniless, and without
     hope,—a fiery anguish is at my heart, as if hell itself were there!"
"Mary Anstruther!" said Captain De Crespigny, in a hurried tone of great agitation, "I
     wronged you once. I acknowledge it with sorrow and remorse. We were young indeed then, and you
     had no cause, surely, to complain of my liberality. I offered you——"
"Yes! yes! yes!" replied she, with frantic vehemence, while her eyes, glazed, and without
     moisture, were darkened by the shadow of deep despair. "You offered me everything but what you
     had promised, and what alone I would accept. You took from me every blessing of life, and
     offered me money! I hated you for supposing me mean enough to accept it. I would rather die in
     the street, or perish on a dung-hill, than receive your alms. My name branded with infamy, not
     a roof to cover me, and not a friend in all the earth to pity me; my brother now a terror and a
     reproach to all who know him; crazed myself in mind and heart, aloof from all earthly sympathy,
     branded and alone—what remains for me? Yet I would rather die in an hospital than owe the very
     air I breathe to you."
"Why, then, do I see you here?" asked Captain De Crespigny, endeavoring to steady the
     tremulousness of his voice. "I would serve you yet, if possible. I cannot entirely forget
     former times!"
"Former times!" exclaimed the miserable being, with a heavy sob, while a rush of agony poured
     itself out in her voice, and clasping her hands over her burning eyes, tears, such as she had
     not shed for ages, fell like rain over her face. "Who talks of former times! You! who made my
     whole life, past, present, and future, one long agony of suffering! Do you remind me of former
     times! Oh! bring them back—those days which now seem like a dream, when I was young, innocent,
     and happy! Who so gay then as I—whose step so joyous—whose eye so bright—who so admired; and,"
     added she, her voice changing to a low, deep tone of anguish, "who so loved? It was the
     delirium of an hour, and what am I now? Of all the wretched outcasts on earth, the most
     wretched; while he who has made me so thinks it degradation to waste a thought upon one so
     lost."
There was a pause for some moments, and she added, in a deep, sepulchral voice,
"A wide gulph separates us now. I know and feel that. I do not even wish it otherwise. You
     are courted and admired in every house, while I wander like a solitary ghost upon the earth! A
     furnace of guilt and horror burns within me! No language is dark and dreadful enough to express
     what I endure. The fresh green turf, and the blue sky above, I dare not look upon; for they
     speak of days that are for ever past—of that short summer filled with hope and joy, which has
     been followed by this dreary, endless winter——"
Captain De Crespigny's eye quailed beneath the look of chilling despair fastened upon
     himself. The hurricane of her feelings had been exhausted, but there was an unearthly fixedness
     in the eye of Mary Anstruther. In her voice, too, a cold, calm, almost spectral solemnity of
     tone had succeeded to the wild expression of her manner. Her expression was that of a lull
     after a storm, the ground-swell that follows the hushing of a tempest; and she again stood as
     at first, pale as death, still and motionless as a corpse, while the long drapery of her cloak
     hung as a winding-sheet around her wasted limbs.
"If there be any thing on earth I can do for you, speak but the word, and it is done," said
     Captain De Crespigny, with undisguised emotion. "My purse, if you will yet accept it, is yours;
     but remember your very life is at stake in coming here. I have shut my eyes already too long! I
     cannot conceal from my own mind that the man who calls himself Howard, and lives with Sir
     Arthur Dunbar, must be your brother. He has hidden himself always from me, and I should
     scarcely even know him if we met, but this shall not last. Tell him he must go! Once,—and once
     only, I may for your sake connive at his escape from justice, but let Ernest cross my path
     again, and no earthly power shall induce me to neglect the sacred law that bids us deliver up
     the murderer to justice. You also at St. John's Lodge, would once have followed the example of
     your unhappy brother's crime. You escaped on that occasion, and I have tried to convince myself
     it could not be,—that you were already in another world,—but I will not, even for the sake of
     our early days, be made a participator in crime. Go, then, to some distant country together.
     The sword of the law is suspended over both your heads. Fly for your very lives. The means
     shall not be wanting,—and tell your guilty brother, as I tell you, that if he delays, cost what
     it may,—and I know the cost to me will be great indeed, justice shall have its course."
"Let me then drink my cup of sorrow to the dregs!" replied Mary, in a low deep whisper. "He
     will not go! No earthly power can rule him,—no terror in life intimidates him. For myself; I
     dread nothing now but a prolonged existence. The sooner it is ended by any hand but my own, the
     better. Yours is indeed the fittest. That will only complete the work which you began. Give us
     up then to justice. In remembrance of those days when among the green lanes of England you
     promised to love me,—me only till death,—deliver us up now to the rope and to the scaffold.
     Yes!" added she, with a look of fevered anguish, and a frightful hysterical laugh, "This is as
     it should be; cheated of innocence, blighted in affection, blistered in heart, trodden down
     with contempt, driven almost to madness, and delivered up to death. Such be the fate of all who
     ever trust in man."
"Leave me! leave me!" said Captain De Crespigny, visibly shuddering. "If you desire
     vengeance, the sight of you, Mary Anstruther, such as you are now, is more than I can bear.
     Leave me!"
"Vengeance!—No!—It was for a good purpose I came, and let me not forget it," said Mary, in a
     low, broken, bewildered voice, while a gleam like sun-light on the stormy wave seemed for a
     moment to restore the softness and beauty of youth to her countenance. "I would save you from
     death. My wretched brother long ago suspected that you were the author of my ruin. That secret
     he never could wring from me, and he never shall. Oh, no! I ask no revenge on you. I am
     grieved, even once to have reproached you; but it is done, and my tongue shall be silent in the
     grave before you hear it again. Ernest swore an oath,—a deep, deep oath, that if you had indeed
     deceived me, nothing should screen you from his vengeance. Already he was irritated, believing
     you wished to marry Miss Howard, and on that subject you know how long he has been crazed.
     Ernest never forgives, and never forgets. He lives but for revenge. He would make you drink a
     cup bitter as his own. On that fatal night to which I never dare to look back, the knife he
     used was yours,—yes! it was stolen for the very purpose, and you know its peculiar form. He
     intended, if detected, to accuse you as an accessary to the murder. His plans are skillfully
     laid, and he threatens thus to hurl you from the eminence on which you now stand in
     society——"
"Impossible! absurd! Nothing but derangement could make your brother imagine any mortal would
     believe a fabrication so atrocious and improbable!"
"It will at least excite interest, and his plans are but too well laid. My story might then
     become public; and little as the world thinks in general of such sorrows as mine, there are
     some who would pity me. Ernest has the cunning of madness; and he thinks if you and Henry De
     Lancey were removed, he must succeed to Lord Doncaster. If I live, his strange and deadly
     scheme of revenge shall be circumvented; yet beware of Ernest! Your life is not safe for an
     hour! Night and day,—alone or in company, at your table or in your bed, wherever you turn, and
     wherever you go, beware; for none but myself can tell what his love or his hatred are. I would
     prevent mischief for his sake, and—and even for yours."
A dark convulsion passed over the unhappy woman's countenance,—she gazed for several moments
     at Captain De Crespigny in silent, disastrous wretchedness, and with the livid smile of a
     broken heart, she disappeared.
Captain De Crespigny scarcely slept that night,—the moaning of the wind sounded dismal as the
     cry of departed spirits in his ears, and when at last his eye closed in feverish, restless
     slumber, he suddenly started up, thinking his name had been called out with a shriek of anguish
     in accents to which he had long been a stranger, and unable to tell whether it had been a dream
     or a reality, he watched for some time in agitated silence, and towards morning fell into a
     deep repose.
</div></body></text></TEI>