<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
  CHAPTER XXVII.
Every man should be considered accountable to Providence, not only for diffusing as much
     enjoyment around him as he possibly can, but also for being as happy himself as is consistent
     with the many gifts bestowed on him individually; and it is a duty to look back with
     self-reproach on any hour of existence, which, on account of our ill temper or discontent, has
     been less enjoyed by ourselves or by another, than it might have been; yet it is an obvious
     truth, that all men might be happier than they are, if mankind would but make the best of life
     for themselves and others. Never had this remark appeared so undeniable to Marion as now, in
     the case of Agnes, who alienated Sir Patrick more and more by her peevishness, though the
     arrows of her satire had more poison than point in them, and he was always ready enough to
     enter on a skirmish in the diamond-cut-diamond style of conversation, while it often blistered
     the very heart of their gentle sister, to hear the bitter taunting remarks and repartees which
     they levelled at each other.
One day, Agnes, in a magnificent fit of ill-humor, had seated herself at that universal
     refuge for idleness and discontent, an open window, complaining that the dulness of Edinburgh
     was quite maddening; while it became evident that the needle of her temper pointed in the most
     stormy direction. It was a favorite doctrine with Agnes, that ennui is
     peculiar to intellectual beings, and that those who never suffered from it were like cows or
     sheep, scarcely to be considered rational. On the present occasion, therefore, she was
     relieving the intolerable tedium which oppressed her, by delivering her opinion to Sir Patrick,
     in no measured terms, on the unutterable cruelty of his leaving her stranded in Edinburgh,
     while she understood he was going soon to amuse himself abroad.
She seemed inflated with ill-humor, like a spider, bursting with its own poison, and her
     countenance had assumed not the most amiable expression in the world, while Sir Patrick
     snatched up a newspaper, which he began intently reading upside down. Having successfully and
     distinctly proved that she was a martyr to the injuries which "patient merit of th' unworthy
     takes," and her brother being apparently on the point of falling asleep before her face, Agnes
     suddenly rose from her seat, with an exclamation of annoyance and astonishment, saying,
"I do believe here is that old formality, Sir Arthur, going to call! Getting slowly and with
     difficulty out of a ragged, ruinous-looking hackney coach, as frail as himself! I had no idea
     he was become so aged and infirm! What a bore! I do wish we might enjoy the privilege, after
     being grown up, of choosing our own relations. J'ai pitie de
     moi-meme!"
"What can bring the old fellow here?" exclaimed Sir Patrick, crumpling up his newspaper, and
     approaching the window with an angry whistle. "He looks, in those glittering spectacles, like a
     post-chaise, with the lamps lighted. I must be grown quite respectable when the Admiral honors
     me with a visit. Has anybody paid my debts?"
"I declare," said Agnes, "Sir Arthur gropes his way along as if he came from the Blind
     Asylum, and his dear, puckered old face looks as dry and cracked as an old picture!"
"Suppose I stay in the room incog., to hear all the civil and agreeable truths our
     worthy uncle will say of me," said Sir Patrick, laughingly throwing himself into a large
     arm-chair, in a distant corner of the room. "I should certainty realize the old proverb about
     listeners hearing no good of themselves. Sir Arthur is so blind he will never see me, and it is
     certainly no bad joke for a rainy day."
"I think it would be a very bad joke, indeed, Patrick," said Marion, coloring. "But I am sure
     you would not play upon our uncle's infirmities, and I shall certainly ask you some question
     the moment he enters, to betray your ambuscade."
"Marion! for a young lady who professes timidity, you exhibit a tolerable share of decision!"
     replied Sir Patrick, looking with surprise at the glowing countenance of his sister, whose
     voice quivered with agitation. "However, since you are determined to make a scene between Sir
     Arthur and me, I shall be off, not feeling in the humor for one of his lectures to-day! He will
     be a whirlpool of rage at this raffle I am making of the family plate and pictures. Perhaps he
     means to take a ticket! Do not mention, for your lives, girls, that I am in the next room,
     unless he be come on a matter of life and death! Exit Sir Patrick in haste!"
When Sir Arthur entered the room, there was a look of unwonted care in his fine countenance,
     and less firmness in his step than usual. He silently but cordially shook hands with Agnes,
     while a look of almost compassionate kindness beamed in his countenance, and Marion, with
     girlish delight sparkling in her eyes, and dimpling in her cheeks, led him to a chair, on which
     he sat down for some moments without speaking, apparently fatigued and agitated, while she
     filled up the pause which ensued, by taking his hat and stick, placing her arm within his when
     she seated herself by his side, and showing a thousand demonstrations of her heartfelt
     affection and respect.
"Uncle Arthur!" said Agnes, observing him at length glancing round the room. "You have never
     been in this house before?"
"No! nor I never expected to enter it!" replied he, in a tone of profound sadness.
     "Never!—urgent duty brings me now! This then is the family residence to which the Dunbars of
     Dornington are at last degraded! Is your brother at home?"
"No!" replied Agnes, with the most perfect intrepidity of countenance. "You must have met him
     in the Park."
"I did not perceive him, and it was as well," answered Sir Arthur with melancholy sternness.
     "The seldomer we meet the better. It is a disgrace to be in the room with Sir Patrick."
"Uncle Arthur! you are growing angry and personal," interrupted Marion, in a beseeching tone,
     while she shook his hand caressingly in her own. "That is the harshest thing you ever said of
     our brother!"
"May he never deserve more, or he shall have it," continued the Admiral, with angry
     vehemence, while his neckcloth seemed growing too tight for him. "Sir Patrick is, without
     meaning to flatter him, about the greatest scamp I know. His last step in the regiment was
     purchased, I am told, over the head of a young officer from whom he gained the money at play!
     but, Marion, my dear girl, I am not come to quarrel with you, the dearest niece in the
     world—nor with Agnes, though I could wish that she came sometimes to see me."
Sir Arthur held out his hand to both his nieces, and added, in a tone of hurried agitation,
     "If you had witnessed, Agnes, the many long years during which your father and I associated
     together on terms of more than brotherly confidence, you could not wonder that now, living in
     an empty world, the grave of all who started in life beside me, amidst old remembrances,
     vanished pleasures, faded health, and lost affections, I cling to whatever reminds me of him,
     and that nothing can make me cease to love you all—all without exception—even that disgraceful
     scoundrel your brother. I would close these eyes in death, only once to see him, the man his
     father's son should be; but I might live for ever if I wait till then!"
Marion was grieved and alarmed to perceive her uncle's increasing agitation, while he hastily
     turned away to hide it, but the breeze which had ruffled his mind soon passed away, and though
     his hand still shook with emotion, he added in a calmer tone of deep-rooted anxiety,
"I have been told this morning, that Sir Patrick intends to cut his stick, and take flight
     immediately to the continent, therefore I am here to ascertain, my dear girls, what is to
     become of you?"
"I scarcely know indeed!" replied Marion, in a tone of irresistible depression. "Patrick
     seems to have no settled plan. He did talk of hiring a lodging for us, and engaging some old
     lady for a chaperon."
"And for such a scheme, my dear Marion, where in all the wide world is he to get money—or
     even credit? Not in the name of Sir Patrick Dunbar!—a name that, in my brother's time, stood
     proudly forward as a warrant for everything honorable, soldier-like and generous!—a name, till
     now, never sullied by dishonor."
Sir Arthur's voice faltered, a hectic color burned on his cheek, he remained silent for
     several minutes, and then continued, after a strong effort to recover himself,
"It is no matter! Patrick adds a nail to my coffin every day, but I am the last wreck of an
     old generation, and have already outstaid the period intended for man! My head is whitened by
     the frost of more than eighty winters—my heart seared with the wear and tear of life—my very
     existence a perpetual miracle! It would people a city if all could be revived whom I have
     intimately known in those days when the dearest ties of life were clustered around me, but now
     I am a scathed and solitary ruin. How truly has it been said, that the remembrance of youth is
     a sigh, yet all has been ordered as it should be, and that wind is ever the best which will
     carry us most safely to the end of our voyage."
Sir Arthur paused with a look of solemn and inexpressible emotion, and Marion pressed her
     uncle's hand affectionately, hot tears coursed each other down her face, and she gazed
     earnestly at his countenance, while, looking at her with his usual expression of benignity and
     kindness, he continued, "You are the chief, or rather the only objects of my care, for all my
     wishes and hopes on my own account might now be contained in a nut-shell. I am a stranger in
     this altered world, soon—very soon to depart. There is one heart in my brother's family,
     Marion, that feels as his child ought to feel, and one eye that will be dimmed with sorrow when
     I am no more. For your sake, and yours only, need I wish to live! Well may the young weep for
     sorrow—they have long to endure it, but for me, the end of all earthly things is at hand. Many
     a warning bell has reached my ear already, and I would wish only to see you launched under safe
     protection in the stormy ocean of life. With no guardian but a brother worse than nobody, and
     an old, infirm uncle tottering into the grave, my dear girls, what are you to do?"
Marion glanced at Agnes, who tried to preserve her usual air of consequential indifference,
     and pulled her bouquet to pieces, with an expression of silent and majestic
     impatience, but she neither looked up nor answered.
"While I live, you can always confer a pleasure by taking shelter with me," continued Sir
     Arthur, in the warmest tone of kindness; "and all that an old man can do to make you happy
     shall be done, though that, I fear, is little or nothing."
Agnes, evidently not much delighted at this unexpected proposal of being located at what she
     always called "the Admiral's humdrummery," now assumed a pre-engaged look, while practising a
     particularly graceful attitude in the opposite mirror, and drawing out her long glossy ringlets
     with a cold, artificial smile, she answered, "Thank you, Sir Arthur! I am sure we are most
     excessively obliged. Probably now that Marion is so well disposed of, my brother may take me
     with him to Paris!"
"Reckoning without your host, Agnes!" whispered Sir Patrick, entering with a look of assumed
     bravado, but of evident embarrassment. "Wishes cost nothing; but how could such an idea ever
     enter your ingenious head? Pray strike a light and look for your senses! Ah! Sir Arthur! A
     hundred thousand welcomes. I am happy not to have missed your kind visit!"
"That would have been a mutual misfortune!" replied the Admiral, drily, and drawing himself
     up to his full height, while Sir Patrick bowed and smiled with an air of sarcastic gratitude.
     "Certainly, for some years past I am not owing you many visits."
"Why, no! I hate to see people running themselves into debt; therefore believing you might
     find it inconvenient to return my cards, I have not been very troublesome in the way of
     calling; but," continued Sir Patrick, stealing a look of laughing condolence at Agnes, "my
     sisters are exceedingly delighted by your very considerate offer of a home during my absence.
     The plan will suit admirably! They both want sea-bathing, and—society, Agnes?"
"In respect to society I can promise nothing. I would raise a regiment of beaux if possible,
     but my house is a mere Greenwich Hospital for years past, visited only by a few veterans as
     aged and broken as myself."
"I wish they had all gone down in the Royal George," muttered Agnes, whose face now looked
     like a thunder cloud. "A set of resuscitated mummies, with scarcely a complete set of limbs and
     features amongst them. I would rather live in the moon, where there is at least one entire man
     to be seen."
"We instituted a club lately," continued Sir Arthur, "in which no member was eligible who had
     not been deprived of one limb at least in the service of his country. With many of my friends
     all is lost but honor! That is what a man should die rather than lose! It was long a hereditary
     heir-loom in our family, Patrick! entailed upon you, Sir! handed down untarnished from father
     to son, generation after generation! And where is it now? Lost in the kennel, the race-course,
     the stable, the gambling house, and every receptacle of infamy and shame, while I live to see
     the Dunbars of Dornington utterly ruined, as well as utterly disgraced!"
"Not as long as you live!" exclaimed Sir Patrick, advancing with sudden emotion, and grasping
     his uncle's hand. "Your name, Sir Arthur, will shed a lustre over our house after mine has been
     blotted out for ever from the memory of man!"
"Why should it be so?" asked Sir Arthur, speaking in a tone of deep vehemence and solemnity,
     while his noble and serious countenance assumed an expression of that affection which nothing
     could extinguish. "Patrick! it is long lane that has no turning! Be like your father in mind,
     as you are in person, and let me leave you my best blessing at last!"
"Too late! too late!" replied Sir Patrick, walking hurriedly up and down the room, and then
     suddenly resuming his usual tone of reckless gayety. "No! no! as Joseph Surface remarked, 'too
     good a character is inconvenient!' You are unadultered gold, Sir Arthur, but I must only set up
     for being a genuine Bristol farthing."
"Yet, Patrick! even if honor were like truth, at the bottom of a well, it is worth diving
     for; and the best throw on the dice is to throw them away."
"Your whole nature and mine are different, Sir Arthur! A wasp may work his heart out, but he
     never can make honey," replied the young Baronet, hurriedly. "I have neither wishes, plans, nor
     hopes for myself! Already I am older in heart than you, and neither know nor care how short a
     time I have to exist! N'importe! It would not certainly be convenient
     for me at present to fly off like a kite, with both my sisters at my tail, therefore we are all
     most grateful for your kind invitation to them, and shall accept the honor you offer with
     pleasure."
"Be it so then," replied Sir Arthur, in a calm, dignified, but mournful voice. "If my nieces
     will be content with little, they may be as happy as if we had much. I am most anxious to
     invent anything which might add to their enjoyment, and Lady Towercliffe tells me, Agnes, that
     your whole heart is bent on spending a month at Harrowgate! If that would really be any
     pleasure or advantage to you, tell me so, and I shall endeavor if possible to go there myself,
     though now, in my old age, very like Punch, who could act only in his own box."
"Oh! not for worlds would we ask you to go, dear uncle," exclaimed Marion, venturing in her
     eagerness to speak before Agnes, and shocked at the idea of a journey, the fatigue and expense
     of which she knew the Admiral was so little able to incur. "We shall be more than happy at
     home! do not think of such a thing!"
"But if I may be permitted to have an opinion, being the person consulted, Marion, let me say
     that nothing on earth was ever more enchanting than this delicious proposal. You have made me
     the happiest person alive, Sir Arthur!" exclaimed Agnes, for once condescending to look
     perfectly pleased. "I must endeavor not to go mad with joy! You are our very best friend! My
     dear uncle, all I can say is, YOU ARE A GENTLEMAN!"
"Well, Agnes! That being the case," replied Sir Arthur, smiling, "how soon can you be ready
     to start?"
"To-night!—this minute!—wait till I put on my bonnet!" exclaimed Agnes, in accents of the
     liveliest glee. "I am quite impatient to set about forgetting Edinburgh!"
"Well done, Lady Towercliffe! Harrowgate was a capital hit!" cried Sir Patrick, laughing
     satirically. "Before taking a voyage to India, there is no place like it for young ladies! Why,
     Agnes, it is a perfect emporium of beaux! You will live there at the
     rate of twenty new victims a-day! A down-pour of marriages takes place at the end of every
     season. Several jewellers have made large fortunes at Harrowgate, merely by providing wedding
     rings! and a confectioner is kept at each hotel, with nothing else to do but to make marriage
     cakes! Sir Arthur must take a dozen lessons in match-making, from some of the manœuvring mammas
     and aunts."
"An unmanœuvring uncle is all we shall require," answered Agnes, looking daggers at Sir
     Patrick, in all the dignity of having been extremely ill-treated. "In my humble opinion——"
"Humble, Agnes!" interrupted Sir Patrick. "Did I hear aright? Where did you ever learn the
     meaning of that word?"
"As for manœuvring or match-making, I leave all that sort of thing to such persons as Lady
     Towercliffe," observed Sir Arthur. "She and other old ladies have such an intense curiosity
     about weddings, that I do think, even when laid in their graves, they would like to be told who
     are going to be married. In such affairs I would be out of my element, like a bear in a boat,
     not knowing how to proceed,—but at my age——"
"Your age, uncle Arthur! You are no age at all," interrupted Agnes, in high good humor. "You
     are not a day older since we were first acquainted! As Harrowgate is the greatest marriage
     manufactory in Britain, I should not wonder if you were to pick up a wife there yourself!
     Indeed, no single man ever escapes, and I shall make it my business to get you off!"
"By all means!" replied the Admiral, entering good-humoredly into the jest. "I have no doubt
     some young lady will fall desperately and hopelessly in love with me! Are those new spectacles
     becomingly put on? My eyes are so fine, they must be kept under glass! My hair has had rather
     too much of the bleaching liquid lately, but do you recommend a wig, Agnes, or the vegetable
     dye?"
"I would not alter a hair of your head, uncle Arthur," said Marion, smiling. "And I am sure
     you will have more admirers at Harrowgate than any of us. I should like to know," added she,
     after the Admiral had departed, "out of the prodigious incomes enjoyed by thousands of persons
     in Britain, how much is spent during the year in really generous actions,—in actions of such
     disinterested liberality as our dear kind uncle's, when putting himself to all this expense and
     inconvenience for our sakes,—for ours, who never can make him the smallest return."
"To say the truth," replied Agnes, laughing, "I merely go to Harrowgate for Sir Arthur's
     good. It will renew his youth to be forced into balls, beguiled into pic-nics, and enlisted
     into dinner parties. A diet of ice and lemonade is excellent for old people."
"You are lucky girls!" exclaimed Sir Patrick. "A month at Harrowgate! why! you might be
     married five times over in that time! It is not the most impossible thing in the world that I
     may come there myself, to meet De Crespigny! The matrimonial horizon looked rather dark and
     unpromising in this quarter, Agnes; but your extraordinary merit is quite unknown as yet in the
     English hemisphere. The world shall see you, and you shall see the world now, under Sir
     Arthur's auspices. Good worthy old soul! his very walking-stick is respectable!"
"Then I wish you were like it," said Agnes, in her most stinging accent. "Sir Arthur's
     respectability might be divided among a dozen of people whom I know, and each would get a share
     larger than he had before."
"You will perfectly canonize him, now that he can be made useful! Agnes! you jumped at Sir
     Arthur's offer as an ex-minister would jump at a seat in the cabinet! You showered down thanks
     on the Admiral's devoted head, like bon-bons at the carnival!"
"No wonder!" said Marion. "Think of dear uncle Arthur leaving his old friends, his old
     habits, and his old home for us, when he has said and thought so often, that his next journey
     would be that long and last one, which we must all travel, never to return."
"It is vastly kind, as you say, Marion!" added Agnes, flippantly. "Leaving that old fireside,
     where he has so long been spinning interminable yarns, spoiling old servants, reading old
     magazines, dozing over antiquated newspapers, letting himself be cheated by beggars, and
     getting convivial over very weak negus."
"Agnes, how long is it since you lost your senses!" asked Marion, indignantly. "Nothing short
     of that could account for your holding up our venerable uncle to ridicule, even with no one to
     hear you but ourselves, who know his inestimable worth and kindness."
"Well, girls, the best reward you can give him, is to look delightfully with all your might,
     and to waltz and quadrille yourselves into husbands immediately!" said Sir Patrick, in a tone
     of lively exultation. "Now, tighten the drums of your ears and listen, for I am about to give
     you a popular course of lectures on the important subject of match-making. Marion, you are a
     flower that has bloomed in the shade, and must now be displayed in the sunshine; therefore you
     ought to know that fortune is like a game at blind man's buff, where the timid and retiring are
     forgotten, while the bold and forward alone put themselves in the way of receiving her favors.
     Agnes has frittered away her time only too long already on the mere minnows of society,
     danglers and detrimentals of the younger species; but I must tell you plainly,——"
"Never tell me anything plainly," interrupted Agnes, laughing. "But you are altogether
     mistaken, for I have often wished that people would get rid of their younger sons now, as Tom
     Thumb's father wisely did, losing them in a forest and leaving them to starve."
"Then take my advice, and never dance with any. I warn you against fashionable huzzars, all
     spurs and gold lace, with more bullion on their jackets than in their purses; attaches
     who are not to be attached, ready to fall into flirtations but not into love; Honorable Edwards
     and Honorable Fredricks, who never are, but always to be rich, investing their whole fortunes
     in white kid gloves, and offering, perhaps, to share their starvation with you; and," added Sir
     Patrick, with a glance at Marion, who blushed deeply, but said nothing, "remember, above all, I
     forbid reverend divines, young or old, especially those who have no living and no prospect of a
     mitre. You should each knock down a coronet for yourselves, and avoid the most detestable of
     all poverty,—genteel poverty; at the same time, do not gamble too deeply in life. Ascertain
     well, 'sur quel pied a danser.' In a sickly season, even a fifth son is
     not to be despised. Take a smaller certainty rather than a greater possibility, and lose no
     time, or the bridge may break down before you run across it."
"Your advice to me is perfectly superfluous," replied Agnes, looking very superb, and giving
     a contemptuous toss of her head. "I detest economy, and abjure all penny weddings, having no
     genius for turning or dying silk dresses,—putting servants on scanty allowance,—driving about
     in hackney coaches,—locking up jellies,—counting out eggs,—or measuring small beer! I am sworn
     at Highgate always to prefer the best partners, and generally have them."
"How would you like," said Marion, "to have been the young lady long ago in London, who could
     not dance with the King of Prussia, because she was previously engaged to the Emperor of
     Russia?"
"That would suit me exactly. I should like to carry my head as high as the Pope's tiara. But
     I have reason, as you know, to expect hereafter one of the proudest coronets in Britain; and
     shall certainly not remain a day longer than I can help dependent, Patrick, on the most
     singularly generous, liberal, and considerate of brothers,—with the one only fault of caring
     for nobody but himself. If I were drowning, you would scarcely stretch out your little finger
     to save me, in case it might become wet."
"Quite right, Agnes, not to depend on me, or you would have little to depend upon. My pockets
     are to let unfurnished now! I shall perhaps go to Australia,—or probably measure the depth of
     the Serpentine some evening; though, in the mean while, I may put up with life a little longer,
     bad as it is. Now, therefore, Agnes, hear my last advice. You have the world upon a string, and
     shall see a large assortment of admirers to choose among. When torrents of proposals are
     pouring in upon you, as they will and must do soon, get safely into the haven of matrimony, or
     you will be shipwrecked for ever. Accomplished misses are quite a drug in the market now; but
     you ought to be ashamed, Agnes, of missing that little pigmy peer, Lord Bowater, two years ago,
     when you had three days the start of every other young lady in making the acquaintance. He
     treated you shockingly, to fall in love at first sight with that paltry Miss Gordon. As for any
     other coronet you are ever likely to wear, I know of none that even a telescope could give you
     the most distant prospect of. Now wait till I am out of the room before you faint!"
"Marion!" said Agnes, yawning outrageously when her brother had departed, and looking
     unspeakably forlorn, "How often I have laughed ready to die, at the case of other girls,
     without ever dreaming it could in any degree resemble my own! Every year that worthy, old,
     respectable Lord Towercliffe, as fond of home as uncle Arthur or any garden snail, suddenly
     breaks up his comfortable establishment in the country, and comes to town with the declared
     intention of giving Charlotte and Maria 'proper advantages!' The poor girls, then, see their
     father obliged to undergo the wretchedness of frequenting a club, to form suitable
     acquaintances, and suffering hourly martyrdom in being absent from his farm, his stud, his
     improvements, and all that interests him in life, while our active, energetic friend, Lady
     Towercliffe, plunged into a wilderness of blond and feathers, rushes eagerly from house to
     house, followed by her flock of disposable daughters, whom she is perpetually puffing off, like
     Robins the auctioneer. Then follow dinner parties, given at an expense which the young ladies
     know to be ruinous, balls, soirees, flirtations, disappointments, and at last the family coach
     trundling slowly back at a funeral pace to St. Abbsbury, where the lodge-keeper despondingly
     counts heads as they pass, to see whether their numbers continue still undiminished! It is
     altogether horrid, and perfectly laughable, too!"
"Not very laughable!" said Marion, coloring; "whether Lord Towercliffe takes the affair
     good-humoredly or otherwise, it must be most degrading and humiliating for the young ladies. I
     can fancy nothing more odious!"
"A grand skirmish ending in defeat!" added Agnes, ironically. "I remember formerly, when
     these Malcolm girls were in their school-room, the chief bugbear hung over them, if they
     neglected the arts of dress and fascination, was, that they would inevitably die old maids.
     They were educated for the profession of matrimony, and were each taught to expect a husband of
     rank and fortune, at the very least, equal to their father's."
"Yes," said Marion, "Lady Towercliffe would consider any one of her very plain daughters as
     perfectly disgraced, either to marry in a grade the least degree below her own, or not to marry
     at all, therefore they are allowed no alternative. The position of young ladies during the
     present time seems far from enviable. In these days of clubs, money-making, and old
     bachelorism, not a third of those who grow up now will be married at all, and perhaps not a
     third of those who do marry will be happy! It seems to me strange and unaccountable that
     parents who have any consideration for the happiness of their daughters, inculcate no ideas
     into their minds and hearts unconnected with matrimony, and, like Lady Towercliffe, drive them
     forward to the public view, a mark for censure, gossip, and ridicule, till they find shelter in
     some other home, where it is five to one that they will be miserable."
"Yes, miserable indeed," added Agnes, indolently, "men are all so selfish. Husbands expect
     the whole time, thoughts, and affections of their wives in return for the very little they
     choose to spare from their horses, dogs, and clubs. On these their whole income is to be
     squandered, while they keep to that favorite rule—'What is yours is mine, and what is mine is
     my own.' The ladies must be invariably in good humor and lively spirits at home, perfectly well
     dressed, with a cheerful fireside, and a luxurious table; but, at the same time, we are never
     to ask for money or to have any bills! our servants are all to be first-rate on the very lowest
     wages, and our children in the best order without ever being punished or thwarted!—a fairy's
     wand could not do the half of it."
"I am often amused now," said Marion, "to hear people say of the dullest and most
     unprepossessing old bachelor in the world, 'I wonder he never takes it into his head to marry!'
     while they observe, in discussing any girl more beautiful and fascinating than another, 'How
     very surprising that she has never got married!' when, at the same time, there is not perhaps a
     single year of her life since she was born that she might not have been established if she
     chose. I believe that the vulgar consideration of money makes all the difference; for if ladies
     had the fortunes, instead of gentlemen, they would be quite as uncertain and capricious, off
     and on, about marrying or not marrying, as—as even Captain De Crespigny!"
"One of the last times he called here," said Agnes, "when lamenting, as he often does, his
     unmarriageable state of poverty at present, Captain De Crespigny said, in his droll way, that
     he would some day bring a bill into Parliament, ordaining that every old bachelor who could
     maintain a wife for himself and will not, shall be obliged to support one for somebody else,
     who wishes to marry and cannot afford. Now, Marion, let us put all our Harrowgate irons in the
     fire, and prepare to be admired by all admirers next week at the Granby!"
"You know, Agnes, though I do not tease you or Patrick by often alluding to what you call my
     sentimental vagaries, that there is only one person in the world by whom I have any ambition to
     be admired; though our engagement must be postponed, till Richard is in circumstances to marry
     with prudence. Without reference to that, however, in respect to Harrowgate society, it is said
     to be more like a low farce than a genteel comedy!"
"A little of both! but we shall be in the best set. I hope Sir Arthur will not be teasing us
     with any of his world-before-the-flood ideas, about late hours, waltzing, and all the other
     enormities of fashionable life! It is my duty, really, to give him a few presentable ideas now,
     for he lived in the dark ages, when old Queen Charlotte used to keep the ladies all so
     preternaturally precise and decorous. Most of the Admiral's notions he had from his mother, who
     lived, I believe, with Queen Elizabeth!"
"But Agnes! even the prejudices of our uncle should be attended to. He shows us greater
     kindness than we ever have known, or can know from any body else, and the whole wealth of his
     affection is devoted to us."
"Well, then! I wish his love could be turned into money! I often think if our skins were made
     of gold, that Patrick would flay us alive! Of course I shall not fly in Sir Arthur's face upon
     every trifle, for we must humor him sometimes! One day, long ago, I took him in delightfully,
     by saying that if he disapproved of waltzing, I hoped he would not object to a galope! At
     Harrowgate, the military men will all fortunately be out of uniform, therefore Sir Arthur need
     never guess who or what they are, as he has a most inconvenient dislike to my being so intimate
     with the army list, and one really cannot do without a few tame officers running about the
     drawing-room."
"But, Agnes! as Patrick says, you cannot live upon fried epaulettes, therefore it would look
     much better not to be surrounded by so great a variety of officers! It scarcely seems
     respectable to be, as Patrick called you long ago, the member for Barrackshire!"
"Marion! you are most ridiculously circumspect for your years!" replied Agnes, in her most
     stately tone; "you have certainly commenced life at the wrong end, and will be beginning to
     grow young, when I am thinking it time to grow old—if I ever do!"
"I wish not to buy experience at so dear a rate as most girls do, but rather to benefit by
     that of others,—to reach the kernel at once, without having any trouble in breaking the
     shell!"
"Pshaw, Marion! I would feel myself a fool for a week, had I spoken such nonsense! It gives
     me the tic douloureux to hear you. Who would think of listening now to every old hack, worn out
     with the vicissitudes of life, and only fit to make you melancholy before the time! But take
     your own way," added Agnes, who allowed Marion her own way, as the Vicar of Wakefield's
     daughters were allowed their pocket-money, which was never to be used. "You go upon the
     impossible plan of pleasing everybody; but remember the wise old proverb,—'Cover yourself with
     honey, and the flies will eat you up.'"
When Marion spoke from the heart to her sister, she was accustomed to find herself talking to
     the winds, therefore she now concluded the conversation with a lively good-humored reply, and
     sat down to the pianoforte. Her music was as different as her conversation from that of Agnes,
     who but little appreciated it, and generally left the room, humming a tune as soon as Marion
     struck her first chord; but, on this occasion, she for once remained stationary.
The style of Agnes' singing was a brilliant bravura, which, in any public performer, might
     have commanded whirlwinds of applause, but while her clear soprano voice dazzled and astonished
     by its uncommon brilliancy, Sir Patrick alleged that it cracked every glass in the room, and
     that her taste had been cultivated till she had literally none of her own,—Bellini's cadences,
     Rubini's shake, and Anybody's graces, all acquired from every teacher except nature, to whom
     nothing had been trusted.
The rich full-toned melody of Marion's contralto voice, often became
     instinct with the simple suggestions of her own feeling, while her music had that only one
     charm which never can be taught,—expression. There was a depth of sensibility in her eye and
     voice, which riveted the attention and awakened the sympathy of every heart, while it always
     appeared that, if display had been her object, she could have done much more than she
     attempted. No bird on a tree ever warbled its wild notes with more perfect simplicity and real
     delight. The rippling of a brook over its pebbly bed, or the sighing of the breeze amidst the
     summer foliage, was not more entirely natural, and while Sir Patrick sometimes protested that
     "every note was a tear," she yet reached even his feelings, so that not a whisper could be
     heard from him till the last cadence had melted away on his ear. Marion having seldom yet had
     any audience except her school-companions, remained almost unconscious of her own singular
     gift; but this day she sang with deep enthusiasm, and the last thrilling tones of her voice had
     died inaudibly away, when she looked round and saw young Lord Wigton standing near the door
     beside Agnes, in an attitude of intense and speechless admiration, with all his faculties, if
     he had any, apparently suspended,—his lips apart,—his eyes beaming with delight,—and his whole
     expression full of wonder and ecstasy; while Sir Patrick was lounging on a sofa near,
     exhibiting a smiling, frolicsome expression in his eye, full of fun and mischief.
"This is hardly fair," exclaimed Marion, laughingly starting up with a brilliant blush of
     astonishment; "you know, Lord Wigton, stealing into a dwelling house is punishable by law."
"Whatever be the penalty, I am sufficiently rewarded," answered he, with a shy diffident
     look. "My flute will be happy any day to make you an apology."
Those who love music, and those only, can estimate its power over the feelings, and for
     several minutes afterwards Lord Wigton remained silent, then, suddenly awakening as if from a
     dream, he uttered some incoherent exclamations of rapture, and in tones of unaffected animation
     entreated Marion to sing the same air once again; while she, amused and surprised at his
     extraordinary empressement, prepared to comply.
"My song is not worth asking for twice, and still less worth refusing, therefore you shall
     have it in my very best style!" said Marion, playing the prelude, for she had none of that
     giggling affected shyness assumed by most girls during their first winter. "This note is
     pitched so high, you should go up stairs to hear it!"
"How strange that one so gay as you, should have a voice of such melting sadness!" exclaimed
     Lord Wigton. "It awakens fifty thousand thoughts and feelings I never knew before! I shall
     become an improvisatore, when listening to melody 'so rare and enchanting!'"
"You must have heard it through the key-hole!" said Marion, laughing. "I had no idea that my
     trash could reach any ears but my own."
"It did more, for it reached my heart! Your voice is the very essence of nightingales. I
     shall follow you to Harrowgate, for the chance of hearing that air once again."
"Perhaps, then, it has some peculiar interest," said Marion, surprised at the warmth of his
     enthusiasm. "The chief delight of music certainly is, the associations it brings out, the
     remembrances of bye-gone hours it recalls, and the million of little phantoms it creates of
     past or future times."
"Marion! your voice is by no means equal to that song, and your style is very amateur-ish
     indeed," interrupted Agnes, bitterly. "I do not wish to boast," added she, laughing, to conceal
     her irritation; "but Grisi never ventured to sing that air after hearing me, and Delvini said
     his fortune would be made, if he could engage me for his Prima Donna. I only mention this among
     friends. Keep it secret, for I hate to cause jealousy and mortification! Few people understand
     music like my old master Delvini, who said that my god-mother must certainly have possessed the
     wand of a fairy, and gifted me with music."
"Ah! Delvini is the man who plays a whole concerto upon one note of the piano, or something
     wonderful of that kind," observed Lord Wigton, looking impatiently for Marion to begin. "I hate
     the helter-skelter school in music! people scampering through their songs with a thousand
     miraculous flourishes, which set one's teeth on edge."
"Such performers," answered Marion, "give me no more pleasure than to see Van Amburgh thrust
     his head into the lion's mouth, which is very surprising, and what I could not do myself, but
     it excites no sympathy, and raises no emotion better than wonder."
"Your voice is like some fairy spirit that would lead me to the world's end," said Lord
     Wigton, with an air of eager expectation. "And now, Miss Dunbar, I am all ears."
"So I think, and very long ears too," muttered Agnes to herself, angry beyond all bounds at
     the young Peer's attention to Marion, when hitherto she had been the principal, or rather the
     only object of interest to him whenever they were in the same room. Agnes, without an assiduous
     lover, ready to put on her shawl, clasp her bracelets, and carry her boa, was like a ship
     without a compass, not knowing which way to turn, and though nothing could make up for the want
     of those graceful flatteries, amusing quarrels, and ambitious hopes, to which she was
     accustomed with Captain De Crespigny, yet should he disappoint her, Lord Wigton had been
     recently promoted to the character of a pis aller in the list of her
     admirers, as she was heard to remark, that "it is better to have a donkey that carries you,
     than a horse that throws you." Though usually the object of her unbounded ridicule, yet the
     young Peer had recently become of so much importance to her, that it was indeed an unpardonable
     affront when he spared one moment's attention to Marion, while at the same time she considered
     his taste on the occasion, quite as questionable as that of the bird which preferred a
     barley-corn to a diamond.
Next morning, to the increased indignation of Agnes, Lord Wigton's servant left at the door
     of St. John's Lodge, two splendid bouquets, both equally rare and beautiful; but when they were
     presented, Agnes looked angrily at Marion's, and plucked her own to pieces, saying, "That
     absurd little man! it is worth while to hear him talk of being in love, he makes the subject so
     thoroughly ridiculous! I like all my lovers till I tire of them, and his Lordship's reign was
     over last Tuesday. He has the stiffness of the poker without its occasional heat, and no more
     individuality of character than a leaf upon a tree. I wonder where we could have him measured
     for a cap-and-bells. He has so little vivacity, that he now wears the fool's cap without the
     bells. He did so weary me! I think Lord Wigton must be the man Rochefoucalt had in his eye when
     he said that many people would never have known how to fall in love, if they had not first
     heard it talked about! His sentimental speeches are so thoroughly ridiculous, they often remind
     me of Liston's meditation in the farce, 'There stands my Mary's cottage! and she must either be
     in it, or out of it!'"
</div></body></text></TEI>