<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">
  CHAPTER XXIII.
One of the best receipts for happiness in this world is, to make the utmost of small
     pleasures, and the very least of small vexations, which was the plan on which Marion invariably
     lived; and it often seemed as if all the duties of affection and friendship were written with a
     sunbeam on her mind. She now resolved, with characteristic kindness and good sense, that as her
     presence at St. John's Lodge could do no good to her sister, it should at least do no harm;
     therefore she determined if possible to obtain leave of absence for a few weeks from home, and
     to explain in writing to Agnes, her own opinion of Captain De Crespigny's conduct, and the
     reasons on which it was grounded; being convinced that in all the important affairs of life,
     perfect frankness between friends is, however painful, an imperative duty, and that no one, on
     any occasion where he has to act or to feel, should be left in the dark as to his own actual
     position.
With a somewhat tremulous voice, and heightened color, Marion proceeded next morning into her
     brother's private sitting-room, where, surrounded by a perfect armory of rifles,
     double-barrelled guns and pistols, she found him selecting his weapons for a pigeon-match to
     "come off" that day, between himself and Captain De Crespigny, of whose arrival he was in
     momentary expectation; and he seemed by no means inclined at first to lend her much of his
     notice.
"I came to mention, Patrick, that if you have no objection, it is my wish to spend a
     fortnight now, with uncle Arthur," said Marion. "We have met very seldom of late, and Henry De
     Lancey is going off soon to join the army. Did you hear that a commission in the same corps as
     Captain De Crespigny, has been sent to him lately by his unknown friends. The regiment is going
     soon, I am told, to Canada, but he is to join the depot for some months at Portsmouth."
"Well! but what does all this matter to you! I shall not give my consent if you ask me till
     midnight!" exclaimed Sir Patrick, peevishly; for he felt by no means disposed that his house
     should lose the attraction of Marion's resplendent beauty. "If Sir Arthur in his dotage,
     chooses to make himself ridiculous about this anonymous youth, is that any reason why the whole
     family should go wild about him? Besides, Marion, you confessed long ago, that Mr. Granville
     visits at our uncle's; and I am determined that you shall learn to know your own value better
     than to take him! What has he to offer you but that trumpery little cottage, like a
     Tunbridge-ware work-box, a kitchen garden stocked with cabbages, or gooseberry bushes, and to
     live upon brown bread and water. But I begin to suspect, Marion, that you are one of the very
     few people in this world who like their own way; therefore it is my duty to keep you here out
     of danger."
"I wish to escape a danger, rather than to encounter one," replied Marion, with an ingenuous
     blush. "You know, Patrick, that I consider Agnes almost engaged to Captain De Crespigny. It
     would be a very great disappointment to me, and I think to yourself, if, after all that has
     passed, he become merely general in his attentions—showing no preference to one of us more than
     for another. You always wish me to be in the room when he calls,—and—and——"
"Oh! I understand!" exclaimed Sir Patrick, fixing his hawk's eyes on Marion, and trying to
     conceal a smile beneath a look of stern interrogation. "Agnes is jealous!"
"No! not in the very least! I trust she has no reason—that she never can have any. It seems
     like vanity in me to mention the subject even to my own brother in confidence, but I will be
     perfectly honest. You know, Patrick, I saw no society at school. I am not at all aware what is
     customary; but your friend often says things to me that I am sure he would not like Agnes to
     hear."
"You are young and green in this old world, Marion, if you fancy that Agnes is ever to catch
     such a will-o'-the-wisp as De Crespigny. Il s'aime, et n'a point de
      rival. He plays with hearts as if they were shuttlecocks; and indeed some hearts are
     little better. It is an absurd affair of vanity on both sides, and the sooner the thing goes
     off the better. I know you are a perfect coward in giving pain, and that Agnes considers
     herself sole proprietor of De Crespigny's attentions; but who made her so? That bubble will
     burst ere long; and if he is inclined to try a little harmless flirtation with you, what
     occasion is there to go off in a tangent about that, I should like to know! I must insist,
     Marion, on your doing all that is possible to make this dull, out-of-the-way house of mine,
     agreeable to my friends, for it is impracticable to exist here without society, which is the
     best weapon to kill time with. I shall take it as a mark of your sisterly kindness, to receive
     De Crespigny as all other young ladies receive him everywhere. If he only opened his mouth wide
     enough, I know at least a dozen girls who would jump down his throat, and 'il
      faut jouer le jeu, selon les regles de la societe dans laquelle vous etes force de
     vivre.' My deepest resentment shall rest on either Agnes or you, Marion, if my most
     intimate companion be banished from our society, either by the one liking him too much, or the
     other too little."
"But, Patrick! if you think Agnes lays too much stress on Captain De Crespigny's very marked
     attentions, and lover-like language, why do you not warn her against becoming really attached
     to him?"
"Pshaw! nonsense! She will come to her senses soon, if she has any senses to come to. Agnes'
     hopes are all certainties; and she expects by shutting her own eyes, that everybody else shall
     become blind; but she or any one might see with half an eye, that De Crespigny cares no more
     for her than the poker does for the tongs. Agnes has been given to expecting impossibilities
     from childhood, when she used to be angry at her wax doll for not answering her when spoken to.
     If she did not flatter herself so egregiously, the flattery of De Crespigny would do her no
     harm. His love affairs flame up and go out again like a lucifer-match box."
"Yet, Patrick," replied Marion, trying to steady her voice, and to look excessively firm, "I
     must make a point of going for one week to uncle Arthur. If Agnes is to be disappointed, let me
     not have any part of the blame, either from her, or from myself."
"My good Marion! what trash you talk! It puts my mustachios out of curl to hear you! Agnes is
     no more engaged to De Crespigny than I am to Mrs. Penfold! There is no necessity on that score
     for your becoming a porcupine, and setting up your quills at my friend. Il
      n'a fait, que remplir son role de jeune homme. Agnes thinks every partner at a ball would
     gladly become a partner for life, and if any one of them were to mention the ring of Saturn,
     she would consider it a proposal; but her lovers all drop off like nine pins at last. Many a
     time she has seen the 'decline and fall' of her empire already, and it will be the same thing
     now in De Crespigny's case. 'Old birds are not caught with chaff.'"
"You mean that the chaff is Captain De Crespigny, of course," replied Marion, with
     reproachful gravity. "But the subject might have been illustrated with a more graceful allusion
     to Agnes' lovers."
"As for Agnes' lovers, no one can tell who they are; yet depend upon it, De Crespigny is not
     in the number. As usual, she is always flirting with the wrong man! Agnes has about as much
     chance of him as the man in the moon!" continued Sir Patrick, with increasing vehemence. "She
     might as well attempt to overtake last year! Open the door of your understanding, Marion, and
     listen to me: De Crespigny will no more propose to her than you will to the Archbishop of
     Canterbury! Anybody may see he is merely amusing himself!"
"Then he deserves to be hanged!" replied Marion, indignantly. "Surely, Patrick, you should
     not have allowed this to continue so long, and to go so far, under your own eyes, unless you
     really believed that Captain De Crespigny was as much attached to Agnes as she is certainly to
     him."
"Or at least to his future title and estates! My dear friend, one would suppose you had
     swallowed a whole circulating library this morning! Are you a believer in broken hearts? My
     good Marion, they were exploded long ago, like ghosts and witchcraft! Nobody now dies of love
     except on the stage. You do not actually suppose Agnes will expire with the disappointment! She
     knows better. Why, Marion, you must expect to go through half-a-dozen such affairs before you
     get safe into the harbor of matrimony."
"I hope not! My heart would not stand quite so much breakage," replied Marion, coloring and
     laughing, while she added, in a lower tone, "besides which it is already in very safe keeping.
     I have given it away, you know, Patrick, once for all."
"Pshaw! Marion, none of your sentimental vagaries! Your attachment is, of course, to be a chef d'œuvre d'amour; but nothing lasts for ever now. If there were no
     disappointments in such a love-in-a-cottage affair as yours, what would become of poets and
     novel readers! Agnes understands the game of life better than you do. In her estimation, it is
     like a rubber at whist, where hearts are trumps, and the prize a good establishment in common
     with the first partner who offers. De Crespigny knows all this, and cannot be expected to place
     any great value on a second-hand heart, much the worse for wear. The intimacy between them has
     chiefly arisen from our relationship, he being her cousin only once removed."
"I wish he were removed altogether. Captain De Crespigny ought to suffer all the bitterness
     of disappointment himself, when his insatiable vanity inflicts it so heartlessly on
     others."
"Suppose you take that method of revenging Agnes," replied Sir Patrick, with a penetrating
     look. "He is the best catch going, and very civil to you. De Crespigny's attentions are an
     honor to any one, and would be quite a feather in your cap."
"So he seems to think; but I have no desire for such feathers. I make it a rule," said
     Marion, archly, "never to refuse any gentleman till he has proposed; but the honor of making
     him miserable for life never can be mine, though he so well deserves it. I suppose, being a
     Roman Catholic, he has bought an indulgence for deceit, or I should rather say falsehood."
"What old-fashioned bread-and-butter ideas you have, Marion! Everybody has been ill-used by
     somebody, and nobody minds it now. Agnes will continue incurably heart-broken, til some new
     lover pays his devoirs, and then you will understand her better, Marion. On
      garde long temps son premier amant quand on n'en pas un second."
"I judge of her by myself; and if once so cruelly deceived as she is, Patrick, my heart could
     never venture on any second attachment—never! Once awakened from such a dream, I neither could
     nor would attempt to dream it over again. My ideas of mutual attachment are not borrowed from
     novels or poems, because I never had time to read one at Mrs. Penfold's, but from conceiving
     what it might be to have a companion for life, from whom no thought should be concealed, and
     all my happiness derived. Who could ever place such trust in Captain De Crespigny, if he has
     really, as I may say, swindled Agnes out of her time, thoughts, and affections, without
     intending amply to repay them with his own? I am rapidly disliking him, Patrick; and the longer
     we talk, the more anxious I become for your leave to be out of his way entirely. Depend upon
     it, I shall be excessively rude to your friend the next time we meet. So, pray, let me go
     to-morrow."
Hearing a slight noise, Marion looked round, and she would have felt it rather a relief at
     the moment if the floor could have opened under her feet, when, with a gasp of consternation,
     she beheld Captain De Crespigny standing in an attitude of perplexity and irresolution near the
     door, evidently, for once in his life, feeling almost awkward, and very nearly abashed, though
     a moment afterwards he regained his usual matchless intrepidity of countenance and manner; when
     Sir Patrick advanced, with extended hand, to welcome him, saying,
"Ah! De Crespigny! is that you?"
"The same and no other," replied he, bending his riding-whip till it nearly broke; but
     assuming an Irish accent to conceal his annoyance. "The top of the morning to you both. How is
     every inch of you?"
"Very tolerable, indeed! It always does me good to be astonished, and certainly your
     apparition came rather unexpectedly. It made my mustachios perfectly stand upon end; and Marion
     will not require a stroke of electricity for some time after this! She seems rapidly petrifying
     into stone!"
"Miss Marion Dunbar! if my presence be unwelcome, I wish it were possible to dissolve away in
     the likeness of a sigh!" said he, with a comic smile. "Shall I invite myself to sit down, or
     will any one else do so?"
"If you are so exceedingly ceremonious, perhaps Marion ought to reach you a chair," replied
     Sir Patrick, while his face became perfectly crimsoned with trying to suppress a burst of
     laughter, when he observed the graceful timidity of Marion's manner, contrasted with the easy
     assurance of Captain De Crespigny's, who looked at her with undisguised admiration. "I had been
     inwardly betting with myself for the last half hour that you would drop in exactly as you did.
     Here is an undeniably fine day, so that ends all discussion of the weather, and now for our
     pigeon-match."
"Any match you please in this house. I have been sitting for the last ten minutes tuning your
     sister's guitar, and she sent me here for the strings. How much her dog Darling has improved in
     the tone and expression of his barking."
"Agnes is perfectly dog mad since you gave her that pert ill-tempered little animal. As Lord
     Byron said, 'nobody need want a friend who can get a dog.' She wears a lock of his hair set in
     gold—has got a supply of sheets and towels for him, marked with his name—helps him before any
     of us at dinner—teaches him to bark Toryism—and says dogs have all the good qualities of
     mankind, with none of the evil. I wish those who preach sermons against cruelty to animals,
     would also say a little against over-indulging them, especially in the case of lap-dogs."
"It is an amiable weakness," observed Captain De Crespigny, in a tone that sounded very like
     contempt. "I suppose your sister would scarcely be outdone by Queen Henrietta Maria, who rushed
     through a shower of bullets to save her favorite lap-dog. I envy the whole canine race. They
     have, like ourselves, fox-hunting and grouse-shooting for amusement; and moreover, they are
     such favorites with the ladies! Horses are slaves and drudges from youth to age, bearing a yoke
     from which nothing can deliver them except death; but dogs generally meet with some return for
     their attachment, and are always believed to be sincere in what they profess. What do you say,
     Miss Marion Dunbar? Have I not reason to envy your estimation of Darling?"
Marion colored to the very temples, embarrassed by the consciousness of all that Captain De
     Crespigny had evidently overheard, and after saying a few inaudible words, she would have
     hastened out of the room; but on looking round, Sir Patrick, who privately thought that on the
     present occasion there might be one too many, had strolled off to the drawing-room, and as
     Captain De Crespigny continued speaking, she could not, without actual rudeness, withdraw. A
     blush is one of the most beautiful phenomena in nature, and so thought Captain De Crespigny,
     when he perceived Marion's color flitting like an aurora borealis, while for a moment she
     remained completely abashed, and then, with a look of apprehensive timidity, re-seated
     herself.
"Excuse me, Miss Dunbar!" said he, in a tone of unwonted gravity and respect, while his usual
     self-confident audacity seemed entirely to have forsaken him. "I became inadvertently a
     listener to-day, when my name was mentioned by you in terms of which I must entreat an
     explanation. You will think me perhaps rather too much of the free-and-easy school, if I take
     this liberty; but the value I place upon your good opinion and cousinly regard is such, that I
     shall neither eat nor sleep till you have enlightened me respecting the offences for which I am
     to be thus condemned unheard."
"Pray forget all that was said! I am unaccustomed to—to conceal my thoughts!" replied Marion,
     trying to look particularly firm; but seeing that Captain De Crespigny still waited with an
     obvious resolution to obtain something more explicit, she felt herself urged on to say what,
     under ordinary circumstances, she would have sunk into the earth rather than utter; therefore
     assuming a certain haughty dignity of manner quite unusual with her, she added, "If I did not
     almost consider you a brother, I should not remain in the room now; but I do most sincerely
     regret that your name occurred in our conversation at all, and particularly in a way for which
     I ought to apologise."
"As for my name, Miss Dunbar!" replied Captain De Crespigny, in a rallying tone, "make any
     use of it you please. Take it yourself, or give it to your dog, and I shall feel honored; but
     pardon me for being desirous that you, more than any other person in the world, should
     understand how perfectly unfounded is the idea of my being engaged to—to any lady."
"From all that has passed, Captain De Crespigny, and from what I have myself heard you say, I
     could scarcely have believed it possible that there could be any mistake," replied Marion,
     indignantly. "I shall never pardon myself for having betrayed such unfounded expectations; but
     let it be understood, that I spoke only my own thoughts, in which no other person is
     implicated."
"And the misapprehension was most natural—perhaps unavoidable, Miss Dunbar, considering how
     little you are yet accustomed to the persiflage of every-day society," replied Captain
     De Crespigny, looking perfectly irresistible. "But allow me the privilege of a cousin, to give
     you some little knowledge of the world as it is."
"You have done that already," replied Marion, coldly; "and I mean to be as long as possible
     of learning more. It certainly does not improve upon acquaintance."
"We have all much to complain of, undoubtedly! If the gossiping world here had its own way, I
     should be married to as rapid a succession of young ladies as the Sultan in the Arabian Nights.
     Reports grow here like hops. Old women round a tea table make up their budget of scandal,
     without giving due allowance to the altered customs of society, and my name is for ever going
     about the world like a cricket-ball. Every gentleman asks his partners to dance now, as nearly
     as possible in a tone as if he were engaging a partner for life, and says all that words can
     express, without attaching any permanent meaning to it, provided he has never asked that one
     conclusive question, which I have never yet ventured to put, though most anxious soon to do so,
     if I had the slightest encouragement from one whom, above all others, I admire,—Madam, will you
     marry me?"
Captain De Crespigny said these last words very much as if he meant them now to be serious,
     and fixed his eyes—eyes accustomed to do wonders—on Marion, who felt the color rushing
     painfully into her cheek; but angry at herself for blushing, she turned away in silence, while
     he added more energetically than before,
"I would not, for all the worlds upon earth, lose one iota of your good opinion. That really
     is precious to me. Allow me, irritated as you evidently are, in some degree to justify myself
     respecting my cousin Agnes. Strike, but hear me. She knows the world, having already smiled on
     hundreds of admirers, and blushed for dozens; therefore I am but one in a crowd, who, like the
     kings in Macbeth, 'come like shadows and so depart,' being scarcely missed in the rapid
     succession which follows; and, to use a vulgar proverb, 'there are some ladies with whom one
     shoulder of mutton very soon drives down another.'"
Captain Be Crespigny paused; and had Marion been less agitated, and less anxious to terminate
     the interview, she could have smiled at this unusual fit of humility, which made him willing,
     for once, to suppose that his attentions could be insignificant; but seeing that she was now
     about to make a hasty exit from the room, he rapidly continued, with a slight relapse into his
     ordinary tone of conceit:
"I am vain enough to think that I deserve to be preferred for something better than the mere
     accident of birth and fortune, with which the very meanest of mankind may be endowed; but there
     are ladies—observe I name nobody—who, if they were informed that a gentleman waited in the next
     room ready to marry them, with double my income, rank, and property, would ask no other
     question, but put on a veil, get up a fit of bridal hysterics, and proceed to chapel. Such
     intimacies as mine with your sister are like a tread-mill, always apparently getting on, but
     never advancing, while neither of us ever dream of going a step beyond it. Agnes is formed to
     be gazed at with wondering admiration—to make conquests, but not to keep them. I would no more
     think of being seriously in love with her, than with a piece of Dresden china in a shop window.
     She should be shut up in a glass case, to be admired and forgotten every day. It is not the
     mere symmetry of form or features that could permanently interest me," continued Captain De
     Crespigny, looking a million of things; but Marion's eyes were fixed on the door, while her
     whole countenance was in a glow of indignant vexation, and he continued to speak with
     increasing ardor. "There is beauty in an icicle, and beauty in a sunbeam; but how different.
     Can you wonder—can you blame me—that I see the disparity in mind as much as in appearance
     between yourself and your sister. She is like an amusing book, destitute of interest, to be
     taken up with pleasure, but laid aside without regret. She might beguile a weary hour; but you
     would prevent the possibility of any hour ever becoming so."
"Captain De Crespigny, I know not what the persiflage of society entitles you to
     say, and it would be well for the happiness of others if they understood your ideas upon that
     subject as well," replied Marion, with restored firmness—and never had she looked so tall. "You
     forget the confidence that subsists between sisters, and that I am aware you generally express
     very different feelings, which I must still hope, for your credit, are the real truth,
     otherwise nothing you can say shall ever convince me that Agnes is not extremely ill-treated. I
     only wonder very much that she cares for you at all. I have been betrayed into speaking on this
     subject—I shall regret having done so as long as I live—but I must be true to my sister now, in
     saying what I think of your conduct, that it has been most heartless and most unjustifiable.
     Let me request you never again to speak to me as you have done to-day."
"No! not till the next opportunity. You should be angry often, Miss Dunbar, for it becomes
     you, and is the only thing that can bring you to the level of an ordinary mortal; therefore,
     let me detain you by the right of cousinship, if by no other, even against your wishes, one
     moment longer to propose terms of peace. I am going next week to do penance at Beaujolie Park
     with my very long-lived and not very much respected uncle, who insists on my escorting him to
     Harrowgate. He may, perhaps, be unreasonable enough to detain me two months, during which it
     would have amused me beyond measure could I act the invisible gentleman and observe your
     sister; but what I cannot do myself you may and must. If Agnes does not flirt in a
     young-lady-like manner with every man she meets, then I make you a very safe promise, that the
     rest of my life shall be devoted to her, and nothing you ever read in a romance shall exceed my
     devotion and constancy; but you must be honest, and if the day after my P.P.C. cards are left,
     you perceive her quite as happy to see Captain Digby, or Lord Wigton, or Sir Anybody Anything,
     as ever she was to see me, then I am to be honorably acquitted; and you will consider me
     entitled," added Captain De Crespigny, with one of his most expressive looks, "to seek for
     happiness where I could be sure of finding it, if only fortunate enough to be thought
     deserving; but, unless a preference be reciprocal, the expression of it is little believed or
     valued."
"Captain De Crespigny," replied Marion, looking a thousand ways to avoid meeting his eye,
     "whoever you may hereafter prefer, I can wish no greater happiness to any one than I enjoy
     myself, being engaged to one in whom I can place the most perfect reliance. My brother has
     probably told you already, what I am always proud to acknowledge, that your old friend Mr.
     Granville, is attached to me, and we await only Patrick's consent to our marriage, having
     fortunately obtained my uncle's."
The color mounted in brilliant hues to Marion's cheek when she spoke, for it was evidently a
     strong effort to do so at all, and her eyes were fixed on the ground, or she would have been
     astonished and shocked at the effect her words produced on Captain De Crespigny, who bit his
     lip till the blood nearly sprung out, while his face became for a moment pale as death; but,
     after fixing a long scrutinizing look on Marion's countenance, to read its expressions, he
     said, in a voice so altered from his usual tone of gay hilarity, that she could scarcely have
     recognised it:
"Dunbar will never consent. Impossible! He knows your value better. It cannot be. A parson
     with nothing but his pulpit! I never dreamed of such a thing—never. A life of Sunday schools
     and clothing societies in that bauble of a cottage. Pshaw! No girl ever ends by marrying the
     first man she likes, and no more will you. I shall make you prefer me in a month."
"Probably not, as I rather dislike you now," replied Marion, suppressing a smile.
"That will wear off. It is best, as Mrs. Malaprop says, to begin with a little aversion. You
     will at last like me beyond any one in the world."
"Extremes meet sometimes; but I must explain myself once for all now, Captain De Crespigny,
     that no one may ever be led into a mistake. My brother wishes us to be responsible for making
     this house, as far as we can, agreeable to his friends, but only as Patrick's friend can I ever
     now have pleasure in seeing you here, as, in another respect, I heartily disapprove of your
     conduct, and I will not appear for one moment to participate in the sort of farce you would
     carry on here with myself,—and with others. Let us be on terms of cousinly civility for the
     future, and never on more."
"Well, then, I am satisfied to be received on your terms," replied Captain De Crespigny, with
     an exceedingly dissatisfied look. "Let me be welcomed on your brother's account, until I can
     make myself welcome on my own. As for constancy in this world, it is all very right and very
     desirable, but, as I hope one of your admirers may soon discover,

"Rien n'est plus commun que le nom,
Rien n'est plus rare que la chose."

</div></body></text></TEI>