<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">
  CHAPTER XXVI.
The intellectual powers and literary acquirements of Henry de Lancey were first-rate, and
     feeling a consciousness of ability, he ardently longed to coin them into fame and distinction.
     Full of high aspirations, there was something grand in the outline of his head, and in the
     expression of his speaking eyes, while animated by his desire to render himself worthy of
     Caroline, and to reward the care of Sir Arthur by his own exertions. He longed now to run the
     race of life with others—to be useful among men—to win for himself a place in society—to write
     his name perhaps in the records of time—but above all, to promote the cause of truth, religion,
     and holiness. He had learned in the society of Mr. Granville to believe that true happiness is
     not to be found in the temple of fame, nor in the temple of pleasure or of fortune, but in the
     temple of God; and at one time his thoughts and studies were turned towards the church, with a
     fervent desire to take orders, till the tide of his plans became entirely changed by the
     unexpected arrival of a commission in the 15th Huzzars, then quartered in Canada, which he felt
     bound, from whatever hand it came, to accept.
Henry had been deeply affected when first told all the peculiar circumstances of his own
     history, but Sir Arthur accustomed him from the first to discuss the subject confidentially,
     that every recollection might be preserved which he yet retained of those earlier days, now
     involved in impenetrable mystery, which none but himself had witnessed, but the secret of which
     Sir Arthur still entertained a sanguine hope of at last developing, while often, when gazing
     with almost parental affection at his promising young protege, he
     prophesied that his unnatural connections would yet be forced or persuaded to acknowledge
     him.
Though lines of deep thought were already riveted on the youthful countenance of Henry, yet
     his manner became full of life and animation; and in personal courage he was the boldest of the
     bold, displaying a fearless energy of character, which caused the Admiral to express, on the
     night when they were about to part, a confident hope that, though the service of his country
     had not been his choice, yet he was well suited to his profession, and his profession to
     him.
"Let me only become another Sir Arthur Dunbar, and my utmost ambition will be gratified!"
     exclaimed Henry, warmly clasping the hand of his benefactor. "Often—oh, how often! I shall look
     back upon the only home, and the best friend I have ever known!"
They were to meet no more, as young De Lancey had engaged his place in the earliest coach
     next morning, and Marion saw, by the paleness of his cheek, and the compression of his lip,
     that though for worlds he would not have compromised his manhood by weeping, yet, moved as much
     by Sir Arthur's evident grief as by his own, he had the utmost difficulty in suppressing a
     burst of tears.
The aged Admiral grasped his young friend's hand in silence, and leaning for some moments on
     his arm, he walked up and down the room with heavy measured steps, his eyes cast down, his
     noble forehead clouded with care, and his brows knit as in deep and painful thought. He too
     seemed to dread the greatness of his own agitation, being little fitted now to bear any, yet it
     seemed to Marion as if a tear had forced its way into his glazed and nearly blinded eyes,
     though carefully screening it from observation, and evidently unwilling or unable to say a
     word. After several minutes had elapsed, Henry broke the long silence, exclaiming, in a low,
     tremulous tone of incoherent agitation,
"Before my voice fails, Sir Arthur, I must speak!—I must say something, to tell you what I
     feel——"
"No! no! my dear boy! I know it all! I will believe more than you say, but spare yourself and
     me," interrupted Sir Arthur, in a tone of calm and serious affection. "We know each other,
     Henry."
"But once—only once let me say all that has been treasured in my heart for years! Can I leave
     the happiest home which ever blessed a son with his father, and not remember that but for you I
     should have been a friendless outcast! Every act of kindness you have shown me, every smile of
     regard, every token of confidence, crowds upon my memory now, and increases the store of
     obligations which it is my pride and my happiness to owe you. If you could but read my heart,
     Sir Arthur, I need not speak; for there you would see love without bounds, and gratitude which
     it shall ever be my delight to cherish! If I am better than the brutes that perish, you are,
     under Providence, the cause; and I shall be worse than the worst of them, if I ever for one
     hour overlook what I owe to you, or forget the principles of honor, duty, truth, and piety that
     you have taught me."
Henry paused in speechless emotion, he clenched his hands together, the youthful fire of his
     eye became dimmed, and he hurried to the window for several moments, where, having in some
     measure recovered his composure, he turned round, and saw, for the first time in his life,
     tears rolling down the face of Sir Arthur—the tears of a good and venerable man, of all sights
     upon earth the most affecting; and overcome with emotion, Henry took his benefactor's hand in
     his own, with an expression of the deepest solemnity and respect, saying, in rapid but
     tremulous accents,
"It might soothe the very bed of death, for you, Sir Arthur, to remember what you have done
     for me!—more than almost any man can ever do for another. The first of earthly blessings is to
     be loved; and yet, but from your kindness to me from childhood, no eye would ever have saddened
     at my departure, nor brightened at my return! With not a friend upon the visible earth but
     yourself, the child perhaps of shame and misery, I must have become lost indeed! The thought of
     this will be nearest my heart when it ceases to beat! If I perish abroad—or if—if we meet no
     more on earth, take all I can offer, Sir Arthur, my fervent prayers that you may be
     rewarded."
Sir Arthur mournfully held out his hand to Henry, who kneeled down and kissed it with the
     profoundest reverence; then starting hastily up, he seemed about to rush out of the room, when
     he was arrested by the deep, solemn voice of the Admiral, whose eye had now become calm and
     steady, while in a low and impressive voice he said,
"It is true, Henry, we shall probably meet no more! I know, and so must you, that this is our
     last interview on earth; but long after I am at rest in the grave, may you remember, and may
     you deserve the fervent blessing I now give you, trusting that both my children, yourself and
     Marion, may hereafter enjoy as bright a destiny as any child of earth can know in this
     suffering and sin-blighted world. In speaking of the past, Henry, do not suppose that the
     obligation is all on your side! No! your dutiful affection has more than re-paid me. It is
     something to know that my aged years have not been spent in vain—that I leave a record in your
     heart, where my name will be respectfully and affectionately remembered! No man living can
     endure the thought of being utterly forgotten; and to you, my young friends, I commit my
     memory. The earth will lie lighter on my grave for the belief, that you have loved me so well,
     and will so truly lament me. Your young spirits have cheered my heart—your welfare has deeply
     interested me; and I know that one day or other, my young soldier will do me honor in his
     profession, and not forget to shed a tear over my remains."
Many were the tears of both Henry and Marion at these words; but Sir Arthur calmly continued
     in a firmer voice,
"When I called you back, my dear Henry, it was not for any vain attempt to express my
     feelings,—that would be impossible,—but to mention how, in all probability, you may one day be
     able more than to return the little I have done. It is easy for men to wrestle through the
     difficulties of life, and with such talent and enter-enterprise as yours, to conquer them all.
     For other reasons, too, I have no doubt of your at last being most happily settled for life,
     but many anxious thoughts beset me respecting Marion. The uncertainty of Richard Granville's
     prospects, and the certainty that my nephew will refuse his consent to her marriage, weighs
     heavily at my heart. I do trust that a long life of happiness awaits you both; but if my worst
     anticipations were ever to be realised—if your brother, Marion, a bankrupt already in fortune
     and character, were hereafter to desert you—if your sister, heartless and vain, should throw
     herself away, and leave you in bleak and sorrowful loneliness,—then remember, Henry, my solemn
     and last injunction is laid upon you, to act as a brother towards Marion,—much may then be in
     your power—more than you now expect—and you must then protect her, as I would have done myself,
     considering all that you may ever do for her, as done for me."
"It would be something to live for, if I had a hope of being useful to Marion, Sir Arthur!
     Under any circumstances that would have been a pleasure; but now it has become ten times more a
     sacred duty than ever. Your injunction shall remain with me till my dying hour!"
In the solitude and silence of his own apartment, Henry gave ample vent to his
     long-suppressed anguish, while mourning over the sad conviction, that he had now seen, probably
     for the last time, that generous and noble-hearted benefactor, whom he loved with an enthusiasm
     to which no words could do justice. Though every action of his life had been actuated by
     grateful attachment, he now felt as if his existence had been wasted without sufficiently
     testifying his ardent affection, and he wondered to think that any opportunities were ever
     formerly overlooked, of conversing with Sir Arthur, and attending on him. Henry thought of his
     growing infirmities, of his solitary home, of his high spirit, and of his resolute mind, now
     enervated by advancing years, and mourned to think that in sickness, or even at the hour of
     death, he himself must no longer be at hand, to console and support his benefactor.
Exhausted nature at length needed repose, and amidst the stillness and darkness of a night
     which had already seemed interminable, Henry felt himself slowly sinking into the calmness of
     slumber, when suddenly he was awakened to consciousness by a slight rustling sound from beside
     his bed, and the noise of some one breathing, as if trying in vain to suppress it. Uncertain
     what this might be, he opened his eyes, and lay perfectly immoveable; but gradually his heart
     almost ceased to beat, and quailed with a feeling of supernatural apprehension, when the
     curtains were slowly opened, and a dark form cautiously stooping over him, gazed into his face,
     till he felt the warm breath upon his cheek.
In the dead hour of the night, Marion was startled out of a dull, heavy, unrefreshing sleep,
     by a sharp shrill cry for help, which seemed to proceed from Henry's room, and was succeeded by
     stifled cries, and the sound of a violent scuffle. Springing out of bed with an instantaneous
     decision, Marion flew towards the spot, calling loudly for assistance, and the instant she
     opened the door, some one, uttering a wild and fearful shriek, rushed violently out, striking
     her what seemed at the moment a severe blow on the arm, but an instant afterwards she became
     deluged with blood.
Henry was in the act of eagerly pursuing the rapidly receding figure, when, seeing Marion
     stagger backwards, he caught her in his arms, supported her to a chair, and hastily bound up
     her wound, which was bleeding profusely.
"Leave me! I am well! Look to my uncle," cried she, eagerly. "He must have been alarmed! How
     was it, Henry? Are you hurt? Is Sir Arthur safe? Oh! there he is!" exclaimed she, rushing into
     her uncle's arms, and bursting into tears.
"Here is Mr. Howard too!" added Henry, turning round, as that gentleman entered with a calm
     but rather anxious look, while the paleness of his cheek was almost startling. "You seem, Sir,
     to have dropped ready dressed from the clouds!"
"I seldom retire early to bed," replied he, with a quick, sharp, scrutinizing glance at
     Henry. "Hearing a tumult in the house, I—I——"
"You gave it time to subside before attempting to interfere," added Henry, with a thrilling
     emphasis in his voice, while closely observing Mr. Howard's countenance. "There is a strange
     and fearful mystery here!"
"There is!" replied he, gnawing his nails to the very quick, while he shot a momentary glance
     of rancorous detestation at young De Lancey, after which, his features became as passionless
     and immoveable as if they had been fixed in a vice. "The whole affair is mysterious—very——"
"What! you already know all!"
"I do!—I—I met the man rushing out of the house," answered Mr. Howard, with the air of one
     outfacing an accusation, but his voice became low and suffocated. "I attempted to stop him,
     but——"
"I am glad you did!" observed Sir Arthur, looking anxiously at Henry, and then gazing
     intently on the sallow countenance of Mr. Howard, which became gradually dyed with the deepest
     hectic; his lips were now closely compressed, he raised his tall figure to its full height, and
     closed his eyes, as if wishing thus to exclude some fearful spectre from his mind, but after a
     momentary struggle, he became once more calm and resolute, with a singular serenity of look and
     manner.
"You met some one in the passage! The assassin must have escaped long before!" muttered
     Henry, in a vague and dreaming tone; but his brow grew darker, and there was an anxious
     intensity in his look and voice, when he added in a tone of resolute determination, "Let me be
     plain with you, Mr. Howard! Your expression of countenance when I saw you last night, filled me
     with astonishment—almost with apprehension; it was a look never to be forgotten! Your manner
     now perplexes me! There is something amiss which I cannot understand, but for your sake as well
     as my own, this very strange affair must be fully investigated!"
"You suspect me!" exclaimed Mr. Howard, with a sudden laugh of terrible mirth, and in a voice
     elevated into accents of indescribable fury, while his eye throwing off the torpor in which it
     had been shrouded, glittered with the fearful brightness of delirium, his veins became swollen,
     and his figure dilated beyond its ordinary height, assuming an aspect of rage and of almost
     supernatural strength, such as insanity alone can give. "You suspect me, and you have dared to
     confess it. Many a word lightly spoken carries weight. The arrow has been shot at random, but
     you are right. Lightning rushes through my brain! I would be destructive as a whirlwind to you,
     De Lancey, as I once was to your wretched mother. She stood in the way of my advancement, as
     you may yet do,—she accused, betrayed, and ruined my sister," continued he in a rapid voice,
     insupportably shrill and piercing. "You too have injured me, and you shall suffer for it as she
     did—she died!"
With the spring and the strength of a tiger, he rushed toward Henry, and a knife which he had
     plucked from his sleeve, gleamed like lightning in the air, when suddenly Sir Arthur placed
     himself so as to intercept the madman's career, and fixed upon him his commanding eye, with a
     look of calm, stern, and lofty composure, while Henry vainly strove to advance before him, and
     Marion, with frantic vehemence, called for help.
"Take my life, if you must have blood. I have trusted you, Howard,—shown you kindness when no
     other hand was stretched out in compassion, and through my heart only shall you reach that
     boy!" said Sir Arthur, firmly. "I am old, and ready to die, but he is a son to me, and shall
     not perish in my sight."
"Your life! no! not yours," replied the maniac, in accents of vehement horror, yet still
     fastening his glaring eyes on Henry, with looks of deadly malignity. "May my hand wither before
     it injures one hair of your venerable head! May my life be sacrificed first, and my limbs be
     manacled in chains! But for him, his days shall be few! He bears a charmed life, or he must
     have died long ago! I would extinguish all mankind!—the whole human race, if I could; but there
     are two whom I have sworn to destroy, and he is one! I have said it! The will and the power are
     mine! I cannot fail! His life shall be hunted by night and by day! This knife shall be plunged
     to the very hilt in his blood! I have said it. One blow—one mortal blow, and it is done!"
Having said these words, with gestures of outrageous madness, he bounded towards the door,
     broke through every impediment with a strength which ten men could scarcely have mastered, and
     giving a loud delirious cry of insufferable wildness, he instantaneously vanished.
Before long, the neighborhood was aroused, lights gleamed and reddened in the opposite
     windows, shouts arose among the assembling crowd, and a rapid search was made for the frantic
     and mysterious criminal, but not a trace of any living being could be discovered, and when they
     paused to listen, not a sound broke the stillness of the night.
"This is my second preservation from a violent death!" said Henry, in once more taking leave
     of Sir Arthur. "And most forcibly do all these circumstances bring to mind the horrors of that
     fearful night which first threw me on the care of my benefactor. It is exactly such a shadowy
     form bending over me in the silence of midnight, which has often from that hour haunted me in
     my dreams. I am ready, I trust, to brave any danger in the open face of day; but there is
     something terrible to me, I confess—something vague and appalling in the stealthy, mysterious,
     death-like approach of an enemy evidently insane, who has pursued me with remorseless hatred
     from childhood to the present hour, breaking upon me in the darkest hours of midnight, and
     invading me amidst the moments of helpless repose; but I am under the care of one who
     slumbereth not, nor sleepeth, and to Him I confidently commit myself."
</div></body></text></TEI>