<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="28">
CHAPTER V.
Towards the end of the session of 1836, the hopes of the Conservative party were
       again in the ascendant. The Tadpoles and the Tapers had infused such enthusiasm into all the
       country attorneys, who, in their turn, had so bedevilled the registration, that it was
       whispered in the utmost confidence, but as a flagrant truth, that Re-action was at length "a
       great fact." All that was required was the opportunity; but as the existing Parliament was
       not two years old, and the government had an excellent working majority, it seemed that the
       occasion could scarcely be furnished. Under these circumstances, the back-stairs politicians,
       not content with having by their premature movements
        already seriously damaged the career of their leader, to whom in public they
       pretended to be devoted, began weaving again their old intrigues about the court, and not
       without effect.
It was said that the royal ear lent itself with no marked repugnance to suggestions, which
       might rid the Sovereign of ministers, who, after all, were the ministers not of his choice,
       but of his necessity. But William IV. after two failures in a similar attempt, after his
       respective embarrassing interviews with Lord Grey and Lord Melbourne, on their return to
       office in 1832 and 1835, was resolved never to make another move unless it were a checkmate.
       The King therefore listened and smiled, and loved to talk to his favourites of his private
       feelings and secret hopes; the first outraged, the second cherished; and a little of these
       revelations of royalty was distilled to great personages who, in their turn spoke
       hypothetically to their hangers on of royal dispositions and possible contingencies, while
       the hangers-on and go-betweens, in their turn, looked more than they expressed; took county
       members by the button
        into a corner, and advised, as friends, the representatives of boroughs to look
       sharply after the next registration.
Lord Monmouth, who was never greater than in adversity, and whose favourite excitement was
       to aim at the impossible, had never been more resolved on a Dukedom, than when the Reform Act
       deprived him of the twelve votes, which he had accumulated to attain that object. While all
       his companions in discomfiture were bewailing their irretrievable overthrow, Lord Monmouth
       became almost a convert to the measure, which had furnished his devising and daring mind,
       palled with prosperity, and satiated with a life of success, with an object, and the
       stimulating enjoyment of a difficulty.
He had early resolved to appropriate to himself a division of the county in which his chief
       seat was situate; but what most interested him, because it was most difficult, was the
       acquisition of one of the new boroughs that was in his vicinity, and in which he possessed
       considerable property. The borough however was a manufacturing town, and returning only one
       member,
        it had hitherto sent up to Westminster a radical shopkeeper, one Mr. Jawster
       Sharp, who had taken what is called "a leading part" in the town on every "crisis" that had
       occurred since 1830; one of those zealous patriots who had got up penny subscriptions for
       gold cups to Lord Grey; cries for the bill, the whole bill, and nothing but the bill; and
       public dinners where the victual was devoured before grace was said; a worthy who makes
       speeches, passes resolutions, votes addresses, goes up with deputations, has at all times the
       necessary quantity of confidence in the necessary individual; confidence in Lord Grey;
       confidence in Lord Durham; confidence in Lord Melbourne; and can also, if necessary, give
       three cheers for the King or three groans for the Queen.
But the days of the genus Jawster Sharp were over in this borough as well as in many
       others. He had contrived in his lustre of agitation to feather his nest pretty successfully;
       by which he had lost public confidence and gained his private end. Three hungry Jawster
       Sharps, his hopeful sons, had all become commissioners
        of one thing or another; temporary appointments with interminable duties; a
       low-church son-in-law found himself comfortably seated in a chancellor's living; and several
       cousins and nephews were busy in the Excise. But Jawster Sharp himself was as pure as Cato.
       He had always said he would never touch the public money, and he had kept his word. It was an
       understood thing that Jawster Sharp was never to show his face again on the hustings of
       Darlford; the Liberal party was determined to be represented in future by a man of station,
       substance, character, a true Reformer, but one who wanted nothing for himself, and therefore
       might if needful get something for them. They were looking out for such a man, but were in no
       hurry. The seat was looked upon as a good thing; a contest certainly, every place is
       contested now, but as certainly a large majority. Notwithstanding all this confidence
       however, Re-action or Registration, or some other mystification had produced effects even in
       this creature of the Reform Bill, the good Borough of Darlford. The borough that out of
       gratitude
        to Lord Grey returned a jobbing shopkeeper twice to Parliament as its
       representative without a contest, had now a Conservative Association, with a banker for its
       chairman, and a brewer for its vice-president, and four sharp lawyers knibbing their pens,
       noting their memorandum books, and assuring their neighbours with a consoling and complacent
       air, that "Property must tell in the long run." Whispers also were about that when the proper
       time arrived, a Conservative candidate would certainly have the honour of addressing the
       electors. No name mentioned, but it was not concealed that he was to be of no ordinary
       calibre; a tried man, a distinguished individual, who had already fought the battle of the
       constitution, and served his country in eminent posts; honoured by the nation, favored by his
       sovereign. These important and encouraging intimations were ably diffused in the columns of
       the Conservative journal, and in a style which from its high tone evidently indicated no
       ordinary source and no common pen. Indeed there appeared occasionally in this paper articles
       written with such unusual
        vigour, that the proprietors of the Liberal journal almost felt the necessity of
       getting some eminent hand down from town to compete with them. It was impossible that they
       could emanate from the rival Editor. They knew well the length of their brother's tether. Had
       they been more versant in the periodical literature of the day, they might in this "slahing"
       style have caught perhaps a glimpse of the future candidate for their borough, the Right
       Honourable Nicholas Rigby.
Lord Monmouth, though he had been absent from England since 1832, had obtained from his
       vigilant correspondent a current knowledge of all that had occurred in the interval. All the
       hopes, fears, plans, prospects, manoeuvres, and machinations; their rise and fall; how some
       had bloomed, others were blighted; not a shade of re-action that was not represented to him;
       not the possibility of an adhesion that was not duly reported; he could calculate at Naples
       at any time within ten, the result of a dissolution. The season of the year had prevented him
       crossing the Alps in 1834, and after the
        general election he was too shrewd a practiser in the political world to be
       deceived as to the ultimate result. Lord Eskdale, in whose judgment he had more confidence
       than in that of any individual, had told him from the first that the pear was not ripe;
       Rigby, who always hedged against his interest by the fulfilment of his prophecy of
       irremediable discomfiture, was never very sanguine. Indeed the whole affair was always
       considered premature by the good judges; and a long time elapsed before Tadpole and Taper
       recovered their secret influence, or re-assumed their ostentatious loquacity or their silent
       insolence.
The pear however now was ripe. Even Lord Eskdale wrote that after the forthcoming
       registration a bet was safe, and Lord Monmouth had the satisfaction of drawing the Whig
       Mimister at Naples into a cool thousand on the event. Soon after this he returned to England,
       and determined to pay a visit to Coningsby Castle, feast the county, patronise the borough,
       diffuse that confidence in the party which his presence never failed to do; so great and so
       just was
        the reliance in his unerring powers of calculation, and his intrepid pluck.
       Notwithstanding Schedule A, the prestige of his power had not sensibly diminished, for his
       essential resources were vast, and his intellect always made the most of his influence.
True however to his organization Lord Monmouth, even to save his party and gain his
       dukedom, must not be bored. He therefore filled his castle with the most agreeable people
       from London, and even secured for their diversion a little troop of French comedians. Thus
       supported he received his neighbours with all the splendour befitting his immense wealth and
       great position, and with one charm which even immense wealth and great position cannot
       command, the most perfect manner in the world. Indeed Lord Monmouth was one of the most
       finished gentlemen that ever lived, and as he was extremely good-natured, and for a selfish
       man even good-humoured, there was rarely a cloud of caprice or ill-temper to prevent his fine
       manners having their fair play. The country neighbours were all fascinated; they were
       received
        with so much dignity and dismissed with so much grace. Nobody would believe a
       word of the stories against him. Had he lived all his life at Coningsby, fulfilled every duty
       of a great English nobleman, benefited the county, loaded the inhabitants with favours, he
       would not have been half so popular as he found himself within a fortnight of his arrival
       with the worst county reputation conceivable, and every little squire vowing that he would
       not even leave his name at the castle to show his respect.
Lord Monmouth whose contempt for mankind was absolute; not a fluctuating sentiment, not a
       mournful conviction ebbing and flowing with circumstances, but a fixed, profound, unalterable
       instinct; who never loved any one, and never hated any one except his own children; was
       diverted by his popularity, but he was also gratified by it. At this moment it was a great
       element of power; he was proud that with a vicious character, after having treated these
       people with unprecedented neglect and contumely, he should have won back their golden
       opinions in a moment by the magic of
        manner and the splendour of wealth. His experience proved the soundness of his
       philosophy.
Lord Monmouth worshipped gold, though, if necessary, he could squander it like a caliph. He
       had even a respect for very rich men; it was his only weakness, the only exception to his
       general scorn for his species. Wit, power, particular friendships, general popularity, public
       opinion, beauty, genius, virtue, all these are to be purchased; but it does not follow that
       you can buy a rich man: you may not be able or willing to spare enough. A person or a thing
       that you perhaps could not buy, became invested in the eyes of Lord Monmonth with a kind of
       halo amounting almost to sanctity.
As the prey rose to the bait, Lord Monmouth resolved they should be gorged. His banquets
       were doubled; a ball was announced; a public day fixed; not only the county but the principal
       inhabitants of the neighbouring borough were encouraged to attend; Lord Monmouth wished it,
       if possible, to be without distinction of party. He had come to reside among his old friends,
       to live and die where he was born. The Chairman
        of the Conservative Association and the Vice-President exchanged glances, which
       would have become Tadpole and Taper; the four attorneys knibbed their pens with increased
       energy, and vowed that nothing could withstand the influence of the aristocracy "in the long
       run." Allwent and dined at the castle; all returned home overpowered by the condescension of
       the host, the beauty of the ladies, several real Princesses, the splendour of his liveries,
       the variety of his viands, and the flavour of his wines. It was agreed that at future
       meetings of the Conservative Association, they should always give "Lord Monmouth and the
       House of Lords!"—superseding the Duke of Wellington, who was to figure in an after toast with
       the Battle of Waterloo.
It was not without emotion that Coningsby beheld for the first the castle that bore his
       name. It was visible for several miles before he even entered the park, so proud and
       prominent was its position, on the richly wooded steep of a considerable eminence. It was a
       castellated building, immense and magnificent, in a very faulty and incongruous style of
       architecture indeed,
        but compensating in some degree for these deficiencies of external taste and
       beauty by the splendour and accommodation of its interior, and which a Gothic castle raised
       according to the strict rules of art could scarcely have afforded. The declining sun threw
       over the pile a rich colour as Coningsby approached it, and lit up with fleeting and fanciful
       tints the delicate foliage, of the rare shrubs and tall thin trees that clothed the acclivity
       on which it stood. Our young friend felt a little embarrassed when, without a a servant and
       in a hack chaise, he drew up to the grand portal, and a crowd of retainers came forth to
       receive him. A superior servant inquired his name with a stately composure, that disdained to
       be supercilious. It was not without some degree of pride and satisfaction that the guest
       replied, "Mr. Coningsby." The instantaneous effect was magical. It seemed to Coningsby that
       he was borne on the shoulders of the people to his apartment; each tried to carry some part
       of his luggage; and he only hoped his welcome from their superiors might be as hearty.

</div></body></text></TEI>