<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="45">
CHAPTER VI.
The departure of Sidonia from Coningsby Castle in the autumn determined the
       Princess Lucretia on a step which had for some time before his arrival occupied her brooding
       imagination. Nature had bestowed on this lady an ambitious soul and a subtile spirit; she
       could dare much, and could execute finely. Above all things she coveted power; and though not
       free from the characteristic susceptibility of her sex, the qualities that could engage her
       passions or fascinate her fancy must partake of that intellectual eminence which
       distinguished her. Though the Princess Lucretia in a short
        space of time had seen much of the world, she had as yet encountered no hero.
       In the admirers whom her rank, and sometimes her intelligence, assembled around her, her
       master had not yet appeared. Her heart had not trembled before any of those brilliant forms
       whom she was told her sex admired; nor did she envy any one the homage which she did not
       appreciate. There was therefore no disturbing element in the worldly calculations which she
       applied to that question which is to woman what a career is to man, the question of marriage.
       She would marry to gain power, and therefore she wished to marry the powerful. Lord Eskdale
       hovered around her, and she liked him. She admired his incomparable shrewdness; his freedom
       from ordinary prejudices, the selfishness which was always good-natured, and the
       imperturbability that was not callous. But Lord Eskdale had hovered round many; it was his
       easy habit. He liked clever women, young, but who had seen something of the world. The
       Princess Lucretia pleased him much; with the form and mind of a woman even in the nursery. He
       had watched
        her development with interest; and had witnessed her launched in that world
       where she floated at once with as much dignity and consciousness of superior power, as if she
       had braved for seasons its waves and its tempests.
Musing over Lord Eskdale, the mind of Lucretia was drawn to the image of his friend; her
       friend; the friend of her parents. And why not marry Lord Monmouth? The idea pleased her.
       There was something great in the conception; difficult and strange. The result, if achieved,
       would give her all that she desired. She devoted her mind to this secret thought. She had no
       confidants. She concentrated her intellect on one point, and that was to fascinate the
       grandfather of Coningsby, while her step-mother was plotting that she should marry his
       grandson. The volition of Lucretia Colonna was, if not supreme, of a power most difficult to
       resist. There was something charm-like and alluring in the conversation of one who was silent
       to all others; something in the tones of her low rich voice which acted singularly on the
       nervous system. It was the voice of the
        serpent; indeed there was an undulating movement in Lucretia when she
       approached you, which irresistibly reminded you of that mysterious animal.
Lord Monmouth was not insensible to the spell, though totally unconscious of its purpose.
       He found the society of Lucretia very agreeable to him; she was animated, intelligent,
       original; her inquiries were stimulating; her comments on what she saw, and heard, and read,
       racy and often indicating a fine humour. But all this was reserved for his ear. Before her
       parents as before all others, Lucretia was silent, a little scornful, never communicating,
       neither giving nor seeking amusement, shut up in herself.
Lord Monmouth fell therefore into the habit of riding and driving with Lucretia alone. It
       was an arrangement which he found made his life more pleasant. Nor was it displeasing to
       Madame Colonna. She looked upon Lord Monmouth's fancy for Lucretia as a fresh tie for them
       all. Even the Prince, when his wife called his attention to the circumstance, observed it
       with satisfaction. It was a circumstance
        which represented in his mind a continuance of good eating and good drinking,
       fine horses, luxurious baths, unceasing billiards.
In this state of affairs appeared Sidonia, known before to her step-mother, but seen by
       Lucretia for the first time. Truly he came, saw, and conquered. Those eyes that rarely met
       anothers, were fixed upon his searching yet unimpassioned glance. She listened to that voice
       full of music, yet void of tenderness: and the spirit of Lucretia Colonna bowed before an
       intelligence that commanded sympathy, yet offered none.
Lucretia naturally possessed great qualities as well as great talents. Under a genial
       influence her education might have formed a being capable of imparting and receiving
       happiness. But she found herself without a guide. Her father offered her no love; her
       step-mother gained from her no respect. Her literary education was the result of her own
       strong mind and inquisitive spirit. She valued knowledge, and she therefore acquired it. But
       not a single moral principle or a single religious truth had
        ever been instilled into her being. Frequent absence from her own country had
       by degrees broken off even an habitual observance of the forms of her creed; while a life of
       undisturbed indulgence, void of all anxiety and care, while it preserved her from many of the
       temptations to vice, deprived her of that wisdom "more precious than rubies" which adversity
       and affliction, the struggles and the sorrows of existence, can alone impart.
Lucretia had passed her life in a refined, but rather dissolute society. Not indeed that a
       word that could call forth a maiden blush, conduct that could pain the purest feelings, could
       be heard or witnessed in those polished and luxurious circles. The most exquisite taste
       pervaded their atmosphere; and the uninitiated who found themselves in those perfumed
       chambers and those golden saloons, might believe from all that passed before them, that their
       inhabitants were as pure, as orderly, and as irreproachable as their furniture. But among the
       habitual dwellers in these delicate halls, there was a tacit understanding, a prevalent
       doctrine
        that required no formal exposition, no proofs and illustrations, no comment and
       no gloss; which was indeed rather a traditional conviction than an imparted dogma; that the
       exoterick public were on many subjects the victims of very vulgar prejudices, which these
       enlightened personages wished neither to disturb nor to adopt.
A being of such a temper, bred in such a manner; a woman full of intellect and ambition,
       daring and lawless, and satiated with prosperity, is not made for equable fortunes and an
       uniform existence. She would have sacrificed the world for Sidonia, for he had touched the
       fervent imagination that none before could approach, but that inscrutable man would not read
       the secret of her heart, and prompted alike by pique, the love of power, and a weariness of
       her present life, Lucretia resolved on that great result which Mr. Rigby is now about to
       communicate to the Princess Colonna.
About half an hour after Mr. Rigby had entered that lady's apartments it seemed that all
       the bells of Monmouth House were ringing
        at the same time. The sound even reached the Marquess in his luxurious recess,
       who immediately took a pinch of snuff and ordered his valet to lock the door of the
       ante-chamber. The Princess Lucretia too heard the sounds; she was lying on a sofa in her
       boudoir reading the Inferno and immediately mustered her garrison in the form of a French
       maid, and gave directions that no one should be admitted. Both the Marquess, and his intended
       bride, felt that a crisis was at hand, and resolved to participate in no scenes.
The ringing ceased; there was again silence. Then there was another ring; a very short,
       hasty, and violent pull; followed by some slamming of doors. The servants, who were all on
       the alert and had advantages of hearing and observation denied to their secluded master,
       caught a glimpse of Mr. Rigby endeavouring gently to draw back into her apartments Madame
       Colonna, furious amid his deprecatory exclamations.
"For Heaven's sake, my dear Madame; for your own sake—now really—now I assure
        you—you are quite wrong—you are indeed—it is a complete misapprehension—I will
       explain everything. I entreat—I implore—whatever you like—just what you please—only
       listen."
Then the lady with a mantling visage and flashing eye, violently closing the door, was
       again lost to their sight. A few minutes after, there was a more moderate ring and Mr. Rigby
       coming out of the apartments, with his cravat a little out of order as if he had had a
       violent shaking, met the servant who would have entered.
"Order Madame Colonna's travelling carriage," he exclaimed in a loud voice, "and send
       Mademoiselle Conrad here directly. I don't think the fellow hears me," added Mr. Rigby and
       following the servant, he added in a low tone and with a significant glance, "no travelling
       carriage; no Mademoiselle Conrad; order the britska round as usual."
Nearly another hour passed; there was another ring; very moderate indeed. The servant was
       informed that Madame Colonna was coming down; and she appeared as usual. In
        a beautiful morning dress, and leaning on the arm of Mr. Rigby she descended
       the stairs, and was handed into her carriage by that gentleman, who seating himself by her
       side, ordered them to drive to Richmond.
Lord Monmouth having been informed that all was calm, and that Madame Colonna attended by
       Mr. Rigby, had gone to Richmond, ordered his carriage, and accompanied by Lucretia and Lucian
       Gay, departed immediately for Blackwall, where in white bait, a quiet bottle of claret, the
       society of his agreeable friends, and the contemplation of the passing steamers, he found a
       mild distraction and an amusing repose.
Mr. Rigby reported that evening to the Marquess on his return, that all was arranged and
       tranquil. Perhaps he exaggerated the difficulties, to increase the service; but according to
       his account they were very considerable. It required some time to make Madame Colonna
       comprehend the nature of his communication. All Rigby's diplomatic skill was expended in the
       gradual development. When it was once fairly put before her, the effect was appalling. That
       was
        the first great ringing of bells. Rigby softened a little what he had
       personally endured; but he confessed she sprang at him like a tigress baulked of her prey,
       and poured forth on him a volume of epithets, many of which Rigby really deserved. But after
       all in the present instance he was not treacherous, only base, which he always was. Then she
       fell into a passion of tears, and vowed frequently that she was not weeping for herself, but
       only for that dear Mr. Coningsby, who had been treated so infamously and robbed of Lucretia,
       and whose heart she knew must break. It seemed that Rigby stemmed the first violence of her
       emotion by mysterious intimations of an important communication that he had to make; and
       piquing her curiosity, he calmed her passion. But really having nothing to say, he was nearly
       involved in fresh dangers. He took refuge in the affectation of great agitation which
       prevented exposition. The lady then insisted on her travelling carriage being ordered, and
       packed, as she was determined to set out for Rome that afternoon. This little occurrence gave
       Rigby some few
        minutes to collect himself, at the end of which he made the Princess several
       announcements of intended arrangements, all of which pleased her mightily, though they were
       so inconsistent with each other, that if she had not been a woman in a passion, she must have
       detected that Rigby was lying. He assured her almost in the same breath, that she was never
       to be separated from them, and that she was to have any establishment in any country she
       liked. He talked wildly of equipages, diamonds, shawls, opera boxes; and while her mind was
       bewildered with these dazzling objects, he with intrepid gravity consulted her as to the
       exact amount she would like to have apportioned, independent of her general revenue, for the
       purposes of charity.
At the end of two hours, exhausted by her rage and soothed by these visions, Madame
       Colonna, having grown calm and reasonable, sighed and murmured a complaint, that Lord
       Monmouth ought to have communicated this important intelligence in person. Upon this Rigby
       instantly assured her, that Lord Monmouth had been for some time waiting to do
        so, but in consequence of her lengthened interview with Rigby, his Lordship had
       departed for Richmond with Lucretia, where he hoped that Madame Colonna and Mr. Rigby would
       join him. So it ended, with a morning drive and suburban dinner; Rigby, after what he had
       gone through, finding no difficulty in accounting for the other guests not being present, and
       bringing home Madame Colonna in the evening, at times almost as gay and good-tempered as
       usual, and almost oblivious of her disappointment.
When the Marquess met Madame Colonna, he embraced her with great courtliness, and from that
       time consulted her on every arrangement. He took a very early occasion of presenting her with
       a diamond necklace of great value. The Marquess was fond of making presents to persons to
       whom he thought he had not behaved very well, and who yet spared him scenes.
The marriage speedily followed by special licence at the villa of the Right Hon. Nicholas
       Rigby, who gave away the bride. The wedding
        party was very select, but brilliant as the diamond necklace: a royal Duke and
       Duchess, Lady St. Julians, and a few others. Mr. Ormsby presented the bride with a bouquet of
       precious stones, and Lord Eskdale with a French fan in a diamond frame. It was a fine day;
       Lord Monmouth, calm as if he were winning the St. Leger; Lucretia, universally recognized as
       a beauty; all the guests gay, the Princess Colonna especially.
The travelling-carriage is at the door which is to bear the happy pair away. Madame Colonna
       embraces Lucretia; the Marquess gives a grand bow: they are gone. The guests remain awhile. A
       Prince of the blood will propose a toast; there is another glass of champagne quaffed,
       another ortolan devoured; and then they rise and disperse. Madame Colonna leaves them with
       Lady St. Julians, whose guest for a while she is to become. And in a few minutes their host
       is alone.
Mr. Rigby retired into his library: the repose of the chamber must have been grateful to
       his feelings after all this distraction. It was spacious,
        well-stored, classically adorned, and opened on a beautiful lawn. Rigby threw
       himself into an ample chair, crossed his legs, and resting his head on his arm, apparently
       fell into deep contemplation.
He had some cause for reflection, and though we did once venture to affirm that Rigby never
       either thought or felt, this perhaps may be the exception that proves the rule.
He could scarcely refrain from pondering over the strange event which he had witnessed, and
       had assisted.
It was an incident that might exercise considerable influence over his fortunes. His patron
       married, and married to one who certainly did not offer to Mr. Rigby such a prospect of easy
       management as her step-mother! Here were new influences arising; new characters, new
       situations, new contingencies. Was he thinking of all this? He suddenly jumps up, hurries to
       a shelf and takes down a volume. It is his interleaved peerage, of which for twenty years he
       had been threatening an edition. Turning to the Marquisate of Monmouth, he took
        up his pen and thus made the necessary entry.
" Married, second time, August 3rd. 1837, The Princess Lucretia Colonna,
        daughter of Prince Paul Colonna, born at Rome, February 16 th. 1819.
That was what Mr. Rigby called "a great fact." There was not a peerage compiler in England
       who had that date save himself.
Before we close this slight narrative of the domestic incidents that occurred in the family
       of his grandfather since Coningsby quitted the castle, we must not forget to mention what
       happened to Villebecque and Flora. Lord Monmouth took a great liking to the manager. He found
       him very clever in many things independently of his profession; he was useful to Lord
       Monmouth, and did his work in an agreeable manner. And the future Lady Monmouth was
       accustomed to Flora, and found her useful too, and did not like to lose her. And so the
       Marquess turning all the circumstances in his mind, and being convinced that Villebecque
       could never succeed,
        to any extent in England in his profession, and probably no where else,
       appointed him, to Villebecque's infinite satisfaction, Intendant of his household with a
       considerable salary, while Flora still lived with her kind step-father.

</div></body></text></TEI>