<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="49">
CHAPTER II.
Sidonia was to dine at Lord Monmouth's the day after he met Lucretia, and
       afterwards they were all to meet at a ball much talked of, and to which invitations were much
       sought; and which was to be given that evening by the Baroness S. de R—d.
Lord Monmouth's dinners at Paris were celebrated. It was generally agreed that they had no
       rivals; yet there were others who had as skilful cooks, others who for such a purpose were
       equally profuse in their expenditure. What then was the secret spell of his success? The
       simplest in the world, though no one
        seemed aware of it. His Lordship's plates were always hot: whereas at Paris, in
       the best appointed houses, and at dinners, which for costly materials and admirable art in
       their preparation, cannot be surpassed, the effect is always considerably lessened, and by a
       mode the most mortifying—by the mere circumstance that every one at a French dinner is served
       on a cold plate. The reason of a custom, or rather a necessity, which one would think a
       nation so celebrated for their gastronomical taste would recoil from, is really, it is
       believed, that the ordinary French porcelain is so very inferior, that it cannot endure the
       preparatory heat for dinner. The common white pottery, for example, which is in general use,
       and always found at the cafés, will not bear vicinage to a brisk kitchen fire for half an
       hour. Now if we only had that treaty of commerce with France which has been so often on the
       point of completion, the fabrics of our unrivalled potteries, in exchange for their capital
       wines, would be found throughout France. The dinners of both nations would be improved: the
       English
        would gain a delightful beverage, and the French for the first time in their
       lives would dine off hot plates. An unanswerable instance of the advantages of commercial
       reciprocity!
The guests at Lord Monmouth's to-day were chiefly Carlists, individuals bearing illustrious
       names, that animate the page of history, and are indissolubly bound up with the glorious
       annals of their great country. They are the phantoms of a past, but real aristocracy; an
       aristocracy that was founded on an intelligible principle; which claimed great privileges for
       great purposes; whose hereditary duties were such, that their possessors were perpetually in
       the eye of the nation, and who maintained and, in a certain point of view, justified their
       pre-eminence by constant illustration.
It pleased Lord Monmouth to show great courtesies to a fallen race with whom he
       sympathized; whose fathers had been his friends in the days of his hot youth; whose mothers
       he had made love to; whose palaces had been his home; whose brilliant fêtes he remembered;
       whose fanciful splendour excited his early
        imagination; and whose magnificent and wanton luxury had developed his own
       predisposition for boundless enjoyment. Soubise and his suppers; his cutlets and his
       mistresses; the profuse and embarrassed De Laraguais, who sighed for "entire ruin," as for a
       strange luxury, which perpetually eluded his grasp; these were the heroes of the olden time
       that Lord Monmouth worshipped; the wisdom of our ancestors which he appreciated; and he
       turned to their recollection for relief from the vulgar prudence of the degenerate days on
       which he had fallen: days when nobles must be richer than other men, or they cease to have
       any distinction.
It was impossible not to be struck by the effective appearance of Lady Monmouth as she
       received her guests in grand toilet preparatory to the ball; white satin and minever, a
       brilliant tiara. Her fine form, her costume of a fashion as perfect as its materials were
       sumptuous, and her presence always commanding and distinguished, produced a general effect to
       which few could be insensible. It
        was the triumph of mien over mere beauty of countenance.
The hotel of Madame S. de R—d is not more distinguished by its profuse decoration, than by
       the fine taste which has guided the vast expenditure. Its halls of arabesque are almost
       without a rival; there is not the slightest embellishment in which the hand and feeling of
       art are not recognized. The rooms were very crowded; everybody distinguished in Paris was
       there: the lady of the Court, the duchess of the Faubourg, the wife of the rich financier,
       the constitutional Throne, the old Monarchy, the modern Bourse were alike represented.
       Marshals of the Empire, Ministers of the Crown, Dukes and Marquises, whose ancestors lounged
       in the Oeil de Boeuf; diplomatists of all countries, eminent foreigners of all nations,
       deputies who led sections, members of learned and scientific academies, occasionally a stray
       poet; a sea of sparkling tiaras, brilliant bouquets, glittering stars, and glowing ribbands,
       many beautiful faces, many famous ones: unquestionably the general air of a first-rate
       Parisian saloon, on a
        great occasion, is not easily equalled. In London there is not the variety of
       guests; nor the same size and splendour of saloons. Our houses are too small for
       reception.
Coningsby, who had stolen away from his grandfather's before the rest of the guests, was
       delighted with the novelty of the splendid scene. He had been in Paris long enough to make
       some acquaintances, and mostly with celebrated personages. In his long-fruitless endeavour to
       enter the saloon in which they danced, he found himself hustled against the illustrious Baron
       von H—t, whom he had sat next to at dinner a few days before at Count M—é's.
"It is more difficult than cutting through the Isthmus of Panama, Baron," said Coningsby,
       alluding to a past conversation.
"Infinitely," replied M. de H., smiling; "for I would undertake to cut through the Isthmus,
       and I cannot engage that I shall enter this ball-room."
Time however brought Coningsby into that brilliant chamber. What a blaze of light and
       loveliness! How coquettish are the costumes!
        How vivid the flowers! To sounds of stirring melody, beautiful beings move with
       grace. Grace indeed is beauty in action.
Here where all are fair and everything is attractive, his eye is suddenly arrested by one
       object— a form of surpassing grace among the graceful, among the beauteous, a countenance of
       unrivalled beauty.
She was young among the youthful; a face of sunshine amid all that artificial light; her
       head placed upon her finely moulded shoulders with a queen-like grace; a coronet of white
       roses on her dark brown hair; her only ornament. It was the beauty of the picture
       gallery.
The eye of Coningsby never quitted her. When the dance ceased, he had an opportunity of
       seeing her nearer. He met her walking with her cavalier, and he was conscious that she
       observed him. Finally, he remarked that she resumed a seat next to the lady, whom he had
       mistaken for her mother, but had afterwards understood to be Lady Wallinger.
Coningsby returned to the other saloons; he witnessed the entrance and reception of Lady
        Monmouth, who moved on towards the ballroom. Soon after this, Sidonia arrived;
       he came in with the still handsome and ever courteous Duke D—s. Observing Coningsby, he
       stopped to present him to the Duke. While thus conversing, the Duke, who is very fond of the
       English, observed: "See, here is your beautiful countrywoman, that all the world are talking
       of. That is her uncle. He brings to me letters from one of your lords, whose name I cannot
       recollect."
And Sir Joseph and his lovely niece veritably approached. The Duke addressed them: asked
       them in the name of his Duchess to a concert on the next Thursday; and after a thousand
       compliments moved on. Sidonia stopped; Coningsby could not refrain from lingering, but stood
       a little apart, and was about to move away, when there was a whisper, of which, without
       hearing a word, he could not resist the impression that he was the subject. He felt a little
       embarrassed, and was retiring, when he heard Sidonia reply to an inquiry of the lady, "The
       same," and then turning to Coningsby,
        said aloud: "Coningsby, Miss Millbank says that you have forgotten her."
Coningsby started, advanced, coloured a little, could not conceal his surprise. The lady
       too though more prepared, was not without confusion, and for an instant looked down.
       Coningsby recalled at that moment the long dark eye-lashes and the beautiful, bashful,
       countenance that had so charmed him at Millbank; but two years had otherwise effected a
       wonderful change in the sister of his school-day friend, and transformed the silent,
       embarrassed girl into a woman of surpassing beauty and of the most graceful and impressive
       mien.
"It is not surprising that Mr. Coningsby should not recollect my niece," said Sir Joseph
       addressing Sidonia, and wishing to cover their mutual embarrassment; "but it is impossible
       for her or for any one connected with her, not to be anxious at all times to express to him
       our sanse of what we all owe him."
Coningsby and Miss Millbank were now in full routine conversation, consisting of questions;
       how long she had been at Paris; when she had
        heard last from Millbank; how her father was; also, how was her brother. Sidonia
       made an observation to Sir Joseph on a passer-by, and then himself moved on; Coningsby
       accompanying his new friends in a contrary direction, to the refreshment room to which they
       were proceeding.
"And you have passed a winter at Rome," said Coningsby. "How I envy you! I feel that I
       shall never be able to travel!"
"And why not?"
"Life has become so stirring, that there is ever some great cause that keeps one at
       home."
"Life, on the contrary, so swift, that all may see now that of which they once could only
       read."
"The gold and silver sides of the shield," said Coningsby with a smile.
"And you, like a good knight will maintain your own."
"No, I would follow yours."
"You have not heard lately from Oswald?"
"Oh, yes; I think there are no such faithful
        correspondents as we are; I only wish we could meet."
"You will soon; but he is such a devotee of Oxford; quite a monk; and you, too, Mr.
       Coningsby are much occupied."
"Yes, and at the same time as Millbank. I was in hopes when I once paid you a visit, I
       might have found your brother."
"But that was such a rapid visit," said Miss Millbank.
"I always remember it with delight," said Coningsby.
"You were willing to be pleased; but Millbank notwithstanding Rome commands my affections,
       and in spite of this surrounding splendour, I could have wished to have passed my Christmas
       in Lancashire.
"Mr. Millbank has lately purchased a very beautiful place in the county. I became
       acquainted with Hellingsley when staying at my grandfather's."
"Ah! I have never seen it; indeed, I was very much surprised that papa became its
       purchaser, because he never will live
        there; and Oswald I am sure could never be tempted to quit Millbank. You know
       what enthusiastic ideas he has of his order?"
"Like all his ideas; sound, and high, and pure. I always duly appreciated your brother's
       great abilities, and what is far more important, his lofty mind. When I recollect our Eton
       days, I cannot understand how more than two years have passed away without our being
       together. I am sure the fault is mine. I might now have been at Oxford instead of Paris. And,
       yet," added Coningsby, "that would have been a sad mistake, since I should not have had the
       happiness of being here."
"Oh, yes, that would have been a sad mistake," said Miss Millbank.
"Edith," said Sir Joseph, rejoining his niece, from whom he had been momentarily separated,
       "Edith, that is Monsieur Thiers."
In the meantime Sidonia reached the ballroom, and sitting near the entrance was Lady
       Monmouth, who immediately addressed him. He was as usual intelligent and unimpassioned, and
       yet not without a delicate deference which
        is flattering to women, especially if not altogether unworthy of it. Sidonia
       always admired Lucretia, and preferred her society to that of most persons. But the lady was
       in error in supposing that she had conquered or could vanquish his heart. Sidonia was one of
       those men, not so rare as may be supposed, who shrink above all things from an adventure of
       gallantry with a woman in a position. He had neither time nor temper for sentimental
       circumvolutions. He detested the diplomacy of passion: protocols, protracted negociations,
       conferences, correspondence, treaties projected, ratified, violated. He had no genius for the
       tactics of intrigue; your reconnoiterings, and marchings, and counter-marchings, sappings and
       minings, assaults, sometimes surrenders and sometimes repulses. All the solemn and studied
       hypocrisies were to him infinitely wearisome; and if the movements were not merely formal,
       they irritated him, distracted his feelings, disturbed the tenor of his mind, deranged his
       nervous system. Something of the old Oriental vein influenced him in his carriage towards
       women. He was oftener behind the scenes of the
        Opera House than in his box; he delighted too in the society of εταραι
       ; Aspasia was his heroine. Obliged to appear much in what is esteemed pure society, he
       cultivated the acquaintance of clever women because they interested him; but in such saloons
       his feminine acquaintances were merely psychological. No lady could accuse him of trifling
       with her feelings, however decided might be his predilection for her conversation. He yielded
       at once to an admirer; never trespassed by any chance into the domain of sentiment; never
       broke by any accident of blunder into the irregular paces of flirtation; was a man who
       notoriously would never diminish by marriage the purity of his race; and one who always
       maintained that passion and polished life were quite incompatible. He liked the drawing-room,
       and he liked the desart, but he would not consent that either should trench on their mutual
       privileges.
The Princess Lucretia had yielded herself to the spell of Sidonia's society at Coningsby
       Castle, when she knew that marriage was impossible. But she loved him; and with an Italian
       spirit.
        Now they met again and she was the Marchioness of Monmouth, a very great lady,
       very much admired, and followed, and courted, and very powerful. It is our great moralist who
       tells us in the immortal page that an affair of gallantry with a great lady is more
       delightful than with ladies of a lower degree. In this he contradicts the good old ballad;
       but certain it is, that Dr. Johnson announced to Boswell, "Sir, in the case of a Countess the
       imagination is more excited."
But Sidonia was a man on whom the conventional superiorities of life produced as little
       effect as a flake falling on the glaciers of the High Alps. His comprehension of the world
       and human nature was too vast and complete; he understood too well the relative value of
       things, to appreciate anything but essential excellence; and that not too much. A charming
       woman was not more charming to him because she chanced to be an empress in a particular
       district of one of the smallest planets; a charming woman under any circumstances was not an
       unique animal. When Sidonia felt a disposition
        to be spell-bound, he used to review in his memory all the charming women of
       whom he had read in the books of all literatures, and whom he had known himself in every
       court and clime, and the result of his reflections ever was, that the charming woman in
       question was by no means the paragon, which some who had read, seen, and thought less, might
       be inclined to esteem her. There was indeed no subject on which Sidonia discoursed so
       felicitously as on woman: nor none on which Lord Eskdale more frequently endeavoured to
       attract him. He would tell you Talmudical stories about our mother Eve and the Queen of Sheba
       which would have astonished you. There was not a free lady of Greece; Leontium and Phryne,
       Lais, Danae, and Lamia; the Egyptian girl Thonis; respecting whom he could not tell you as
       many diverting tales as if they were ladies of Loretto; not a nook of Athenæus, not an
       obscure scholiast, not a passage in a Greek orator, which could throw light on these
       personages, which was not at his command. What stories he would tell you about Marc
        Anthony and the actress Cytheris in their chariot drawn by tigers! What a
       character would he paint of that Flora who gave her gardens to the Roman people! It would
       draw tears to your eyes. No man was ever so learned in the female manners of the last
       centuries of polytheism as Sidonia. You would have supposed that he had devoted his studies
       peculiarly to that period, if you had not chanced to draw him to the Italian middle ages. And
       even those startling revelations were almost eclipsed by his anecdotes of the Court of Henry
       III. of France, with every character of which he was as familiar as with the brilliant groups
       that at this moment filled the saloons of Madame de R—d.

</div></body></text></TEI>