<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER II.
The day after his adventure at the Forest Inn, Coningsby arrived at Beaumanoir. It
       was several years since he had visited the family of his friend, who were indeed also his
       kin; and in his boyish days had often proved that they were not unmindful of the affinity.
       This was a visit that had been long counted on, long promised, and which a variety of
       circumstances had hitherto prevented. It was to have been made by the schoolboy: it was to be
       fulfilled by the man. For no less a character could Coningsby under any circumstances now
       consent to claim,
        since he was closely verging to the completion of his nineteenth year; and it
       appeared manifest that if it were his destiny to do anything great, he had but few years to
       wait before the full development of his power. Visions of Gastons de Foix and Maurices of
       Saxony, statesmen giving up cricket to govern nations, beardless Jesuits plunged in profound
       abstraction in omnipotent cabinets, haunted his fancy from the moment he had separated from
       his mysterious and deeply interesting companion. To nurture his mind with great thoughts had
       ever been Coningsby's inspiring habit. Was it also destined that he should achieve the
       heroic?
There are some books, when we close them— one or two in the course of our life—difficult as
       it may be to analyze or ascertain the cause,—our minds seem to have made a great leap. A
       thousand obscure things receive light; a multitude of indefinite feelings are determined. Our
       intellect grasps and grapples with all subjects with a capacity, a flexibility and a vigour,
       before unknown to us. It masters questions hitherto perplexing, which are not even touched or
       referred
        to in the volume just closed. What is this magic? It is the spirit of the
       supreme author that by a magnetic influence blends with our sympathizing intelligence,
       directs and inspires it. By that mysterious sensibility we extend to questions, which he has
       not treated, the same intellectual force which he has exercised over those which he has
       expounded. His genius for a time remains in us. 'Tis the same with human beings as with
       books. All of us encounter, at least once in our lives, some individual who utters words that
       make us think for ever. There are men whose phrases are oracles; who condense in a sentence
       the secrets of life; who blurt out an aphorism that forms a character or illustrates an
       existence. A great thing is a great book; but greater than all, is the talk of a great
       man!
And what is a great man? Is it a Minister of State? Is it a victorious General? A gentleman
       in the Windsor uniform? A Field Marshal covered with stars? Is it a Prelate, or a Prince? A
       King, even an Emperor? It may be all these; yet these, as we must all daily
        feel, are not necessarily great men. A great man is one who affects the mind of
       his generation: whether he be a monk in his cloister agitating Christendom, or a monarch
       crossing the Granicus, and giving a new character to the Pagan world.
Our young Coningsby reached Beaumanoir in a state of meditation. He also desired to be
       great. Not from the restless vanity that sometimes impels youth to momentary exertion by
       which they sometimes obtain a distinction as evanescent as their energy. The ambition of our
       hero was altogether of a different character. It was indeed at present not a little vague,
       indefinite, hesitating, inquiring, sometimes desponding. What were his powers, what should be
       his aim, were to him, as to all young aspirants, often questions infinitely perplexing and
       full of pain. But, on the whole, there ran through his character, notwithstanding his many
       dazzling qualities and accomplishments, and his juvenile celebrity which has spoiled so much
       promise, a vein of grave simplicity that was the consequence of an earnest temper, and of
        an intellect that would be content with nothing short of the profound.
His was a mind that loved to pursue every question to the centre. But it was not a spirit
       of scepticism that impelled this habit; on the contrary, it was the spirit of Faith.
       Coningsby found that he was born in an age of infidelity in all things, and his heart assured
       him that a want of faith was a want of nature. But his vigorous intellect could not take
       refuge in that maudlin substitute for belief which consists in a patronage of fantastic
       theories. He needed that deep and enduring conviction that the heart and the intellect,
       feeling and reason united, can alone supply. He asked himself why governments were hated, and
       religions despised? Why Loyalty was dead, and Reverence only a galvanised corpse?
These were indeed questions that had as yet presented themselves to his thought in a very
       crude and imperfect from; but their very occurrence showed the strong pre-disposition of his
       mind. It was because he had not found guides among his elders that his thoughts and
        been turned to the generation that he himself represented. The sentiment of
       veneration was so developed in his nature, that he was exactly the youth that would have hung
       with enthusiastic humility on the accents of some sage of old in the groves of Academus, or
       the porch of Zeno. But as yet he had found Age only perplexed and desponding; Manhood only
       callous and desperate. Some thought that systems would last their time; others, that
       something would turn up. His deep and pious spirit recoiled with disgust and horror from such
       lax, chance-medley maxims, that would reduce in their consequences man to the level of the
       brutes. Notwithstanding a prejudice which had haunted him from his childhood, he had applied
       when the occasion offered to Mr. Rigby for instruction; as one distinguished in the republic
       of letters, as well as the realm of politics, who assumed the guidance of the public mind,
       and as the phrase runs, was looked up to. Mr. Rigby listened at first to the inquiries of
       Coningsby, urged, as they ever were, with a modesty and deference which do not always
       characterize
        juvenile investigations, as if Coningsby were speaking to him of the unknown
       tongues. But Mr. Rigby was not a man who ever confessed himself at fault. He caught up
       something of the subject as our young friend proceeded, and was perfectly prepared long
       before he had finished, to take the whole conversation into his own hands.
Mr. Rigby began by ascribing every thing to the Reform Bill, and then referred to several
       of his own speeches on Schedule A. Then he told Coningsby that want of religious Faith was
       solely occasioned by want of churches; and want of Loyalty, by George IV. having shut himself
       up too much at the Cottage in Windsor Park; entirely against the advice of Mr. Rigby. He
       assured Coningsby that the Church Commission was operating wonders, and that with private
       benevolence, (he had himself subscribed £1000, for Lord Monmouth) we should soon have
       churches enough. The great question now was their architecture. Had George IV. lived, all
       would have been right. They would have been built on the model of the Buddhist pagoda. As for
       Loyalty, if the present King
        went regularly to Ascot races, he had no doubt all would go right. Finally, Mr.
       Rigby impressed on Coningsby to read the Quarterly Review with great attention; and to make
       himself master of Mr. Wordy's History of the late War in twenty volumes, a capital work,
       which proved that Providence was on the side of the Tories.
Coningsby did not apply to Mr. Rigby again; but worked on with his own mind, coming often
       enough to sufficiently crude conclusions, and often very much perplexed and harassed. He
       tried occasionally his inferences on his companions, who were intelligent and full of
       fervour. Millbank was more than this. He was of a very thoughtful mood; had also some
       principles caught up from a new school, which were materials for discussion. One way or other
       however before he quitted Eton, there prevailed among this circle of friends, the initial
       idea doubtless emanating from Coningsby, an earnest, though a rather vague, conviction that
       the present state of feeling in matters both civil and religious was not healthy; that there
       must be substituted
        for this latitudinarianism, something sound and deep, fervent and well defined,
       and that the priests of this new faith must be found among the New Generation; so that when
       the bright-minded rider of the 'Daughter of the Star' descanted on the influence of
       individual character, of great thoughts and heroic actions, and the divine power of youth and
       genius, he touched a string that was the very heart-chord of his companion, who listened with
       fascinated enthusiasm, as he introduced him to his gallery of inspiring models.
Coningsby arrived at Beaumanoir at a season when men can neither hunt nor shoot. Great
       internal resources should be found in a country family under such circumstances. The Duke and
       Duchess had returned from London only a few days with their daughter, who had been presented
       this year. They were all glad to find themselves again in the country which they loved, and
       which loved them. One of their sons-in-law and his wife, and Henry Sydney, completed the
       party.
There are few conjunctures in life of a more
        startling interest, than to meet the pretty little girl that we have gambolled
       with in our boyhood, and to find her changed in the lapse of a very few years, which in some
       instances may not have brought a corresponding alteration in our own appearance, into a
       beautiful woman. Something of this flitted over Coningsby's mind, as he bowed, a little
       agitated from his surprise, to Lady Theresa Sydney. All that he remembered had prepared him
       for beauty; but not for the degree or character of beauty that he met. It was a rich, sweet
       face, with blue eyes and dark lashes, and a nose that we have no epithet to describe in
       English, but which charmed in Roxalana. Her brown hair fell over her white and well-turned
       shoulders in long and luxuriant tresses. One has met something as brilliant and dainty in a
       medallion of old Sèvres, or amid the terraces and gardens of Watteau.
Perhaps Lady Theresa too might have welcomed him with more freedom had his appearance also
       more accorded with the image which he had left behind. Coningsby was a boy then as we
       described him in our first chapter.
        Though only nineteen now, he had attained his full stature, which was above the
       middle height, and time had fulfilled that promise of symmetry in his figure, and grace in
       his mien, then so largely intimated. Time too which had not yet robbed his countenance of any
       of its physical beauty, had strongly developed the intellectual charm by which it had ever
       been distinguished. As he bowed lowly before the Duchess and her daughter, it would have been
       difficult to image a youth of a mien more pre-possessing and a manner more finished.
A manner that was spontaneous; nature's pure gift, the reflex of his feeling. No artifice
       prompted that profound and polished homage. Not one of those influences, the aggregate of
       whose sway produces, as they tell us, the finished gentleman, had ever exercised its
       beneficent power on our orphan, and not rarely forlorn, Coningsby. No clever and refined
       woman, with her quick perception, and nice criticism that never offends our self-love, had
       ever given him that education that is more precious than Universities. The mild suggestions
        of a sister, the gentle raillery of some laughing cousin, are also advantages
       not always appreciated at the time, but which boys, when they have become men, often think
       over with gratitude, and a little remorse at the ungracious spirit in which they were
       received. Not even the dancing-master had afforded his mechanical aid to Coningsby, who, like
       all Eton boys of this generation, viewed that professor of accomplishments with frank
       repugnance. But even in the boisterous life of school, Coningsby, though his style was free
       and flowing, was always well-bred. His spirit recoiled from that gross familiarity that is
       the characteristic of modern manners, and which would destroy all forms and ceremonies merely
       because they curb and control their own coarse convenience and ill-disguised selfishness. To
       women however Coningsby instinctively bowed as to beings set apart for reverence and delicate
       treatment. Little as his experience was of them, his spirit had been fed with chivalrous
       fancies, and he entertained for them all the ideal devotion of a Surrey or a Sydney.
       Instructed, if not learned, as books and thought
        had already made him in men, he could not conceive that there were any other
       women in the world than fair Geraldines and Countesses of Pembroke.
There was not a country-house in England that had so completely the air of habitual
       residence as Beaumanoir. It is a charming trait, and very rare. In many great mansions
       everything is as stiff, formal, and tedious, as if your host were a Spanish grandee in the
       days of the Inquisition. No ease, no resources; the passing life seems a solemn spectacle in
       which you play a part. How delightful was the morning-room at Beaumanoir; from which
       gentlemen were not excluded with that assumed suspicion that they can never enter it but for
       felonious purposes. Such a profusion of flowers! Such a multitude of books! Such a various
       prodigality of writing materials! So many easy chairs too of so many shapes; each in itself a
       comfortable home; yet nothing crowded. Woman alone can organise a drawing-room; man succeeds
       sometimes in a library. And the ladies' work! How graceful they look bending over
        their embroidery frames, consulting over the arrangement of a group, or the
       colour of a flower. The panniers and fanciful baskets overflowing with variegated worsted,
       are gay and full of pleasure to the eye, and give an air of elegant business that is
       vivifying. Even the sight of employment interests.
Then the morning costume of English women is itself a beautiful work of art. At this period
       of the day, they can find no rivals in other climes. The brilliant complexions of the
       daughters of the north dazzle in daylight; the illumined saloon levels all distinctions. One
       should see them in their well-fashioned muslin dresses. What matrons, and what maidens! Full
       of graceful dignity, fresher than the morn! And the married beauty in her little lace cap.
       Ah, she is a coquette! A charming character at all times; in a country-house an invaluable
       one.
A coquette is a being who wishes to please. Amiable being! If you do not like her, you will
       have no difficulty in finding a female companion of a different mood. Alas! coquettes are
        but too rare. 'Tis a career that requires great abilities, infinite pains, a
       gay and airy spirit. 'Tis the coquette that provides all amusement; suggests the riding
       party, plans the pic-nic, gives and guesses charades, acts them. She is the stirring element
       amid the heavy congeries of social atoms; the soul of the house, the salt of the banquet. Let
       any one pass a very agreeable week, or it may be ten days, under any roof and analyse the
       cause of his satisfaction, and one might safely make a gentle wager that his solution would
       present him with the frolick phantom of a coquette.
"It is impossible that Mr. Coningsby can remember me?" said a clear gay voice; and he
       looked round and was greeted by a pair of sparkling eyes and the gayest smile in the
       world.
It was Lady Everingham, the Duke's married daughter.

</div></body></text></TEI>