<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">
CHAPTER XII.
Madame Colonna with that vivacious energy which characterises the south, had no
       sooner seen Coningsby, and heard his praises celebrated by his grandfather, than she resolved
       that an alliance should sooner or later take place between him and her step-daughter. She
       imparted her projects without delay to Lucretia, who received them in a very different spirit
       to that in which they were communicated. Lucretia bore as little resemblance to her
       step-mother in character, as in person. If she did not possess her beauty, she was born with
       an intellect of far greater capacity and reach. She had a deep judgment. A hasty alliance
       with a youth,
        arranged by their mutual relatives, might suit very well the clime and manners
       of Italy, but Lucretia was well aware that it was altogether opposed to the habits and
       feelings of this country. She had no conviction that either Coningsby would wish to marry
       her, or if willing, that his grandfather would sanction such a step in one as yet only on the
       threshold of the world. Lucretia therefore received the suggestions and proposals of Madame
       Colonna with great coldness and indifference; one might even say contempt, for she neither
       felt respect for this lady, nor was she sedulous to evince it. Although really younger than
       Coningsby, Lucretia felt that a woman of eighteen is in all worldly considerations, ten years
       older than a youth of the same age. She anticipated that a considerable time might elapse
       before Coningsby would feel it necessary to seal his destiny by marriage, while on the other
       hand, she was not only anxious, but resolved, not to delay on her part her emancipation from
       the galling position in which she very frequently found herself.
Lucretia felt rather than expressed these ideas
        and impressions. She was not naturally communicative, and conversed with no one
       with less frankness and facility than with her step-mother. Madame Colonna therefore found no
       reasons in her conversation with Lucretia to change her determination. As her mind was not
       very ingenious she did not see questions in those various lights which make us at the same
       time infirm of purpose and tolerant. What she fancied ought to be done, she fancied must be
       done; for she perceived no middle course or alternative. For the rest, Lucretia's carriage
       towards her gave her little discomfort. Besides she herself though good-natured, was
       obstinate. Her feelings were not very acute; nothing much vexed her. As long as she had fine
       dresses, good dinners, and opera boxes, she could bear her plans to be crossed like a
       philosopher; and her consolation under her unaccomplished devices was her admirable
       consistency, which always assured her that her projects were wise, though unfulfilled.
She broke her purpose to Mr. Rigby that she might gain not only his adhesion to her views,
        but his assistance in achieving them. As Madame Colonna in Mr. Rigby's
       estimation exercised more influence over Lord Monmouth than any other individual, faithful to
       his policy or practice, he agreed with all Madame Colonna's plans and wishes, and volunteered
       instantly to further them. As for the Prince, his wife never consulted him on any subject,
       nor did he wish to be consulted. On the contrary, he had no opinion about anything. All that
       he required was that he should be surrounded by what contributed to his personal enjoyment,
       that he should never be troubled, and that he should have billiards. He was not inexpert in
       field-sports, rode indeed very well for an Italian, but he never cared to be out of doors;
       and there was only one room in the interior which passionately interested him. It was where
       the echoing balls denoted the sweeping hazard or the effective cannonade. That was the
       chamber where the Prince Colonna literally existed. Half an hour after breakfast he was in
       the billiard room; he never quitted it until he dressed for dinner; and he generally
       contrived, while the
        world were amused or amusing themselves at the comedy or in the dance, to steal
       down with some congenial sprites to the magical and illumined chamber, and use his cue until
       bedtime.
Faithful to her first impressions, Lucretia had made no difference in her demeanour to
       Coningsby to that which she offered to the other guests. Polite, but uncommunicative; ready
       to answer, but never originating conversation; she charmed him as little by her manner as by
       her person; and after some attempts not very painstaking to interest her, Coningsby had
       ceased to address her. The day passed by with only a faint recognition between them; even
       that sometimes omitted.
When however Lucretia observed that Coningsby had become one of the most notable persons in
       the castle; when she heard everywhere of his talents and accomplishments, his beauty and
       grace and great acquirements, and perceived that he was courted by all; that Lord Monmouth
       omitted no occasion publicly to evince towards him his regard and consideration;
        that he seemed generally looked upon in the light of his grandfather's heir,
       and that Lady St. Julians, more learned in that respect than any lady in the kingdom, was
       heard more than once to regret that she had not brought another daughter with her, Clara
       Isabella as well as Augustina; the Princess Lucretia began to imagine that Madame Colonna
       after all, might not be so extravagant in her purpose, as she had first supposed. She
       therefore surprised Coningsby with the almost affectionate moroseness with which, while she
       hated to sing, she yet found pleasure in singing for him alone. And it is impossible to say
       what might not have been the next move in her tactics in this respect, had not the very night
       on which she had resolved to commence the enchantment of Coningsby, introduced to her
       Sidonia.
The Princess Lucretia met her fate as she encountered the dark still glance of the friend
       of Lord Eskdale. He too beheld a woman unlike other women, and with his fine experience both
       as a man and a physiologist felt that he was in the presence of no ordinary organization.
        From the evening of his introduction, Sidonia sought the society of the
       Princess Lucretia. He could not complain of her reserve. She threw out her mind in various
       and highly cultivated intelligence. He recognised in her a deep and subtile spirit,
       considerable reading for a woman, habits of thought, and a soul passionate and daring. She
       resolved to subdued one whose appreciation she had gained, and who had subdued her. The
       profound meaning and the calm manner of Sidonia combined to quell her spirit. She struggled
       against the spell. She tried to rival his power; to cope with him, and with the same weapons.
       But prompt as was her thought and bright as was its expression, her heart beat in tumult; and
       with all her apparent serenity, her agitated soul was the prey of absorbing passion. She
       could not contend with that intelligent, yet inscrutable, eye; with that manner so full of
       interest and respect, and yet so tranquil. Besides they were not on equal terms. Here was a
       girl contending with a man learned in the world's way.
Between Sidonia and Coningsby there at
        once occurred companionship. The morning after his arrival they went out
       shooting together. After a long ramble they would stretch themselves on the turf under a
       shady tree, often by the side some brook where the cresses grow, that added a luxury to their
       sporting meal, and then Coningsby would lead their conversation to some subject on which
       Sidonia would pour out his mind with all that depth of reflection, variety of knowledge, and
       richness of illustrative memory, which distinguished him; and which offered so striking a
       contrast to the sharp talent, the shallow information, and the worldly cunning that make a
       Rigby.
This fellowship between Sidonia and Coningsby elevated the latter still more in the
       estimation of Lucretia, and rendered her still more desirous of gaining his good will and
       opinion. A great friendship seemed to have arisen between them, and the world began to
       believe that there must be some foundations for Madame Colonna's inuendoes. That lady herself
       was not in the least alarmed by the attention which Sidonia paid her step-daughter. It was of
        course well-known that Sidonia was not a marrying man. He was however a great
       friend of Mr. Coningsby, his presence and society brought Coningsby and Lucretia more
       together; and however flattered her daughter might be for the moment by Sidonia's homage,
       still as she would ultimately find out, if indeed she ever cared so to do, that Sidonia could
       only be her admirer, Madame Colonna had no kind of doubt, that ultimately Coningsby would be
       Lucretia's husband, as she had arranged from the first.
The Princess Lucretia was a fine horsewoman, though she rarely joined the various
       riding-parties that were daily formed at the Castle. Often indeed, attended only by her
       groom, she met the equestrians. Now she would ride with Sidonia and Coningsby, and as a
       female companion was indispensable, she insisted upon "La Petite" accompanying her. This was
       a fearful trial for Flora, but she encountered it, encouraged by the kind solicitude of
       Coningsby, who always seemed her friend.
Very shortly after the arrival of Sidonia, the
        Archduke and his suite quitted the Castle, which had been His Highness's
       head-quarters during his visit to the manufacturing districts; but no other great change in
       the assembled company occurred for some little time.

</div></body></text></TEI>