<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER IV.
Although it is far from improbable that, had Sir Robert Peel been in England in
       the autumn of 1834, the Whig government would not have been dismissed; nevertheless, whatever
       may be now the opinion of the policy of that measure; whether it be looked on as a premature
       movement which necessarily led to the compact re-organization of the Liberal party, or as a
       great stroke of State, which, by securing at all events a dissolution of the Parliament of
       1832, restored the healthy balance of parties in the Legislature; questions into which we do
       not now wish to enter; it must be generally
        admitted, that the conduct of every individual eminently concerned in that
       great historical transaction was characterized by the rarest and most admirable quality of
       public life—moral courage. The Sovereign who dismissed a Ministry apparently supported by an
       overwhelming majority in the Parliament and the nation, and called to his councils the absent
       chief of a parliamentary section, scarcely numbering at that moment one hundred and forty
       individuals, and of a party in the country supposed to be utterly discomfited by a recent
       revolution; the two ministers who in this absence provisionally administered the affairs of
       the kingdom in the teeth of an enraged and unscrupulous opposition, and perhaps themselves
       not sustained by a profound conviction, that the arrival of their expected leader would
       convert their provisional into a permanent position; above all, the statesman who accepted
       the great charge at a time and under circumstances which marred probably the deep projects of
       his own prescient sagacity and maturing ambition; were all men gifted with a high spirit of
       enterprise,
        and animated by that active fortitude which is the soul of free
       governments.
It was a lively season, that winter of 1834! What hopes, what fears, and what bets! From
       the day on which Mr. Hudson was to arrive at Rome to the election of the Speaker, not a
       contingency that was not the subject of a wager! The people sprang up like mushrooms; town
       suddenly became full. Everybody who had been in office, and everybody who wished to be in
       office; everybody who had ever had anything, and everybody who ever expected to have
       anything; were alike visible. All of course by mere accident; one might meet the same men
       regularly every day for a month, who were only passing through town.
Now was the time for men to come forward who had never despaired of their country. True,
       they had voted for the Reform Bill, but that was to prevent a revolution. And now they were
       quite ready to vote against the Reform Bill, but this was to prevent a dissolution. These are
       the true patriots whose confidence in the good sense of their countrymen and
        in their own selfishness is about equal. In the meantime, the hundred and forty
       threw a grim glance on the numerous waiters on Providence, and amiable trimmers, who
       affectionately inquired every day when news might be expected of Sir Robert. Though too weak
       to form a government, and having contributed in no wise by their exertions to the fall of the
       late, the cohort of Parliamentary Tories felt all the alarm of men, who have accidentally
       stumbled on some treasure-trove, on the suspicious sympathy of their new allies. But after
       all, who were to form the government, and what was the government to be? Was it to be a Tory
       government, or an Enlightened-Spirit of the Age, Liberal-Moderate-Reform government; was it
       to be a government of high philosophy or of low practice; of principle or of expediency; of
       great measures or of little men? A government of statesmen, or of clerks? Of Humbug or of
       Humdrum? Great questions these, but unfortunately there was nobody to answer them. They tried
       the Duke; but nothing could be pumped out of him. All that he knew, which he told
        in his curt husky manner was, that he had to carry on the King's government. As
       for his solitary colleague, he listened and smiled, and then in his musical voice asked them
       questions in return, which is the best possible mode of avoiding awkward inquiries. It was
       very unfair this; for no one knew what tone to take; whether they should go down to their
       public dinners and denounce the Reform Act, or praise it; whether the Church was to be
       re-modelled or only admonished; whether Ireland was to be conquered or conciliated.
"This can't go on much longer," said Taper to Tadpole, as they reviewed together their
       electioneering correspondence on the Ist of December; "We have no cry."
"He is half way by this time," said Tadpole; "send an extract from a private letter to the
       Standard, dated Augsburg, and say he will be here in four days."
At last he came; the great man in a great position, summoned from Rome to govern England.
       The very day that he arrived, he had his audience with the King.

It was two days after this audience; the town, though November, in a state of great
       excitement; clubs crowded, not only morning-rooms, but halls and staircases swarming with
       members eager to give and to receive rumours equally vain; streets lined with cabs and
       chariots, grooms and horses; it was two days after this audience that Mr. Ormsby, celebrated
       for his political dinners, gave one to a very numerous party. Indeed his saloons to-day,
       during the half-hour of gathering which precedes dinner, offered in the various groups, the
       anxious countenances, the inquiring voices, and the mysterious whispers, rather the character
       of an Exchange or Bourse than the tone of a festive society.
Here might be marked a murmuring knot of grey-headed privy-counsellors who had held fat
       offices under Percival and Liverpool, and who looked back to the Reform Act as to a hideous
       dream; there some middle-aged aspirants might be observed who had lost their seats in the
       convulsion, but who flattered themselves they had done something for the party in the
       interval
        by spending nothing except their breath in fighting hopeless boroughs, and
       occasionally publishing a pamphlet, which really produced less effect than chalking the
       walls. Light as air, and proud as a young peacock, tripped on his toes a young Tory, who had
       contrived to keep his seat in a Parliament where he had done nothing, but who thought an
       Under Secretaryship was now secure, particularly as he was the son of a noble Lord who had
       also in a public capacity plundered and blundered in the good old time. The true political
       adventurer, who with dull desperation had stuck at nothing, had never neglected a treasury
       note, had been present at every division, never spoke when he was asked to be silent, and was
       always ready on any subject when they wanted him to open his mouth; who had treated his
       leaders with servility even behind their backs, and was happy for the day if a future
       Secretary of the Treasury bowed to him; who had not only discountenanced discontent in the
       party, but had regularly reported in strict confidence every instance of insubordination
       which came to his knowledge;
        might there too be detected under all the agonies of the crisis; just beginning
       to feel the dread misgiving, whether being a slave and a sneak were sufficient qualifications
       for office, without family or connexion. Poor fellow! half the industry he had wasted on his
       cheerless craft might have made his fortune in some decent trade!
In dazzling contrast with these throes of low ambition, were some brilliant personages who
       had just scampered up from Melton, thinking it probable that Sir Robert might want some moral
       lords of the bed-chamber. Whatever may have been their private fears or feelings, all however
       seemed smiling and significant; as if they knew something if they chose to tell it, and that
       something very much to their own satisfaction. The only grave countenance that was
       occasionally ushered into the room belonged to some individual whose destiny was not in
       doubt, and who was already practising the official air that was in future to repress the
       familiarity of his former fellow-strugglers.
"Do you hear anything?" said a great
        noble, who wanted something in the general scramble, but what he knew not; only
       he had a vague feeling he ought to have something, having made such great sacrifices.
"There is a report that Clifford is to be secretary to the Board of Control," said Mr.
       Earwig, whose whole soul was in this subaltern arrangement, of which the Minister of course
       had not even thought; "but I cannot trace it to any authority."
"I wonder who will be their Master of the Horse," said the great noble, loving gossip
       though he despised the gossipper.
"Clifford has done nothing for the party," said Mr. Earwig.
"I dare say Rambrooke will have the Buckhounds," said the great noble musingly.
"Your Lordship has not heard Clifford's name mentioned?" continued Mr. Earwig.
"I should think they had not come to that sort of thing," said the great noble with
       ill-disguised contempt. "The first thing after the Cabinet is formed, is the Household: the
       things you talk of are done last," and he turned upon
        his heel, and met the imperturbable countenance and clear sarcastic eye of Lord
       Eskdale.
"You have not heard anything?" asked the great noble of his brother patrician.
"Yes, a great deal since I have been in this room; but unfortunately it is all untrue."
"There is a report that Rambrooke is to have the Buck-hounds; but I cannot trace it to any
       authority."
"Pooh!" said Lord Eskdale.
"I don't see that Rambrooke should have the Buck-hounds any more than anybody else. What
       sacrifices has he made?"
"Past sacrifices are nothing," said Lord Eskdale. \ "Present sacrifices are the thing we
       want:—men who will sacrifice their principles, and join us."
"You have not heard Rambrooke's name mentioned?"
"When a Minister has no Cabinet, and only one hundred and forty supporters in the House of
       Commons, he has something else to think of than places at Court," said Lord Eskdale, as he
       slowly turned away to ask Lucian Gay,
        whether it were true that Jenny Colon was coming over.
Shortly after this, Henry Sydney's father, who dined with Mr. Ormsby, drew Lord Eskdale
       into a window and said in an under tone:
"So there is to be a kind of programme: something is to be written."
"Well, we want a cue," said Lord Eskdale. "I heard of this last night: Rigby has written
       something."
The Duke shook his head.
"No; Peel means to do it himself."
But at this moment Mr. Ormsby begged his Grace to lead them to dinner.
"Something is to be written." It is curious to recall the vague terms in which the first
       projection of documents, that are to exercise a vast influence on the course of affairs or
       the minds of nations, is often mentioned. This "something to be written" was written; and
       speedily; and has ever since been talked of.
We believe we may venture to assume that at no period during the movements of 1834-5, did
       Sir Robert Peel ever believe in the success
        of his administration. Its mere failure could occasion him little
       dissatisfaction; he was compensated for it by the noble opportunity afforded to him for the
       display of those great qualities, both moral and intellectual, which the swaddling-clothes of
       a routine prosperity had long repressed, but of which his opposition to the Reform Bill had
       given to the nation a very significant intimation. The brief administration elevated him in
       public opinion, and even in the eye of Europe; and it is probable that a much longer term of
       power would not have contributed more to his fame.
The probable effect of the premature effort of his party on his future position as a
       Minister was however far from being as satisfactory. At the lowest ebb of his political
       fortunes, it cannot be doubted that Sir Robert Peel looked forward, perhaps through the vista
       of many years, to a period when the national mind arrived by reflection and experience at
       certain conclusions, would seek in him a powerful expositor of its convictions. His time of
       life permitted him to be tranquil in adversity, and to
        profit by its salutary uses. He would then have acceded to power as the
       representative of a Creed, instead of being the leader of a Confederacy, and he would have
       been supported by earnest and enduring enthusiasm, instead of by that churlish sufferance
       which is the result of a supposed balance of advantages in his favour. This is the
       consequence of the tactics of those short-sighted intriguers, who persisted in looking upon a
       revolution as a mere party struggle; and would not permit the mind of the nation to work
       through the inevitable phases that awaited it. In 1834 England, though frightened at the
       reality of Reform, still adhered to its phrases; it was inclined, as practical England, to
       maintain existing institutions; but, as theoretical England, it was suspicious that they were
       indefensible.
No one had arisen either in Parliament, or the Universities, or the Press, to lead the
       public mind to the investigation of principles; and not to mistake, in their reformations,
       the corruption of practice for fundamental ideas. It was this perplexed, ill-informed, jaded,
       shallow
        generation, repeating cries which they did not comprehend, and wearied with the
       endless ebullitions of their own barren conceit, that Sir Robert Peel was summoned to govern.
       It was from such materials, ample in quantity, but in all spiritual qualities most deficient;
       with great numbers, largely acred, consoled up to their chins, but without knowledge, genius,
       thought, truth, or faith, that Sir Robert Peel was to form a "great Conservative party on a
       comprehensive basis." That he did this like a dextrous politician, who can deny? Whether he
       realized those prescient views of a great statesman in which he had doubtless indulged, and
       in which, though still clogged by the leadership of 1834, he may yet find fame for himself,
       and salvation for his country, is altogether another question. His difficult attempt was
       expressed in an address to his constituents, which now ranks among state papers. We shall
       attempt briefly to consider it with the impartiality of the future.

</div></body></text></TEI>