<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
CHAPTER VII.
The future historian of the country will be perplexed to ascertain what was the
       distinct object which the Duke of Wellington proposed to himself in the political manoeuvres
       of May, 1832. It was known that the passing of the Reform Bill was a condition absolute with
       the King; it was unquestionable, that the first general election under the new law must
       ignominiously expel the Anti-Reform Ministry from power; who would then resume their seats on
       the Opposition benches in both houses with the loss not only of their boroughs, but of that
       reputation for political consistency, which
        might have been some compensation for the parliamentary influence of which they
       had been deprived. It is difficult to recognise in this premature effort of the Anti-Reform
       leader to thrust himself again into the conduct of public affairs, any indications of the
       prescient judgment which might have been expected from such a quarter. It savoured rather of
       restlessness than of energy; and while it proved in its progress not only an ignorance on his
       part of the public mind, but of the feelings of his own party, it terminated under
       circumstances which were humiliating to the Crown, and painfully significant of the future
       position of the House of Lords in the new constitutional scheme.
The Duke of Wellington has ever been the votary of circumstances. He cares little for
       causes. He watches events rather than seeks to produce them. It is a characteristic of the
       military mind. Rapid combinations, the result of a quick, vigilant, and comprehensive glance,
       are generally triumphant in the field; but in
        civil affairs, where results are not immediate; in diplomacy and in the
       management of deliberative assemblies, where there is much intervening time and many
       counteracting causes; this velocity of decision, this fitful and precipitate action, is often
       productive of considerable embarrassment, and sometimes of terrible discomfiture. It is
       remarkable that men celebrated for military prudence are often found to be headstrong
       statesmen. A great general in civil life is frequently and strangely the creature of impulse;
       influenced in his political movements by the last snatch of information; and often the
       creature of the last aid-de-camp who has his ear.
We shall endeavour to trace in another chapter the reasons which on this, as on previous
       and subsequent occasions, induced Sir Robert Peel to stand aloof, if possible, from official
       life, and made him reluctant to re-enter the service of his Sovereign. In the present
       instance, even temporary success could only have been secured
        by the utmost decision, promptness and energy. These were all wanting: some were
       afraid to follow the bold example of their leader; many were disinclined. In eight and forty
       hours it was known there was a "hitch."
The Reform party, who had been rather stupified than appalled by the accepted mission of
       the Duke of Wellington, collected their scattered senses, and rallied their forces. The
       agitators harangued, the mobs hooted. The City of London, as if the King had again tried to
       seize the five members, appointed a permanent committee of the Common Council to watch the
       fortunes of the "great national measure," and to report daily. Brookes', which was the only
       place that at first was really frightened, and talked of compromise, grew valiant again;
       while young Whig heroes jumped upon club tables, and delivered fiery invectives. Emboldened
       by these demonstrations, the House of Commons met in great force, and passed a vote which
       struck, without disguise, at all rival powers in
        the State; virtually announced its supremacy; revealed the forlorn position of
       the House of Lords under the new arrangement; and seemed to lay for ever the fluttering
       phantom of regal prerogative.
It was on the 9th of May that Lord Lyndhurst was with the King, and on the 15th all was
       over. Nothing in parliamentary history so humiliating as the funereal oration delivered that
       day by the Duke of Wellington over the old constitution, that, modelled on the Venetian, had
       governed England since the accession of the House of Hanover. He described his Sovereign,
       when his Grace first repaired to his Majesty, as in a state of the greatest "difficulty and
       distress," appealing to his never failing loyalty to extricate him from his trouble and
       vexation. The Duke of Wellington representing the House of Lords sympathizes with the King,
       and pledges his utmost efforts for his Majesty's relief. But after five days' exertion, this
       man of indomitable will and invincible fortunes, resigns
        the task in discomfiture and despair, and alleges as the only and sufficient
       reason of his utter and hopeless defeat, that the House of Commons had come to a vote which
       ran counter to the contemplated exercise of the prerogative.
From that moment power passed from the House of Lords to another assembly. But if the peers
       have ceased to be magnificoes, may it not also happen that the Sovereign may cease to be a
       Doge? It is not impossible that the political movements of our time, which seem on the
       surface to have a tendency to democracy, have in reality a monarchical bias.
In less than a fortnight's time the House of Lords, like James II; having abdicated their
       functions by absence, the Reform Bill passed; the ardent monarch, who a few months before had
       expressed his readiness to go down to parliament, if necessary, in a hackney-coach to assist
       its progress, now declining personally to give his assent to its provisions.

In the protracted discussions to which this celebrated measure gave rise, nothing is more
       remarkable than the perplexities into which the speakers of both sides are thrown, when they
       touch upon the nature of the representative principle. On one hand it was maintained, that
       under the old system the people were virtually represented; while on the other, it was
       triumphantly urged, that if the principle be conceded, the people should not be virtually,
       but actually represented. But who are the people? And where are you to draw a line? And why
       should there be any? It was urged that a contribution to the taxes was the constitutional
       qualification for the suffrage. But we have established a system of taxation in this country
       of so remarkable a nature, that the beggar who chews his quid as he sweeps a crossing, is
       contributing to the imposts. Is he to have a vote? He is one of the people, and he yields his
       quota to the public burthens.
Amid these conflicting statements and these
        confounding conclusions, it is singular that no member of either house should
       have recurred to the original character of these popular assemblies, which have always
       prevailed among the northern nations. We still retain in the antique phraseology of our
       statutes, the term which might have beneficially guided a modern Reformer in his
       re-constructive labours.
When the crowned Northman consulted on the welfare of his kingdom, he assembled the
        Estates of his realm. Now an estate is a class of the nation invested with
       political rights. There appeared the estate of the clergy, of the barons, of other classes.
       In the Scandinavian kingdoms to this day, the estate of the peasants sends its
       representatives to the Diet. In England, under the Normans, the Church and the Baronage were
       convoked, together with the estate of the Community, a term which then probably described the
       inferior holders of land, whose tenure was not immediate of the Crown.
        This Third Estate was so numerous, that convenience suggested its appearance by
       representation; while the others, more limited, appeared, and still appear, personally. The
       Third Estate was reconstructed as circumstances developed themselves. It was a Reform of
       Parliament when the towns were summoned.
In treating the House of the Third Estate as the House of the People, and not as the House
       of a privileged class, the Ministry and Parliament of 1831 virtually conceded the principle
       of Universal Suffrage. In this point of view the ten pound franchise was an arbitrary,
       irrational and impolitic qualification. It had, indeed, the merit of simplicity, and so had
       the constitutions of Abbé Siéyès. But its immediate and inevitable result was Chartism.
But if the Ministry and Parliament of 1831 had announced that the time had arrived when the
       Third Estate should be enlarged and reconstructed, they would have occupied an intelligible
       position; and if, instead of simplicity of
        elements in its reconstruction, they had sought, on the contrary, various and
       varying materials which would have neutralised the painful predominance of any particular
       interest in the new scheme, and prevented those banded jealousies which have been its
       consequences, the nation would have found itself in a secure condition. Another class not
       less numerous than the existing one, and invested with privileges not less important, would
       have been added to the public estates of the realm; and the bewildering phrase "the People"
       would have remained what it really is, a term of natural philosophy, and not of political
       science.
During this eventful week of May, 1832, when an important revolution was effected in the
       most considerable of modern kingdoms, in a manner so tranquil, that the victims themselves
       were scarcely conscious at the time of the catastrophe, Coningsby passed his hours in
       unaccustomed pleasures and in novel excitement. Although he heard daily from the
        lips of Mr. Rigby and his friends that England was for ever lost, the assembled
       guests still contrived to do justice to his grandfather's excellent dinners; nor did the
       impending ruin that awaited them prevent the Princess Colonna from going to the opera,
       whither she very good-naturedly took Coningsby. Madame Colonna indeed gave such gratifying
       accounts of her dear young friend, that Coningsby became daily a greater favourite with Lord
       Monmouth, who cherished the idea that his grandson had inherited not merely the colour of his
       eyes, but something of his shrewd and fearless spirit.
With Lucretia, Coningsby did not much advance. She remained silent and sullen. She was not
       beautiful; pallid, with a lowering brow, and an eye that avoided meeting another's. Madame
       Colonna, though good-natured, felt for her something of the affection for which step-mothers
       are celebrated. Lucretia, indeed, did not encourage her kindness, which irritated
        her step-mother, who seemed seldom to address her but to rate and chide;
       Lucretia never replied, but looked dogged. Her father, the Prince, did not compensate for
       this treatment. The memory of her mother, whom he had greatly disliked, did not soften his
       heart. He was a man still young; slender, not tall; very handsome, but worn; a haggard
       Antinous; his beautiful hair daily thinning; his dress rich and effeminate; many jewels, much
       lace; he seldom spoke, but was polished, though moody.
At the end of the week, Coningsby returned to Eton. On the eve of his departure, Lord
       Monmouth desired his grandson to meet him in his apartments on the morrow before Coningsby
       quitted his roof. This farewell visit was as kind and gracious as the first one had been
       repulsive. Lord Monmouth gave Coningsby his blessing and ten pounds, desired that he would
       order a dress, anything he liked, for the approaching Montem, which Lord Monmouth
        meant to attend; and informed his grandson that he should order that in future a
       proper supply of game and venison should be forwarded to Eton for the use of himself and his
       friends.

</div></body></text></TEI>