<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="42">
CHAPTER III.
We must now revert to the family, or rather the household of Lord Monmouth, in
       which considerable changes and events had occurred since the visit of Coningsby to the Castle
       in the preceding autumn.
In the first place, the earliest frost of the winter had carried off the aged proprietor of
       Hellingsley, that contiguous estate which Lord Monmouth so much coveted, the possession of
       which was indeed one of the few objects of his life, and to secure which, he was prepared to
       pay far beyond its intrinsic value, great as that undoubtedly was. Yet Lord Monmouth did not
       become its possessor. Long as his mind
        had been intent upon the subject, skilful as had been his combinations to
       secure his prey, and unlimited the means which were to achieve his purpose, another stepped
       in, and without his privity, without even the consolation of a struggle, stole away the
       prize; and this too a man whom he hated, almost the only individual out of his own family
       that he did hate; a man who had crossed him before in similar enterprises; who was his avowed
       foe; had lavished treasure to oppose him in elections; raised associations against his
       interest; established journals to assail him; denounced him in public; agitated against him
       in private; had declared more than once that he would make "the county too hot for him;" his
       personal, inveterate, indomitable foe, Mr. Millbank of Millbank.
The loss of Hellingsley was a bitter disappointment to Lord Monmouth; but the loss of it to
       such an adversary touched him to the quick. He did not seek to control his anger; he could
       not succeed even in concealing his agitation. He threw upon Rigby that glance so rare with
       him, but under which men always
        quailed; that play of the eye which Lord Monmouth shared in common with Henry
       VIII. that struck awe into the trembling Commons when they had given an obnoxious vote, as
       the King entered the gallery of his palace, and looked around him.
It was a look which implied the dreadful question: "Why have I bought you that such thing
       should happen? Why have I unlimited means and unscrupulous agents?" It made even Rigby feel;
       even his brazen tones were hushed.
To fly from everything disagreeable was the practical philosophy of Lord Monmouth; but he
       was as brave as he was sensual. He would not shrink before the new proprietor of Hellingsley.
       He therefore remained at the castle with an aching heart, and redoubled his hospitalities. An
       ordinary mind might have been soothed by the unceasing consideration and the skilful and
       delicate flattery that ever surrounded Lord Monmouth; but his sagacious intelligence was
       never for a moment the dupe of his vanity. He had no self-love, and as he valued no one,
        there were really no feelings to play upon. He saw through everybody and
       everything; and when he had detected their purpose, discovered their weakness or their
       vileness, he calculated whether they could contribute to his pleasure or his convenience in a
       degree which counter-balanced the objections which might be urged against their intentions,
       or their less pleasing and profitable qualities. To be pleased was always a principal object
       with Lord Monmouth; but when a man wants vengeance, gay amusement is not exactly a
       satisfactory substitute.
A month elapsed, Lord Monmouth with a serene or smiling visage to his guests, but in
       private taciturn and morose. He scarcely ever gave a word to Mr. Rigby, but continually
       bestowed on him glances which painfully affected the appetite of that gentleman. In a hundred
       ways it was intimated to Mr. Rigby that he was not a welcome guest, and yet something was
       continually given him to do which rendered it impossible for him to take his departure. In
       this state of affairs, another event occurred which changed the current of feeling, and by
        its possible consequences, distracted the Marquess from his brooding
       meditations over his discomfiture in the matter of Hellingsley. The Prince Colonna, who,
       since the steeple-chase, had imbibed a morbid predilection for such amusements, and indeed
       for every species of rough riding, was thrown from his horse and killed on the spot.
This calamity broke up the party at Coningsby, which was not at the moment very numerous.
       Mr. Rigby, by command, instantly seized the opportunity of preventing other guests who were
       expected from arriving. This catastrophe was the cause of Mr. Rigby resuming in a great
       measure his old position in the castle. There were a great many things to be done, and all
       disagreeable; he achieved them all, and studied everybody's convenience. Coroner's inquests,
       funerals especially, weeping women, these were all spectacles which Lord Monmouth could not
       endure, but he was so high-bred, that he would not for the world that there should be in
       manner or degree the slightest deficiency of propriety or
        even sympathy. But he wanted somebody to do everything that was proper; to be
       considerate and consoling and sympathetic. Mr. Rigby did it all; gave evidence at the
       inquest, was chief mourner at the funeral, and arranged everything so well that not a single
       emblem of death crossed the sight of Lord Monmouth; while Madame Colonna found submission in
       his exhortations, and the Princess Lucretia, a little more pale and pensive than usual,
       listened with tranquillity to his discourse on the vanity of all sublunary things.
When the tumult had subsided, and habits and feelings had fallen into their old routine,
       and relapsed into their ancient channels, the Marquess proposed that they should all return
       to London, and with great formality, though with great warmth, begged that Madame Colonna
       would ever consider his roof as her own. All were glad to quit the castle, which now
       presented a scene so different to its former animation, and Madame Colonna, weeping, accepted
       the hospitality of her friend, until the impending expansion of the spring would permit
        her to return to Italy. This notice of her return to her own country seemed to
       occasion the Marquess great disquietude.
After they had remained about a month in London, Madame Colonna sent for Mr. Rigby one
       morning to tell him how very painful it was to her feelings to remain under the roof of
       Monmouth House without the sanction of a husband; that the circumstance of being a foreigner,
       under such unusual affliction, might have excused, though not authorized, the step at first,
       and for a moment; but that the continuance of such a course was quite out of the question;
       that she owed it to herself, to her step-child, no longer to trespass on this friendly
       hospitality; that if persisted in, might be liable to misconstruction. Mr. Rigby listened
       with great attention to this statement, and never in the least interrupted Madame Colonna;
       and then offered to do that which he was convinced the lady desired, namely to make the
       Marquess acquainted with the painful state of her feelings. This he did according to his
       fashion, and with sufficient dexterity. Mr. Rigby himself
        was extremely anxious to know which way the wind blew, and the mission with
       which he had been entrusted, fell in precisely with his inclinations and necessities. The
       Marquess listened to the communication and sighed, then turned gently round and surveyed
       himself in the mirror and sighed again, then said to Rigby:
"You understand exactly what I mean, Rigby. It is quite ridiculous their going, and
       infinitely distressing to me. They must stay."
Rigby repaired to the Princess full of mysterious bustle, and with a face beaming with
       importance and satisfaction. He made much of the two sighs; fully justified the confidence of
       the Marquess in his comprehension of unexplained intentions; prevailed on Madame Colonna to
       have some regard for the feelings of one so devoted; expatiated on the insignificance of
       worldly misconstructions, when replied to by such honourable intentions; and fully succeeded
       in his mission. They did stay. Month after month rolled on, and still they stayed; every
       month all the family becoming more resigned
        or more content, and more cheerful. As for the Marquess himself, Mr. Rigby
       never remembered him more serene and even joyous. His Lordship scarcely ever entered general
       society. The Colonna family remained in strict seclusion; and he preferred the company of
       these accomplished and congenial friends to the mob of the great world.
Between Madame Colonna and Mr. Rigby there had always subsisted considerable confidence.
       Now, that gentleman seemed to have achieved fresh and greater claims to her regard. In the
       pleasure with which he looked forward to her approaching alliance with his patron, he
       reminded her of the readiness with which he had embraced her suggestions for the marriage of
       her daughter with Coningsby. Always obliging, she was never wearied of chaunting his praises
       to her noble admirer, who was apparently much gratified she should have bestowed her esteem
       on one of whom she would necessarily in after life see so much. It is seldom the lot of
       husbands that their confidential friends gain the regards of their brides.

"I am delighted you all like Rigby," said Lord Monmouth, "as you will see so much of
       him."
The remembrance of the Hellingsley failure seemed to be quite erased from the memory of the
       Marquess. Rigby never recollected him more cordial and confidential, and more equable in his
       manner. He told Rigby one day, that he wished that Monmouth House should possess the most
       sumptuous and the most fanciful boudoir in London or Paris. What a hint for Rigby! That
       gentleman consulted the first artists, and gave them some hints in return; his researches on
       domestic decoration ranged through all ages; he even meditated a rapid tour to mature his
       inventions; but his confidence in his native taste and genius, ultimately convinced him that
       this movement was unnecessary.
The summer advanced; the death of the King occurred; the dissolution summoned Rigby to
       Coningsby and the borough of Darlford. His success was marked certain in the secret books of
       Tadpole and Taper. A manufacturing town, enfranchised under the Reform
        Act, already gained by the Conservative cause! Here was reaction—here influence
       of property! Influence of character, too; for no one was so popular as Lord Monmouth; a most
       distinguished nobleman, of strict Conservative principles, who, if he carried the county and
       the manufacturing borough also, merited the straw-berry -leaf.
"There will be no holding Rigby," said Taper; "I'm afraid he will be looking for something
       very high."
"The higher the better," rejoined Tadpole, "and then he will not interfere with us. I like
       your high-fliers; it is your plodders I detest, wearing old hats and high-lows, speaking in
       committee, and thinking they are men of business: d—n them!"
Rigby went down, and made some very impressive speeches; at least they read very well in
       some of his second-rate journals, where all the uproar figured as loud cheering, and the
       interruption of a cabbage-stalk was represented as a question from some intelligent
       individual in the crowd. The fact is, Rigby bored his audience
        too much with history, especially with the French Revolution, which he fancied
       was his "forte," so that the people at last, whenever he made any allusion to the subject,
       were almost as much terrified as if they had seen the guillotine.
Rigby had as yet one great advantage; he had no opponent; and without personal opposition,
       no contest can be very bitter. It was for some days Rigby versus Liberal principles; and
       Rigby had much the best of it; for he abused Liberal principles roundly in his harangues, who
       not being represented on the occasion made no reply; while plenty of ale, and some capital
       songs by Lucian Gay, who went down express, gave the right cue to the mob, who declared in
       chorus, beneath the windows of Rigby's hotel, that he was "a fine old English gentleman!"
But there was to be a contest; no question about that, and a sharp one, although Rigby was
       to win, and well. The liberal party had been so fastidious about their new candidate, that
       they had none ready though several biting.
        Jawster Sharp thought at one time that sheer necessity would give him another
       chance still; but even Rigby was preferable to Jawster Sharp, who, finding it would not do,
       published his long-prepared valedictory address, in which he told his constituents, that
       having long sacrificed his health to their interests, he was now obliged to retire into the
       bosom of his family. And a very well provided for family, too.
All this time the Liberal deputation from Darlford—two aldermen, three town counsellors,
       and the Secretary of the Reform Association, were walking about London like mad things,
       eating luncheons and looking for a candidate. They called at the Reform Club twenty times in
       the morning, badgered whips and red-tapers, were introduced to candidates, badgered
       candidates; examined would-be members as if they were at a cattle show, listened to political
       pedigrees, dictated political pledges, referred to Hansard to see how men had voted, inquired
       whether men had spoken, finally discussed terms. But they never could hit the right man. If
       the principles were right, there was no money; and
        if money were ready, money would not take pledges. In fact they wanted a
       Phoenix; a very rich man, who would do exactly as they liked, with extremely low opinions and
       with very high connexions.
"If he would go for the ballot and had a handle to his name, it would have the best
       effect," said the secretary of the Reform Association, "because you see we are fighting
       against a Right Honourable, and you have no idea how that takes with the mob."
The deputation had been three days in town, and urged by despatches by every train to bring
       affairs to a conclusion, jaded, perplexed, confused, they were ready to fall into the hands
       of the first jobber or bold adventurer. They discussed over their dinner at a Strand
       Coffee-house the claims of the various candidates who had presented themselves. Mr. Donald
       Macpherson Macfarlane, who would only pay the legal expenses: he was soon dispatched. Mr.
       Gingerly Browne of Jermyn Street, the younger son of a Baronet, who would go as far as a
       £1000, provided the seat was secured. Mr.
        Juggins, a distiller, £2000 man; but would not agree to any annual
       subscriptions. Sir Baptist Placid, vague about expenditure, but repeatedly declaring that
       "there could be no difficulty on that head." He however had a moral objection to subscribing
       to the races,— and that was a great point at Darlford. Sir Baptist would subscribe a guinea
       per annum to the Infirmary, and the same to all religious Societies, without any distinction
       of sects—but races, it was not the sum, £100 per annum, but the principle. He had a moral
       objection.
In short the deputation began to suspect what was the truth, that they were a day after the
       fair, and that all the electioneering rips that swarm in the purlieus of political clubs
       during an impending dissolution of Parliament, men who become political characters in their
       small circle, because they have been talked of as once having an intention to stand for
       places for which they never offered themselves, or for having stood for places, where they
       never could by any circumstance have succeeded, were in fact nibbling at their dainty
       morsel.

At this moment of despair, a ray of hope was imparted to them by a confidential note from a
       secretary of the Treasury, who wished to see them at the Reform Club on the morrow. You may
       be sure they were punctual to their appointment. The secretary received them with great
       consideration. He had got them a candidate, and one of high mark—the son of a Peer, and
       connected with the highest Whig houses. Their eyes sparkled. A real honourable. If they liked
       he would introduce them immediately to the Honourable Alberic de Crecy. He had only to
       introduce them, as there was no difficulty either as to means or opinions, expenses or
       pledges.
The secretary returned with a young gentleman whose diminutive stature would seem, from his
       smooth and singularly puerile countenance, to be merely the consequence of his very tender
       years, but Mr. de Crecy was really of age, or at least would be by the nomination day. He did
       not say a word, but looked like the rosebud which dangled in the button-hole of his frock
       coat. The Aldermen and Town Counsellors
        were what is sometimes emphatically styled flabbergasted; they were speechless
       from bewilderment. "Mr. de Crecy will go for the ballot," said the secretary of the Treasury
       with an audacious eye and a demure look, "and for Total and Immediate if you press him hard;
       but don't if you can help it, because he has an uncle, an old county member who has
       prejudices, and might disinherit him. However, we answer for him. And I am very happy that I
       have been the means of bringing about an arrangement, which I feel will be mutually
       advantageous." And so saying the secretary effected his escape.
Circumstances, however, retarded for a season the political career of the Honourable
       Alberic de Crecy. While the Liberal party at Darlford were suffering under the daily
       inflictions of Mr. Rigby's slashing style, and the post brought them very unsatisfactory
       prospects of a champion, one offered himself, and in an address which intimated that he was
       no man of straw, likely to recede from any contest in which he chose to embark. The town was
       suddenly placarded
        with a letter to the Independent Electors from Mr. Millbank the new proprietor
       of Hellingsley.
He expressed himself as one not anxious to obtrude himself on their attention and founding
       no claim to their confidence on his recent acquisition; but at the same time as one resolved
       that the free and enlightened community, with which he must necessarily hereafter be much
       connected, should not become the nomination Borough of any Peer of the realm without a
       struggle if they chose to make one. And so he offered himself if they could not find a better
       candidate without waiting for the ceremony of a requisition. He was exactly the man they
       wanted; and though he had "no handle to his name," and was somewhat impracticable about
       pledges, his fortune was so great, and his character so high, that it might be hoped that the
       people would be almost as content as if they were appealed to by some obscure scion of
       factitious nobility subscribing to political engagements which he could not comprehend, and
       which in general are vomited with as much facility as they are swallowed.

</div></body></text></TEI>