<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER X.
What wonderful things are events! The least are of greater importance than the
       most sublime and comprehensive speculations! In what fanciful schemes to obtain the
       friendship of Coningsby had Millbank in his reveries often indulged! What combinations that
       were to extend over years and influence their lives! But the moment that he entered the world
       of action, his pride recoiled from the plans and hopes which his sympathy had inspired. His
       sensibility and his inordinate self-respect were always at variance. And he seldom exchanged
       a word
        with the being whose idea engrossed his affection.
And now, suddenly an event had occurred, like all events, unforeseen, which in a few brief,
       agitating, tumultuous moments, had singularly and utterly changed the relations that
       previously subsisted between him and the former object of his concealed tenderness. Millbank
       now stood, with respect to Coningsby, in the position of one who owes to another the greatest
       conceivable obligation; a favour which time could permit him neither to forget nor to repay.
       Pride was a sentiment that could no longer subsist before the preserver of his life. Devotion
       to that being, open, almost ostentatious, was now a duty, a paramount and absorbing tie. The
       sense of past peril, the rapture of escape, a renewed relish for the life so nearly
       forfeited, a deep sentiment of devout gratitude to the Providence that had guarded over him,
       for Millbank was an eminently religious boy, a thought of home, and the anguish that might
       have overwhelmed
        his hearth; all these were powerful and exciting emotions for a young and
       fervent mind, in addition to the peculiar source of sensibility on which we have already
       touched. Lord Vere, who lodged in the same house as Millbank, and was sitting by his bedside,
       observed as night fell that his mind wandered.
The illness of Millbank, the character of which soon transpired and was soon exaggerated,
       attracted the public attention with increased interest to the circumstances out of which it
       had arisen, and from which the parties principally concerned had wished to have diverted
       notice. The sufferer indeed had transgressed the rules of the school by bathing at an
       unlicensed spot, where there were no expert swimmers in attendance, as is customary, to
       instruct the practice and to guard over the lives of the young adventurers. But the
       circumstances with which this violation of rules had been accompanied, and the assurance of
       several of the party that they had not themselves
        infringed the regulations, combined with the high character of Millbank, made
       the authorities not over-anxious to visit with penalties a breach of observance, which, in
       the case of the only proved offender, had been attended with such impressive consequences.
       The feat of Coningsby was extolled by all as an act of high gallantry and skill. It confirmed
       and increased the great reputation which he already enjoyed.
"Millbank is getting quite well," said Buckhurst to Coningsby a few days after the
       accident. Henry Sydney and I are going to see him. Will you come?"
"I think we shall be too many. I will go another day," replied Coningsby.
So they went without him. They found Millbank up and reading.
"Well, old fellow," said Buckhurst, "how are you? We should have come up before but they
       would not let us. And you are quite right now, eh?"

"Quite; has there been any row about it?"
"All blown over," said Henry Sydney; "C—y behaved like a trump."
"I have seen nobody yet," said Millbank; "they would not let me till to-day. Vere looked in
       this morning and left me this book, but I was asleep. I hope they will let me out in a day or
       two. I want to thank Coningsby; I never shall rest till I have thanked Coningsby."
"Oh! he will come to see you," said Henry Sydney. "I asked him just now to come with
       us."
"Yes!" said Millbank, eagerly; "and what did he say?"
"He thought we should be too many."
"I hope I shall see him soon," said Millbank, "some how or other."
"I will tell him to come," said Buckhurst.
"Oh! no, no; don't tell him to come," said Millbank. "Don't bore him."
"I know he is going to play a match at fives this afternoon," said Buckhurst, "for I am
       one."

"And who are the others?" inquired Millbank.
"Herbert and Campbell."
"Herbert is no match for Coningsby," said Millbank.
And then they talked over all that had happened since his absence; and Buckhurst gave him a
       very graphic report of the excitement on the afternoon of the accident; at last they were
       obliged to leave him.
"Well, good bye, old fellow; we will come and see you every day. What can we do for you?
       Any books or anything?"
"If any fellow asks after me," said Millbank, "tell him I shall be glad to see him. It is
       very dull being alone. But do not tell any fellow to come if he does not ask after me."
Notwithstanding the kind suggestions of Buckhurst and Henry Sydney, Coningsby could not
       easily bring himself to call on Millbank. He felt a constraint. It seemed as if he went to
       receive thanks. He would rather have met
        Millbank again in school, or in the playing fields. Without being able then to
       analyze his feelings, he shrank unconsciously from that ebullition of sentiment, which in
       more artificial circles is described as a scene. Not that any dislike of Millbank prompted
       him to this reserve. On the contrary, since he had conferred a great obligation on Millbank,
       his prejudice against him had sensibly decreased. How it would have been had Millbank saved
       Coningsby's life, is quite another affair. Probably, as Coningsby was by nature generous, his
       sense of justice might have struggled successfully with his painful sense of the overwhelming
       obligation. But in the present case there was no element to disturb his fair
       self-satisfaction. He had greatly distinguished himself; he had conferred on his rival an
       essential service; and the whole world rang with his applause. He began rather to like
       Millbank; we will not say because Millbank was the unintentional cause of his pleasurable
       sensations. Really it was that the unusual
        circumstances had prompted him to a more impartial judgment of his rival's
       character. In this mood, the day after the visit of Buckhurst and Henry Sydney, Coningsby
       called on Millbank, but finding his medical attendant with him, Coningsby availed himself of
       that excuse for going away without seeing him.
The next day he left Millbank a newspaper on his way to school, time not permitting a
       visit. Two days after, going into his room, he found on his table, a letter addressed to
        Harry Coningsby, Esq.
Eton, May—, 1832.
"Dear Coningsby,
"I very much fear that you must think me a very ungrateful fellow because you have not
       heard from me before; but I was in hopes that I might get out and say to you what I feel; but
       whether I speak or write, it is quite impossible for me to make you understand the feelings
       of my heart to you. Now I will say
        at once that I have always liked you better than any fellow in the school, and
       always thought you the cleverest; indeed I always thought that there was no one like you, but
       I never would say this or show this, because you never seemed to care for me, and because I
       was afraid you would think I merely wanted to make a pal of you, as they used to say of some
       other fellows, whose names I will not mention, because they always tried to make a pal with
       Henry Sydney and you. I do not want this at all, but I want, though we may not speak to each
       other more than before, that we may be friends; and that you will always know that there is
       nothing I will not do for you, and that I like you better than any fellow at Eton. And I do
       not mean that this shall be only at Eton, but afterwards, wherever we may be, that you will
       always remember that there is nothing I will not do for you. Not because you saved my life,
       though that is a great thing, but because before that I would have done any thing for you;
       only for
        the cause above mentioned, I would not show it. I do not expect that we shall
       be more together than before; nor can I ever suppose that you could like me as you like Henry
       Sydney and Buckhurst, or even as you like Vere; but still I hope you will always think of me
       with kindness now, and let me sign myself, if ever I do write to you,
Your most attached, affectionate, and devoted friend,
Oswald Millbank ."

</div></body></text></TEI>