<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER III.
A breakfast at Beaumanoir was a meal of some ceremony. Every guest was expected to
       attend, and at a somewhat early hour. Their host and hostess set them the example of
       punctuality. 'Tis an old form rigidly adhered to in some great houses, but it must be
       confessed does not contrast very agreeably with the easier arrangements of establishments of
       less pretension and of more modern order.
The morning after the dinner to which we have been recently introduced, there was one
       individual absent from the breakfast table whose non-appearance could scarcely be passed over
        without notice; and several inquired with some anxiety, whether their host were
       indisposed.
"The Duke has received some letters from London which detain him," replied the Duchess. "He
       will join us."
"Your Grace will be glad to hear that your son Henry is very well," said Mr. Rigby; "I
       heard of him this morning. Harry Coningsby enclosed me a letter for his grandfather, and
       tells me that he and Henry Sydney had just had a capital run with the King's hounds."
"It is three years since we have seen Mr. Coningsby," said the Duchess. "Once he was often
       here. He was a great favorite of mine. I hardly ever knew a more interesting boy."
"Yes, I have done a great deal for him," said Mr. Rigby. "Lord Monmouth is fond of him and
       wishes that he should make a figure; but how any one is to distinguish himself now, I really
       am at a loss to comprehend."
"But are affairs so very bad?" said the Duchess, smiling. "I thought that we were all
       regaining our good sense and good temper."
"I believe all the good sense and all the good
        temper in England are concentrated in your Grace," said Mr. Rigby very
       gallantly.
"I should be sorry to be such a monopolist. But Lord Fitz-Booby was giving me last night
       quite a glowing report of Mr. Tadpole's prospects for the nation. We were all to have our own
       again; and Percy to carry the county."
"My dear Madam, before twelve months are past there will not be a county in England. Why
       should there be? If boroughs are to be disfranchised, why should not counties be
       destroyed?"
At this moment the Duke entered, apparently agitated. He bowed to his guests and apologized
       for his unusual absence. "The truth is," he continued, "I have just received a very important
       despatch. An event has occurred which may materially affect affairs. Lord Spencer is
       dead."
A thunderbolt in a summer sky, as Sir William Temple says, could not have produced a
       greater sensation. The business of the repast ceased in a moment. The knives and forks were
       suddenly silent. All was still.
"It is an immense event," said Tadpole.

"I don't see my way," said Taper.
"When did he die?" said Lord Fitz-Booby.
"I don't believe it," said Mr. Rigby.
"They have got their man ready," said Tadpole.
"It is impossible to say what will happen," said Taper.
"Now is the time for an amendment on the address," said Fitz-Booby.
"There are two reasons which convince me that Lord Spencer is not dead," said Mr.
       Rigby.
"I fear there is no doubt of it," said the Duke, shaking his head.
"Lord Althorp was the only man who could keep them together," said Lord Fitz-Booby.
"On the contrary," said Tadpole. "If I be right in my man, and I have no doubt of it, you
       will have a radical programme and they will be stronger than ever."
"Do you think they can get the steam up again?" said Taper, musingly.
"They will bid high," replied Tadpole. "Nothing could be more unfortunate than this death.
       Things were going on so well and so quietly! The Wesleyans almost with us!"

"And Shabbyton, too!" mournfully exclaimed Taper. "Another registration and quiet times,
       and I could have reduced the constituency to two hundred and fifty."
"If Lord Spencer had died on the 10th," said Rigby, "it must have been known to Henry
       Rivers. And I have a letter from Henry Rivers by this post. Now, Althorp is in
       Northamptonshire, mark that, and Northamptonshire is a county—"
"My dear Rigby," said the Duke, "pardon me for interrupting you. Unhappily, there is no
       doubt Lord Spencer is dead, for I am one of his executors."
This announcement silenced even Mr. Rigby, and the conversation now entirely merged in
       speculations on what would occur. Numerous were the conjectures hazarded, but the prevailing
       impression was, that this unforeseen event might embarrass those secret expectations of Court
       succour in which a certain section of the party had for some time reason to indulge.
From the moment, however, of the announcement of Lord Spencer's death, a
        change might be visibly observed in the tone of the party at Beaumanoir. They
       became silent, moody, and restless. There seemed a general, though not avowed, conviction
       that a crisis of some kind or other was at hand. The post too brought letters every day from
       town teeming with fanciful speculations, and occasionally mysterious hopes.
"I kept this cover for Peel," said the Duke pensively, as he loaded his gun on the morning
       of the 14th. "Do you know, I was always against his going to Rome?"
"It is very odd," said Tadpole, "but I was thinking of the very same thing."
"It will be fifteen years before England will see a Tory Government," said Mr. Rigby,
       drawing his ramrod, "and then it will only last five months."
"Melbourne, Althorp, and Durham—all in the Lords," said Taper. "Three leaders! They must
       quarrel."
"If Durham come in, mark me, he will dissolve on Household Suffrage and the Ballot," said
       Tadpole.

"Not near as good a cry as Church," replied Taper.
"With the Malt Tax," said Tadpole. "Church will not do against Household Suffrage and
       Ballot without the Malt Tax."
"Malt Tax is madness," said Taper. "A good farmer's friend cry without Malt Tax, would work
       just as well."
"They will never dissolve," said the Duke. "They are so strong."
"They cannot go on with three hundred majority," said Taper. "Forty is as much as can be
       managed with open constituencies."
"If he had only gone to Paris instead of Rome!" said the Duke.
"Yes," said Mr. Rigby, "I could have written to him then by every post, and undeceived him
       as to his position."
"After all, he is the only man," said the Duke; "and I really believe the country thinks
       so."
"Pray, what is the country?" inquired Mr. Rigby. "The country is nothing; it is the
       constituency you have to deal with."

"And to manage them you must have a good cry," said Taper. "All now depends upon a good
       cry."
"So much for the science of politics," said the Duke, bringing down a pheasant. "How Peel
       would have enjoyed this cover!"
"He will have plenty of time for sport during his life," said Mr. Rigby.
On the evening of the 15th of November, a despatch arrived at Beaumanoir, informing his
       Grace that the King had dismissed the Whig Ministry, and sent for the Duke of Wellington.
       Thus the first agitating suspense was over; to be succeeded however by expectation still more
       anxious. It was remarkable that every individual suddenly found that he had particular
       business in London which could not be neglected. The Duke very properly pleaded his
       executorial duties; but begged his guests on no account to be disturbed by his inevitable
       absence. Lord Fitz-booby had just received a letter from his daughter who was extremely
       indisposed at Brighton, and he was most anxious to reach her. Tadpole had to receive
        deputations from Wesleyans, and well-registered boroughs anxious to receive
       well-principled candidates. Taper was off to get the first job at the contingent Treasury, in
       favour of the Borough of Shabbyton. Mr. Rigby alone was silent; but he quietly ordered a
       post-chaise at daybreak, and long before his fellow guests were roused from their slumbers,
       he was halfway to London, ready to give advice either at the Pavilion or Apsley House.

</div></body></text></TEI>