<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
CHAPTER II.
Less than a year after the arrival of Coningsby at Cambridge, and which he had
       only once quitted in the interval, and that to pass a short time in Berkshire with his friend
       Buckhurst, occurred the death of King William IV. This event necessarily induced a
       dissolution of the Parliament elected under the auspices of Sir Robert Peel in 1834, and
       after the publication of the Tamworth manifesto.
The death of the King was a great blow to what had now become to be generally styled the
       "Conservative Cause." It was quite unexpected; within a fortnight of his death eminent
       persons
        still believed that "it was only the hay fever." Had his Majesty lived until
       after the then impending Registration, the Whigs would have been again dismissed. Nor is
       there any doubt that under these circumstances the "Conservative Cause" would have secured
       for the new ministers a Parliamentary majority. What would have been the consequences to the
       country if the four years of Whig rule from 1837 to 1841 had not occurred? It is easier to
       decide what would have been the consequences to the Whigs. Some of their great friends might
       have lacked blue ribbons and Lord Lieutenantcies; and some of their little friends
       comfortable places in the Customs and Excise. They would have lost undoubtedly the
       distributions of four years patronage; we can hardly say the exercise of four years power;
       but they would have existed at this moment as the most powerful and popular opposition that
       ever flourished in this country, if indeed the course of events had not long ere this carried
       them back to their old posts in a proud and intelligible position. The Reform Bill did not do
        more injury to the Tories than the attempt to govern this country without a
       decided Parliamentary majority did the Whigs. The greatest of all evils is a weak government.
       They cannot carry good measures, they are forced to carry bad ones.

The twelve-hundred-a-yearers were in despair about the King's death. Their loyal souls were
       sorely grieved that his gracious Majesty had not outlived the registration. All their happy
       inventions about "hay-fever," circulated in confidence and sent by post to chairmen of
       conservative associations, followed by a royal funeral! General election about to take place
       with the old registration; government boroughs against them, and the young Queen for a cry.
       What a cry! Youth, beauty, and a Queen! Taper grew pale at the thought. What could they
       possibly get up to countervail it? Even Church and Corn Laws together, would not do; and then
       Church was sulky, for "the Conservative Cause" had just made it a present of a Commission,
       and all that the country gentlemen knew of Conservativism was that it would not repeal the
       malt tax, and had made them repeal
        their pledges. Yet a cry must be found. A dissolution without a cry, in the
       Taper philosophy, would be a world without a sun. A rise might be got by "Independence of the
       House of Lords;" and Lord Lyndhurst's summaries might be well circulated at one penny per
       hundred, large discount allowed to Conservative Associations and endless credit. Tadpole
       however was never very fond of the House of Lords; besides it was too limited. Tadpole wanted
       the young Queen brought in; the rogue! At length one morning, Taper came up to him with a
       slip of paper and a smile of complacent austerity on his dull visage, "I think Mr. Tadpole
       that will do."
Tadpole took the paper and read " Our young Queen, and our old Institutions !"
The eyes of Tadpole sparkled as if they had met a gnomic sentence of Periander or Thales;
       then turning to Taper, he said,
"What do you think of 'ancient,' instead of 'old'?"
"You cannot have 'Our modern Queen, and our ancient Institutions,'" said Mr. Taper.

The dissolution was soon followed by an election for the borough of Cambridge. The
       "Conservative Cause" candidate was an old Etonian. That was a bond of sympathy which imparted
       zeal even to those who were a little sceptical of the essential virtues of Conservativism.
       Every under-graduate especially who remembered "the distant spires," became enthusiastic.
       Buckhurst took a very decided part. He cheered, he canvassed, he brought men to the poll whom
       none could move; he influenced his friends and his companions. Even Coningsby caught the
       contagion, and Vere, who had imbibed much of Coningsby's political sentiment, prevailed on
       himself to be neutral. The Conservative Cause triumphed in the person of its Eton champion.
       The day the member was chaired, several men in Coningsby's rooms were talking over their
       triumph.
"By Jove," said the panting Buckhurst, throwing himself on the sofa, "it was well done;
       never was anything better done. An immense triumph! The greatest triumph the Conservative
       Cause has had. And yet," he
        added, laughing, "if any fellow were to ask me what the Conservative Cause was,
       I am sure I should not know what to say."
"Why it's the cause of our glorious institutions," said Coningsby. "A Crown robbed of its
       prerogatives; a Church controlled by a commission; and an Aristocracy that does not
       lead."
"Under whose genial influence, the order of the Peasantry, 'a country's pride,' has
       vanished from the face of the land," said Henry Sydney, "and is succeeded by a race of serfs,
       who are called labourers and who burn ricks."
"Under which," continued Coningsby, "the crown has become a cipher; the church a sect; the
       nobility drones; and the people drudges."
"It is the great constitutional cause," said Lord Vere, "that refuses everything to
       opposition; yields everything to agitation: conservative in Parliament, destructive out of
       doors; that has no objection to any change provided only it be effected by unauthorized
       means."
"The first public association of men," said Coningsby, "who have worked for an avowed end,
       without enunciating a single principle."

"And who have established political infidelity throughout the land," said Lord Henry.
"By Jove!" said Buckhurst, "what infernal fools we have made ourselves this last week!"
"Nay," said Coningsby, smiling, "it was our last schoolboy weakness. Floreat Etona, under
       all circumstances."
"I certainly, Coningsby," said Lord Vere, "shall not assume the Conservative Cause, instead
       of the Cause for which Hampden died in the field, and Sydney on the scaffold."
"The cause for which Hampden died in the field, and Sydney on the scaffold," said
       Coningsby, "was the cause of the Venetian Republic."
"How—how?" said Buckhurst.
"I repeat it," said Coningsby. "The great object of the Whig leaders in England from the
       first movement under Hampden to the last more successful one in 1688, was to establish in
       England a high aristocratic republic on the model of the Venetian, then the study and
       admiration of all speculative politicians. Read Harrington; turn over Algernon Sydney; and
        you will see how the minds of the English leaders in the seventeenth century
       were saturated with the Venetian type. And they at length succeeded. William III. found them
       out in an instant. He told the Whig leaders 'I will not be a Doge.' He balanced parties; he
       baffled them as the Puritans baffled them fifty years before. The reign of Anne was a
       struggle between the Venetian and the English systems. Two great Whig nobles, Argyle and
       Shrewsbury, worthy of seats in the Council of Ten, forced their Sovereign on her death-bed to
       change the ministry. They accomplished their object. They brought in a new family on their
       own terms. George I. was a Doge; George II. was a Doge; they were what William III., a great
       man, would not be. George III. tried not to be a Doge, but it was impossible materially to
       resist the deeply laid combination. He might get rid of the Whig magnificoes, but he could
       not rid himself of the Venetian constitution. And a Venetian constitution did govern England
       from the accession of the House of Hanover until 1832. Now I do not ask
        you, Vere, to relinquish the political tenets which in ordinary times would
       have been your inheritance. All I say is, the constitution introduced by your ancestors
       having been subverted by their descendants your contemporaries, beware of still holding
       Venetian principles of government when you have not a Venetian constitution to govern with.
       Do what I am doing, what Henry Sydney and Buckhurst are doing, what other men that I could
       mention are doing, hold yourself aloof from political parties which, from the necessity of
       things, have ceased to have distinctive principles, and are therefore practically only
       factions; and wait and see, whether with patience, energy, honour, and Christian faith, and a
       desire to look to the national welfare and not to sectional and limited interests; whether, I
       say, we may not discover some great principles to guide us, to which we may adhere, and which
       then, if true, will ultimately guide and control others."
"The Whigs are worn out," said Vere, "Conservativism is a sham, and Radicalism is
       pollution."

"I certainly," said Buckhurst, "when I get into the House of Commons, shall speak my mind
       without reference to any party whatever; and all I hope is, we may all come in at the same
       time, and then we may make a party of our own."
"I have always heard my father say," said Vere, "that there was nothing so difficult as to
       organize an independent party in the House of Commons."
"Ay! but that was in the Venetian period, Vere," said Henry Sydney smiling.
"I dare say," said Buckhurst, "the only way to make a party in the House of Commons is just
       the one that succeeds anywhere else. Men must associate together. When you are living in the
       same set, dining together every day, and quizzing the Dons, it is astonishing how well men
       agree. As for me, I never would enter into a conspiracy, unless the conspirators were fellows
       who had been at Eton with me; and then there would be no treachery."
"Let us think of principles, and not of parties," said Coningsby.

"For my part," said Buckhurst, "whenever a political system is breaking up, as in this
       country at present, I think the very best thing is to brush all the old Dons off the stage.
       They never take to the new road kindly. They are always hampered by their exploded prejudices
       and obsolete traditions. I don't think a single man, Vere, that sat in the Venetian Senate
       ought to be allowed to sit in the present English House of Commons."
"Well no one does in our family except my uncle Philip," said Lord Henry; "and the moment I
       want it, he will resign; for he detests Parliament. It interferes so with his hunting."
"Well, we have all fair parliamentary prospects," said Buckhurst. "That is something. I
       wish we were in now."
"Heaven forbid," said Coningsby. "I tremble at the responsibility of a seat at any time.
       With my present unsettled and perplexed views, there is nothing from which I should recoil so
       much as the House of Commons."
"I quite agree with you," said Henry Sydney.
        "The best thing we can do is to keep as clear of political party as we possibly
       can. How many men waste the best part of their lives in painfully apologising for a
       conscientious deviation from a parliamentary course which they adopted when they were boys,
       without thought, or prompted by some local connexion or interest to secure a seat."
It was the midnight following the morning when this conversation took place, that Coningsby
       alone, and having just quitted a rather boisterous party of wassailers who had been
       celebrating at Buckhurst's rooms the triumph of "Eton Statesmen," if not of Conservative
       principles, stopped in the precincts of that Royal College, that reminded him of his
       school-days, to cool his brow in the summer air, that even at that hour was soft, and to calm
       his mind in the contemplation of the still, the sacred, and the beauteous scene that
       surrounded him.
There rose that fane, the pride and boast of Cambridge, not unworthy to rank among the
       chief temples of Christendom. Its vast form was exaggerated in the uncertain hour; part
        shrouded in the deepest darkness, while a flood of silver light suffused its
       southern side, distinguished with revealing beam the huge ribs of its buttresses, and bathed
       with mild lustre its airy pinnacles.
"Where is the spirit that raised these walls?" thought Coningsby. "Is it indeed extinct? Is
       then this civilization, so much vaunted, inseparable from moderate feelings and little
       thoughts? If so, give me back barbarism! But I cannot believe it. Man that is made in the
       image of the Creator, is made for God-like deeds. Come what come may, I will cling to the
       heroic principle. It can alone satisfy my soul."

</div></body></text></TEI>