<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="70">
CHAPTER XII.
 Less than an hour after the arrival of Sybil at Mowbray Castle the scout that Mr
       Mountchesney had sent off to gather news returned, and with intelligence of the triumph of
       Gerard’s eloquence, that all had ended happily, and that the people were dispersing and
       returning to the town.
 Kind as was the reception accorded to Sybil by Lady de Mowbray and her daughter on her
       arrival, the remembrance of the perilous position of her father had totally disqualified her
       from responding to their advances. Acquainted with the cause of her anxiety and depression
       and sympathising with womanly softness with her distress, nothing could be more
       considerate than their behaviour. It touched Sybil much, and she regretted the harsh thoughts
       that irresistible circumstances had forced her to cherish respecting persons, who, now that
       she saw them in their domestic and unaffected hour, had apparently many qualities to
       conciliate and to charm. When the good news arrived of her father’s safety, and safety
       achieved in a manner so flattering to a daughter’s pride, it came upon a heart predisposed to
       warmth and kindness and all her feelings opened. The tears stood in her beautiful eyes, and
       they were tears not only of tenderness but gratitude. Fortunately Lord de Mowbray was at the
       moment absent, and as the question of the controverted inheritance was a secret to every
       member of the family except himself, the name of Gerard excited no invidious sensation in the
       circle. Sybil was willing to please and to be pleased: every one was captivated by her
       beauty, her grace, her picturesque expression and sweet simplicity. Lady de Mowbray serenely
       smiled and frequently when unobserved viewed her through her eyeglass. Lady
       Joan, much softened by marriage, would show her the castle; Lady Maud was in ecstasies with
       all that Sybil said or did: while Mr Mountchesney who had thought of little else but Sybil
       ever since Lady Maud’s report of her seraphic singing, and who had not let four-and-twenty
       hours go by without discovering, with all the practised art of St James’, the name and
       residence of the unknown fair, flattered himself he was making great play when Sybil, moved
       by his great kindness, distinguished him by frequent notice. They had viewed the castle, they
       were in the music-room, Sybil had been prevailed upon, though with reluctance, to sing. Some
       Spanish church music which she found there called forth all her powers: all was happiness,
       delight, rapture, Lady Maud in a frenzy of friendship, Mr Mountchesney convinced that the
       country in August might be delightful, and Lady Joan almost gay because Alfred was pleased.
       Lady de Mowbray had been left in her boudoir with the “Morning Post.” Sybil had just finished
       a ravishing air, there was a murmur of luncheon—when suddenly Harold, who had
       persisted in following his mistress and whom Mr Mountchesney had gallantly introduced into
       the music-room, rose and coming forward from the corner in which he reposed, barked
       violently.
 “How now!” said Mr Mountchesney.
 “Harold!” said Sybil in a tone of remonstrance and surprise.
 But the dog not only continued to bark but even howled. At this moment the groom of the
       chambers entered the room abruptly and with a face of mystery said that he wished to speak
       with Mr Mountchesney. That gentleman immediately withdrew. He was absent some little time,
       the dog very agitated; Lady Joan becoming disquieted, when he returned. His changed air
       struck the vigilant eye of his wife.
 “What has happened Alfred?” she said.
 “Oh! don’t be alarmed,” he replied with an obvious affectation of ease. “There are some
       troublesome people in the park; stragglers I suppose from the rioters. The gate-keeper ought
       not to have let them pass. I have given directions to Bentley what to do, if they come to the
       castle.”

 “Let us go to mama,” said Lady Joan.
 And they were all about leaving the music-room, when a servant came running in and called
       out “Mr Bentley told me to say, sir, they are in sight.”
 “Very well,” said Mr Mountchesney in a calm tone but changing colour. “You had better go
       to your mama, Joan, and take Maud and our friend with you. I will stay below for a while,”
       and notwithstanding the remonstrances of his wife, Mr Mountchesney went to the hall.
 “I don’t know what to do, sir,” said the house steward. “They are a very strong
       party.”
 “Close all the windows, lock and bar all the doors,” said Mr Mountchesney. “I am
       frightened,” he continued, “about your lord. I fear he may fall in with these people.”
 “My lord is at Mowbray,” said Mr Bentley. “He must have heard of this mob there.”
 And now emerging from the plantations and entering on the lawns, the force and description
       of the invading party were easier to distinguish. They were numerous, though consisting of
       only a section of the original expedition, for Gerard had collected a great
       portion of the Mowbray men, and they preferred being under his command to following a
       stranger whom they did not much like on a somewhat licentious adventure of which their
       natural leader disapproved. The invading section therefore were principally composed of
       Hell-cats, though singular enough Morley of all men in the world accompanied them, attended
       by Devilsdust, Dandy Mick, and others of that youthful class of which these last were the
       idols and heroes. There were perhaps eighteen hundred or two thousand persons armed with bars
       and bludgeons, in general a grimy crew, whose dress and appearance revealed the kind of
       labour to which they were accustomed. The difference between them and the minority of Mowbray
       operatives was instantly recognizable.
 When they perceived the castle this dreadful band gave a ferocious shout. Lady de Mowbray
       showed blood; she was composed and courageous. She observed the mob from the window, and
       re-assuring her daughters and Sybil she said she would go down and speak to
       them. She was on the point of leaving the room with this object when Mr Mountchesney entered
       and hearing her purpose, dissuaded her from attempting it. “Leave all to me,” he said; “and
       make yourselves quite easy; they will go away, I am certain they will go away,” and he again
       quitted them.
 In the meantime Lady de Mowbray and her friends observed the proceedings below. When the
       main body had advanced within a few hundred yards of the castle, they halted and seated
       themselves on the turf. This step re-assured the garrison: it was generally held to indicate
       that the intentions of the invaders were not of a very settled or hostile character; that
       they had visited the place probably in a spirit of frolic, and if met with tact and civility
       might ultimately be induced to retire from it without much annoyance. This was evidently the
       opinion of Mr Mountchesney from the first, and when an uncouth being on a white mule,
       attended by twenty or thirty miners, advanced to the castle and asked for Lord de Mowbray, Mr
       Mountchesney met them with kindness, saying that he regretted his father-in-law was absent,
       expressed his readiness to represent him, and enquired their pleasure. His courteous bearing
       evidently had an influence on the Bishop, who dropping his usual brutal tone mumbled
       something about his wish to drink Lord de Mowbray’s health.
 “You shall all drink his health,” said Mr Mountchesney humouring him, and he gave
       directions that a couple of barrels of ale should be broached in the park before the castle.
       The Bishop was pleased, the people were in good humour, some men began dancing, it seemed
       that the cloud had blown over, and Mr Mountchesney sent up a bulletin to Lady de Mowbray that
       all danger was past and that he hoped in ten minutes they would all have disappeared.
 The ten minutes had expired: the Bishop was still drinking ale, and Mr Mountchesney still
       making civil speeches and keeping his immediate attendants in humour.

 “I wish they would go,” said Lady de Mowbray.
 “How wonderfully Alfred has managed them,” said Lady Joan. “After all,” said Lady Maud,
       “it must be confessed that the people—” Her sentence was interrupted; Harold who had been
       shut out but who had laid down without quietly, though moaning at intervals, now sprang at
       the door with so much force that it trembled on its hinges, while the dog again barked with
       renewed violence. Sybil went to him: he seized her dress with his teeth and would have pulled
       her away. Suddenly uncouth and mysterious sounds were heard, there was a loud shriek, the
       gong in the hail thundered, the great alarum-bell of the tower sounded without, and the
       housekeeper followed by the female domestics rushed into the room.
 “O! my lady, my lady,” they all exclaimed at the same time, “the Hell-cats are breaking
       into the castle.”
 Before any one of the terrified company could reply, the voice of Mr Mountchesney was heard. He was approaching them; he was no longer calm. He hurried into the
       room; he was pale, evidently greatly alarmed. “I have come to you,” he said; “these fellows
       have got in below. While there is time and we can manage them, you must leave the place.”
 “I am ready for anything.” said Lady de Mowbray.
 Lady Joan and Lady Maud wrung their hands in frantic terror. Sybil very pale said “Let me
       go down; I may know some of these men.”
 “No, no,” said Mr Mountchesney. “They are not Mowbray people. It would not be safe.”
 Dreadful sounds were now heard; a blending of shouts and oaths and hideous merriment.
       Their hearts trembled.
 “The mob are in the house, sir,” called out Mr Bentley rushing up to them. “They say they
       will see everything.”
 “Let them see everything,” said Lady de Mowbray, “but make a condition that they first let us go. Try Alfred, try to manage them before they are utterly
       ungovernable.”
 Mr Mountchesney again left them on this desperate mission. Lady de Mowbray and all the
       women remained in the chamber. Not a word was spoken: the silence was complete. Even the
       maid-servants had ceased to sigh and sob. A feeling something like desperation was stealing
       over them.
 The dreadful sounds continued increased. They seemed to approach nearer. It was impossible
       to distinguish a word, and yet their import was frightful and ferocious.
 “Lord have mercy on us all!” exclaimed the housekeeper unable to restrain herself. The
       maids began to cry.
 After an absence of about five minutes Mr Mountchesney again hurried in and leading away
       Lady de Mowbray, he said, “You haven’t a moment to lose. Follow us!”
 There was a general rush, and following Mr Mountchesney they passed rapidly through
       several apartments, the fearful noises every moment increasing, until they reached the library which opened on the terrace. The windows were broken, the terrace crowded
       with people, several of the mob were in the room, even Lady de Mowbray cried out and fell
       back.
 “Come on,” said Mr Mountchesney. “The mob have possession of the castle. It is our only
       chance.”
 “But the mob are here,” said Lady de Mowbray much terrified.
 “I see some Mowbray faces,” cried Sybil springing forward, with a flashing eye and glowing
       cheek. “Bamford and Samuel Carr: Bamford, if you be my father’s friend, aid us now; and
       Samuel Carr, I was with your mother this morning: did she think I should meet her son thus?
       No, you shall not enter,” said Sybil advancing. They recognised her, they paused. “I know
       you, Couchman; you told us once at the Convent that we might summon you in our need. I summon
       you now. O, men, men!” she exclaimed, clasping her hands. “What is this? Are you led away by
       strangers to such deeds? Why, I know you all! You came here to aid, I am sure, and not to
       harm. Guard these ladies; save them from these foreigners! There’s Butler, he’ll
       go with us, and Godfrey Wells. Shall it be said you let your neighbours be plundered and
       assailed by strangers and never tried to shield them? Now, my good friends, I entreat, I
       adjure you, Butler, Wells, Couchman, what would Walter Gerard say, your friend that you have
       so often followed, if he saw this?”
 “Gerard forever!” shouted Couchman.
 “Gerard forever!” exclaimed a hundred voices.
 “‘Tis his blessed daughter,” said others; “‘tis Sybil, our angel Sybil.”
 “Stand by Sybil Gerard.”
 Sybil had made her way upon the terrace, and had collected around her a knot of stout
       followers, who, whatever may have been their original motive, were now resolved to do her
       bidding. The object of Mr Mountchesney was to descend the side-step of the terrace and again
       the flower-garden, from whence there were means of escape. But the throng was still too
       fierce to permit Lady de Mowbray and her companions to attempt the passage, and
       all that Sybil and her followers could at present do, was to keep the mob off from entering
       the library, and to exert themselves to obtain fresh recruits.
 At this moment an unexpected aid arrived.
 “Keep back there! I call upon you in the name of God to keep back!” exclaimed a voice of
       one struggling and communing with the rioters, a voice which all immediately recognised. It
       was that of Mr St Lys. Charles Gardner, “I have been your friend. The aid I gave you was
       often supplied to me by this house. Why are you here?”
 “For no evil purpose, Mr St Lys. I came as others did, to see what was going on.”
 “Then you see a deed of darkness. Struggle against it. Aid me and Philip Warner in this
       work; it will support you at the judgment. Tressel, Tressel, stand by me and Warner. That’s
       good, that’s right! And you too, Daventry, and you, and you. I knew you would wash your hands
       of this fell deed. It is not Mowbray men who would do this. That’s right, that’s right! Form
       a band. Good again. There’s not a man that joins us now who does not make a friend for
       life.”
 Mr St Lys had been in the neighbourhood when the news of the visit of the mob to the
       castle reached him. He anticipated the perilous consequences. He hastened immediately to the
       scene of action. He had met Warner the handloom weaver in his way, and enlisted his powerful
       influence with the people on his side.
 The respective bands of Sybil and Mr St Lys in time contrived to join. Their numbers were
       no longer contemptible; they were animated by the words and presence of their leaders: St Lys
       struggling in their midst; Sybil maintaining her position on the terrace, and inciting all
       around her to courage and energy.
 The multitude were kept back, the passage to the side-steps of the terrace was clear.
 “Now,” said Sybil, and she encouraged Lady de Mowbray, her daughters, and followers to
       advance. It was a fearful struggle to maintain the communication, but it was a
       successful one. They proceeded breathless and trembling, until they reached what was commonly
       called the Grotto, but which was in fact a subterranean way excavated through a hill and
       leading to the bank of a river where there were boats. The entrance of this tunnel was
       guarded by an iron gate, and Mr Mountchesney had secured the key. The gate was opened, Warner
       and his friends made almost superhuman efforts at this moment to keep back the multitude,
       Lady de Mowbray and her daughters had passed through, when there came one of those violent
       undulations usual in mobs, and which was occasioned by a sudden influx of persons attracted
       by what was occurring, and Sybil and those who immediately surrounded her and were guarding
       the retreat were carried far away. The gate was closed, the rest of the party had passed, but
       Sybil was left, and found herself entirely among strangers.
 In the meantime the castle was in possession of the mob. The first great rush was to the
       cellars: the Bishop himself headed this onset, nor did he rest until he was
       seated among the prime binns of the noble proprietor. This was not a crisis of corkscrews;
       the heads of the bottles were knocked off with the same promptitude and dexterity as if they
       were shelling nuts or decapitating shrimps: the choicest wines of Christendom were poured
       down the thirsty throats that ale and spirits had hitherto only stimulated; Tummas was
       swallowing Burgundy; Master Nixon had got hold of a batch of tokay; while the Bishop himself
       seated on the ground and leaning against an arch, the long perspective of the cellars full of
       rapacious figures brandishing bottles and torches, alternately quaffed some very old Port and
       some Madeira of many voyages, and was making up his mind as to their respective and relative
       merits.
 While the cellars and offices were thus occupied, bands were parading the gorgeous saloons
       and gazing with wonderment on their decorations and furniture. Some grimy ruffians had thrown
       themselves with disdainful delight on the satin couches and the state beds: others rifled the cabinets with an idea that they must be full of money, and finding
       little in their way, had strewn their contents—papers and books and works of art over the
       floors of the apartments; sometimes a band who had escaped from below with booty came up to
       consummate their orgies in the magnificence of the dwelling rooms. Among these were Nixon and
       his friends, who stared at the pictures and stood before the tall mirrors with still greater
       astonishment. Indeed many of them had never seen an ordinary looking-glass in their
       lives.
 “‘Tis Natur!” said Master Nixon surveying himself, and turning to Juggins.
 Many of these last grew frantic, and finished their debauch by the destruction of
       everything around them.
 But while these scenes of brutal riot were occurring there was one select but resolute
       band who shared in none of these excesses. Morley, followed by half a dozen Mowbray lads and
       two chosen Hell-cats, leaving all the confusion below, had ascended the great staircase, traced his way down a corridor to the winding steps of the Round Tower, and
       supplied with the necessary instruments had forced his entrance into the muniment room of the
       castle. It was a circular chamber lined with tall fire-proof cases. These might have
       presented invincible obstacles to any other than the pupils of Bishop Hatton; as it was, in
       some instances the locks in others the hinges yielded in time, though after prolonged
       efforts, to the resources of their art; and while Dandy Mick and his friends kept watch at
       the entrance, Morley and Devilsdust proceeded to examine the contents of the cases: piles of
       parchment deeds, bundles of papers arranged and docketed, many boxes of various size and
       materials: but the desired object was not visible. A baffled expression came over the face of
       Morley; he paused for an instant in his labours. The thought of how much he had sacrificed
       for this, and only to fail, came upon him—upon him, the votary of Moral Power in the midst of
       havoc which he had organised and stimulated. He cursed Baptist Hatton in his heart.

 “The knaves have destroyed them,” said Devilsdust. “I thought how it would be. They never
       would run the chance of a son of Labour being lord of all this.”
 Some of the cases were very deep, and they had hitherto in general, in order to save time,
       proved their contents with an iron rod. Now Morley with a desperate air mounting on some
       steps that were in the room, commenced formally rifling the cases and throwing their contents
       on the floor; it was soon strewn with deeds and papers and boxes which he and Devilsdust the
       moment they had glanced at them hurled away. At length when all hope seemed to have vanished,
       clearing a case which at first appeared only to contain papers, Morley struck something at
       its back; he sprang forward with outstretched arm, his body was half hid in the cabinet, and
       he pulled out with triumphant exultation the box, painted blue and blazoned with the arms of
       Valence. It was neither large nor heavy; he held it out to Devilsdust without saying a word,
       and Morley descending the steps sate down for a moment on a pile of deeds and folded his
       arms.

 At this juncture the discharge of musketry was heard.
 “Hilloa!” said Devilsdust with a queer expression. Morley started from his seat. Dandy
       Mick rushed into the room. “Troops, troops! there are troops here!” he exclaimed.
 “Let us descend,” said Morley. “In the confusion we may escape. I will take the box,” and
       they left the muniment room.
 One of their party whom Mick had sent forward to reconnoitre fell back upon them. “They
       are not troops,” he said; “they are yeomanry; they are firing away and cutting every one
       down. They have cleared the ground floor of the castle and are in complete possession below.
       We cannot escape this way.”
 “Those accursed locks!” said Morley clenching the box. “Time has beat us. Let us see, let
       us see.” He ran back into the mumment room and examined the egress from the window. It was
       just possible for any one very lithe and nimble to vault upon the roof of the less elevated
       part of the castle. Revolving this, another scout rushed in and said, “Comrades,
       they are here! they are ascending the stairs.”
 Morley stamped on the ground with rage and despair. Then seizing Mick by the hand he said,
       “You see this window; can you by any means reach that roof?”
 “One may as well lose one’s neck that way,” said Mick. “I’ll try.”
 “Off! If you land I will throw this box after you. Now mind; take it to the convent at
       Mowbray and deliver it yourself from me to Sybil Gerard. It is light; there are only papers
       in it; but they will give her her own again, and she will not forget you.”
 “Never mind that,” said Mick. “I only wish I may live to see her.”
 The tramp of the ascending troopers was heard.
 “Good bye my hearties,” said Mick, and he made the spring. He seemed stunned, but he might
       recover. Morley watched him and flung the box.
 “And now,” he said drawing a pistol, “we may fight our way yet. I’ll shoot the first man
       who enters, and then you must rush on them with your bludgeons.”
 The force that had so unexpectedly arrived at this scene of devastation was a troop of the
       yeomanry regiment of Lord Marney. The strike in Lancashire and the revolt in the mining
       districts had so completely drained this county of military, that the lord lieutenant had
       insisted on Lord Marney quitting his agricultural neighbourhood and quartering himself in the
       region of factories. Within the last two days he had fixed his headquarters at a large
       manufacturing town within ten miles of Mowbray, and a despatch on Sunday evening from the
       mayor of that town having reached him, apprising him of the invasion of the miners, Egremont
       had received orders to march with his troop there on the following morning.
 Egremont had not departed more than two hours when the horsemen whom Sybil had met arrived
       at Lord Marney’s headquarters, bringing a most alarming and exaggerated report of the
       insurrection and of the havoc that was probably impending. Lord Marney being of
       opinion that Egremont’s forces were by no means equal to the occasion resolved therefore at
       once to set out for Mowbray with his own troop. Crossing Mowbray Moor he encountered a great
       multitude, now headed for purposes of peace by Walter Gerard. His mind inflamed by the
       accounts he had received, and hating at all times any popular demonstration, his lordship
       resolved without inquiry or preparation immediately to disperse them. The Riot Act was read
       with the rapidity with which grace is sometimes said at the head of a public table—a ceremony
       of which none but the performer and his immediate friends are conscious. The people were
       fired on and sabred. The indignant spirit of Gerard resisted; he struck down a trooper to the
       earth, and incited those about him not to yield. The father of Sybil was picked out—the real
       friend and champion of the People—and shot dead. Instantly arose a groan which almost quelled
       the spirit of Lord Marney, though armed and at the head of armed men. The people who before
       this were in general scared and dispersing, ready indeed to fly in all
       directions, no sooner saw their beloved leader fall than a feeling of frenzy came over them.
       They defied the troopers, though themselves armed only with stones and bludgeons; they rushed
       at the horsemen and tore them from their saddles, while a shower of stones rattled on the
       helmet of Lord Marney and seemed never to cease. In vain the men around him charged the
       infuriated throng; the people returned to their prey, nor did they rest until Lord Marney
       fell lifeless on Mowbray Moor, literally stoned to death.
 These disastrous events of course occurred at a subsequent period of the day to that on
       which half-a-dozen troopers were ascending the staircase of the Round Tower of Mowbray
       Castle. The distracted house-steward of Lord de Mowbray had met and impressed upon them, now
       that the Castle was once more in their possession, of securing the muniment room, for Mr
       Bentley had witnessed the ominous ascent of Morley and his companions to that important
       chamber.

 Morley and his companions had taken up an advantageous position at the head of the
       staircase.
 “Surrender,” said the commander of the yeomanry. “Resistance is useless.”
 Morley presented his pistol, but before he could pull the trigger a shot from a trooper in
       the rear, and who from his position could well observe the intention of Morley, struck
       Stephen in the breast; still he fired, but aimless and without effect. The troopers pushed
       on; Morley fainting fell back with his friends who were frightened, except Devilsdust, who
       had struck hard and well, and who in turn had been slightly sabred. The yeomanry entered the
       muniment room almost at the same time as their foes, leaving Devilsdust behind them, who had
       fallen, and who cursing the Capitalist who had wounded him managed to escape. Morley fell
       when he had regained the room. The rest surrendered.
 “Morley! Stephen Morley!” exclaimed the commander of the yeomanry. “You, you here!”
 “Yes. I am sped,” he said in a faint voice. “No, no succour. It is useless and I desire
       none. Why I am here is a mystery; let it remain so. The world will misjudge me; the man of
       peace they will say was a hypocrite. The world will be wrong, as it always is. Death is
       bitter,” he said with a deep sigh, and speaking with great difficulty, “more bitter from you;
       but just. We have struggled together before, Egremont. I thought I had scotched you then, but
       you escaped. Our lives have been a struggle since we first met. Your star has controlled
       mine; and now I feel I have sacrificed life and fame—dying men prophecy—for your profit and
       honour. O Sybil!” and with this name half sighed upon his lips the votary of Moral Power and
       the Apostle of Community ceased to exist.
 Meanwhile Sybil, separated from her friends who had made their escape through the grotto,
       was left with only Harold for her protector, for she had lost even Warner in the crush. She
       looked around in vain for some Mowbray face that she could recognise, but after some
       fruitless research, a loud shouting in the distance, followed by the firing of
       musketry, so terrified all around her, that the mob in her immediate neighbourhood dispersed
       as if by magic, and she remained alone crouching in a corner of the flower-garden, while
       dreadful shouts and shrieks and yells resounded from the distance, occasionally firing, the
       smoke floating to her retreat. She could see from where she stood the multitude flying about
       the park in all directions, and therefore she thought it best to remain in her present
       position and await the terrible events. She concluded that some military force had arrived,
       and that if she could maintain her present post, she hoped that the extreme danger might
       pass. But while she indulged in these hopes, a dark cloud of smoke came descending in the
       garden. It could not be produced by musket or carbine: its volume was too heavy even for
       ordnance: and in a moment there were sparks mingled with its black form; and then the
       shouting and shrieking which had in some degree subsided, suddenly broke out again with
       increased force and wildness. The Castle was on fire.

 Whether from heedlessness or from insane intention, for the deed sealed their own doom,
       the drunken Hell-cats brandishing their torches, while they rifled the cellars and examined
       every closet and corner of the offices, had set fire to the lower part of the building, and
       the flames that had for some time burnt unseen, had now gained the principal chambers. The
       Bishop was lying senseless in the main cellar, surrounded by his chief officers in the same
       state: indeed the whole of the basement was covered with the recumbent figures of Hell-cats,
       as black and thick as torpid flies during the last days of their career. The funeral pile of
       the children of Woden was a sumptuous one; it was prepared and lighted by themselves; and the
       flame that, rising from the keep of Mowbray, announced to the startled country that in a
       short hour the splendid mimickry of Norman rule would cease to exist, told also the pitiless
       fate of the ruthless savage, who, with analogous pretension, had presumed to style himself
       the Liberator of the People.

 The clouds of smoke, the tongues of flame, that now began to mingle with them, the
       multitude whom this new incident and impending catastrophe summoned hack to the scene, forced
       Sybil to leave the garden and enter the park. It was in vain she endeavoured to gain some
       part less frequented than the rest, and to make her way unobserved. Suddenly a band of
       drunken ruffians, with shouts and oaths, surrounded her; she shrieked in frantic terror;
       Harold sprung at the throat of the foremost; another advanced, Harold left his present prey
       and attacked the new assailant. The brave dog did wonders, but the odds were fearful; and the
       men had bludgeons, were enraged, and had already wounded him. One ruffian had grasped the arm
       of Sybil, another had clenched her garments, when an officer covered with dust and gore,
       sabre in hand, jumped from the terrace, and hurried to the rescue. He cut down one man,
       thrust away another, and placing his left arm round Sybil, he defended her with his sword,
       while Harold now become furious, flew from man to man, and protected her on the
       other side. Her assailants were routed, they made a staggering flight; the officer turned
       round and pressed Sybil to his heart.
 “We will never part again,” said Egremont.
 “Never,” murmured Sybil.
</div></body></text></TEI>