<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sybil, by Benjamin
      Disraeli</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1845</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER VIII.
 A few days after his morning walk with Sybil, it was agreed that Egremont should visit Mr
       Trafford’s factory, which he had expressed a great desire to inspect. Gerard always left his
       cottage at break of dawn, and as Sybil had not yet paid her accustomed visit to her friend
       and patron, who was the employer of her father, it was arranged that Egremont should
       accompany her at a later and more convenient hour in the morning, and then that they should
       all return together.
 The factory was about a mile distant from their cottage, which belonged indeed to Mr
       Trafford, and had been built by him. He was the younger son of a family that had
       for centuries been planted in the land, but who, not satisfied with the factitious
       consideration with which society compensates the junior members of a territorial house for
       their entailed poverty, had availed himself of some opportunities that offered themselves,
       and had devoted his energies to those new sources of wealth that were unknown to his
       ancestors. His operations at first had been extremely limited, like his fortunes; but with a
       small capital, though his profits were not considerable, he at least gained experience. With
       gentle blood in his veins, and old English feelings, he imbibed, at an early period of his
       career, a correct conception of the relations which should subsist between the employer and
       the employed. He felt that between them there should be other ties than the payment and the
       receipt of wages.
 A distant and childless relative, who made him a visit, pleased with his energy and
       enterprise, and touched by the development of his social views, left him a considerable sum,
       at a moment too when a great opening was offered to manufacturing capital and
       skill. Trafford, schooled in rigid fortunes, and formed by struggle, if not by adversity, was
       ripe for the occasion, and equal to it. He became very opulent, and he lost no time in
       carrying into life and being the plans which he had brooded over in the years when his good
       thoughts were limited to dreams. On the banks of his native Mowe he had built a factory which
       was now one of the marvels of the district; one might almost say, of the country: a single
       room, spreading over nearly two acres, and holding more than two thousand work-people. The
       roof of groined arches, lighted by ventilating domes at the height of eighteen feet, was
       supported by hollow cast-iron columns, through which the drainage of the roof was effected.
       The height of the ordinary rooms in which the work-people in manufactories are engaged is not
       more than from nine to eleven feet; and these are built in stories, the heat and effluvia of
       the lower rooms communicated to those above, and the difficulty of ventilation
       insurmountable. At Mr Trafford’s, by an ingenious process, not unlike that which
       is practised in the House of Commons, the ventilation was also carried on from below, so that
       the whole building was kept at a steady temperature, and little susceptible to atmospheric
       influence. The physical advantages of thus carrying on the whole work in one chamber are
       great: in the improved health of the people, the security against dangerous accidents for
       women and youth, and the reduced fatigue resulting from not having to ascend and descend and
       carry materials to the higher rooms. But the moral advantages resulting from superior
       inspection and general observation are not less important: the child works under the eye of
       the parent, the parent under that of the superior workman; the inspector or employer at a
       glance can behold all.
 When the workpeople of Mr Trafford left his factory they were not forgotten. Deeply had he
       pondered on the influence of the employer on the health and content of his workpeople. He
       knew well that the domestic virtues are dependent on the existence of a home,
       and one of his first efforts had been to build a village where every family might be well
       lodged. Though he was the principal proprietor, and proud of that character, he nevertheless
       encouraged his workmen to purchase the fee: there were some who had saved sufficient money to
       effect this: proud of their house and their little garden, and of the horticultural society,
       where its produce permitted them to be annual competitors. In every street there was a well:
       behind the factory were the public baths; the schools were under the direction of the
       perpetual curate of the church, which Mr Trafford, though a Roman Catholic, had raised and
       endowed. In the midst of this village, surrounded by beautiful gardens, which gave an impulse
       to the horticulture of the community, was the house of Trafford himself, who comprehended his
       position too well to withdraw himself with vulgar exclusiveness from his real dependents, but
       recognized the baronial principle reviving in a new form, and adapted to the softer manners
       and more ingenious circumstances of the times.

 And what was the influence of such an employer and such a system of employment on the
       morals and manners of the employed? Great: infinitely beneficial. The connexion of a labourer
       with his place of work, whether agricultural or manufacturing, is itself a vast advantage.
       Proximity to the employer brings cleanliness and order, because it brings observation and
       encouragement. In the settlement of Trafford crime was positively unknown: and offences were
       very slight. There was not a single person in the village of a reprobate character. The men
       were well clad; the women had a blooming cheek; drunkenness was unknown; while the moral
       condition of the softer sex was proportionately elevated.
 The vast form of the spreading factory, the roofs and gardens of the village, the Tudor
       chimneys of the house of Trafford, the spire of the gothic church, with the sparkling river
       and the sylvan hack-ground, came rather suddenly on the sight of Egremont. They were indeed
       in the pretty village-street before he was aware he was about to enter it. Some beautiful children rushed out of a cottage and flew to Sybil, crying out, “the queen, the
       queen;” one clinging to her dress, another seizing her arm, and a third, too small to
       struggle, pouting out its lips to be embraced.
 “My subjects,” said Sybil laughing, as she greeted them all; and then they ran away to
       announce to others that their queen had arrived.
 Others came: beautiful and young. As Sybil and Egremont walked along, the race too tender
       for labour, seemed to spring out of every cottage to greet “their queen.” Her visits had been
       very rare of late, but they were never forgotten; they formed epochs in the village annals of
       the children, some of whom knew only by tradition the golden age when Sybil Gerard lived at
       the great house, and daily glanced like a spirit among their homes, smiling and met with
       smiles, blessing and ever blessed.
 “And here,” she said to Egremont, “I must bid you good bye; and this little boy,” touching
       gently on his head a very serious urchin who had never left her side for a
       moment, proud of his position, and holding tight her hand with all his strength, “this little
       boy shall be your guide. It is not a hundred yards. Now, Pierce, you must take Mr Franklin to
       the factory, and ask for Mr Gerard.” And she went her way.
 They had not separated five minutes when the sound of whirling wheels caught the ear of
       Egremont, and, looking round, he saw a cavalcade of great pretension rapidly approaching;
       dames and cavaliers on horseback; a brilliant equipage, postilions and four horses; a crowd
       of grooms. Egremont stood aside. The horsemen and horsewomen caracoled gaily by him; proudly
       swept on the sparkling barouche; the saucy grooms pranced in his face. Their masters and
       mistresses were not strangers to him: he recognized with some dismay the liveries, and then
       the arms of Lord de Mowbray, and caught the cold, proud countenance of Lady Joan, and the
       flexible visage of Lady Maud, both on horseback, and surrounded by admiring cavaliers.

 Egremont flattered himself that he had not been recognised, and dismissing his little
       guide, instead of proceeding to the factory he sauntered away in an opposite direction, and
       made a visit to the church.
 The wife of Trafford embraced Sybil, and then embraced her again. She seemed as happy as
       the children of the village, that the joy of her roof, as of so many others, had returned to
       them, though only for a few hours. Her husband she said had just quitted the house; he was
       obliged to go to the factory to receive a great and distinguished party who were expected
       this morning, having written to him several days before for permission to view the works. “We
       expect them to lunch here afterwards,” said Mrs Trafford, a very refined woman, but unused to
       society, and who rather trembled at the ceremony; “Oh! do stay with me, Sybil, to receive
       them.”
 This intimation so much alarmed Sybil that she rose as soon as was practicable; and saying
       that she had some visits to make in the village, she promised to return when Mrs Trafford was
       less engaged.

 An hour elapsed; there was a loud ring at the hall-door, the great and distinguished party
       had arrived. Mrs Trafford prepared for the interview, and tried to look very composed as the
       doors opened, and her husband ushered in and presented to her Lord and Lady de Mowbray, their
       daughters, Lady Firebrace, Mr Jermyn, who still lingered at the castle, and Mr Alfred
       Mountchesney and Lord Milford, who were mere passing guests, on their way to Scotland, but
       reconnoitering the heiresses in their course.
 Lord de Mowbray was profuse of praise and compliments. His lordship was apt to be too
       civil. The breed would come out sometimes. To-day he was quite the coffee-house waiter. He
       praised everything: the machinery, the workmen, the cotton manufactured and the cotton raw,
       even the smoke. But Mrs Trafford would not have the smoke defended, and his lordship gave the
       smoke up, but only to please her. As for Lady de Mowbray, she was as usual courteous and
       condescending, with a kind of smouldering smile on her fair aquiline face, that
       seemed half pleasure and half surprise at the strange people she was among. Lady Joan was
       haughty and scientific, approved of much, but principally of the system of ventilation, of
       which she asked several questions which greatly perplexed Mrs Trafford, who slightly blushed,
       and looked at her husband for relief, but he was engaged with Lady Maud, who was full of
       enthusiasm, entered into everything with the zest of sympathy, identified herself with the
       factory system almost as much as she had done with the crusades, and longed to teach in
       singing schools, found public gardens, and bid fountains flow and sparkle for the people.
 “I think the works were very wonderful,” said Lord Milford, as he was cutting a pasty;
       “and indeed, Mrs Trafford, everything here is quite charming; but what I have most admired at
       your place is a young girl we met—the most beautiful I think I ever saw.”
 “With the most beautiful dog,” said Mr Mountchesney.
 “Oh! that must have been Sybil!” exclaimed Mrs Trafford.
 “And who is Sybil?” asked Lady Maud. “That is one of our family names. We all thought her
       quite beautiful.”
 “She is a child of the house,” said Mrs Trafford, “or rather was, for I am sorry to say
       she has long quitted us.”
 “Is she a nun?” asked Lord Milford, “for her vestments had a conventual air.”
 “She has just left your convent at Mowbray,” said Mr Trafford, addressing his answer to
       Lady Maud, “and rather against her will. She clings to the dress she was accustomed to
       there.”
 “And now she resides with you?”
 “No; I should be very happy if she did. I might almost say she was brought up under this
       roof. She lives now with her father.”
 “And who is so fortunate as to be her father?” enquired Mr Mountchesney.
 “Her father is the inspector of my works; the person who accompanied us over them this
       morning.”
 “What! that handsome man I so much admired,” said Lady Maud, “so very
       aristocratic-looking. Papa,” she said, addressing herself to Lord de Mowbray, “the inspector
       of Mr Trafford’s works we are speaking of, that aristocratic-looking person that I observed
       to you, he is the father of the beautiful girl.”
 “He seemed a very intelligent person,” said Lord de Mowbray with many smiles.
 “Yes,” said Mr Trafford; “he has great talents and great integrity. I would trust him with
       anything and to any amount. All I wish,” he added, with a smile and in a lower tone to Lady
       de Mowbray, “all I wish is, that he was not quite so fond of politics.”
 “Is he very violent?” enquired her ladyship in a sugary tone.
 “Too violent,” said Mr Trafford, “and wild in his ideas.”
 “And yet I suppose,” said Lord Milford, “he must be very well off?”
 “Why I must say for him it is not selfishness that makes him a malcontent,” said Mr
       Trafford; “he bemoans the condition of the people.”
 “If we are to judge of the condition of the people by what we see here,” said Lord de
       Mowbray, “there is little to lament in it. But I fear these are instances not so common as we
       could wish. You must have been at a great outlay, Mr Trafford?”
 “Why,” said Mr Trafford, “for my part. I have always considered that there was nothing so
       expensive as a vicious population. I hope I had other objects in view in what I have done
       than a pecuniary compensation. They say we all have our hobbies; and it was ever mine to
       improve the condition of my workpeople, to see what good tenements and good schools and just
       wages paid in a fair manner, and the encouragement of civilizing pursuits, would do to
       elevate their character. I should find an ample reward in the moral tone and material
       happiness of this community; but really viewing it in a pecuniary point of view, the
       investment of capital has been one of the most profitable I ever made; and I would not, I
       assure you, for double its amount, exchange my workpeople for the promiscuous assemblage
       engaged in other factories.”

 “The influence of the atmosphere on the condition of the labourer is a subject which
       deserves investigation,” said Lady Joan to Mr Jermyn, who stared and bowed.
 “And you do not feel alarmed at having a person of such violent opinions as your inspector
       at the head of your establishment,” said Lady Firebrace to Mr Trafford, who smiled a
       negative.
 “What is the name of the intelligent individual who accompanied us?” enquired Lord de
       Mowbray.
 “His name is Gerard,” said Mr Trafford.
 “I believe a common name in these parts,” said Lord de Mowbray looking a little
       confused.
 “Not very,” said Mr Trafford; “‘tis an old name and the stock has spread; but all Gerards
       claim a common lineage I believe, and my inspector has gentle blood, they say, in his
       veins.”
 “He looks as if he had,” said Lady Maud.
 “All persons with good names affect good blood,” said Lord de Mowbray; and then turning to
       Mrs Trafford he overwhelmed her with elaborate courtesies of phrase; praised
       everything again; first generally and then in detail; the factory, which he seemed to prefer
       to his castle—the house, which he seemed to prefer even to the factory—the gardens, from
       which he anticipated even greater gratification than from the house. And this led to an
       expression of a hope that he would visit them. And so in due time the luncheon was achieved.
       Mrs Trafford looked at her guests, there was a rustling and a stir, and everybody was to go
       and see the gardens that Lord de Mowbray had so much praised.
 “I am all for looking after the beautiful Nun,” said Mr Mountchesney to Lord Milford.
 “I think I shall ask the respectable manufacturer to introduce me to her,” replied his
       lordship.
 In the meantime Egremont had joined Gerard at the factory.
 “You should have come sooner,” said Gerard, “and then you might have gone round with the
       fine folks. We have had a grand party here from the castle.”
 “So I perceived,” said Egremont, “and withdrew.”
 “Ah! they were not in your way, eh?” he said in a mocking smile. “Well, they were very
       condescending—at least for such great people. An earl! Earl de Mowbray,—I suppose he came
       over with William the Conqueror. Mr Trafford makes a show of the place, and it amuses their
       visitors I dare say, like anything else that’s strange. There were some young gentlemen with
       them, who did not seem to know much about anything. I thought I had a right to be amused too;
       and I must say I liked very much to see one of them looking at the machinery through his
       eye-glass. There was one very venturesome chap: I thought he was going to catch hold of the
       fly-wheel, but I gave him a spin which I believed saved his life, though he did rather stare.
       He was a lord.”
 “They are great heiresses, his daughters, they say at Mowbray,” said Egremont.
 “I dare say,” said Gerard. “A year ago this earl had a son—an only son, and then his
       daughters were not great heiresses. But the son died and now it’s their turn. And perhaps
       some day it will be somebody else’s turn. If you want to understand the ups and downs of
       life, there’s nothing like the parchments of an estate. Now master, now man! He who served in
       the hall now lords in it: and very often the baseborn change their liveries for coronets,
       while gentle blood has nothing left but—dreams; eh, master Franklin?”
 “It seems you know the history of this Lord de Mowbray?”
 “Why a man learns a good many things in his time; and living in these parts, there are few
       secrets of the notables. He has had the title to his broad acres questioned before this time,
       my friend.”
 “Indeed!”
 “Yes: I could not help thinking of that to-day,” said Gerard, “when he questioned me with
       his mincing voice and pulled the wool with his cursed white hands and showed it to his dame,
       who touched it with her little finger; and his daughters who tossed their heads like
       pea-hens—Lady Joan and Lady Maud. Lady Joan and Lady Maud!” repeated Gerard in a voice of
       bitter sarcasm. “I did not care for the rest; but I could not stand that Lady Joan and that
       Lady Maud. I wonder if my Sybil saw them.”
 In the meantime, Sybil had been sent for by Mrs Trafford. She had inferred from the
       message that the guests had departed, and her animated cheek showed the eagerness with which
       she had responded to the call. Bounding along with a gladness of the heart which lent
       additional lustre to her transcendent brightness, she suddenly found herself surrounded in
       the garden by Lady Maud and her friends. The daughter of Lord de Mowbray, who could conceive
       nothing but humility as the cause of her alarmed look, attempted to re-assure her by
       condescending volubility, turning often to her friends and praising in admiring
       interrogatories Sybil’s beauty.
 “And we took advantage of your absence,” said Lady Maud in a tone of amiable artlessness,
       “to find out all about you. And what a pity we did not know you when you were at
       the convent, because then you might have been constantly at the castle; indeed I should have
       insisted on it. But still I hear we are neighbours; you must promise to pay me a visit, you
       must indeed. Is not she beautiful?” she added in a lower but still distinct voice to her
       friend. “Do you know I think there is so much beauty among the lower order.”
 Mr Mountchesney and Lord Milford poured forth several insipid compliments, accompanied
       with some speaking looks which they flattered themselves could not be misconstrued. Sybil
       said not a word, but answered each flood of phrases with a cold reverence.
 Undeterred by her somewhat haughty demeanour, which Lady Maud only attributed to the
       novelty of her situation, her ignorance of the world, and her embarrassment under this
       overpowering condescension, the good-tempered and fussy daughter of Lord de Mowbray proceeded
       to re-assure Sybil, and to enforce on her that this perhaps unprecedented descent from
       superiority was not a mere transient courtliness of the moment, and that she
       really might rely on her patronage and favourable feeling.
 “You really must come and see me,” said Lady Maud, “I shall never be happy till you have
       made me a visit. Where do you live? I will come and fetch you myself in the carriage. Now let
       us fix a day at once. Let me see; this is Saturday. What say you to next Monday?”
 “I thank you,” said Sybil, very gravely, “but I never quit my home.”
 “What a darling!” exclaimed Lady Maud looking round at her friends. “Is not she? I know
       exactly what you feel. But really you shall not be the least embarrassed. It may feel strange
       at first, to be sure, but then I shall be there; and do you know I look upon you quite as my
       protege.”
 “Protege,” said Sybil. “I live with my father.”
 “What a dear!” said Lady Maud looking round to Lord Milford. “Is not she naive?”
 “And are you the guardian of these beautiful flowers?” said Mr Mountchesney.
 Sybil signified a negative, and added “Mrs Trafford is very proud of them.”
 “You must see the flowers at Mowbray Castle,” said Lady Maud. “They are unprecedented, are
       they not, Lord Milford? You know you said the other day that they were almost equal to Mrs
       Lawrence’s. I am charmed to find you are fond of flowers,” continued Lady Maud; “you will be
       so delighted with Mowbray. Ah! mama is calling us. Now fix—shall it be Monday?”
 “Indeed,” said Sybil, “I never leave my home. I am one of the lower order, and live only
       among the lower order. I am here to-day merely for a few hours to pay an act of homage to a
       benefactor.”
 “Well I shall come and fetch you,” said Maud, covering her surprise and mortification by a
       jaunty air that would not confess defeat.
 “And so shall I,” said Mr Mountchesney.
 “And so shall I,” whispered Lord Milford lingering a little behind.
 The great and distinguished party had disappeared; their glittering barouche, their prancing horses, their gay grooms, all had vanished; the sound of their wheels was
       no longer heard. Time flew on; the bell announced that the labour of the week had closed.
       There was a half holiday always on the last day of the week at Mr Trafford’s settlement; and
       every man, woman, and child, were paid their wages in the great room before they left the
       mill. Thus the expensive and evil habits which result from wages being paid in public houses
       were prevented. There was also in this system another great advantage for the workpeople.
       They received their wages early enough to repair to the neighbouring markets and make their
       purchases for the morrow. This added greatly to their comfort, and rendering it unnecessary
       for them to run in debt to the shopkeepers, added really to their wealth. Mr Trafford thought
       that next to the amount of wages, the most important consideration was the method in which
       wages are paid; and those of our readers who may have read or can recall the sketches,
       neither coloured nor exagerated, which we have given in the early part of this
       volume of the very different manner in which the working classes may receive the remuneration
       for their toil, will probably agree with the sensible and virtuous master of Walter
       Gerard.
 He, accompanied by his daughter and Egremont, is now on his way home. A soft summer
       afternoon; the mild beam still gilding the tranquil scene; a river, green meads full of kine,
       woods vocal with the joyous song of the thrush and the blackbird; and in the distance, the
       lofty breast of the purple moor, still blazing in the sun: fair sights and renovating sounds
       after a day of labour passed in walls and amid the ceaseless and monotonous clang of the
       spindle and the loom. So Gerard felt it, as he stretched his great limbs in the air and
       inhaled its perfumed volume.
 “Ah! I was made for this, Sybil,” he exclaimed; “but never mind, my child, never mind;
       tell me more of your fine visitors.”
 Egremont found the walk too short; fortunately from the undulation of the vale, they could
       not see the cottage until within a hundred yards of it. When they were in sight,
       a man came forth from the garden to greet them; Sybil gave an exclamation of pleasure; it was
       MORLEY.
</div></body></text></TEI>