<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="115">
CHAPTER CXV. THE TREASURE.—A NEW IDEA.
ALAS! that we should be compelled to turn from such bright scenes as woman's love and
      lovers' hope, to deeds of infamy and crime.
But so goes the world; and no faithful historian can venture to deviate from the rule.
Sad, and dismal, and dark, are many of the phases which this narrative has yet to show; but
      we can also promise our reader that there will not be wanting bright and cheering scenes to
      afford relief to his eye.
Chequered, indeed, are the ways of life: varied and diversified are all its paths.
And, oh! let him who is wearied with the load of existence, while wending through the rough
      and craggy places of the world, and when rudely jostled by the world's unfeeling crowd,—let
      him remember that there is another sphere beyond, where the ways are smooth and pleasant, and
      where the voice of lamentation is never heard,—a sphere where angels alone shall be the guides
      of the elect, and where the sound of grateful harmony shall never cease,—a sphere, whose name
      is Heaven!
Again we say, alas! that we should be compelled to divert the attention of our reader from
      scenes of mundane bliss and the contemplation of the purest love, to deeds of iniquity and
      hatred.
But to our task.
It was about five o'clock in the evening of the day that witnessed the incidents of the two
      preceding chapters, and that had succeeded the night on which the unhappy Viola had signed a
      deed surrendering up half her property to her unprincipled husband,—that the Resurrection Man
      returned home to his dwelling in Globe Town.
But before he ascended to the apartments inhabited by himself and his mistress with a
      fearful name, he entered the lower part of the building, and, having lighted a candle,
      descended to the subterranean vaults.
In the first place he went into a cell opposite to that which was still tenanted by Viola,
      who, it will be remembered, had received a solemn promise to be restored to her own abode that
      evening at nine o'clock.
The Resurrection Man entered the cell to which we have alluded, and which was empty.
He raised a stone from the floor, and drew from a hole of about a foot deep, a large
      leathern bag, the contents of which sent forth the welcome metallic sound of gold as he took
      it in his hand.
The miscreant seated himself upon the cold floor of the cell, and poured forth into his hat
      the glittering contents of the bag. His eyes sparkled with delight as he surveyed the
      treasure.
He took a few of the coins up in his hand, and let them drop one by one back again into his
      hat—his glances greedily fixed upon the gold as he thus toyed with it.
"Two hundred good sterling sovereigns here already," he mused within himself,—"two hundred
      pounds earned with toil, trouble, daring, and danger. Two hundred pounds are a decent
      provision for any man in my line of life! And now," he continued, taking a smaller canvass bag
      from his pocket, "there is more to add to swell the treasury. Here is a hundred pounds—my half
      of the sum paid by Tomlinson this afternoon for keeping the secret about his old clerk. The
      Buffer has got his share; but I warrant he will hoard none of it as I do! Thank my stars,
      within the last year I have learnt to be economical and saving. I mean to have something for
      my old age; unless——"
And his countenance suddenly assumed an expression perfectly hideous, as he reflected upon
      the probability of his career being cut short by the hand of the law.
But, in another moment, he grew composed—that is to say, desperately hardened; and he then
      proceeded with his occupation and his musings.
"Well, here is my share of the two hundred pounds that the chicken-hearted, contemptible,
      cowardly Tomlinson paid for a secret which a little calm reflection might have told him that I
      dared not reveal. That's a hundred pounds to add to my sinking fund;"—and here the miscreant
      smiled. "Now," he continued, "comes the grand swag—three hundred pounds from Chichester,—and
      not too much for the trouble I have had in his affair! Two hundred before—Tomlinson's
      hundred—and Chichester's three hundred,—that makes six hundred pounds of good sterling gold,
      the property of Mr. Anthony Tidkins!"
And here the Resurrection Man laughed outright:—it was a horrible chuckle—the triumph of a
      miscreant of a most atrocious nature.
But he was happy—happy after his own fashion;
      —happy in counting and contemplating the produce of his turpitude.
While he was consigning his wealth to the larger bag, and gloating over the gold as he
      passed it through his hand, he was suddenly alarmed by a slight sound in the passage.
It seemed like a low footstep.
He listened, but it was not repeated.
For nearly a minute did he remain motionless, and almost breathless, in a state of painful
      attention; but not another sound met his ear.
Then, recovering from the state of uneasy suspense into which that incident had thrown him,
      he rose from the floor, and hurried into the passage which divided the two rows of cells.
All was quiet.
Ashamed of himself for his childish alarm, and muttering a curse at his folly for having
      given way to that fear, he returned into the cell, buried his treasure and covered the place
      with the stone. He then carefully locked the door of the dungeon.
He crossed the passage, and proceeded gently to open the door leading into the cell occupied
      by Viola. When he entered this vault, he found the lamp extinguished; but by the glare of his
      candle, he perceived the unhappy woman stretched in a profound slumber upon the bed.
"All right," he muttered to himself,—"and just as I expected. She will sleep some hours yet,
      for the wine was well drugged; and thus we can convey her back again to her house in a state
      of insensibility. When she awakes in her own bed, her servants will assure her that all she
      has passed through was a mere dream; and by this plan she will be so bewildered, that she will
      actually fancy she has been delirious, and that her brain has wandered. This was Chichester's
      suggestion; and I must give him credit for it. True—she will sooner or later discover that the
      departure of half her property is no dream; but then the first burst of passion will have gone
      by, and she will consider it prudent to hold her tongue. Well—let her sleep: at nine o'clock
      Chichester and Tomlinson will come, and then she shall be removed."
At that instant an idea struck the Resurrection Man. Hitherto he had worked as Chichester's
      agent, and by Chichester's directions, in this affair: what if he were to turn the business to
      some good account for himself? The lady had only parted with half her property: she had eight
      thousand pounds left. Might not all, or a decent portion of this sum thus remaining, pass into
      the hands of the Resurrection Man? His mode of treatment had elicited the first
      concession: some additional horrors might extort a further grant. The idea was excellent: fool
      that he was for not having thought of it before!
Thus reasoned Anthony Tidkins.
The more he thought of the new plot which had just entered his head, the more he grew
      enamoured of it. He was well aware that neither Chichester nor Tomlinson would dare to adopt
      measures to resist his will; and with a grin of savage delight, he exclaimed aloud, "By God,
      it shall be done!"
He then removed the bottle of wine from the cell, so that when Viola awoke she might not
      repeat her dose—supposing that she should be ignorant of the cause of her long lethargic
      slumber; for the Resurrection Man was not aware of the sudden effect which it had produced
      upon her, but imagined that the drugged liquid was only powerful enough to operate gradually.
      He next replenished the lamp with oil from a bottle which stood in one corner of the cell,
      and, having lighted the lamp, withdrew, carefully bolting and locking the door behind him.
He ascended from the subterranean prison, replaced the stone trap-door, and issued from the
      ground-floor of the house. He observed that the door leading into the alley was locked as he
      had left it when he entered; and this circumstance reassured him relative to the little
      incident which had temporarily disturbed him when counting his money in the cell.
Many circumstances combined to put the Resurrection Man into an excellent humour.
He had that day added four hundred pounds to his hidden treasure; he saw business of all
      kinds multiplying upon his hands, and promising a golden harvest; and he had hit upon a scheme
      which, he had no doubt, would produce him a larger sum than he had ever yet realised even in
      his dreams.
It was therefore with a smiling countenance that he entered the up-stairs room where the
      Rattlesnake was busily employed in spreading the contents of her cupboard upon the table.
"Well, Meg, you see I am home before my time," he exclaimed. "I don't want any dinner: I
      took some at a chop-house in town, as I had to wait on business. But leave the lush: I am in a
      humour for a glass of grog;—and you and I, Meg, will sit down and have a cozy chat
      together."
"So we will, Tony," returned the woman, with a manner even more wheedling and fawning than
      she had ever before used towards her terrible paramour. "You seem in excellent spirits,
      Tony."
"Yes, Meg—excellent: I have done a good day's work—and now I will enjoy myself till nine
      o'clock, when I have got to meet two gentlemen close by here on another little matter."
"Ah! you seldom tell me what you are doing, Tony," said the Rattlesnake.
"No—no: I don't like trusting women a bit farther than I can see them. Such things as
      getting up a body or so—well and good; but serious things, Meg—serious things, never!"
"Well, just as you like," returned Margaret Flathers, affecting a smile as if she were quite
      satisfied; but as she turned to replace the meat in the cupboard, her countenance
      involuntarily assumed an expression of mysterious triumph.
"Come, now—sit down," said the Resurrection Man: "give me a pipe, and brew me my lush.
      There—that's a good girl."
Tidkins lighted his pipe, and smoked for some moments in silence.
"I tell you what, Meg," he exclaimed, after a pause; "you shall sing me a song. I feel in
      such an uncommon good humour this evening—in such excellent spirits. No—I won't have a song: I
      tell you what you shall do."
"What?" said Margaret, as she mixed two glasses of gin and water.
"You shall tell me all about the coal-mines, you know—your own history. You told it me once
      before; but then I wasn't in a humour to hear you. I missed half, and have forgot t' other
      half. So now, come—let's have the Life and Adventures of Miss Margaret Flathers."
The Resurrection Man laughed at this joke—as he considered and meant it to be; and the
      Rattlesnake, who never dared to thwart him in any thing, and who apparently had some
      additional motive to humour him on this occasion, hastened to comply with his request—or
      rather command.
She accordingly related her history, the phraseology of which we have taken the liberty
      materially to correct and amend, in the following manner.
      

</div></body></text></TEI>