<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="171">
CHAPTER CLXX.   THE BLACK VEIL.
Return we now to one whom we have long left, but whom the reader cannot have forgotten.
In a sumptuously furnished room at the house of Mr. Wentworth, the surgeon of Lower
      Holloway, Diana Arlington was reclining upon a sofa.
She was dressed in an elegant manner; but a large black lace veil, doubled so as to render
      it more impervious to the eye of a beholder, was thrown over her head. The folds were also so
      arranged that the elaborately worked border completely concealed her countenance.
She was alone.
An open piano, a harp, and piles of music, together with a choice selection of volumes on
      the shelves of a book-case, denoted the nature of her amusements during her residence of
      several weeks at the surgeon's abode.
It was mid-day.
The damask curtains at the windows were drawn in such a manner as to reduce the light of the
      effulgent sun to a mellow and soft lustre within that apartment.
Beautiful nosegays of flowers imparted a delicious fragrance to the atmosphere.
The bounty of the Earl of Warrington had furnished the room in a style of luxury which could
      scarcely be surpassed.
But was Diana happy?
Were those sighs which agitated her heaving bosom,—was that restlessness which she now
      manifested,—was that frequent listening as the sounds of wheels passed along the road,—were
      all these signs of sorrow or of suspense?
Patience, gentle reader.
The time-piece on the mantel had chimed mid-day.
"He is not punctual," murmured Diana.
Ten minutes elapsed.
"He does not come!" she said aloud.
And her restlessness redoubled.
At length a carriage drove rapidly up to the door; and a long double knock reverberated
      through the house.
"'Tis he!" cried Diana.
In a few moments the Earl of Warrington entered the room.
"Diana—dearest Diana!" exclaimed the nobleman, starting back when he beheld her countenance
      covered with that ominous dark veil: "is it indeed thus——"
"Thus that we meet after so long an absence?" added the Enchantress. "Yes, my lord: Mr.
      Wentworth must have told you as much."
"No, Diana," answered the Earl, seating himself upon the sofa by her side, and taking her
      hand: "you know not by what a strange idiosyncrasy my conduct has been influenced. I entrusted
      you to Mr. Wentworth's care: I enjoined him to spare no money that might procure the best
      advice—the most efficient means of cure. Then I resigned myself to a suspense from which I
      might at any moment have relieved my mind by an inquiry;—but at the bottom of that suspense
      was a fond, a burning hope which made the feeling tolerable—nay, even vested the excitement
      with a peculiar charm of its own. I took it for granted that you would be cured—that your
      countenance would be restored to that beauty which had originally attracted me towards
      you;—and now, may I not say—without detriment to my own firm character as a man, and without
      indelicacy towards your feelings,—may I not say that I am disappointed?"
"And is this my fault?" asked Diana, in a soft plaintive tone. "Does your lordship suppose
      that I have not also suffered—that I do not at present suffer?"
"Oh! yes—you have—you do," answered the nobleman, pressing her hand with warm affection.
      "When we were happy in each other's society, Diana," he continued, "I never spoke to you of
      love: indeed, I experienced for you nothing more than a fervent friendship and profound
      admiration. But since I have ceased to see you—during the interval of our separation—I found
      that you were necessary to me,—that I could not be altogether happy without you,—that your
      conversation had charms which delighted me,—and that your attachment was something on which I
      could ponder with infinite pleasure. My feelings have warmed towards you; and I—I, the Earl of
      Warrington—experience for you a feeling which, if not so romantic and enthusiastic as my
       first affection, is not the less honourable and sincere."
"Ah! my lord," said Diana, in a tremulous tone, "why raise the cup of happiness to my lips,
      when a stern fatality must dash it so cruelly away?"
"No, Diana—it shall not be thus dashed away," answered the Earl, emphatically. "I am rich—I
      am my own master: not a living soul has a right to control or question my conduct. The joy
      which I anticipated at this meeting shall not be altogether destroyed. Here, Diana—here I
      offer you my hand; and on your brow—scarred, blemished by an accident though it be—that hand
      shall place a coronet!"
"My lord, this honour—this goodness is too much," said Diana, in a tone of deep emotion.
      "Remember that I am no longer possessed of those charms which once attracted you; and now that
      they are gone—gone for ever—I may speak of what they were without vanity! Remember, I say,
      that you will ever have before you a countenance seared as with a red-hot iron,—a countenance
      on which you will scarcely be able to look without loathing in spite of all the love which
      your generous heart
      may entertain for me! Remember that when I deck myself in the garments befitting
      the rank to which you seek to elevate me, that splendour would be a hideous mockery—like the
      fairest flowers twining round the revolting countenance of a corpse on which the hand of decay
      has already placed its mark! Remember, in a word, that you will be ashamed of her whom, in a
      moment of generous enthusiasm, you offer to reward for so much suffering—suffering which
      originated in no fault of yours:—remember all this, my lord—and pause—reflect—I implore you to
      consider well the step you are taking!"
"Diana, I am not a child that I do not know my own mind," answered the Earl: "moreover, I
      have the character of firmness: and I shall never repent the proposal I now make
      you—provided you yourself do not give me cause by your conduct."
"And on that head——"
"I have every confidence—the deepest conviction, Diana," interrupted the Earl, warmly.
"Your wishes, then, are my commands—and I obey," returned Diana, her voice thrilling with
      tones expressive of ineffable joy. "But shall we not ratify our engagement with one
      kiss?"
And as she spoke she slowly drew the black veil from her countenance.
The nobleman's heart palpitated, as she did so, with emotions of the most painful
      suspense—even of alarm: he felt like a man who in another instant must know the worst.
The veil dropped.
"Heavens! Diana," exclaimed the Earl, starting with surprise and indescribable delight.
For instead of a countenance seared and marked, he beheld a pure and spotless face glowing
      with a beauty which, even in her loveliest moments, had never seemed to invest her before.
Not a scar—not a trace of the accident was visible.
Her pouting lips were like the rose moistened with dew: her high, pale forehead was pure as
      marble; and her cheeks were suffused in blushes which seemed to be born beneath the clustering
      ringlets of her dark brown hair.
"Ah! Diana," exclaimed the Earl, as he drew her to his breast, "how can I punish thee for
      this cheat!"
"You will pardon me," she murmured, as she clasped her warm white arms around his neck, and
      imprinted a delicious kiss upon his lips, while her eyes were filled with a voluptuous
      languor,—"you will pardon me when you know my motives. But can you not divine them?"
"You wished to put my affection to the test, Diana," said the Earl. "Yes—I must forgive
      you—for you are beautiful—you are adorable—and I love you!"
"And if the sincerest and most devoted attachment on my part can reward you for all your
      past goodness, and for the honours which you now propose to shower upon me, then shall I not
      fail to testify my gratitude," exclaimed Diana.
These vows were sealed with innumerable kisses.
At length the Earl rose to depart.
"Three days hence," he said, "my carriage will be sent to fetch you to the church where our
      hands shall be united."
"And our hearts—for ever," returned Diana.
The nobleman embraced her once more, and took his leave.
But he did not immediately quit the house: he had business with Mr. Wentworth to
      transact.
We know not the precise sum that this generous peer presented to the surgeon: this, however,
      we can assure our readers, that he kept his word to the very letter—for Mr. Wentworth became
      rich in one day.
"If you succeed in restoring her to me," had the Earl said, when he first entrusted
      Diana to the surgeon's care, "in that perfection of beauty which invested her when I took
       leave of her yesterday—without a mark, without a scar,—your fortune shall be my care, and you
       will have no need to entertain anxiety relative to the future, with the Earl of Warrington as
       your patron."
Such were the nobleman's words upon that occasion; and, on the present, he amply fulfilled
      his promise.
Three days after, Diana became the Countess of Warrington.
The happy news were thus communicated by the bride to her sincerest and best friend:—

Grosvenor Square 
March 22nd, 1840 
To Her Serene Highness the Grand Duchess of Castelcicala. 
"I steal a few minutes from a busy day, my dearest Eliza,—for by that dear and familiar
       name you permit me to call you,—to inform you that I have this morning united my destinies
       with those of the Earl of Warrington. In a former letter I acquainted you with the dreadful
       accident which menaced me with horrible scars and marks for life:—you will be pleased to know
       that the skill and unwearied attention of my medical attendant have succeeded in completely
       restoring me to my former appearance—so that not a trace of the injury remains upon my
       person. The Earl of Warrington has elevated me to the proud position of his wife: the
       remainder of my existence shall be devoted to the study of his happiness.
"I regret to perceive by your letters, dearest Eliza, that you are not altogether
       happy. You say that the Grand Duke loves you; but his temper is arbitrary—his disposition
       despotic. And yet he is amiable and gentle in his bearing towards you. Study to solace
       yourself with this conviction. He has elevated you to a rank amongst the reigning princesses
       of Europe; and as you have embraced the honours, so must you endure some few of the political
       alarms and annoyances which are invariably attached to so proud a position. You tremble lest
       the conduct of the Grand Duke, in alienating from him those who are considered his best
       friends, should endanger his crown. Are you convinced that those persons are indeed his
       friends! Of course I know not—I cannot determine: I would only counsel you, my dearest
       friend, not to form hasty conclusions relative to the policy of his Serene Highness.
"I perceive by the English newspapers, that there are numerous Castelcicalan refugees in
       this country. Amongst them are General Grachia and Colonel Morosino, both of whom, I believe,
       occupied high offices in their native land. They, however, appear, so far as I can learn, to
       be dwelling tranquilly in London—no doubt awaiting the happy moment when it shall please your
       illustrious husband to recall them from exile.
"His Highness Alberto of Castelcicala—(for you are aware that the Earl of Warrington
       communicated to me some time ago the real rank and name of Count Alteroni)—continues
       to reside at his villa near Richmond. This much I glean from the public journals; but
       doubtless you are well acquainted with all these facts, inasmuch as your government has a
       representative at the English court.
"Adieu for the present, dearest Eliza:—I knew not, when I sate down, that I should have
       been enabled to write so long a letter. But I must now change my dress; for the carriage will
       be here shortly to convey me to Warrington Park, where we are to pass the honeymoon.
 "Ever your sincere friend, 
"DIANA."
Such are the strange phases which this world presents to our view! That same Fortune, who,
      in
      a moment of caprice, had raised an obscure English lady to a ducal throne, placed,
      when in a similar mood, a coronet upon the brow of another who had long filled a most
      equivocal position in society.
</div></body></text></TEI>