<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="57">
CHAPTER LVII. THE LAST RESOURCE.
POVERTY once again returned—with all its hideous escort of miseries—to the abode of Monroe
      and his daughter. The articles of comfort which they had lately collected around them were
      sent to the pawnbroker: necessaries then followed to the same destination.
Ellen no longer sought for needle-work: she had for some time past led a life which
      incapacitated her for close application to monotonous toil; and she confidently reposed upon
      the hope that the old woman would procure her more employment with an artist or a
      sculptor.
But at the expiration of the ten days, the hag put her off for ten days more; and then again
      for another ten days. Thus a month passed away in idleness for both father and daughter,
      neither of whom earned a shilling.
They could no longer retain the lodgings which they had occupied for some time in a
      respectable neighbourhood; and now behold them returning to the very same cold, miserable, and
      cheerless rooms which we saw them occupying in the first instance, in the court leading out of
      Golden Lane!
What ups and downs constitute existence!
Two years had now passed away since we first introduced the reader to that destitute lodging
      in Golden Lane. We have therefore brought up this portion of our narrative, as well as all the
      other parts of it, to the close of the year 1838.
Misery, more grinding, more pinching, and more acute than any which they had yet known, now
      surrounded the father and daughter. They had parted with every thing which would produce the
      wherewith to purchase food. They lay upon straw at night; and for days and days they had not a
      spark of fire in the grate. They often went six-and-thirty hours together without tasting a
      morsel of food. They could not even pay the pittance of rent which was claimed for their two
      chambers: and if it had not been for their compassionate neighbours they must have starved
      altogether.
Monroe could obtain no employment in the City. When he had failed, during the time of
      Richard Markham's imprisonment, he lost all his friends, because they took no account of his
      misfortunes, and looked only to the fact that he had been compelled to give up business. Had
      he passed through the Bankruptcy Court, and then opened his counting-house again to commence
      affairs upon credit, he would have found admirers and supporters. But as he had paid his
      creditors every farthing, left himself a beggar, and spurned the idea of entering upon
      business without capital of his own, he had not a friend to whom he could apply for a
      shilling.
At length the day came when the misery of the father and the daughter arrived at an extreme
      when it became no longer tolerable. They had fasted for forty-eight hours; and their landlady
      threatened to turn them out of their empty rooms into the street, unless they paid her the
      arrears of rent which they owed. They had not an article upon which they could raise the price
      of a loaf:—it was the depth of a cold and severe winter, and Ellen had already parted with all
      her under-garments.
"My dear child," said the heart-broken father, embracing his daughter affectionately, on the
      morning when their misery thus reached its utmost limit, "I have one resource left—a resource
      to which I should never fly save in an extreme like this!"
"What mean you?" inquired the daughter, anxiously glancing in the pale and haggard
      countenance of her sire.
"I mean that I will apply to Richard Markham," said the old man. "He does not suspect our
      appalling state of destitution, or he would seek us out—he would fly to our succour."
"And you will apply to him who has already suffered so much by you?" said the daughter,
      shaking her head. "Alas! he will refuse you the succour you require!"
"No—no—not he!" ejaculated the old man. "Be of good cheer, Ellen—I shall not be long absent;
      and on my return thou shalt have food, and fire, and clothes!"
"God grant that it may be so!" cried Ellen, clasping her hands together.
"I have moreover a piece of news relative to that villain Montague to communicate to him,"
      added Monroe; "and for that reason—if for none other—should I have called at his residence
      to-day. While I was roving about in the City yesterday to endeavour to procure employment, I
      accidentally learnt that
       Montague is pursuing his old game, at the West End, under the name of
      Greenwood."

"Ah! why do you not rather call upon this man," cried Ellen, "and represent to him the
      misery to which his villany has reduced us? He is doubtless wealthy, and might be inclined to
      give a few pounds to one whom he robbed of thousands."
"Alas! my dear Ellen, you do not know the world as I know it! I have no means of convincing
      Montague, or Greenwood, that I lost money by him. He only knew Allen in the entire
      transaction: he never saw me in his life—nor I him,—at least to my knowledge. Allen is
      dead;—how then can I present myself to this man, whom villany has no doubt rendered
      hard-hearted and selfish, with mere assertions of losses through his instrumentality? He would
      eject me ignominiously from his abode! No—I shall repair to Richard Markham; he is my last and
      only hope!"
With these words the old man embraced his daughter affectionately, and left the room.
The moment he was gone Ellen said to herself, "My father has undertaken a hopeless task! It
      is not probable that Markham, whom he has reduced to a miserable pittance, will spare from
      that pittance aught to relieve our necessities. What is to be done? There are no more artists
      or sculptors who require my services—no more statuaries or photographers who need my aid. And
      yet we cannot starve! When I last saw the old woman, she spoke out plainly—her meaning could
      not be misunderstood. I rushed away from her presence, as if she were a venomous reptile! Fool
      that I was. Starvation is undermining those charms which I have learnt to value: hunger is
      defacing that beauty which gave me bread for nearly two years, and which may give me bread
      again in the same way. I am clothed in rags, and shiver with the cold! My hands, once so
      white, are becoming red: my form, lately so round and plump, is losing its fulness and its
      freshness; my cheeks grow thin and hollow. And in a few hours my poor old father will return
      home, wasted with fatigue, and overwhelmed with famine and disappointment. O my God!" she
      continued, clasping her hands together in an ebullition of intense agony; "pardon—pardon—I can
      hesitate no longer!"
And straightway she proceeded to the dwelling of the old hag.



It was about two o'clock in the afternoon when Mr. Monroe returned to the court in Golden
      Lane.
His countenance was animated with an expression of joy, as he encountered the landlady upon
      the threshold of the house in which he resided.
"Miss Monroe is not come in yet," said the woman roughly. "Here is the key of your
       lodgings—not that I think there is much worth the locking up. However, this key you
      don't have again till my rent is paid."
"Here—pay yourself—pay yourself!" cried the old man, taking a handful of gold and silver
      from his pocket.
The woman's manner instantly changed into cringing politeness. She was not now pressed for
      the rent. She could wait till it was convenient. She always knew that she had to deal with a
      gentleman. What did it matter to her when she was paid, since she felt convinced the money was
      safe?
Monroe cut short her compliments by settling the arrears due, and sending the landlady out
      to purchase some food. The old man was determined to be extravagant that day—he was so happy!
      Markham had declared that he and his daughter should never know want again;—and then—he had
      such a surprise for Ellen. They were to proceed next day to take up their abode with Richard:
      the young man had insisted upon it—Whittingham had supported the proposal;—and so it was all
      resolved upon. No more poverty—no more cold—no more hunger!
It was for this that the old gentleman was resolved to be extravagant. He was anxious to
      provide a delicate little treat for his daughter;—and he was glad that she was not at home
      when he returned. He felt convinced that she had gone out to seek for work, and hoped that she
      would not be long ere she returned.
By means of the landlady he procured a cold fowl, a piece of ham, and a bottle of cheap
      wine; and his own thin and meagre hands spread the dainties upon the table, while the landlady
      lighted a fire in the grate.
When these arrangements were complete, Monroe dispatched the now obsequious mistress of the
      house to redeem from pledge the various articles which had been pawned during this latter
      period of destitution; and when she returned, laden with the necessaries and the comforts
      which had thus been temporarily disposed of, Monroe felt pleasure in arranging them in such a
      way that they might strike Ellen's eyes the moment she should return.
The poor old man was so joyful—so happy, as he executed his task, that he did not observe
      the lapse of time. Six o'clock struck, and the candle had been burning for some time upon the
      mantelpiece, ere Monroe began to wonder what could keep his daughter so long away.
Another half-hour passed; and her well-known step was heard ascending the staircase. The
      door opened; and Ellen rushed into the room, exclaiming, "My dear father, here is gold! here
      is gold!"
"This then appears to be a day of good fortune," said the old man, glancing triumphantly
      around him. "I also have gold—and these are the fruits of the first use which I have made of
      it!"
"What!" exclaimed Ellen, gazing wildly upon the well-spread table and the various articles
      redeemed from the pawnbroker; "Richard Markham——"
"Is an angel!" cried Monroe. "He never will let us know want again!"
"Oh! my God!" ejaculated Ellen, throwing herself upon a chair, and burying her face in her
      hands: "why did I not wait a few hours? why did I not have patience and hope until your
      return?"
"Ellen, what mean those words?" demanded the old man: "speak—tell me——"
"Simply, my dear father," she answered, raising her head, and at the same time exercising an
      almost superhuman control over her inward emotions, "that I have consented to receive work at
      a price which will scarcely find us in bread; and——"
"You shall not hold to your bargain, dearest," interrupted Monroe. "The money which you may
      have received in advance,—for you said, I think, that you had money,—shall be returned to
      those who would condemn you to a slavery more atrocious than that endured by the negroes in
      the West Indies! Take courage my beloved Ellen—take courage: a brighter day will yet dawn upon
      us."
Ellen made no reply: but her countenance wore so singular an expression, that her father was
      alarmed.
"My dearest daughter," he exclaimed, "you have no longer any hope! I see by your looks that
      you despair! God knows that we have encountered enough to teach us to place but little
      reliance upon the smiles of fortune: nevertheless, let us not banish hope altogether from our
      bosoms! To-morrow we shall leave this dismal abode, and repair to the house of our young
      benefactor, Markham."
"Markham!" cried Ellen, the very name appearing to arouse agonizing emotions in her mind:
      "have you promised Mr. Richard Markham that we will reside with him?"
"Yes, dearest Ellen; and in so doing I had hoped to give thee pleasure. You have known each
      other from infancy. Methinks I see thee now, a little child, climbing up that hill in company
      with Richard and his brother——"
"His brother!" repeated Ellen, a cold shudder passing over her entire frame.
"My dearest girl, you are not well," said the old man; and, pouring some wine into a glass,
      he added, "drink this, Ellen; it will revive thee."
The young lady partook of the exhilarating beverage, and appeared refreshed. Her father and
      herself then seated themselves at the table, and partook of the meal.
Ellen ate but little. She was pensive and melancholy; and every now and then her countenance
      wore an expression of supreme horror, which denoted intense agony of feeling within her bosom.
      She, however, contrived to veil from her father's eyes much of the anguish which she thus
      experienced; and the old man's features were animated with a gleam of joy, as he sate by the
      cheerful fire and talked to his daughter of brighter prospects and happier days.
On the following morning they took leave of those rooms in which they had experienced so
      much misery, and repaired to the dwelling of Richard Markham.
</div></body></text></TEI>