<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="232">
CHAPTER CCXXXI.   MR. GREENWOOD AND MR. VERNON.
It was in the middle of April, and about two o'clock in the afternoon, when the Honourable
      Gilbert Vernon knocked at the door of Mr. Greenwood's mansion in Spring Gardens.
He was immediately admitted by a footman in livery; and Filippo, the Italian valet, who was
      lounging in the hall at the moment, conducted him to the elegant drawing-room where the Member
      for Rottenborough was seated.
As soon as Filippo had retired, Mr. Vernon said in a somewhat impatient tone, as he fixed
      his large grey eyes in a scrutinising manner upon Greenwood's countenance, "May I request to
      know, with as little delay as possible, the reason that has induced you to demand this
      interview?"
"Sit down, Mr. Vernon," was the reply; "and listen to me calmly. In January last I met you
      accidentally in London; and you implored me not to breathe to a soul the fact that you were in
      this country."
"And if I had private—urgent motives for so acting, Mr. Greenwood," exclaimed Vernon, "I
      cannot suppose that it cost you any effort to maintain my secret."
"I set out by requesting you to listen to me attentively," returned the Member of
      Parliament, with the coolness of a man who knows he is dictating to one completely in his
      power.
"Proceed," said Vernon, biting his lip. "I will not again interrupt you: that
      is—unless——"
"I need scarcely state that I did keep your secret," continued Greenwood, without
      appearing to notice the hesitation with which his visitor gave the promise of attention. "You
      shortly afterwards called upon me to request a loan, which it was not convenient for me to
      advance at the moment. On that occasion you reiterated your request of secrecy relative to
      your presence in London. I renewed my pledge of silence—and I kept it; but I felt convinced
      that there were some cogent reasons which prompted that anxiety for concealment. Knowing much
      of your circumstances, I instituted inquiries in a certain quarter; and I learnt that Lord
      Ravensworth was dying—dying gradually—in a most mysterious manner—and of a disease that
      baffled all the skill of his physicians. I also ascertained that he was a slave to the use of
      a particular tobacco which you—his brother—had kindly sent him from the East!"
"Mr. Greenwood!" ejaculated Vernon, his face assuming so dark—so foreboding—so ferocious an
      expression that the Member of Parliament saw his dart had been levelled with the most accurate
      aim.
"Pray, listen, Mr. Vernon!" said Greenwood, playing with his watch-chain in a calm and quiet
      manner, as if he were discoursing upon the most indifferent topics. "Having made those
      discoveries,—which, indeed, were so generally known in the fashionable world, that the most
      simple inquiry induced any West-End gossip or newsmonger of the Clubs to descant upon them,—I
      began to view them in a particular light——"
"Mr. Greenwood," cried Vernon, starting from his seat, his countenance red with indignation,
      "do you pretend for one moment to insinuate that I—I, the brother of the late Lord
      Ravensworth——"
"I insinuate nothing," interrupted the Member, with the most provoking calmness: "but I will
      presently explain to you in broad terms, if you choose, the facts of which I am
       convinced. I promise you that you will do well to hear me patiently."
"But is my character to suffer by the scandal of superannuated dowagers and the tattle of
      Club quid nuncs?" demanded Vernon, rage imparting a terrible emphasis to
      his deep-toned voice.
"Your character has in no way suffered with those parties," answered Greenwood. "All that
      they relate is mere idle gossip, without an object or an aim. They have no suspicion:
      circumstances have aroused none in their minds. But when I heard all that they state
      as mere matter of conversation, I viewed it in a different light, because my
      suspicions were aroused by the knowledge of your presence in England,
      and your anxiety to conceal that fact. And, if any thing were wanting to confirm those
      suspicions, the company in which I saw you the evening before last——"
"Ah! you saw me—with some one?" cried Vernon, hastily, and for the moment thrown off his
      guard.
"Yes: I saw you in conversation with a man of the most desperate character—a man who only
      last month escaped from the Middlesex House of Correction——"
"Then, in a word, Mr. Greenwood," interrupted Vernon, subduing his vexation and rage with a
      desperate mental effort, and resuming his seat, "how came you to discover my address in
      Stamford Street? and wherefore did you yesterday write to me to call on you to-day?"
"I overheard you say to Anthony Tidkins, 'The day after to-morrow I shall proceed to
       Ravensworth Hall, as if I had only just returned to England in consequence of letters sent to
       Beyrout to announce to me my brother's death; and you will join me in the capacity agreed
       upon.' This I overheard you say, Mr. Vernon," continued Greenwood, fixing upon his
      visitor a glance of triumphant assurance; "and I then felt convinced that all my previous
      suspicions were well founded! I accordingly followed you when you separated from that
      individual who bears the odious name of the Resurrection Man; and I traced you to
      your lodgings in Stamford Street."
"But for what purpose? with what view?" demanded Vernon, who saw that he was completely in
      Greenwood's power.
"I will come to that presently," was the calm reply. "You do not even give me credit for the
      delicacy with which I acted in bringing about this interview?"
"Delicacy!" repeated Vernon, his lip curling haughtily.
"Yes—delicacy," added Greenwood. "I knew not whether you passed at your lodging by your
      proper name; and therefore I would not call in person to inquire for you—fearful of betraying
      you."
"But I do pass there in my proper name," said Vernon; "for the old widow who keeps
      the house nursed me in my infancy, and I can rely upon her."
"Thank you for this admission, Mr. Vernon," rejoined Greenwood, complacently: "wherever
      reliance is to be placed, it is clear that there is something which might be betrayed. You
      have confirmed the strength of my previous convictions."
"Do not think that I made that admission unguardedly," said Vernon, nettled by Greenwood's
      manner. "No: I see that I am in your power—I admit it; and therefore I no longer attempted to
      mislead you."
"And you acted wisely," returned Greenwood. "It were far better for you to have me as a
      friend, than as an enemy. But, as I was ere now observing, it was to avoid the chance of
      betraying you that I sent my faithful valet, Filippo, to loiter about Stamford Street last
      evening, and slip my note into your hands. I described your person to him—and he executed my
      commission well."
"Then you have no inimical motive in seeking me out—in telling me all that you suspect?"
      said Vernon, looking suspiciously at Greenwood from beneath his dark brows.
"Not the slightest! How can I have such a motive?" exclaimed Greenwood. "A secret falls in
      my way—and I endeavour to profit by it. That is all."
"I scarcely comprehend you," observed the guilty man, his countenance again becoming
      overcast.
"In one word, Mr. Vernon," continued Greenwood, emphatically, "you come to England
      privately—upon some secret and mysterious errand. Still you pass by your own name at your
      lodging. That circumstance to superficial observers might seem to involve a strange want of
      precaution. To me it appears a portion of your plan, and the result of a judicious
      calculation. You return privately to England, I say—but you retain your own name at a place
      where you know it will not be betrayed unless circumstances should peremptorily demand its
      revelation; and then, should certain suspicions attach themselves to you, you would say boldly
      and feasibly also—'It is true that I came to England to live quietly; but I attempted no
       disguise—I assumed no fictitious name.' Ah! I can penetrate further into the human heart
      than most people: my experience of the world is of no common order."
"It would seem not," said Vernon: "especially as you also appear to know Anthony
      Tidkins, since you recognised him in my society the other night."
"There are few men at all notorious for their good or evil deeds, in this great city, who
      are unknown to me," observed Greenwood, calmly. "But permit me to continue. You are here—in
      this country, while really deemed to be abroad—under circumstances of no ordinary mystery;
      your brother smokes the tobacco you so kindly sent him—and dies; your associate the
      Resurrection Man and you are now about to proceed to Ravensworth Hall—doubtless convinced that
      you have allowed a sufficient interval to elapse since your brother's death in the middle of
      February, to maintain the belief—where such belief suits your purposes—that you have only just
      had time to receive that intelligence in the East, and thence return to England. Can you deny
      one tittle of my most reasonable conjectures?"
"Greenwood, you are an extraordinary man," cried Vernon, affecting an ease which he did not
      feel and a sudden familiarity which he did not like. "Did I not before say that I would no
      longer attempt to mislead you? And I am willing to secure you as my friend."
"You now speak to the point. I candidly confess that I have told you all I suspect or know
      concerning yourself and your affairs," proceeded Greenwood; "and I am perfectly indifferent as
      to whether you choose to enlighten me farther, or not. Doubtless you have some defined course
      to pursue; or else the aid of the Resurrection Man would be unnecessary. But whether you hope
      to inherit largely under your deceased brother's will; or whether you can establish claims
      that may benefit you, in spite of the existence of the infant heir of Ravensworth, who was
      born a month ago——"
"Ah! the birth of that heir has well-nigh destroyed all my hopes!" interrupted Vernon, again
      rising from his seat. "But, tell me—what do you require at my hands? how am I to secure you as
      my friend? how am I to purchase your continued silence concerning all you have divined or now
      know?"
"With money," replied Greenwood: "with that article which buys every thing in this
      world!"

"Money!—I have none!" exclaimed Vernon. "But ere long——"
"Stay!" cried Greenwood: "tell me nothing of your schemes—nothing of your projects! I would
      rather remain in ignorance of the designs you may have in view; for, look you, Mr.
      Vernon,—though, between ourselves, I am not over nice in some matters, as you may probably
      suppose from the fact that Anthony Tidkins is known to me, as well as from my readiness to
      receive a bribe to ensure my secrecy in respect to your proceedings,—yet I do not care if I
      tell you that I shudder when I think of the lengths to which you have already gone—to which,
      perhaps, you are still prepared to go!"
"Was it to read me a moral lecture that you sought this interview?" demanded the Honourable
      Gilbert Vernon, with a contemptuous curl of the lip.
"No—far from that!" responded Greenwood. "And therefore enough of this style of discourse on
      my part. Still the observations were not unnecessary; for they serve to explain the relative
      positions in which we stand. You have already committed one fearful
      crime—and I know it: perhaps you meditate another—and I suspect it. But it is not for
      me to betray you—nor to reason with you:—I am not inclined to do either—provided you are
      grateful."
"Mr. Greenwood," said Vernon, speaking thickly between his set teeth, "you shall have a
      noble reward, if you religiously keep my secret."
"Such is the understanding at which I was desirous to arrive," observed Greenwood.
Gilbert Vernon then took his leave, in no very enviable state of mind under the conviction
      that his crimes had placed him so entirely in the power of such an extortioner as the Member
      for Rottenborough.
We must observe, ere we conclude the chapter, that Filippo, the Italian valet, had listened
      at the door of the drawing-room where this interview took place; and that not a syllable of
      the whole conversation was lost upon him.
In the evening Filippo obtained leave of absence for a few hours; and he availed himself of
      this license to repair to the villa in which Eliza Sydney dwelt.
</div></body></text></TEI>