<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="93">
CHAPTER XCIII. NEWS FROM CASTELCICALA.
RETURN we once more to Diana Arlington, who still occupied the splendid mansion in Dover
      Street, which had been fitted up for her by the Earl of Warrington.
The routine of the life of the Enchantress continued the same as we have described it in
      Chapter LI.
The Earl of Warrington was unremitting in his attention, and unchanged in his liberality
      towards his beautiful mistress; and, on her part, Diana was the faithful friend and true
      companion who by her correct conduct maintained the confidence which she had inspired in the
      heart of her noble protector.
We must again introduce our readers to the Enchantress at the hour of breakfast, and in the
      little parlour where we have before seen her.
But on this occasion, instead of being occupied with the perusal of the Morning
       Herald, her entire attention was absorbed in the contents of a letter, which ran as
      follows:—

"Montoni, December 3, 1839.
"I sit down, my dearest Diana, to inform you that the ceremony of my union with his Serene
       Highness Angelo III. was solemnized yesterday.
"You are aware that this ceremony was to have taken place some months ago; but the
       intrigues of certain persons holding high and influential offices in the state, delayed it.
       Calumny after calumny against me was whispered in the ears of the Grand Duke; and, although
       his Highness believed not a word of those evil reports, I steadily refused to accept the
       honour he was anxious to confer upon me, until he had satisfied himself of the falsity of
       each successive calumny. At length I implored his Highness to address an autograph letter to
       the Earl of Warrington, with whom his Highness was acquainted during the residence of that
       good English nobleman in Castelcicala. His Highness complied with my request, and despatched
       his letter so privately that none of those who surround him suspected his proceeding. The
       Earl of Warrington, as you know, dearest Diana, hastened to reply. His answer was so
       satisfactory, so frank, so generous, so candid, that the Duke declared he would visit with
       his severest displeasure any one who dared breathe a word of calumny against me or my friends
       in England, in future.
"The next step adopted by his Serene Highness was to dismiss the Marquis of Gerrano from
       the office of Minister of Foreign Affairs. Baron Ruperto, the Under Secretary in that
       Department, retired with his superior. The Duke adopted this measure in consequence of the
       intrigues of those noblemen to thwart his Highness's intentions of raising to the ducal
       throne the woman whom he loved. You may suppose how grieved—how vexed—how distressed I have
       been through the conviction that I myself was the cause of these heart-burnings, jealousies,
       and intrigues; and although I was innocently the source of such disagreeable proceedings, my
       sorrow and annoyance were but little mitigated by this impression. I implored the Grand Duke
       to allow me to leave the country, and retire to Switzerland; but his Serene Highness remained
       firm, and assured me that, although he had many difficulties to overcome, he was not
       disheartened. Then he declared that his entire happiness was centred in me; and he thus
       over-ruled my scruples.
"At length the duke remodelled his cabinet (a fact to which I alluded above) by appointing
       the Count of Friuli (who is deeply attached to His Highness, and favourable to our union) to
       the Foreign Office, in place of the Marquis of Gerrano. Signor Pisani, another faithful
       dependant of His Highness, was appointed Under-Secretary in the place of Baron Ruperto. The
       Minister of War also retired, and was succeeded by General Grachia. When these changes were
       effected, his Serene Highness communicated to the council of ministers his intention to
        unite himself to Eliza Marchioness of Ziani on the 2d of December of the present
        year.
"This decision was made known on the 19th of last month. I did not write to communicate the
       important fact to you, because I was apprehensive of new delays; and as I had already misled
       you once (though unintentionally on my part) I was unwilling to deceive either you or myself
       a second time. I know your friendship for me, Diana,—I know that you entertain a sister's
       love for me, the same that I feel for you,—and I also know that you anxiously watch the
       progress of my fortunes, as, under similar circumstances, I should yours. I therefore
       resolved to acquaint you with no more of my hopes, until they should have been realised. That
       result has now been attained; and I need preserve a cold silence no longer.
"In the evening of the 19th of November, the Grand Chancellor of Castelcicala, the
       President of the Council (the Marquis of Vincenza), and the Archbishop of Montoni, visited me
       at the villa to acquaint me with the royal decision. I endeavoured—and I hope succeeded—to
       convince their lordships of the profound sense which I entertained of the high honour
       intended to be conferred upon me, and my conviction that no merit which I possessed could
       render me worthy of such distinction; at the same time I declared my readiness to accept that
       honour, since it was the will and pleasure of a sovereign Prince to bestow it upon me.
"I can scarcely tell you the nature of the varied emotions and feelings which filled—indeed
       agitated—my bosom when the memorable morning dawned. That was yesterday! I awoke at an
       early—a very early hour,—before six, and walked in the garden with the hope that the fresh
       air and the charming tranquillity of the scene would compose me. I could scarcely believe
       that I was on the point of entering upon such high destinies; that a diadem was so soon to
       encircle my brow; that the thrilling words Highness and Princess would in a
       few hours be addressed to me! I could not reconcile with my former obscure lot the idea that
       I was shortly to sit upon a sovereign throne,
       —command the allegiance of millions of human beings,—and share the fortunes of a
       potentate of Europe! Was it possible that I—I who was the daughter of a poor farmer, and who
       had seen so much of the vicissitudes of life,—I who had thought myself happy with the
       competence which I enjoyed through the Earl of Warrington's bounty at Clapton,—I who
       conceived myself to be one of the most fortunate of individuals when, by the goodness of that
       same excellent peer, I arrived in this State, and took possession of the villa which he had
       placed at my disposal,—I who had then no more elevated aspirations than to dwell in
       tranquillity and peace—no loftier hope than to deserve that kind nobleman's benefits by my
       conduct,—was it possible that I was in a few hours to become the Grand Duchess of
       Castelcicala? I could not fix my mind to such a belief; the idea seemed an oriental fiction—a
       romantic dream. And yet, I remembered, I had already received an earnest of this splendid
       promise of fortune: I had already been elevated from a lowly condition to an exalted rank;
       the distinction of a Marchioness was mine; for months had I been accustomed to the sounding
       title of Your Ladyship and for months had I been enrolled amongst the peeresses of
       Castelcicala. Yes—I thought: it was true,—true that a Prince—a powerful Prince—intended to
       raise me to a seat upon his own ducal throne!
"At seven precisely the three lovely daughters of General Grachia arrived at the villa to
       assist me in my toilette—my nuptial toilette. They informed me that, if it were my pleasure,
       they were to remain in attendance upon me after my marriage. I embraced them tenderly, and
       assured them that they should always be near me as friends. When the toilette was completed,
       I bade adieu to the villa. I wept—wept tears of mingled joy and sorrow as I said farewell to
       that abode when I had passed so many happy, happy hours! At length I entered General
       Grachia's carriage, which was waiting; and, accompanied by my three amiable friends, repaired
       to their father's private dwelling (not his official palace of the War Department) in
       Montoni.
"Here my letter must terminate. Enclosed is an account of the entire ceremony, translated
       into English by my private secretary (who is well acquainted with my native tongue) from the
        Montoni Gazette. Fain would I have erased those passages which are favourable—too
       favourable to myself; but I fancied that my friend—my sister Diana would be pleased to read
       the narrative in its integrity.
"In conclusion, let me say—and do you believe it as devoutly as I say it sincerely—that, in
       spite of my rank and fortunes,—in spite of the splendours that surround me, to you I am in
       heart, and always shall remain, the same attached and grateful being, whom you have known
       as
"ELIZA SYDNEY."

It would be impossible to describe the feelings of delight with which Mrs. Arlington perused
      the latter portion of this letter. Pass we on, therefore, to the Bridal Ceremony, as it was
      described in the translated narrative which accompanied the communication of the Grand
      Duchess:—

"THE MARRIAGE OF THE GRAND DUKE.
"Yesterday morning were celebrated the nuptials of his Serene Highness Angelo III. and
       Eliza Marchioness of Ziani.
"From an early hour the capital wore an appearance of unusual gaiety and bustle. The houses
       looking on the Piazzetta of Contarini, leading to the ancient Cathedral of Saint Theodosia,
       were decorated in a most splendid manner with banners, garlands, festoons of flowers, and
       various ornaments and devices appropriate to the occasion. The balconies were fitted up as
       verdant bowers and arbours, and the lovely characteristics of the country were thus
       introduced into the very heart of the city. The Town-Hall was hung with numerous banners; and
       the royal standard waved proudly over the Black Tower of the Citadel. The shops in those
       streets through which the procession was to pass were fitted up with seats which were let to
       those who were willing to pay the high prices demanded for them. In other parts of the city
       the shops and marts of trade were all closed, as was the Exchange. A holiday was observed at
       the Bank of Castelcicala; and the business of the General Post Office closed at eleven
       o'clock in the forenoon. Nor was the port less gay than the city. All the vessels in the
       harbour and docks, as well at those in the roadstead, were decked with innumerable flags. The
       royal standard floated from the main of the ships of war of the Castelcicalan navy. The sight
       was altogether most imposing and lively.
"At seven o'clock the bells of Saint Theodosia and all the other churches in Montoni rang
       out merry peals; and the troops of the garrison got under arms. At a quarter before eight the
       Mayor and Corporation of the city, arrayed in their robes of green velvet edged with gold,
       proceeded to the palace and presented an address of congratulation on the auspicious day, to
       his Serene Highness, who was pleased to return a most gracious answer. It being generally
       understood that the Marchioness of Ziani would in the first instance alight at the dwelling
       of General Grachia, the Minister of War, a crowd of highly respectable and well-dressed
       persons had collected in that neighbourhood. At nine o'clock the General's private carriage,
       which had been sent to convey the future Grand Duchess from her own abode to the General's
       mansion, drove rapidly up the street, attended by two outriders. We shall never forget the
       enthusiasm manifested by the assembled multitude upon that occasion. All political feelings
       appeared to be forgotten; and a loud, hearty, and prolonged burst of welcome met the ear. The
       object of this ebullition of generous feeling bowed gracefully to the crowds on either side;
       and the cheering continued for some moments after the carriage had entered the court-yard of
       the General's mansion.
"At half-past ten o'clock the President of the Council, the Grand Chancellor, and the
       Intendant of the Ducal Civil List arrived in their carriages at General Grachia's abode,
       preceded by one of the royal equipages, which was sent to convey the bride and her
       ladies-in-waiting to the palace. In a few minutes the President of the Council handed the
       bride, who was attended by the lady and three lovely daughters of General Grachia, into the
       ducal carriage. The procession then repaired to the palace, the crowds that lined the streets
       and occupied the windows and balconies by which it passed, expressing their feelings by
       cheers and the waving of handkerchiefs. To these demonstrations the bride responded by
       graceful bows, bestowed in a manner so modest and yet evidently sincere, that the conduct of
       this exalted lady upon the occasion won all hearts.
"The procession entered the palace-square; and the Grand Duke, attended by the great
       officers of state and a brilliant staff, received his intended bride at the foot of the great
       marble staircase of the western pavilion. The illustrious company then entered the palace.
       Immediately afterwards the five regiments of household troops, commanded by that noble
       veteran the Marshal Count of Galeazzo, marched into the square, and formed into three lines
       along the western side of the palace. At half-past eleven the royal party appeared at the
       foot of the marble staircase, and entered the numerous carriages in waiting. The bride
       occupied the carriage which had conveyed her to the palace, and was accompanied by the ladies
       in attendance upon her. His Serene Highness, attended by the President of the Council and the
       Grand Chancellor, entered the state carriage. The procession then moved onwards to the
       Cathedral of Saint Theodosia.
"This was the signal for the roar of artillery from all points. The citadel, and the ships
       of war in the roadstead thundered forth the announcement that his Serene Highness had just
       left the palace. The bells rang blithely from every steeple; the troops presented arms, the
       military bands played the national hymn; and the procession was welcomed with joyous shouts,
       the waving of handkerchiefs, and the smiles of beauty. The windows and balconies of the
       houses overlooking the streets through which it passed, were crowded with elegantly dressed
       ladies, brilliant with their own beauty, gay with waving plumes, and sparkling with diamonds.
       The only indication of political feeling which we observed upon the occasion, was on the part
       of the troops; and they were silent.
"The bride was naturally the centre of all interest and attraction. Every one was anxious
       to catch a glimpse of her charming countenance. And certainly this lovely lady never could
       have appeared more lovely than on the present occasion. She was attired in a dress
       of the most costly point-lace over white satin. Her veil was of the first-mentioned material,
       and of the richest description. She was somewhat pale; but a charming serenity was depicted
       upon her countenance. She bowed frequently, and in the most unpretending and affable manner,
       as the procession moved along.
"At length the cavalcade reached the cathedral, where the Archbishop of Montoni, assisted
       by the Bishops of Trevisano and Collato, was in attendance to perform the solemn ceremony.
       The sacred edifice was thronged by the élite and fashion of the capital, who had
       been admitted by tickets. When the royal party had entered the Cathedral, the doors were
       closed; and the holy ceremony was solemnised. The roar of the artillery was again heard, as
       the royal party returned to their carriages. This time the Grand Duchess was handed by his
       Serene Highness into the state carriage. The return to the palace was distinguished by
       demonstrations of satisfaction on the part of the spectators more enthusiastic, if possible,
       than those which marked the progress of the cavalcade to the cathedral. A glow of animation
       was visible upon the countenance of her Serene Highness; and the Grand Duke himself
        looked remarkably well and cheerful. In a short time the Sovereign conducted
       his lovely bride into that palace which in future is to be her home.
"Thus ended a ceremony which, in a political point of view, may probably be attended with
       important results to the interests of Castelcicala. Should male issue proceed from this
       marriage, the contentions of rival parties in the state will be at once annihilated. The
       supporters of the Prince of Castelcicala, who is now an exile in England, are naturally
       indignant and annoyed at the marriage of his Serene Highness Angelo III. with a lady young
       enough to encourage hopes that the union may not remain unfruitful. It is even evident that
       many of the former friends of the exiled Prince pronounced in favour of this marriage, the
       moment it was contemplated some months previously to its solemnization. This sentiment of
       approval will account for the entrance of General Grachia, who was notorious for his adhesion
       to the popular cause espoused by the Prince, into the Ministry. Probably the best friends of
       their country, aware that it was neither natural nor legal to attempt to control the
       inclinations and affections of his Serene Highness Angelo III., looked upon this marriage as
       the best means of securing peace and internal tranquillity to Castelcicala, inasmuch as it
       gives a prospect of an heir to the ducal throne—an heir whose right and title none could
       dispute. This is the view we ourselves take of the case: and we therefore hail the event as
       one of a most auspicious nature in our annals."

Scarcely had the Enchantress terminated this narrative of the ceremony which elevated her
      friend to a ducal throne,—a narrative which she had perused with the liveliest feelings of
      satisfaction, and the most unadulterated pleasure,—when the Earl of Warrington was
      announced.
Diana hastened to communicate to him the tidings which she had received; and the nobleman
      himself read Eliza's letter, and the extract from the Montoni Gazette, with an
      interest which showed how gratified he felt in the high and exalted fortunes of the daughter
      of her whom he had once loved so tenderly.
"Yes, indeed," said the earl, when he had terminated the perusal of the two documents,
      "Eliza Sydney now ranks amongst the queens and reigning princesses of the world: from a humble
      cottage she has risen to a throne."
"And this exalted station she owes to your lordship's goodness," remarked Diana.
"Say to my justice," observed the earl; "for I may flatter myself that I have behaved with
      justice to the child of my departed uncle's daughter. And this remarkable exaltation of Eliza
      Sydney shows us, Diana, that we should never judge of a person's character by one fault. Eliza
      has always been imbued with sentiments of virtue and integrity, although she was led into one
      error by that villain Stephens; and she has now met with a reward of a price high almost
      beyond precedent. But, ah!" exclaimed the earl, who was carelessly turning the letter of the
      Grand Duchess over and over in his hands as he spoke, "this is very singular—very
      remarkable;"—and he inspected the seal and post-marks of the letter with minute attention.
"What is the matter?" inquired Diana.
"Some treachery has been perpetrated here," answered the earl, still continuing his
      scrutiny: "this letter had been opened before it was delivered to you."
"Opened!" cried Diana.
"Yes," said the Earl of Warrington; "here is every proof that the letter has been violated.
      See—there is the English post-mark of yesterday morning: and over it has been stamped
       another mark, of this morning's date. Then contemplate the seal. There are two kinds
      of wax, the one melted over the other: do you not notice a shade different in their
      colours?"
"Certainly," said Diana: "it is apparent. But who could have done this? Perhaps the Grand
      Duchess herself; for the ducal arms are imprinted upon the upper layer of wax."
"The persons who opened this letter, Diana," said the earl, in a serious—almost a solemn
      tone, "are those who know full well how to take the imprint of a seal. But have you not other
      letters from Castelcicala?"
"Several," replied Diana; and she hastily unlocked her writing-desk, where she produced all
      the correspondence she had received from Eliza Sydney.
The earl carefully inspected the envelopes of those letters; and his countenance grew more
      serious as he proceeded with his scrutiny.
"Yes," he exclaimed, after a long pause; "the fact is glaring! Every one of these letters
      was opened somewhere ere they were delivered to you. The utmost caution has been
      evidently used in re-sealing and re-stamping them;—nevertheless, there are proofs—undoubted
      proofs—that the whole of this correspondence has been violated in its transit from the writer
      to the receiver."
"But what object—what motive——"
"I have long entertained suspicions," said the Earl of Warrington, interrupting his fair
      mistress, "that there is one public institution in England which is made the scene of
      proceedings so vile—so detestable—so base as to cast a stain upon the entire nation. Those
      suspicions are now confirmed."
"What mean you?" inquired Diana: "to which institution do you allude?"
"To the General Post-office," replied the Earl of Warrington.
"The General Post-office!" cried Mrs. Arlington, her countenance expressing the most
      profound astonishment.
"The General Post-office," repeated the earl. "But this is a matter of so serious a nature
      that I shall not allow it to rest here. You will lend me these letters for a few hours? I am
      more intimately acquainted with the Home Secretary than with any other of her Majesty's
      Ministers; and to him will I now proceed."
The earl consigned the letters to his pocket, and, with an air of deep determination, took a
      temporary leave of Mrs. Arlington.
Scarcely had the earl left the house, when Mr. Greenwood's valet, Filippo, was
      introduced.
"I have called, madam," said the Italian, "to inform you that I last night counteracted
      another of my master's plots, and saved a young female from the persecution of his
      addresses."
"You have done well, Filippo," exclaimed Mrs. Arlington. "Does your master suspect you?"
"Not in the remotest degree, madam. I contrived matters so well, that he believed the young
      person alluded to had escaped by her own means, and without any assistance, save that of a
      pair of sheets which enabled her to descend in safety from the window of the room in which she
      was confined."
"I am delighted to hear that your mission to England has been so successful, in thwarting
      the machinations of that bad man," observed Mrs. Arlington. "Have you heard any news from
      Castelcicala?"
"I have this morning received a Montoni newspaper, announcing the nuptials of the Grand Duke
      and the Marchioness of Ziani," replied Filippo.
"And I also have heard those happy tidings," said Mrs. Arlington. "But have you any further
      information to give me relative to the schemes of your master? I am always pleased to learn
      that his evil designs experience defeat through your agency."
      
"I have nothing more to say at present, madam," answered Filippo; "except, indeed," he
      added, suddenly recollecting himself, "that I overheard, a few days ago, a warm contention
      between my master and a certain Sir Rupert Harborough."
"Sir Rupert Harborough!" ejaculated Diana, a blush suddenly overspreading her cheeks.
"Yes, madam. From what I could learn, there was a balance of about a thousand pounds due
      from Sir Rupert Harborough to Mr. Greenwood, on a bill that purported to be the acceptance of
      Lord Tremordyn, but which was in reality a forgery committed by Sir Rupert himself."
"A forgery!" cried Diana.
"A forgery, madam. Sir Rupert bitterly reproached Mr. Greenwood with having suggested to him
      that mode of raising money, whereas Mr. Greenwood appeared to deny with indignation any share
      in the part of the transaction imputed to him. The matter ended by Mr. Greenwood declaring
      that if the bill were not paid to-morrow, when it falls due (having, it appears, been renewed
      several times), Sir Rupert Harborough should be prosecuted for forgery."
"And what said Sir Rupert Harborough to that?" inquired Diana.
"He changed his tone, and began to implore the mercy of Mr. Greenwood: but my master was
      inexorable; and Sir Rupert left the house with ruin and terror depicted upon his
      countenance."
"This battle you must allow them to fight out between themselves," said Diana, after a
      moment's hesitation. "I know Sir Rupert Harborough—know him full well; but I do not think that
      he is so thoroughly black-hearted as your master. He was once kind to me—once," she added,
      musing to herself rather than addressing the Italian valet: then, suddenly recollecting
      herself, she said, "However, Filippo—that affair does not regard you."
"Very good, madam," replied the valet; and he then took his departure.
The moment he was gone, Mrs. Arlington threw herself into her comfortable arm-chair, and
      became wrapt up in deep thought.
</div></body></text></TEI>