<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="174">
CHAPTER CLXXIII.   THE ADIEUX.
Our narrative must now take a leap of several months.
It was the middle of October.
Once more in the vicinity of Count Alteroni's mansion near Richmond, a handsome young man
      and a beautiful dark-eyed maiden were walking together.
Need we say that they were Richard and the charming Isabella?
The countenances of both wore an expression of melancholy; but that indication of feeling
      was commingled with the traces of other emotions.
Richard's eyes beamed with ardour, and his lips denoted stern resolution: Isabella's
      bewitching features showed that her generous soul entertained warm and profound hope, even
      though the cloud sate upon her brow.
"Yes, my adored one," said Richard, gazing tenderly upon her, "it is decided! To-morrow I
      embark on this expedition. But I could not quit England without seeing you once more, dearest
      Isabella; and for two or three days have I vainly wandered in this neighbourhood with the hope
      of meeting you—alone."
"Oh! Richard, had I for one moment divined that you were so near, I should have come to
      you," answered the Princess; "and this you know well! If I have hitherto discouraged
      clandestine meetings and secret correspondence—save on one or two occasions—it was simply
      because you should not have reason to think lightly of me;—but you are well aware, Richard,
      that my heart is thine—unchangeably thine,—and that my happiest moments are those I pass with
      thee!"
"I cannot chide you, dearest, for that fine feeling which has made you discourage
      clandestine meetings and secret correspondence," said Richard, gazing with mingled admiration
      and rapture upon the angelic countenance of Isabella; "but now that circumstances are about to
      change,—now that I shall be far away from thee, beloved girl,—that
      restriction must in some degree be removed, and you will permit me to write to
      you from time to time."
"It would be an absurd affectation and a ridiculous prudery, were I to refuse you," replied
      Isabella. "Yes, dear Richard—write to me;—and write often," she added, tears starting into her
      eyes.
"A thousand thanks, Isabella, for this kind permission—this proof of your love. And, oh! to
      whatever perils I am about to oppose myself face to face,—in whatever dangers I may be
      involved,—whatever miseries or privations I may be destined to endure,—the thought of you, my
      own adored Isabella, will make all seem light! But I do not anticipate much difficulty in the
      attainment of our grand object. General Grachia, Colonel Morosino, and the other chiefs of
      this enterprise, have so well, so prudently, so cautiously digested all the measures necessary
      to ensure success, that failure is scarcely possible. The tyranny of the Grand Duke and of his
      shameless Ministry has reduced the Castelcicalans to despair. We have three fine vessels; and
      twelve hundred devoted patriots will form the expedition. The moment we land, we shall be
      welcomed with enthusiasm. And if an opportunity should serve for me to show myself worthy of
      the confidence that General Grachia and his colleagues have placed in me,—if," continued
      Richard, his handsome countenance now lighted up with a glow of heroic enthusiasm,—"if the aid
      of my feeble efforts can in any way demonstrate my zeal in favour of the constitutional cause,
      be well assured, dearest Isabella, that it is not an idle boaster, nor a braggart coward who
      now assures thee that he will not dishonour the service in which he has embarked."
"Of that I feel convinced, Richard," exclaimed the Italian lady, whose soul caught the
      enthusiasm which animated her lover. "But you know not the wild hopes—the exalted visions
      which have at times filled my imagination, since I heard a few weeks ago that you were one of
      the chiefs of this enterprise, the preparations for which were communicated to my father. For
      you are doubtless aware that General Grachia has made my father acquainted with his
      intentions and projects——"
"Which the Prince discountenances," added Richard, with a sigh. "Nevertheless, he is perhaps
      right: but if we succeed, Isabella—oh! if we succeed, your father becomes the sovereign of a
      great and enlightened people! Then—what hope will remain for me?"
"Providence will not desert us, Richard," answered Isabella. "Said I not ere now that the
      wildest hopes—the most exalted visions have dazzled my imagination? I will not describe them
      to you, Richard; but need I confess that they are connected with yourself? The dying words of
      our poor friend Mary Anne have made an impression upon me which I can never forget."
"I can well divine all the hopes and aspirations which her prophetic language was
      calculated to excite," returned Markham; "for there have been moments when I was weak enough
      to yield to the same influence myself. But the future is with the Almighty; and He must ordain
      our happiness or our misery! I must now leave you, my beloved Isabella:—when I am away thou
      wilt think of me often?"
"Oh! Richard, will you really depart? will you venture on this expedition, so fraught with
      danger?" cried Isabella, now giving way to her grief as the moment of separation drew nigh. "I
      told you to hope—I wished to console you; but it is I who require consolation when about to
      say farewell to you! Oh! Richard, if you knew what anguish now fills my heart, you would be
      enabled to estimate all my love for you!"
"I do—I do, adored Isabella!" ejaculated Markham, pressing her to his breast. "How
      devotedly—how faithfully you have loved me, I never can forget! When spurned from your
      father's house—overwhelmed with the most cruel suspicions, your love remained unchanged; and
      in many a bitter, bitter hour, have I derived sweet solace from the conviction that thy heart
      was mine! Oh! Isabella, God in his mercy grant that I may return from this enterprise with
      some honour to myself! It is not that I am influenced by motives of selfish ambition;—it is
      that I may remove at least one of the hundred obstacles which oppose our union. And now adieu,
      my angel—my dearly-beloved Isabella: adieu—adieu!"
"Farewell, Richard—farewell, dearest one—my first and only love," murmured Isabella, as she
      wept bitterly upon his breast.
Then they embraced each other with that passionate ardour—with that lingering unwillingness
      to separate—with that profound dread to tear themselves asunder, which lovers in the moment of
      parting alone can know.
"Let us be firm, Isabella," said Richard: "who can tell what happiness my share in this
      enterprise may create for us?"
"Yes—something tells me that it will be so," answered Isabella; "and that hope sustains
      me!"
Another embrace—and they parted.
Yes—they parted,—that handsome young man and that charming Italian maiden!
And soon they waved their handkerchiefs for the last time;—then, in a few moments, they were
      lost to each other's view.
Richard returned home to his house at Lower Holloway.
He had visited the farm near Hounslow a few days previously, and had taken leave of
      Katherine. The young maiden had wept when her benefactor communicated to her his intended
      absence from England for some time; but, as he did not acquaint her with the nature of the
      business which took him way from his native country, she was not aware of the perils he was
      about to encounter.
He had now to say farewell to the inmates of his own dwelling. But towards Mr. Monroe,
      Ellen, and the faithful Whittingham he was less reserved than he had been to Katherine.
Vainly had the old butler implored "Master Richard not to indemnify himself with other
      people's business;"—vainly had Mr. Monroe endeavoured to persuade him to refrain from risking
      his life in the political dissensions of a foreign country; vainly had the beautiful and
      generous-hearted Ellen, with a sisterly warmth, argued on the same side. Richard was
      determined:—they deemed him obstinate—foolish—almost mad; but they knew not of his love for
      Isabella!
"I must now make you acquainted with a certain portion of my affairs," said our hero,
      addressing Mr. Monroe, "in order that you may manage them for me until my return. I have
      embarked as much of my capital as I could well spare in the enterprise
      on which I am about to set out: you will find in my strong-box, of which I leave
      you the key, a sufficient sum of money to answer the expenses of the establishment until
      January. Should I not return by that time, you will find papers in the same place, which will
      instruct you relative to the moneys that will then be due to me from the two respectable
      individuals who are my tenants. Moreover," added Richard,—and here his voice faltered,—"my
      will is in the strong-box; and should I perish in this undertaking, you will find, my dear
      friend,—and you too, my faithful Whittingham,—that I have not left you without resources."
"Richard, this is too generous!" exclaimed Mr. Monroe, tears of gratitude trickling down his
      cheeks.
Whittingham also wept; and Ellen's sobs were convulsive—for she regarded Richard in the
      light of a dear brother.
"Render not our parting moments more painful than they naturally are, my dear friends," said
      Markham. "You cannot understand—but, if I live, you shall some day know—the motives which
      influence me in joining this expedition. Mr. Monroe—Ellen—Whittingham, I have one last request
      to make. You are all aware that on the 10th of July, 1843, a solemn appointment exists between
      my brother and myself. If I should perish in a far-off clime,—or if a prison, or any accident
      prevent my return,—let one of you represent me on that occasion. Should it be so, tell my
      brother how much I have loved him—how anxiously I have ever looked forward to that day,—how
      sincerely I have prayed for his welfare and his success! Tell him," continued Richard, while
      the tears rolled down his cheeks, large and fast,—"tell him that I have cherished his memory
      as no brother ever before was known to do; and if he be poor—or unhappy—or suffering—or
      unfortunate, receive him into this house, which will then be your own—console, comfort him! If
      he be criminal, do not spurn him:—remember, he is my brother!"
Ellen sobbed as if her heart would break as Richard uttered these words.
There was something fearfully poignant and convulsive in that young lady's grief.
But suddenly rousing herself, she rushed from the room; and, returning in a few moments with
      her child, she presented it to Markham, saying "Embrace him, Richard, before you
      depart;—embrace him—for he bears your Christian name!"
Our hero received the innocent infant in his arms, and kissed it tenderly.
No pen can depict the expression of pleasure—of radiant joy,—joy shining out from amidst her
      tears,—with which Ellen contemplated that proof of affection towards her babe.
"Thank you, Richard—thank you, my brother," she exclaimed, as she received back her
      child.
The old butler and Mr. Monroe were not callous to the touching nature of that scene.
"I have now no more to say," observed Richard. "I am about to retire to the library for a
      short time. At five o'clock the post-chaise will be here. Whittingham, my faithful friend, you
      will see that all my necessaries be carefully packed."
Markham then withdrew to his study.
There he wrote a few letters upon matters of business.
At length Whittingham made his appearance.
"Morcar is arrived, Master Richard," said the old man, "and it is close upon five."
"I shall soon be ready, Whittingham," answered Richard.
The old butler withdrew.
Then Richard took from his strong-box the mysterious packet which had been left to him by
      Thomas Armstrong; and that sacred trust he secured about his person.
"Now," he said, "I am about to quit the home of my forefathers."
And tears trickled down his cheeks.
"This is foolish!" he exclaimed, after a pause: "I must not yield to my emotions, when on
      the eve of such a grand and glorious undertaking."
He then returned to the drawing-room.
At that moment the post-chaise arrived at the front door of the mansion.
We will not detail the affecting nature of the farewell scene: suffice it to say that
      Richard departed with the fervent prayers and the sincerest wishes of those whom he left
      behind.
Morcar, the gipsy, accompanied him.
"Which road, sir?" asked the postillion.
"Canterbury—Deal," replied Richard.
And the post-chaise whirled him away from the home of his forefathers!
By a special messenger, on the same day when the above-mentioned incidents took place, the
      following letter was despatched from London:—

"To Her Serene Highness the Grand Duchess of Castelcicala.
"I have the honour to inform your Serene Highness that the measures which I adopted (and
       which your Highness condemned in the last letter your Highness deigned to address to me) have
       enabled me to ascertain the intentions of the conspirators. The three vessels purchased by
       them are now completely equipped and manned. One has already arrived in the Downs, where the
       Chiefs of the rebels are to join her. A second sailed from Hull four days ago: and the third
       left Waterford about the same time. They will all three meet at Cadiz, where they are to take
       in stores and water. Twelve hundred exiled Castelcicalans are on board these three ships,
       which are ostensibly fitted out as emigrant vessels for North America. So well have General
       Grachia, Colonel Morosino, and Mr. Markham planned their schemes, that I question whether
       even the English government is acquainted with the real destination of those ships, and the
       object of their crews.
"Beware, then, noble lady! The last meeting of the Chiefs of the expedition was held last
       evening; and I was present in my presumed capacity of a stanch adherent to the cause of the
       conspirators. The reasons which I adduced for not proceeding with them on the enterprise, and
       for remaining in London, were completely satisfactory; and no one for a moment suspected my
       integrity. Indeed, the confidence which Mr. Markham has placed in me from the beginning, in
       consequence of the share which I had in saving his life (an incident to which I have alluded
       in preceding letters to your Highness) on a certain occasion, annihilated all suspicion as to
       the sincerity of my motives.
"At the meeting of which I have just spoken, it was resolved that the descent upon
       Castelcicala shall be made in the neighbourhood of Ossore, which, I need scarcely inform your
       Serene Highness, is a small sea-port about thirty-five miles to the south of Montoni.
"And now I have discharged what I consider to be a faithful duty. If I have fallen in your
       Highness's good opinion by betraying those with whom I affected to act, I fondly hope that
       the importance of the information which I have thereby been enabled to give you, will restore
       me to your Highness's favour.
"But remember, my lady—remember the prayer which I offered up to your Highness when first I
       wrote concerning
       this conspiracy,—remember the earnest supplication which I then made and now
       renew,—that not a hair of Richard Markham's head must be injured!
"I have the honour to subscribe myself your Serene Highness's most faithful and devoted
       servant,
 "FILIPPO DORSENNI. 
 Oct. 16th, 1840. 

Thus was it that Mr. Greenwood's Italian valet provided, to the utmost of his power, for the
      safety of Richard Markham, in case those whom he improperly denominated "conspirators" should
      fall into the hands of the Castelcicalan authorities.
</div></body></text></TEI>