<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="85">
CHAPTER LXXXV. A FRIEND IN NEED.
TEN days after the arrest of Count Alteroni, a young lady was proceeding, at about eleven
      o'clock in the forenoon, down the Blackfriars Road.
She was dressed plainly, but with that exquisite taste which denotes a polished mind, and is
      in itself an aristocracy of sentiment. She looked neither to the right nor to the left: her
      pace was somewhat rapid, as if she were anxious to arrive at her destination:—and though there
      was something timid in her manner as she threaded her way along the crowded thoroughfare, few
      who passed her could help turning round to obtain another glimpse of the sylph-like form of
      that unassuming girl.
From the opposite direction advanced a young man of tall and handsome appearance, neatly
      dressed, and with a shade of melancholy upon his countenance.
In a few moments he met the young lady, and was about to pass her, when his eyes happened to
      catch a glimpse of her lovely features.
He started with surprise, exclaiming, "Signora! is it possible? Do we indeed meet again? Ah!
      it seems to me that it is an age since I saw you, dearest Isabella!"
"And since we last met, Richard, many unfortunate events have happened. My poor father—"
"Your father! what can have happened to him?" cried Markham, struck by the mournful tone of
      the beauteous Italian.
"He is in the Queen's Bench Prison," replied Isabella, her eyes filling with tears.
"In the Queen's Bench! And you are going to him now? Oh! Isabella, you must tell me how all
      this happened: I will escort you a little way;"—and with these words, Richard offered his arm
      to the signora, who accepted it with a ready confidence in him whom she loved, and whose
      presence was by no means displeasing to her at that moment when she stood so much in need of
      consolation.
"You are aware," resumed Isabella, "that my father intrusted a considerable sum of money to
      Mr. Greenwood."
"The villain!" ejaculated Markham warmly.
"I cannot explain to you exactly how it was that my father accepted the security of Mr.
      Tomlinson, the banker, for that amount, as I am not acquainted with matters of business;—but
      he did so, and released Mr. Greenwood."
"And Tomlinson failed—and your father lost all!"
"Alas! he did;—and he is now imprisoned for a sum for which he had become answerable to
      serve a friend," said Isabella.
"How long has the count been in—in—"
"In prison," added the signora mournfully. "He was arrested ten days ago; and, by the advice
      of a solicitor, he removed on the following day from the bailiff's private house to the
      Bench."
"And the countess?"
"My mother is very unwell to-day, and could not leave her room; and I am now on my way to
      visit my poor father. We have left Richmond altogether; and my mother and myself occupy
      lodgings in the Blackfriars Road, near the bridge."
"Ten days ago this happened, Isabella," said Richard reproachfully; "and you did not
      acquaint me with what had occurred?"
"Ah! Richard—you know well that circumstances forbade me;—or else—"
"Or else? Speak—dearest Isabella."
"Or else I believe you would have given my father the best advice how to proceed. He is too
      proud to apply to his friends; and he cannot—he must not remain in prison. His health would
      sink under the idea of degradation that has taken possession of him."
"That villain Greenwood!" said Markham, musing. "When will the day of retribution arrive for
      him?"
"We must now part, Richard," observed Isabella, as they came in view of the dingy wall of
      the Queen's Bench Prison, crowned by chevaux-de-frise.
"Yes—we must part again," said Markham mournfully. "But how happy should I have been had we
      met this morning under other circumstances! How I should have blessed the accident that
      brought me thus early this morning on some business of my own, to this neighbourhood! Oh!
      Isabella, you know not how constantly I think of you—how unceasingly I dwell upon your dear
      image!"
"And can you suppose, Richard, that I never devote a thought to you?" said Isabella, in a
      low and plaintive tone. "But we must not talk upon such a subject at present. Let us hope for
      happier times."
With these words the young lady returned the pressure of her lover's hand, and hurried
      towards the Queen's Bench.
Markham loitered about the spot for five minutes, and then proceeded to the lobby of the
      prison. There he inquired into the particulars of Count Alteroni's detention; and ascertained
      that he had been arrested for eighteen hundred pounds, with costs.
He then left the gloomy precincts of the debtors' gaol, and retraced his steps towards the
      City.
"Eighteen hundred pounds would procure the count's liberation," he said to himself:
      "eighteen hundred pounds, which he does not possess, and which he is too proud to
      borrow,—eighteen hundred pounds, which would restore him to his family, and make Isabella
      happy! My property is worth four thousand pounds:—if I raise two thousand pounds upon it, I
      shall curtail my income by exactly one half. I shall have one hundred pounds a-year remaining.
      But my education was good—my acquirements are not contemptible: surely I can turn them to some
      account?"
Then it suddenly struck him that he had already raised five hundred pounds upon his estate
      at the period when the Resurrection Man endeavoured to extort that sum from him; and half of
      this sum had already disappeared in consequence of the amount given to Talbot (alias
      Pocock) in the Dark-House—the assistance rendered to Monroe and Ellen—his journey to
      Boulogne—and other claims. Then there would be the expenses of deeds to reckon. If he raised
      two thousand pounds more, his property would only remain worth to him about fifteen hundred
      pounds. His income would therefore be reduced to seventy-five pounds per annum.
      
But not for one moment did this noble-hearted young man hesitate relative to the course he
      should pursue; and without delay he proceeded to the office of Mr. Dyson, his solicitor, in
      the City.
There the business was speedily explained and put in train. It would, however, require, said
      the solicitor, four days to terminate the affair; but Markham did not leave him until he had
      fixed the precise moment when the deeds were to be signed and the money paid over.
Richard returned home in a state of mind more truly happy than he had known for some time
      past. He had resolved upon an immense sacrifice, to benefit those whom he esteemed or loved;
      and he was prepared to meet any consequences which it might produce. This is human nature. We
      may inure ourselves to the contemplation of any idea, however appalling or alarming it may
      appear at first sight, without a shudder and almost without a regret. The convict, under
      sentence of death in the condemned cell, and his ears ringing with the din of the hammers
      erecting the scaffold, does not experience such acute mental agony as the world are apt to
      suppose. We all have the certainty of death, at some date more or less near, before our eyes;
      and yet this conviction does not trouble our mental equanimity. The convict who is doomed to
      die, is only worse off than ourselves inasmuch as the precise day, hour, and moment of his
      fate are revealed to him; but his death, which is to be sudden and only of a moment's pain,
      must be a thousand times preferable to the long, lingering, agonising throes of sickness which
      many of those who pity him are eventually doomed to endure before their thread of existence
      shall be severed for ever!
Yes—we can bring our minds to meet every species of mortal affliction with resignation, and
      even with cheerfulness;—and there is no sorrow, no malady, no pang, which issued from
      Pandora's box, that did not bear the imprint of hope along with it!
True to the appointed time, Richard proceeded to the office of Mr. Dyson, on the fourth day
      from the commencement of the business.
He signed the papers and received two thousand pounds.
The lawyer shook his head, implying his fears that his client was improvident and
      wasteful.
He was, however, speedily undeceived.
"Will you have the kindness to accompany me in a cab?" said Markham. "You can render me a
      service in the way in which I am about to dispose of this money."
"Certainly," returned Mr. Dyson, "Are you going far?"
"Not very," answered Richard; and when they were both seated in the vehicle, he told the
      driver to proceed towards the Queen's Bench Prison, but to stop at some distance from the
      gates.
These directions were obeyed.
"Now, Mr. Dyson," said Richard, "will you have the kindness to repair to the office of the
      prison, and inquire the amount of debts for which a certain Count Alteroni is detained in
      custody?"
Mr. Dyson obeyed the instructions thus given to him, and in ten minutes returned from the
      prison with a copy of causes in his hand.
"Count Alteroni is a prisoner for eighteen hundred and twenty-one pounds," said the
      lawyer.
"Are there any fees or extra expenses beyond the sum specified in that paper?" asked
      Richard.
"Yes—merely a few shillings," replied the solicitor.
"I wish, then, that every liability of Count Alteroni be settled in such a way that he may
      quit the prison without being asked for a single shilling. Here is the necessary amount: pay
      all that is due—and pay liberally."
"My dear sir," said the lawyer, hesitating, "I hope you have well reflected upon what you
      are about to do."
"Yes—yes," answered Richard impatiently: "I have well reflected, I can assure you."
"Two thousand pounds—or nearly so—is a large sum, Mr. Markham."
"I have weighed all the consequences."
"At least, then, you have received ample security—"
"Not a scrap of paper."
"Had I not better call and see this nobleman, and obtain from him a warrant of attorney or
      cognovit—"
"So far from doing any such thing," interrupted Markham, "you must take especial care not to
      mention to a soul the name of the person who has employed you to effect the count's
      release—not a syllable must escape your lips on this head; nor need you acquaint the clerks
      whom you may see, with your own name. In a word, the affair must be buried in profound
      mystery."
"Since you are determined," said Mr. Dyson, "I will obey your instructions to the very
      letter. But, once again, excuse me if I request you to reflect whether—"
"My dear sir, I have nothing more to reflect upon; and you will oblige me by terminating
      this business as speedily as possible."
The solicitor returned to the prison; and Markham, whom he now considered to be foolish or
      mad, instead of improvident and extravagant, threw himself back in the vehicle, and gave way
      to his reflections. His eyes were, however, turned towards the road leading to the Bench; for
      he was anxious to watch for the re-appearance of his agent.
Ten minutes had elapsed, when his attention was directed to two ladies who passed by the
      cab, and advanced towards the prison-gate.
He leant forward—he could not be mistaken:—no—it was indeed she—the idol of his
      adoration—the being whom he loved with a species of worship! She was walking with the
      countess. They were on their way to visit the count in his confinement; but Richard could not
      catch a glimpse of their countenances—though he divined full well that they wore not an
      expression of joy. It was not, however, necessary for him to behold Isabella's face, in order
      to recognise her:—he knew her by her symmetrical form, the elegant contours of which, even the
      ample shawl she wore could not hide: he knew her by her step—by her graceful and dignified
      gesture—by her lady-like, and yet unassuming gait.
Oh! how speedily, thought he within himself, were she and her parents to be restored to
      happiness again!
In about a quarter of an hour after the ladies had entered the prison, Dyson returned to his
      client.
"Is it all settled?" demanded Markham.
"Every thing," answered the lawyer.
"And when can the count leave the prison?"
"Almost immediately," replied Dyson, as he entered the vehicle once more.
Markham then ordered the driver to return to the City.
In the mean time the countess and Isabella repaired to the room which the noble exile
      occupied in the prison. As they ascended the steep stone staircase which led to it, they
      wondered within themselves
       when he whom they loved so tenderly would be restored in freedom to them.
The count was seated at a table covered with books and papers, and was busily occupied in
      arranging the latter when the countess and signora entered the room. They were instantly
      welcomed with the most affectionate warmth by the noble prisoner: and he endeavoured to assume
      a cheerful air in their presence.
"Any letters?" said the count, after the usual inquiries concerning health and comfort.
"None this morning," answered the countess. "And now, my dear husband, tell me—have you
      settled any plan to effect your release?"
"No," said the count. "I must trust to events. Were Armstrong alive, I should not hesitate
      to accept a loan from him;—but to none other would I apply."
At this moment a knock at the door of the prison chamber was heard; and the two
      inseparables, Captain Smilax Dapper and Sir Cherry Bounce, made their appearance.
"My dear count, you don't mean to say that it is really true, and that you are here on your
      own account—strike me!" ejaculated the gallant hussar.
"The newth wath twue—too twue, you thee, Thmilackth," said Sir Cherry, shuddering visibly,
      and without any affectation too as he glanced around him.
"True indeed!" cried the count, bitterly.
"I wonder whether they will let uth out again?" said Sir Cherry, gazing from the window.
      "But, I declare, they have got wacket-gwoundth here, and no leth than thwee pumpth. What can
      the pwithonerth want with tho muth water?"
"What, indeed—confound me!" exclaimed the captain. "For my part, I always heard that they
      lived upon beer. But tell me—how much is there against you?"
"Yeth—how muth?" echoed Sir Cherry Bounce.
"A mere trifle," answered the count evasively. "I have been cruelly robbed, and my present
      position is the result."
"Well," continued the captain, with remarkable embarrassment of manner, "we are all here
      together—and so there is no harm in speaking openly, you know—and Cherry isn't anybody, strike
      him!—I was thinking that a very satisfactory arrangement might be made. Always strike when the
      iron's hot! I have long entertained a high respect for your family, count: my late uncle, the
      general, who introduced me and Cherry to you, always spoke in the best possible terms of you,
      although he never said much about your past life, and even hinted that there was some
      mystery—"
"To what is all this to lead, Captain Dapper?" exclaimed the count, somewhat
      impatiently.
"Simply that—why do you stand there, laughing like a fool, Cherry?"
"Me, Thmilackth?"
"Yes—you. Well, as I was saying when Cherry interrupted me—I have always entertained the
      highest possible opinion of your family, count, and especially of the signora; and if she
      would accept my hand and heart—why, strike me! an arrangement could be made in four and twenty
      hours—"
"Captain Dapper," interrupted the count, "no more of this. I believe that you would not
      wantonly insult either my daughter or myself; but I cannot listen to the terms to which you
      allude."
"My dear count—"
"Silence, sir! No more of this!" exclaimed the noble Italian.
There was a pause, which was broken by the entrance of one of the turnkeys.
"Sir, I have the pleasure to inform you that you are discharged," said that functionary.
"Discharged!" ejaculated the count: "impossible! How could I be discharged?"
The countess and Isabella surveyed the turnkey with looks of the most intense and painful
      anxiety.
"A stranger has sent his solicitor to pay every thing against you at the gate; and all the
      fees and the little donations to us and the criers are paid also."
"You are bantering me, sirrah!" cried the count. "You are mistaken. The Envoy from my native
      land, who alone of all my acquaintances is capable of doing an action of this generous nature,
      and in so delicate a manner, has been absent from London for the last ten days, and is even
      unaware of my situation. Who then could have paid my debts?"
A name trembled upon Isabella's tongue; but the word died upon her lips. She dared not
      pronounce that name—although her heart told her that her surmise was correct, and that Richard
      Markham was the secret friend to whom her father was indebted for his liberty. Richard! the
      reward of thy good deed had already commenced by the feelings which now changed the love that
      the beauteous girl had hitherto experienced for thee, into an adoration and a worship!
"Well, sir," said the turnkey, "we don't know who has done this, and it wasn't our business
      to inquire. All I can say is, that the debt is paid, the fees settled, and you may leave the
      place as soon as you like."
"Dapper, this is your doing," cried the count, after a moment's pause. "And yet—"
"No—strike me!—I had nothing to do with it—I wish I had now."
We shall not attempt to describe the delight of the Italian family, when they found that the
      joyful tidings were indeed true; but all the count's conjectures, to fix this generous and
      noble deed upon any particular member of his acquaintance, were alike unsatisfactory and
      unavailing:—Isabella alone divined the truth.
</div></body></text></TEI>