<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="109">
CHAPTER CIX. THE STOCK-BROKER.
UPON a glass-door, leading into offices on a ground floor in Tokenhouse Yard, were the words
       "James Tomlinson, Stock-broker."
It was about eleven o'clock in the morning.
A clerk was busily employed in writing at a desk in the front office. The walls of this room
      were covered with placards, bills, and prospectuses, all announcing the most gigantic
      enterprises, and whose principal features were large figures expressing millions of money.
These prospectuses were of various kinds. Some merely put forth schemes by which enormous
      profits were to be realised, but which had not yet arrived to that state of maturity (the
      point at which the popular gullibility has been laid hold of,) when Directors, Secretaries,
      and Treasurers can be announced in a flaming list. Others denoted that the projectors had
      triumphed over the little difficulty of obtaining good names to form a board; and the upper
      part of this class of prospectuses was embellished with a perfect array of M.P.'s, Aldermen,
      and Esquires.
The prospectuses, one and all, set forth, with George-Robins-flourishes and
      poetico-hyperbolical flowers of rhetoric, the unparalleled and astounding advantages to be
      reaped from the enterprises respectfully submitted to public consideration and to the monied
      world especially. The face of the globe was a complete paradise according to those
      announcements. The interior of Africa was represented to be a perfect mine of gold by the
      projectors of a company to trade to those salubrious parts; the cannibals of the South Sea
      Islands became intelligent and interesting beings in the language of another association of
      speculators; the majestic scenery of the North Pole and the phenomena of the aurora borealis
      were held out by a colonising company as inducements to families to emigrate to Spitzbergen;
      the originators of a scheme for forming railways in Egypt expatiated upon the delights of
      travelling at the rate of sixty miles an hour through a land famous for its antiquarian
      remains, and along the banks of a river where the young alligators might be seen disporting in
      the sun; and numerous other prospectuses of majestic enterprises developed their original
      principles and prospective benefits to the astounded reader.
One would have imagined that any individual with a five-pound note in his pocket, had only
      just to step into Mr. Tomlinson's office, take five shares in as many enterprises, pay one
      pound deposit upon each, and walk out again a man of vast wealth.
Mr. Tomlinson himself was seated in a decently
       furnished room, which constituted the "private office." He was looking well, but
      somewhat careworn, and not quite so comfortable as a man who had passed through the Bankruptcy
      Court, got his certificate, and was in business once more, might be expected to look. In a
      word, he had a hard struggle to make his way respectably, and was compelled to meddle in many
      things that shocked his somewhat sensitive disposition.
A short, well-dressed, good-humoured man, with a small quick eye, was sitting on one side of
      the fire, conversing with the stock-broker.
"Well, Mr. Tomlinson," he said, "on those conditions I will lend my name to the Irish
      Railway Company proposed. But, remember, I require fifty shares, and I am not to pay a
      farthing for them."
"Oh, of course," cried Tomlinson; "that is precisely the proposal I was instructed to make
      to you. The fact is, between you and me, the projectors are all men of straw—one came out of
      Whitecross Street Prison a few weeks ago, and another has been a bankrupt twice and an
      insolvent seven times; and so they must raise heaven and earth to get good names."
"'Tis their only plan—their only plan," answered the gentleman; "and I flatter myself," he
      added, drawing himself up, "that the countenance of Mr. Sheriff Popkins is not to be sneezed
      at."
"On the contrary, my dear Mr. Popkins," said Tomlinson, "your name will soon bring a host of
      others."
"I should think so, Mr. Tomlinson—I should think so," was the self-sufficient reply.
"Well, then, Mr. Popkins, shall I make an appointment for you to meet Messrs. Bubble and
      Chouse to-morrow morning at my office?"
"If you please, my dear sir. And now I wish you to do a little matter for me. The fact is, I
      have been fool enough to take thirty shares in a certain railway company, and I have been
      elected a director. The company is in a most flourishing condition, and so I mean to make them
      purchase my shares of me. You will accordingly have the kindness to let it be known on 'Change
      that you have my shares to sell; but you must mind and not part with them. The thing will get
      to the company's ears, and they will be terribly alarmed at the prospect of the injury which
      may be done to the enterprise by a director offering his shares for sale. They will then send
      and negotiate with you privately, and you can make a good bargain with them."
"I understand," said Tomlinson. "I shall only breathe a whisper about the shares being
      offered for sale, in a quarter whence I know the rumour will immediately fly to the Directors
      of the Company."
"Good," observed Mr. Sheriff Popkins. "Here is the scrip: you can tell me what you have done
      when I call to-morrow morning to meet Messrs. Bubble and Chouse."
The worthy sheriff then withdrew, and Mr. Alderman Sniff was announced.
"Mr. Tomlinson," said this gentleman, "I wish you to do your best for a new Joint
      Stock-Company which I have just founded. This is the prospectus."
The stock-broker glanced over it, and said, in a musing manner, "Ah! very good
      indeed—excellent! 'British Marble Company.' Famous idea! 'Capital Two Hundred
       Thousand Pounds in Ten Thousand Shares of Twenty Pounds Each.' Good again. 'Deposit
       One Pound per Share.' That will do. Then comes the Board of Directors—all good names. I
      see you have made yourself Managing Director: well, that's quite fair! Then, again,
       'Auditor, Mr. Alderman Sniff; Treasurer, Mr. Alderman Sniff; Secretary,
       Mr. Alderman Sniff.' But who sells the quarry to the Company? Oh! I see, 'Mr.
       Alderman Sniff.'"
"Well, what do you think of it?" demanded the alderman.
"You ask me candidly, my dear sir?"
"Certainly," replied the alderman.
"I think the plan is excellent. The only drawback to its success, is—shall I speak
      openly?"
"I wish you to do so."
"Then I am of opinion that you have given yourself too many situations," continued
      Tomlinson. "In the first place you found the Company, and you make yourself Managing Director.
      Well and good. But then you also sell the quarry to the Company. Now, as Managing
      Director, you have to award to yourself a sum for that quarry; as Treasurer you pay
      yourself; as Secretary you draw up the agreements; and as Auditor you confirm your own
      accounts!"
"Perfectly correct, Mr. Tomlinson. Is it not a rule that Joint-Stock Companies are never to
      benefit any one save the founder?"
"Oh! no one denies that," answered the stock-broker. "What I am afraid of is, that
      the public will not bite, when they see one man occupying so many situations in the
      Company."
"Nonsense, my dear fellow! The name of an alderman will carry every thing before it. Does
      not the world believe that the Aldermen of the City of London are all as rich as Crœsus?"
"Whereas, between you and me," returned Tomlinson with a sly laugh, "there is scarcely one
      of them who has got a penny if his affairs came to be wound up."
"And yet we live gloriously, ha! ha!" chuckled Mr. Alderman Sniff. "But to return to my
      business: what can you do for me?"
"I can certainly recommend the enterprise," answered Tomlinson. "But where can the marble be
      seen?"
"At my office," said the alderman. "I went and bought the finest piece that was ever
      imported from Italy; and there it is in my counting-house, labelled 'British Marble'
      in letters at least half a foot high."
"Where is the quarry situated?" inquired Tomlinson.
"Oh! I haven't quite made up my mind about that yet," was the answer given by Mr.
      Alderman Sniff. "The truth is, I am going down into Wales this week, and I shall buy the first
      field I can get cheap in some rude part of the country. That is the least difficulty in the
      whole enterprise."
"Your plans are admirable, my dear sir," exclaimed Tomlinson. "I will do all I can for you.
      Will you take a glass of wine and a biscuit?"
"No, I thank you—not now," said the Alderman. "I have promised a colleague to sit for him
      to-day at Guildhall police-court. Last week I was on the rota for attendance there, and I
      remanded a man who was brought up on a charge of obtaining three and sixpence under false
      pretences."
"Indeed?" ejaculated Tomlinson, whose eyes were fixed upon the "Two Hundred Thousand
       Pounds" in the alderman's prospectus.
"Yes," continued Mr. Sniff; "and I am going to sit to-day because that fellow comes up
      again. I mean to clear the City of all such rogues and vagabonds. I shall give him a taste of
      the treadmill for two months. So, good morning. By the by, call as you pass my office and have
      a look at the marble; and mind," he added, sinking his voice,
       "you don't let out that it came from Italy. It is pure Welsh marble,
      remember!"
Alderman Sniff chuckled at this pleasant idea, and then hastened to Guildhall, where he
      fully justified his character of being the most severe magistrate in the City of London.
A few minutes after Mr. Alderman Sniff had taken his departure, Mr. Greenwood was
      announced.
"My dear Tomlinson, I am delighted to see you," said the capitalist. "It is really an age—a
      week at least—since I saw you. How do matters get on?"
"I have prospects of doing an excellent business," answered Tomlinson. "The numberless
      bubble companies that are started every day, are the making of us stock-brokers. We dispose of
      shares or effect transfers, and obtain our commission, let the result be what it may to the
      purchasers."
"And I hope that you have conquered those ridiculous qualms of conscience which always made
      a coward of you, when you were in Lombard Street?" said Greenwood.
"Needs must when the devil drives," observed Tomlinson drily.
"For my part," continued Greenwood, "I take advantage of this mania on the part of the
      English for speculation in joint-stock companies and railway shares. A day of reaction will
      come; and the effects will be fearful. Thousands and thousands of families will be involved in
      irretrievable ruin. That day may not occur for one year—two years—five years—or even ten
      years;—but come it will; and the signal for it will be when the House of Commons is inundated
      with railway and joint-stock company business, and when it is compelled to postpone a portion
      of that business until the ensuing session. Then confidence will receive a shock: an interval
      for calm meditation will occur; and the result will be awful. Every one will be anxious to
      sell shares, and there will be no buyers. Now mark my words, Tomlinson; and, if you speculate
      on your own account, speculate accordingly. I do so."
"And you are not likely to go wrong, I know," said Tomlinson. "But stock-brokers do not risk
      any money of their own: they have plenty of clients, who will do that for them."
"Then you are really thriving?" asked Greenwood.
"I am earning a living, and my business is increasing. But I feel hanging like a mill-stone
      round my neck the thousand pounds which you lent me at twenty per cent.—"
"Yes—only twenty per cent."
"Only at twenty per cent.," continued Tomlinson with a sigh: "and I am unable to
      return you more than one hundred at present, although I agreed to pay you two hundred every
      four months."
"The hundred will do," said Greenwood; and he wrote out a receipt for that amount.
Tomlinson handed him over a number of notes, which Greenwood counted and then consigned to
      his pocket.
"There is a pretty business to be done in the City now," said the capitalist, after a pause.
      "I contrive to snatch an hour or two now and then from the time which I am compelled to devote
      to the enlightened and independent body that returned me to Parliament; and I seldom come into
      the City on those occasions without lending a few hundreds to some poor devil who has
      over-bought himself in shares."
"I have no doubt that you thrive, Greenwood," said the stock-broker. "Every man who takes
      advantage of the miseries of others must get on."
"To be sure—to be sure," cried the Member of Parliament. "I hope that you will act upon that
      principle."
"I have no reason to complain of the business that I am now doing: I act as honestly as I
      can—and that principle deprives me of many advantageous affairs. Then I experience annoyance
      from a constant reminiscence of that poor old man who so nobly sacrificed himself for me."
"The eternal cry!" ejaculated Greenwood. "If you are so very anxious to find him out, put an
      advertisement in the Times—"
"And if he saw it, he would believe it to be a stratagem of the police to arrest him. You
      know that there is a warrant out against him. The official assignee took that step."
"Well, let him take his chance; and if he should happen to be captured, we will petition the
      Home Secretary to diminish the period for which he will be sentenced to transportation. Not
      that such a step would benefit him much, because his age—"
"Let us drop this subject, Greenwood," said Tomlinson, evidently affected.
"With all my heart. I must admit that it moves one's feelings; and if I met the old man in
      the street, I should not hesitate to give him a guinea out of my own pocket."
"A guinea!" cried Tomlinson—and a smile of contempt curled his lips. "Perhaps you would
      recommend me to bestow a five-pound note upon that poor Italian nobleman whom you cheated out
      of his fifteen thousand pounds."
"You need not call him a poor nobleman," answered Greenwood. "He is now worth ten thousand
      pounds a-year."
"Indeed! A great change must have taken place, then, in his fortunes?" exclaimed
      Tomlinson.
"The fact, in a few words, is this. A young lady, whom I knew well," said Greenwood,
      "obtained letters of introduction from Count Alteroni to certain friends of his in Montoni,
      the capital of Castelcicala, to which state she repaired for the benefit of her health, or
      some such frivolous reason. She had the good fortune to captivate the Grand Duke—"
"Miss Eliza Sydney, you mean?" said Tomlinson.
"The same. Did you know her?"
"Not at all. But I read in the newspapers the account of her marriage with Angelo III.
      Proceed."
"The moment she married the Grand Duke, a pension of ten thousand a-year was granted to
      Count Alteroni, by way of indemnification, I have heard, for his estates, which were
      confiscated after he had fled the country in consequence of political intrigues."
"How did you learn all this?"
"My valet Filippo happens to be a native of Montoni, and he seems well acquainted with all
      that passes in Castelcicala. Count Alteroni and his family have returned to the villa which
      they formerly inhabited at Richmond."
"I am delighted to hear this good news. You have taken a considerable weight off my mind;
      the transaction with that nobleman was always a subject of self-reproach."
"I dare say," observed Mr. Greenwood ironically; then, drawing his chair closer to
      Tomlinson's seat, he added, "You are no doubt the most punctilious and conscientious of all
      City men. I have something to communicate to you, and must do it briefly,
       as I am compelled to return to Spring Gardens, to meet a deputation from the
      Rottenborough Agricultural Society, at one o'clock precisely—and I never keep such people
      waiting more than an hour!"
"That is considerate on your part," said the stock-broker.
"Don't you think it is? But I did not come here for the sole purpose of chatting. The fact
      is, a gentleman with whom I am acquainted wants a stock-broker for a very delicate and
      important business—for a business," added Greenwood, sinking his voice to a whisper, "which
      requires a man who will be content to put five hundred pounds into his pocket for the service
      that will be required of him, and perform that service blindfold, as it were."
"I will do nothing to compromise my safety," said Tomlinson.
"You will not be required to do so," answered Greenwood. "However, the gentleman I allude to
      will call upon you in the course of the day, I dare say; and he will then explain to you the
      service he has to demand at your hands."
"What is the name of your friend?" inquired Tomlinson.
"Mr. Chichester—Arthur Chichester," was the reply.
"Chichester—Chichester," said the stock-broker, musing; "surely I have heard you mention
      that name before? Ah! now I remember! Did you not complain to me a few days ago that he had
      been making mischief between you and a certain Sir Rupert Harborough?"
"I did," answered Greenwood; "and I certainly had good cause for anger against this same
      Arthur Chichester. But I had become his confidant and adviser in a certain affair a few weeks
      before I discovered that he had acquainted Sir Rupert Harborough with circumstances which he
      had better have kept to himself; and I am therefore compelled to continue my assistance and
      counsel to him until the affair alluded to be brought to a successful termination. Besides, as
      Sir Rupert and I have settled our little differences, there is no use in bearing malice,
      especially when something is to be gained by forbearance."
"I thought you would make that admission," said Tomlinson, laughing. "Well, I shall see your
      friend, and if, with safety, I can earn five hundred pounds, certainly, in my position, I
      cannot afford to lose such an opportunity."
"That is speaking like a reasonable man," observed Greenwood. "Never stick at trifles. What
      should I be now, if I had hesitated at every step I took? Should I possess a hundred thousand
      pounds in good securities? should I be enabled to gratify every wish, caprice, or desire,
      whose object money can accomplish? should I be the representative of one of the most
      independent and intelligent constituencies in England? Ah, my dear fellow, think of me and my
      position when you hesitate; and always make money after the well-authorised
       system—honestly, if you can; but, at all events, make money."
With these words, Mr. Greenwood took his departure.
"Yes," mused Tomlinson, when he was alone once more, "that man is right! Make money,
      honestly, if you can; but, at all events, make money. That is the burden of
       his song; why should it not be the chorus of mine? When I look around me, I
      see every one making money upon the same plan. Sheriff Popkins does not hesitate to lend his
      name to a bubble; and Alderman Spiff concocts one! And they are men of reputation—holding
      important offices—appearing at Court—wielding power—exercising influence. This is indeed a
      wide field for contemplation. Why, Greenwood, in his bold, dashing manner, gains more in a day
      than I, in my miserable, droning fashion, earn in a month. To be afraid to touch the gold that
      is thrown in one's way in this wonderful city, is to be a coward—a very coward. Yes—I see it
      all! Greenwood is right. Make money—honestly, if you can; but, at all events, make money!"
Mr. Tomlinson's soliloquy had arrived at this very pleasing conclusion, just as the door of
      his office opened, and a clerk entered to acquaint his master that a gentleman of the name of
      Chichester desired to speak to him.
"Show Mr. Chichester in," said Tomlinson.
Mr. Chichester was dressed in his usually fashionable manner; and his gait had lost nothing
      of the care-nothing-for-anybody kind of swagger which characterised him when he was first
      introduced to the reader.
Having thrown himself listlessly upon a chair, he said, "I presume our mutual friend
      Greenwood has mentioned my name to you, Mr. Tomlinson?"
"He has. I was prepared for your visit."
"But not for its object, perhaps?" said Chichester.
"I am as yet ignorant on that head," was the reply.
"Mr. Greenwood then told you nothing—"
"Nothing, save an intimation that my services were required in a certain delicate and
      important matter, and that five hundred pounds would be my remuneration."
"Perfectly correct," answered Mr. Chichester. "Are you disposed to aid me on the proposed
      terms?"
"I must first learn the nature of the business in which my interference is needed."
"And if you should then decline?"
"You shall have my solemn assurance that what you confide to me remains buried in my own
      bosom."
"That is what I call a proper understanding," exclaimed Chichester. "You must know, then,
      that some three months ago I wooed, and won, a widow lady, not very ugly, certainly, but whose
      principal attraction consisted of the sum of sixteen thousand pounds in the three and a half
      per cents. She was five and twenty years of age, and possessed of a sweet little house in the
      neighbourhood of the Cambridge Heath gate. I met her one evening in July or August last at a
      party at my father's house—when I was doing the amiable to the old gentleman in order to sound
      his pockets; and my father whispered to me that I ought to make up to Mrs. Higgins. Certainly
      the name was not very aristocratic; but then her Christian name was Viola; and I thought that
      Viola Chichester would be pretty enough. I accordingly flirted with the widow on that
      occasion, and we seemed tolerably pleased with each other. I called next day—and every now and
      then, when I had time; but I, really, scarcely entertained serious thoughts of making her an
      offer, until one day when I was desperately hard up, and I saw my friend Harborough involved
      in such difficulties that we could not do any good together. So I got into an omnibus in
      Bishopsgate Street, went down to Cambridge Heath, called upon Mrs. Higgins, and then and there
      offered her my heart and hand. She accepted me. We had a pleasant little chat about money
      matters: she stated that her late husband, a wealthy builder, had left her sixteen thousand
      pounds; and, of course, I could not make
       myself out a pauper. Besides, she knew that father was tolerably well off. I
      assured her that I was possessed of a few thousands, and that the old gentleman allowed me
      three hundred a-year into the bargain. She stipulated that all her own money should be settled
      upon herself. I demurred to this proposal; but she was obstinate; and I then discovered that
      Mrs. Viola Higgins had a very determined will and a very positive temper of her own. I thought
      to myself, 'Here is a charming widow who throws herself into my arms, and who possesses a
       decent fortune; it would be madness to neglect so golden an opportunity of enriching myself.
       Besides,' I reasoned, 'when once we are married, it will be very easy for me to
       wheedle the affectionate creature out of any money that I may require.' Well, I
      consented to the settlement of all her property upon herself; and in due course we were
      married. I did not mention the matter to any of my West-End friends, because I did not like to
      invite them to the wedding—I was afraid their off-hand manners would alarm the bride, and give
      her an unfavourable opinion with regard to myself. So the business was kept very snug and
      quiet; and we passed the honey-moon at my wife's sister and brother-in-law's, very decent
      people in their way, and dwelling at Stratford-le-Bow. On our return to London, I thought it
      time to break the ice in respect to my own pecuniary situation. The truth was, that I had not
      a penny-piece of my own, and that my father had long since withdrawn his support, in
      consequence of the immense drains I had made upon his purse. I was moreover encumbered with
      debts; and some of my tradesmen had found me out and began to call at the house at Cambridge
      Heath. They even used menaces. My position was truly critical. I did not marry the widow
      merely with a view to take her out for a walk, sit by the fire-side chatting, or read a book
      while she worked. I wanted money,—money to pay my debts,—money to enjoy myself with.
      Accordingly I broke the ice by very candidly avowing that I had not a shilling. I, however,
      swore that her beauty and accomplishments had alone induced me thus to deceive her. But—oh!
      the vixen! She flew into such a passion that I thought she would tear my eyes out. She raved
      and wept—and wept and raved—and then reproached and taunted,—until I wished one of us at the
      devil, and scarcely cared which went there. The scene ended in Viola's falling into a fit of
      hysterics; and she was compelled to go to bed. I was most assiduous to her; and my attentions
      evidently softened her. In a few hours she grew calm, and then said, 'Arthur, you have
       deceived me grossly; but I can forgive you. I do not regret the loss of the wealth and income
       which you led me to believe were yours; I am only sorry that you should have thought it
       necessary to practise such a measure to induce me to marry you. But let what is past be
       forgotten. The income derived from my property is sufficient for us; and, if you will be kind
       and good to me, this deception shall never more trouble our happiness.'"
"I think Mrs. Chichester spoke like a generous, sensible, and noble-hearted woman," observed
      Tomlinson, who was, nevertheless, at a loss to conceive how all these details could be
      connected with the service which Mr. Chichester required at his hands.
"Ahem!" exclaimed that gentleman, who did not seem to relish the remark particularly well.
      "However, all that fine feeling was mere outward show with my wife," he continued; "for she
      was inexorable in her refusal to sell out or mortgage any of her funded property for my use. I
      told her that I had debts. 'Give a list to my solicitor,' she said, 'and he shall
       compromise with your creditors.' I assured her that I could make a better bargain with
      them myself. She would not believe me. I then declared point-blank that I did not mean to
      remain tied to her apron-strings; that she must at least settle half the property upon me;
      that I desired to keep a horse and cab, and introduce my friends to my wife; and that I was
      resolved we should live as people of property ought to live. It was then that she showed her
      inveterate obstinacy, and manifested the worst shades of an infamous temper. She agreed to
      allow me one hundred a-year for my clothes and pocket-money, but would not give me any control
      over her property. As for horses, cabs, and West End friends, she ridiculed the idea. I
      prayed, threatened, and reasoned by turns: she was as immoveable as Mount Atlas. Several days
      were passed in perpetual arguments upon the subject; but the more I prayed, threatened, and
      reasoned, the more obstinate she grew. One morning we had a desperate quarrel. I swore that I
      would be revenged—that I would extort from her by violence, or other means, what she refused
      to yield to argument. Nothing, however, could move her: she said that she would not ruin
      herself to gratify my extravagances. This was nearly a month ago. I bounced out of the house,
      and hurried up to the West End of the town, as fast as I could go, to see and consult my
      friend Sir Rupert Harborough. But, as I was on my way thither—for I actually had not even
      money in my pocket to pay a cab—I accidentally met Greenwood. He saw that I was annoyed and
      vexed, and inquired the reason. I told him all. He reflected for some moments, and then said,
       'Do not consult Harborough in this matter. He cannot assist you. There is only one course
       to adopt with such a woman as this. You must put her under restraint.' I told him that
      nothing would please me better; but that I should have all her friends upon me if I threw her
      into a lunatic asylum; and that I was, moreover, without the means to take a single step.
      Greenwood and I went into a tavern, and discussed the business over a bottle of wine. He then
      laid down a certain plan, made certain stipulations respecting remuneration for himself, and
      offered to back me in carrying the matter to the extreme. Of course I assented to all he
      proposed. The whole affair was managed in such a manner as—"
"As none but Greenwood could manage it," observed Tomlinson.
"Exactly," returned Chichester. "Indeed, he is a thorough man of business! He
      procured two surgeons to call, at separate times, at the house at Cambridge Heath, ostensibly
      to see me. I took care to be at home. They also saw my wife; and the result was that they
      granted the certificates I required."
"Certificates of an unsound state of mind?" inquired Tomlinson.
"Certificates of an unsound state of mind," repeated Chichester, affirmatively. "Greenwood
      managed it all—keeping himself, however, entirely in the back-ground. He found the
      surgeons—provided me with money to fee them—and then recommended to me a keeper of a lunatic
      asylum, who is not over particular. These proceedings occupied two or three days, during which
      I was on my very best behaviour with my wife; but if ever I
       hinted to her the propriety of acceding to my wishes in respect to the disposal
      of her property, she cut me short by the assurance that her decision was irrevocable. I really
      wished to avoid extreme measures; but with such a disobedient, self-willed, obstinate woman,
      leniency was an impossibility. Accordingly, I one evening allured her, during a walk, into the
      immediate vicinity of the lunatic asylum: the streets were lonely and deserted; and it was
      already dark. The keeper of the mad-house had been prepared for the execution of the project
      that evening; and he was at his post. As we slowly passed by his house, he sprang forward from
      some recess or dark nook, and fixed a plaster over my wife's mouth. Thus not a cry could
      escape her lips. At the same moment we seized her, and conveyed her into the asylum."
"That was three weeks ago?" inquired Tomlinson.
Chichester nodded an assent.
"And she has not come to her senses yet?"
"She has at length," was the answer. "I received a letter yesterday from the keeper of the
      asylum, stating that her spirit is broken, and that she is now ready to obey her husband in
      all things. The keeper wrote to me a few days ago to state that his mode of cure was
      producing a favourable result; and yesterday he intimated to me by another letter that the
       mode alluded to had proved completely successful."
"What course do you now intend to pursue?" demanded Tomlinson, who began to suspect the
      manner in which his services were to be made available.
"I immediately communicated the important contents of this second letter to Greenwood,"
      continued Chichester, "and he recommended me to apply to you to aid me in completing the
      business. My wife now sees her folly, and is willing to devote one half of her
      property—namely, eight thousand pounds, to the use and purposes of her lawful husband; and I
      am generous enough to be satisfied with that sum, instead of insisting upon having the
      whole."
"I understand you," said Tomlinson: "you require a stock-broker to effect the transfer of
      eight thousand pounds from the name of your wife into your own name."
"And to sell out the amount when so transferred," added Chichester.
"It will be necessary for me to obtain the signature of your wife to a certain paper,"
      observed Tomlinson.
"Greenwood has told me all this. In one word, will you accompany me to the asylum where my
      wife is confined, and obtain her signature?"
"If she be willing to give it, I am willing to receive it—as a matter of business,"
      answered Tomlinson. "But, are you sure—in a word, what guarantee have you that she will not
      denounce the whole proceeding to the officers of justice—rally her friends around her—appeal
      to the law—and punish every one concerned in the business?"
"Listen. The document which she agrees to sign is a general power on my behalf over eight
      thousand pounds in the Bank of England: this power will be dated two months back—a month after
      our marriage. We must be supposed to have called at your office on a particular day at that
      period, on which occasion she signed the power in your presence. It being a general power of
      transfer, it would not seem extraordinary that I did not use it until now—that is, two months
      after it was given. This night must she sign the deed: to-morrow you must transfer and sell
      out the money. Then to-morrow night, she shall be conveyed back to the house at Cambridge
      Heath. The two servants whom we keep are bribed to my interest: they are ready, in case of
      need, to prove the existence of those symptoms of insanity which justified the certificates of
      the surgeons and the restraint under which my wife has been placed. How, then, can she do us
      an injury? If she proclaim her 'wrongs'—as she may call them, you can prove
      that the power of transfer could not have been extorted from her in a mad-house, as it was
      signed two months ago at your office! Then, if she were to speak of the mode of
       treatment adopted by the keeper of that mad-house to curb her haughty spirit, the
      accusation would be indignantly denied; and her statements would be set down to a disordered
      imagination, and would justify further restraint. Be you well assured, that she will
      never say or do any thing that may endanger her liberty again! No—the fact is simply this: we
      divide the property, and separate for ever. She will be glad to get rid of a husband like me:
      I shall not be sorry to dissolve—as far as we can dissolve it—a connexion with a woman of her
      mean, griping, and avaricious disposition."
"This is Greenwood's scheme throughout," said Tomlinson. "No other man living could plot
      such admirable combinations to effect a certain object, without danger to any one."
"Do you consent to act in this matter, on consideration of retaining for yourself five
      hundred pounds of the money which you will have to transfer and sell out to-morrow?"
"I do consent," replied Tomlinson, after a few moments' reflection, during which he muttered
      to himself, "Make money—honestly, if you can; but, at all events, make money."
"To-night—at ten o'clock, will you come to me at my house at Cambridge Heath?" inquired
      Chichester.
"I will," was the answer. "But let me ask you one question:—what excuse have you made to
      your wife's friends for this absence of three weeks?"
"In the first place," said Chichester, "her only relations consist of a sister and this
      sister's husband at Stratford-le-Bow; and they are so immersed in the cares of business, that
      they have not called once at Cambridge Heath ever since our marriage. Secondly, my wife always
      lived in a very retired manner, and has very few acquaintances or friends besides my father's
      family. It was therefore easy to satisfy the one or two persons who did call, with
      the excuse that Mrs. Chichester had gone on a short visit to some relatives in the
      country."
"And you feel convinced your precautions are so wisely taken, that she will never open her
      lips relative to the past?" said Tomlinson.
"I am confident that she will not breathe a word that may lead to her return to the
       place where she now is," answered Chichester, with a significant look and emphatic
      solemnity of tone.
"Then I will not hesitate to serve you in this business," said Tomlinson. "To-night—at ten
      o'clock."
"To-night—at ten o'clock," repeated Chichester; and with these words he departed.
When he was gone, Tomlinson paced his office in an agitated manner.
"The die is cast—I am now about to plunge into crime!" he said. "And yet how could I
      avoid—how could I long procrastinate this step? These mean tricks—these dishonourable
      dealings—these deceptive schemes in which we brokers are compelled
       to bear a part, only serve to prepare the way for more daring and more criminal
      pursuits. Five hundred pounds at one stroke! That is a little fortune to a man, struggling
      against the world, like me! Four hundred will I pay to Greenwood—the other hundred will swell
      my little account at the bankers'; for who can hope to do any extent of business in this city
      without a good name at his bankers'?"

Tomlinson ceased, and sate down calm and collected. Alas! how easy is it to reason oneself
      into a belief of the existence of a necessity for pursuits of dishonesty or crime!
The clerk entered the private office, and said, "Sir, there is a person, who refuses to give
      his name, waiting to speak to you."
"Let him come in," replied Tomlinson.
The clerk ushered in a man of cadaverous countenance, bushy brows, and large whiskers, and
      who was dressed in a suit of black.
"Your business, sir?" said the stock-broker, who did not much like the appearance of his
      visitor.
"Your name's Tomlinson?" remarked the man, coolly taking a chair.
"Yes. What would you with me?"
"James Tomlinson," continued the man, referring to a scrap of paper, which he took from his
      waistcoat pocket, "late banker in Lombard Street?"
"The same," said Tomlinson, impatiently.
"Then I took it down right, although he did speak in such a confused manner," observed the
      man, muttering rather to himself than to Mr. Tomlinson.
"What do you mean?" demanded the stock-broker.
"I mean that there's a person who wants to see you," answered the stranger. "I don't know
      that I'm exactly right in saying wants, because he is in such a state that he can
      neither want nor care about any thing. At the same time, I think it would be as well if
       you was to see him."
"Who is this person?" cried Tomlinson.
"A man that seems to know you well enough, if I can understand his ravings."
"Ravings!" repeated the stock-broker, already influenced by a slight misgiving.
"Ravings, indeed! and enough to make him rave! To be laid out as dead for four days, then
      put in a coffin, buried, and be had up again within
       ten or a dozen hours:—if that wouldn't make a man rave—what the devil
      would?"
"Have the goodness to explain yourself. Every word you utter is an enigma to me."
"But it wasn't an enigma to my poor friend when the stiff 'un suddenly put a cold hand upon
      his. However, in two words, do you know a person called Michael Martin?"
"Michael Martin!" cried the stock-broker. "Speak—what has become of him?"
"He has been ill—"
"Ill! poor old man! and I not to know it!"
"Worse than that! He died—"
"Died! Where—when?"
"Died—and was buried."
"Trifle not with me. When did he die? where is he buried?"
"He died—was buried—and came to life again!" said the stranger, with the most provoking
      coolness.
"Sir," exclaimed Tomlinson, advancing towards his visitor, and speaking in a firm and
      emphatic manner, "if you have called to tell me any thing concerning Michael Martin, speak
      without mystification."
"Well, sir," returned the stranger, "the plain truth is this:—An old man, without a name,
      took up his abode in a by-street in Globe Town some months ago. He was taken ill, and, to all
      appearance, died. He was buried. A surgeon fancied him as a subject, and hired me and a friend
      of mine to have him up again. We resurrectionized him, and took him in a cart last night to
      the surgeon's house. He was conveyed into the dissecting-room, and stretched on the table. The
      doctor and I went into the surgery to settle the expenses; and, in the mean time, my friend
      was left alone with the stiff 'un. It seems that a neighbour, suspecting that the surgeon now
      and then got a subject for his experiments, saw the cart stop at the door, and immediately
      understood what was going on. He went into his garden, which joins the yard where the
      dissecting-house stands, and seeing a light in the window of the dissecting-house, he felt
      sure that his suspicions were well founded, although he could not see into the place, because
      there was a dark blind drawn down over the window. However, the neighbour was resolved to
      clear up his doubts; so he took up a brick-bat, and threw it as hard as he could against the
      window. The glass was broken, and the light extinguished. My friend, who was left alone with
      the stiff 'un, was somewhat startled at this occurrence; but how much more was he alarmed when
      he suddenly felt the body stretch out its hand and catch hold of one of his?"
"Then Michael Martin was not dead?" ejaculated Tomlinson, in a tone which expressed alike
      the tenderness of deep emotion and also the bitterness of disappointment; for, perhaps, all
      circumstances considered, the ex-banker would rather have heard a confirmation of the death,
      than an account of the resuscitation of his late clerk.
"No—the old man is not dead. The doctor and myself were in the surgery, when we heard the
      smash of the window and the cry of the Buf—of my friend, I mean."
"Of your brother resurrectionist, I suppose," continued Tomlinson, in a tone of ineffable
      disgust. "Well, go on."
"We went into the dissecting-room with a lamp, and there we found the light put out, and my
      comrade insensible on the floor. But what was more extraordinary still, we saw the corpse
      gasping for breath. 'He is not dead!' cried the surgeon; and in a moment a lancet was
      stuck into his arm. The blood would not flow at first, but the surgeon chafed his temples and
      hands by turns; and in a few moments the blood trickled out pretty freely. Meantime I had
      recovered my companion, and explained to him the nature of the phenomenon that had taken
      place. When he heard the real truth, he was no longer alarmed, because he knew very well that
      people are often buried in a trance. In fact, one night, about eighteen months ago, he and I
      went to Old Saint Pancras church-yard to get up a stiff 'un, and when we opened the coffin, we
      found that the body had turned completely round on its face; it was, however, stone dead when
      we got it up—and never shall I forget what a countenance it had! But of that no matter."
"Have the goodness to keep to your present narrative," said Tomlinson, scarcely able to
      conceal his disgust at the presence of a resurrectionist—an avowed body-snatcher.
"Well," continued the man with the cadaverous countenance, "in a very few minutes we
      completely recovered the old gentleman. I obeyed all the directions of the surgeon, and ran
      backwards and forwards to the pharmacy for God only knows what salts and what ammonia. At last
      the subject gave a terrible groan, opened his eyes, and exclaimed, 'Where am I?' The
      surgeon assured him that he was in safety—that he had been very ill—that he was now much
      better—and so on. Meantime, by the surgeon's orders, I had called up his housekeeper, (for he
      is a bachelor,) and she had got a bed prepared and warmed, and some hot water ready, and every
      thing comfortable. Well, we carried the old gentleman up to bed; the doctor gave him a little
      warm brandy and water; and in another half hour, he was able to speak a few words in a
      comprehensible manner. But his brain seemed confused, and all we could learn was that his name
      was 'Michael Martin,' and that he raved after a gentleman, whom he called 'James
       Tomlinson, the banker.'"
"Ah! he said that—did he?" cried Tomlinson, rising, and pacing the room with agitated
      steps.
"He did," was the reply. "And then we began to think that we had heard those names before;
      and, in a few minutes, I—who know every thing," added the man, fixing his serpent-like eyes
      upon he stock-broker with a kind of fiendish leer,—"I," he continued, "remembered that Michael
      Martin was the man who had been the cashier in the bank of Tomlinson and Company, Lombard
      Street."
"But did he say—did he—" began the stock-broker, gasping for breath,—"did he—"
"He raved—he grew delirious; and in his wanderings, he said enough to prove that he
      was not guilty of the breach of trust imputed to him."
"O God! thy vengeance overtakes me, then, at last!" cried Tomlinson, sinking, pale and
      trembling, upon a chair.
"He said much—very much," continued the man whose revelations had thus produced so strange
      an effect upon James Tomlinson. "But do not alarm yourself—I am not one to peach; and the
      doctor himself is not likely to say any thing that night lead to an awkward inquiry into the
      circumstances that brought the old gentleman into his house. Remember, the law now punishes
      with transportation those who resurrectionize, and those who encourage resurrectionists."
"Then you will not betray me?" ejaculated Tomlinson, a ray of hope animating his
      countenance.
      
"Betray you!" echoed the man, with a contemptuous curl of his lip and a ferocious leer of
      his eyes, which gleamed from beneath their bushy brows like those of a hyena from the shade of
      an overhanging brake: "betray you! What good should I get by that? You know that a reward of
      three thousand pounds was offered to any one who would deliver up this Michael Martin; and as
      a man of sense, you must also understand that it would not be very convenient for me to go
      forward and claim this reward. At the same time, I might talk—or my friend might talk; no one
      could prevent that; and such-like idle gossiping would lead to the detection of the old man.
      Now you are the best judge whether or not it is worth while to put a seal upon our lips. We
      don't want to be hard upon you;—but, perhaps," added the man, interrupting himself, "you had
      better see the old gentleman first, and then you will know that I am telling you the
      truth."
"When can I see him? where is he?" demanded Tomlinson, almost bewildered by the sudden
      revelation which had been made to him concerning Michael Martin.
"You had better put off your visit till dusk," was the reply; "because I should like to go
      with you, and the surgeon would not be very well pleased if I called upon him in the
      day-time."
"Let it be at dusk, then," said Tomlinson.
"Name your hour."
"I have an engagement between nine and ten o'clock to-night," returned the stock-broker.
"And so have I," said the visitor. "What should you say to seven o'clock? It is as dark then
      as it is at ten or eleven."
"Seven will suit me well," answered Tomlinson. "Where shall I meet you?"
"At Bethnal Green New Church—the church that stands in the Cambridge Road, and faces the
      Bethnal Green Road," explained the body-snatcher. "You can be walking up and down there a few
      minutes before seven—I shall not keep you waiting."
"I will be punctual," said Tomlinson. "But—once more—you will not betray me?"
"Ridiculous!" was the contemptuous reply.
"And this surgeon—will he not be tempted by the reward to—"
"Do you think he would walk straight into Newgate and say, 'I am come to be transported
       for encouraging and employing resurrection men?' You need not alarm yourself. Me and my
      comrade will settle the matter amicably with you."
The body-snatcher then took his departure.
Tomlinson threw himself back in his chair, pressed both his hands against his heated
      forehead, and exclaimed in a tone of despair, "I have fervently prayed that I might meet my
      poor old clerk again; and heaven has granted my request—but merely to punish me for my
      crimes!"
</div></body></text></TEI>