<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="45">
CHAPTER XLV. THE FRUITLESS SEARCH.
WHEN Richard Markham was precipitated into the hole beneath the stairs, by the perfidy of
      the Mummy, he fell with his head against a stone, and became insensible.
He lay in this manner for upwards of half an hour, when a current of air which blew steadily
      upon his face, revived him; and he awoke to all the horrors of his situation.
He had seen and passed through enough that night to unhinge the strongest mind. The secrets
      of the accursed den in a subterranean dungeon of which he now lay,—the atrocious mysteries
      revealed by the conversation of the body-snatchers ere they set out on their expedition to
      Shoreditch Church,—the cold corpse of some unfortunate being most inhumanly murdered, and all
      the paraphernalia of a hideous death, in the front-room of that outpost of hell,—haunted his
      imagination, and worked him up to a pitch of excitement bordering upon frenzy.
He felt that if he did not escape from that hole, he should dash his head against the wall,
      or go raving mad.
He clenched his fists and struck them against his forehead in an access of despair.
And then he endeavoured to reason with himself, and to look the perils that beset him, in
      the face.
But he could not remain cool—he could not control his agonising emotions.
"O God!" he exclaimed aloud; "what have I done to be thus afflicted? What sin have I
      committed to be thus tortured? Have I not served thee in word and deed to the best of my
      ability? Do I not worship—venerate—adore thee? O God! why wilt thou that I should die thus
      early—and die, too, so cruel a death? Is there not room on earth enough for a worm like me?
      Have I not been sufficiently tried, O my God? and in the hour of my deepest—bitterest anguish,
      did I ever deny thee? Did I repine against thy supreme will when false men encompassed me to
      destroy me in the opinion of the world? Hear me, O God—hear me! and let me not die this
      time;—let me not perish, O Lord, thus miserably!"
Such was the fervent, heart-felt prayer which Markham breathed to heaven, in the agony and
      despair of his soul.
He extended his arms, with his hands clasped together, in the ardour of his appeal; and they
      encountered an opening in the wall.
A ray of hope penetrated to his heart; and when upon further search, he discovered an
      aperture sufficiently wide for him to creep through, he exclaimed, "O Lord! I thank thee, thou
      hast heard my prayer! Pardon—oh! pardon my repinings;—forgive me that I dared to question thy
      sovereign will!"
At all risks he determined to pass through the opening—lead whithersoever it might; for he
      knew that he could scarcely be worse off; and he felt a secret influence which prompted him
      thus to act, and for which he could not wholly account.
He crept through the hole in the partition-wall, and found himself upon a soft damp
      ground.
Every thing was veiled in the blackest obscurity.
He groped about with his hands, and stepped cautiously forward, pausing at every pace.
Presently his foot encountered what appeared to be a step: to his infinite joy he
      ascertained, in another moment, that he was at the bottom of a flight of stone stairs.
He ascended them, and came to a door, which yielded to his touch. He proceeded slowly and
      cautiously along a passage, groping his way with his hands; and, in a few moments he reached
      another door, which opened with a latch.
He was now in the open street!
Carefully closing the door behind him, he hurried away from that accursed vicinity as if he
      were pursued by blood-hounds.
He ran—he ran, reckless of the deep pools of stagnant water, careless of the heaps of thick
      mud through which he passed,—indifferent to the bruises which he sustained against the angles
      of houses, the corners of streets, and the stone-steps of doors,—unmindful of the dangers
      which he dared in threading thus wildly those rugged and uneven thoroughfares amidst the dense
      obscurity which covered the earth.
He ran—he ran, a delirium of joy thrilling in his brain, and thanksgiving in his soul; for
      now that he had escaped from the peril which so lately beset him, it appeared to his
      imagination a thousand times more frightful than when it actually impended over him. Oh! he
      was happy—happy—thrice happy, in the enjoyment of liberty, and the security of life once
      more;—and he began to look upon the scenes of that eventful night as an accumulation of
      horrors which could have possibility only in a dream!
He ran—he ran, amidst those filthy lanes and foul streets, where a nauseating atmosphere
      prevailed;—but had he been threading a labyrinth of rose-trees, amongst the most delicious
      perfumes, he could not have experienced a more burning—ardent—furious joy! Yes—his delight was
      madness, frenzy! On, on—splashed with mud—floundering through black puddles—knee-deep in
      mire,—on, on he went—reckless which direction he pursued, so long as the rapidity of his pace
      removed him afar from the accursed house that had nearly become his tomb!
For an hour did he thus pursue his way.
At length he stopped through sheer exhaustion, and seated himself upon the steps of a door
      over which a lamp was flickering.
He collected his scattered ideas as well as he could, and began to wonder whither his wild
      and reckless course had led him: but no conjecture on his part furnished him with any clue to
      solve the mystery of his present whereabouts. He knew that he must be
       somewhere in the eastern district of the metropolis; but in what precise spot it
      was impossible for him to tell.

While he was thus lost in vain endeavours to unravel the tangled topographical skein which
      perplexed his imagination, he heard footsteps advancing along the street.
By the light of the lamp he soon distinguished a policeman, walking with slow and measured
      steps along his beat.
"Will you have the kindness to tell me where I am?" said Richard, accosting the officer: "I
      have lost my way. What neighbourhood is this?"
"Ratcliff Highway," answered the policeman: "in the middle of Wapping, you know."
"In the midst of Wapping?" ejaculated Markham, in a tone of surprise and vexation.
And, truly enough, there he was in the centre of that immense assemblage of dangerous
      streets, cutthroat lanes, and filthy alleys, which swarm with crimps ever ready to entrap the
      reckless and generous-hearted sailor; publicans who farm the unloading of the colliers, and
      compel those whom they employ to take out half their wages in vile adulterated beer; and poor
      half-starved coal-heavers whose existence alternates between crushing toil and killing
      intoxication. It was in this neighbourhood that Richard Markham now was!
Heaven alone can tell what tortuous paths and circuitous routes he had been pursuing during
      the hour of his precipitate flight; but his feet must have passed over many miles of ground
      from the instant that he emerged from the murderers' den until he sank exhausted on the steps
      of a house in Ratcliff Highway.
He was wet and covered with mud, and very cold. But he suddenly remembered that there was a
      duty which he owed to society—an imperative duty which he dared not neglect. He was impressed
      with the idea that Providence had that night favoured his escape from the jaws of death, in
      order that he might become the means of rooting up a den of horrors.
There was not a moment to be lost: the three miscreants, unconscious of peril, had repaired
      to Shoreditch Church to exercise the least terrible portion of their avocations in that sacred
      edifice:—it might yet be time to secure them there!
The policeman was still standing near him.
"Which is the way to the station-house?" suddenly exclaimed Markham. "I have matters of
       the deepest importance to communicate to the police,—I can place them upon the
      scent of three miscreants—three demons in human form——"
"And how came you to know about them?" asked the officer.
"Oh! it is too long to tell you now—we shall only be wasting time; and the villains may
      escape," cried Richard, in a tone of excitement and with a wildness of manner which induced
      the officer to fancy that his brain was turned.
"Well, come along with me," said the policeman; "and you can tell all you know to the
      Superintendent."
Markham signified his readiness to accompany the officer; and they proceeded to the
      station-house in the neighbourhood.
There Richard was introduced to the Superintendent.
"I have this night," said the young man, "escaped from the most fearful perils. I was
      proceeding along a dark, narrow, and dirty street somewhere in the neighbourhood of Shoreditch
      Church, when I was knocked down, and carried into a house where murder—yes, murder," added
      Markham, in a tone of fearful excitement, "seems to be committed At this moment there is a
      corpse—the corpse of some unfortunate man who has been assassinated in a most inhuman
      manner—lying stretched out in that house! I could tell you how the miscreants who frequent
      that den dispose of their victims,—how they pounce upon those who pass their door, and drag
      them into that human slaughter-house,—and how they make away with them;—I could tell you
      horrors which would make your hair stand on end;—but we should lose time; for you may yet
      capture the three wretches whose crimes have been this night so providentially revealed to
      me!"
"And where can we capture these men?" inquired the Superintendent, surveying Markham from
      head to foot in a strange manner.
"They are at this moment at Shoreditch Church," returned the young man; "they are engaged in
      exhuming a corpse for a surgeon whom they were to meet at half-past one at the back of the
      burial-ground."
"And it is now three o'clock," said the Superintendent. "I dare say they have got over their
      business by this time. You had much better sit down here by the fire and rest yourself; and
      when it is daylight some one shall see you home to your friends."
"Sit here tranquilly, when justice claims its due!" ejaculated Markham; "impossible! If you
      will not second my endeavours to expose a most appalling system of wholesale murder——"
"My dear sir," interrupted the Superintendent, "do compose yourself, and get such horrid
      thoughts out of your head. Come—be reasonable. This is London, you know—and it is impossible
      that the things you have described could be committed in so populous a city."
"I tell you that every word I have uttered is the strict truth," cried Markham
      emphatically.
"And how came you to escape from such a place?" demanded the Superintendent.
"The villain who attacked me thought me dead—he fancied that I was killed by the blow; but
      it had only stunned me for a few moments——"
"Just now there were three murderers," whispered one policeman to another: "now there is
      only one. He is as mad as a March-hare."
"Then I was decoyed into a deep pit," continued Markham; "and I escaped through an aperture
      opening into another pit, with stone steps to it, in the next house."
The two policemen turned round to conceal their inclination to laugh; and the Superintendent
      could scarcely maintain a serious countenance.
"And now will you come with me to Shoreditch Church, and capture the villains?" cried
      Markham.
"We had better wait till morning. Pray sit down and compose yourself. You are wet and
      covered with mud—you have evidently been walking a great distance."
"Oh! now I understand the cause of your hesitation," ejaculated Markham: "you do not believe
      me—you fancy that I am labouring under a delusion. I conjure you not to suffer justice to be
      defeated by that idea! The tale is strange; and I myself, had it been communicated to me as it
      now is to you, should look upon it as improbable. No doubt, too, my appearance is strange; and
      my manner may be excited, and my tone wild;—but, I swear to you by the great God who hears us,
      that I am sane—in the possession of my reason,—although, heaven knows! I have this night
      passed through enough to unhinge the strongest intellects!"
"Can you lead us to the house where you allege that these enormities are committed?"
      demanded the Superintendent, moved by the solemnity and rationality with which Markham had
      uttered this last appeal to him.
"No, I cannot," was the reply: "I had lost my way amongst those streets with which I was
      totally unacquainted: the night was dark—dark as it is now;—and therefore I could not guide
      you to that den of such black atrocities. But, I repeat the murderers left that house a little
      after one to commit a deed of sacrilege in Shoreditch Church. You say that it is now three:
      perhaps their resurrection-labours are not terminated yet; and you might then capture them in
      the midst of their unholy pursuits."
"And if we do not find that Shoreditch Church has been broken open?" said the
      Superintendent; "you will admit——"
"Admit that I am mad—that I have deceived you—that I deserve to be consigned to a lunatic
      asylum," exclaimed Markham, in a tone which inspired the Superintendent with confidence.
That officer accordingly gave instructions to four constables to accompany Markham to
      Shoreditch Church.
The little party proceeded thither with all possible expedition; but the clock struck four
      just as they reached the point of destination.
They hastily scaled the railings around the burial-ground, and proceeded to the very door
      from which the body-snatchers had emerged an hour previously.
One of the policemen tried the door; and it immediately yielded to his touch. At the same
      moment his foot struck against something upon the top step. He picked it up:—it was a padlock
      with the semicircular bolt sawed through.
The policemen and Markham entered the church; and the former commenced a strict search by
      means of their bull's-eye lanterns.
"There's no doubt that the gentleman was right, and all he said was true," observed one of
      the officers; "but the birds have flown—that's clear."
"Well—they must have done their work pretty cleverly if they haven't left a trace," said
      another.
"I have heard it stated," remarked Richard, "that resurrection-men are so expert at their
      calling, that they can defy the most acute eye to discover the spot upon which they have been
      operating."
      
"Well, if we don't find out which vault they have opened, it's no matter. We have seen
      enough to convince us that you were right, sir, in all you told us."
"And as the body-snatchers are not here," added another police-officer, "we had better get
      back as quick as we can and report the church's having been broke open to our
      Superintendent."
"And I will return with you," said Markham; "for when it is light I may perhaps be enabled
      to conduct you to within a short distance of the street—even if not into the very street
      itself—where the den is situated which those monsters frequent or inhabit."
The officers and Richard accordingly returned to the station-house whence they came; and as
      soon as the Superintendent heard that the church had really been broken open, he apologised to
      Markham for his former incredulity.
"You will, however, admit, sir," said this functionary, "that your narrative was calculated
      to excite strange suspicions relative to the condition of the intellects of the person who
      told it."
"I presume you fancied that I had escaped from a madhouse?" observed Markham.
"To tell you the truth, I did," answered the Superintendent: "you were in such a dreadful
      condition! And that reminds me that you are all wet and covered with mud: please to step into
      my private room, and you will find every thing necessary to make you clean and
      comfortable."
*   *  *  *  *
Day dawned shortly after seven; and at that time might be seen Richard Markham, accompanied
      by an officer in plain clothes, and followed by others at a distance, threading the streets
      and alleys in the neighbourhood of the Bird-cage Walk.
The sun rose upon that labyrinth of close, narrow, and wretched thoroughfares, and
      irradiated those sinks of misery and crime as well as the regal palace and the lordly mansion
      at the opposite end of London.
But the search after the house in which Markham had witnessed such horrors and endured such
      intense mental agony on the preceding night, was as vain and fruitless as if its existence
      were but a dream.
There was not a street which Markham could remember having passed through; there was not a
      house to which even his suspicions attached.
And yet, may be, he and his official companions proceeded up the very street, and went by
      the door of the very house, which they sought.
After a useless search throughout that neighbourhood for nearly four hours, Markham declared
      that he was completely at fault.
The police accordingly abandoned any further proceedings on that occasion. It was however
      agreed between them and Markham that the strictest secresy should be preserved relative to the
      entire business, in order that the measures to be subsequently adopted with a view to discover
      the den of the murderers, might not be defeated by the tattle of busy tongues.
</div></body></text></TEI>