<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="224">
CHAPTER CCXXIII.   THE MARRIAGE.
The happy morning dawned.
The weather was mild and beautiful; the sky was of a cloudless azure; and all nature seemed
      to smile with the gladness of an early spring.
Markham rose at seven o'clock, and dressed himself in plain clothes; but upon his breast he
      wore the star which denoted his princely rank.
And never had he appeared so handsome;—no—not even when, with the flash of his first triumph
      upon his cheeks, he had entered the town of Estella and received the congratulations of the
      inhabitants.
When he descended to the breakfast-room, he found Mr. Monroe, Ellen, and Katherine already
      assembled: they too were attired in a manner which showed that they were not to be omitted
      from the bridal party.
At eight o'clock the Grand-Duke's carriage drove up to the door; and in a few minutes our
      hero and his friends were on their way to Richmond.
"Strange!" thought Ellen to herself; "that I should have passed my honeymoon of twenty-four
      hours with him in the same neighbourhood whither Richard is now repairing to fetch
      his bride."
The carriage rolled rapidly along; and as the clock struck nine it dashed up the avenue to
      the door of the now royal dwelling.
Richard and his companions were ushered into the drawing-room, where the Grand-Duke and the
      Duchess, with the aides-de-camp, and a few select guests, were awaiting
      their arrival. The reception which Mr. Monroe, Ellen, and Katherine experienced at the hands
      of the royal pair was of a most cordial kind, and proved how favourably our hero had spoken of
      them.
In a short time Isabella made her appearance, attended by her bridemaids—the two daughters
      of an English peer.
Richard hastened to present his friends to the Princess; and the cordiality of the parents
      underwent no contrast on the part of the daughter;—but if she were more courteous—nay, kind—in
      her manner to either, that preference was shown towards Ellen.
And it struck the young lady that such slight preference was evinced towards her; for she
      turned a quick but rapid glance of profound gratitude upon Richard, as much as to say, "'Tis
      you whom I must thank for this!"
How lovely did Isabella seem—robed in virgin white, and her cheeks suffused with blushes!
      There was a charm of ineffable sweetness—a halo of innocence about her, which fascinated the
      beholder even more than the splendour of her beauty. As she cast down her eyes, and the long
      slightly-curling black fringes reposed upon her cheeks, there was an air of purest chastity in
      her appearance which showed how nearly allied her heart was to the guilelessness of angels.
      And then her loveliness of person—Oh! that was of a nature so ravishing, so enchanting, as to
      inspire something more than mere admiration—something nearer resembling a worship. Poets have
      compared eyes to stars—teeth to ivory—lips to coral—bosoms to snow;—they have likened symmetry
      of form to that of sylphs, and lightness of step to that of fairies;—but poor, poor indeed are
      all similitudes which we might call to our aid to convey an idea of the beauty of this
      charming Italian maiden, now arrayed in her bridal vestment!
The ceremony was twofold, Richard being a Protestant and Isabella a Roman Catholic. A
      clergyman of the Church of England therefore united them, in the first instance, by special
      licence, at the Grand-Duke's mansion. The bridal party immediately afterwards entered the
      carriages, which were in readiness, and repaired to the Roman Catholic chapel at Hammersmith,
      where the hands of the young couple were joined anew according to the ritual of that
      creed.
And now the most exalted of Richard's earthly hopes were attained;—the only means by which
      his happiness could be ensured, and a veil drawn over the sorrows of the past, were
      accomplished. When he looked back to the period of his first acquaintance with
      Isabella,—remembered how ridiculously insignificant was once the chance that his love for her
      would ever terminate in aught save disappointment,—and then followed up all the incidents
      which had gradually smoothed down the difficulties that arose in his path until the happy
      moment when he knelt by her side at the altar of God,—he was lost in astonishment at the
      inscrutable ways of that Providence which had thus brought to a successful issue an aspiration
      that at first wore the appearance of a wild and delusive dream!
On the return of the bridal party to the mansion near Richmond, a splendid banquet was
      served up; and if there were a sentiment of melancholy which stole upon the happiness of any
      present, it was on the part of Isabella and her parents at the idea of separation.
At length the déjeuner is over; and Isabella retires with her mother and
      bridemaids to prepare for her departure. The Grand-Duke takes that opportunity to thrust a
      sealed packet into our hero's hand. A few minutes elapse—Isabella returns—the farewells take
      place—and the bridegroom conducts his charming bride to the carriage. Mr. Monroe, Ellen, and
      Katherine follow in a second chariot.

It was four o'clock in the afternoon when Richard assisted his lovely young wife
      to alight at the door of his own mansion; and now Markham Place becomes the residence of the
      Prince and Princess of Montoni.
Vain were it to attempt to describe the delight of the old butler when he beheld his master
      bring home that beauteous, blushing bride; and—as he said in the course of the day to Mr.
      Monroe, "It was only, sir, a doo sense of that comportance which belongs to a man in my
      situation of authority over the servants that perwented me from collapsing into some of them
      antics that I indulged in when we heerd of Master—I mean of his Highness's successes in Castle
      Chichory, and when he came home the day before yesterday. But I won't do it, sir—I won't do
      it; although I don't promise, Mr. Monroe," he added, in a mysterious whisper, "that I shan't
      go to bed rayther jolly to-night with champagne."
It was eleven o'clock that night when Ellen cautiously issued from the back door of the
      mansion.
She passed rapidly through the garden, passed out of the gate, and hastily ascended the hill
      on whose summit were the two trees.
A man was seated on the bench.
Ellen approached him, threw her arms round his neck, and embraced him with a tenderness that
      even appeared to surprise him by its warmth.
She placed herself by his side; he drew her towards him—and kissed her almost
      affectionately.
"You are not happy?" said Ellen, in a plaintive and anxious tone. "I knew that by
      the contents of the note which Marian gave me just now; and your manner confirms me in the
      opinion."
"I know not how it is," replied Greenwood, without answering her question in a direct way,
      "but you never seemed dear to me, Ellen, until this evening."
"And am I dear to you now?" she asked, in a tone tremulous with joy.
"You are—you are," exclaimed Greenwood, speaking nevertheless in a manner which seemed to
      indicate that he was giving way to a feeling of weakness which he could not conquer, but of
      which he was ashamed; "you are dear to me—for my heart appears as if it required something to
      love, and some one to love me."
"And do I not love you?" cried Ellen, pressing her lips to his. "Oh! there was a time when I
      never thought I could love you—when I only sought you as a husband because you were the father
      of my child:—but since we have been united in holy bonds, I have learnt to love you—and I
       do love you—I do love you—in spite of all that has passed!"
"You are a good girl, Ellen," said Greenwood, upon whose lash a tear stood: but he hastily
      dashed it away, exclaiming, "This is unlike me! What can be the cause of these
      emotions—hitherto unknown? Is it that I am envious of his happiness? Is it that I
      pine for that sweet domesticity which he will now enjoy? Or is it that I am wearied of a world
      false and hollow-hearted?"
"Alas!" cried Ellen, the tears streaming from her eyes: "is the world really false and
      hollow-hearted? or have you sought only that sphere which wears the appearance that you
      deplore? Look yonder," she continued, pointing towards the mansion; "no falsehood—no
      hollow-heartedness are there! And why? Because he who rules in that abode has encouraged every
      sweet sympathy that renders life agreeable—every amenity which inspires confidence and mutual
      reliance between a number of persons dwelling together. The sphere that he has chosen is
      purified by his own virtues: the light of his excellence is reflected from the hearts of all
      around him. All are good, or strive to be good in his circle—because he himself is good. Where
      you have moved—ever agitating amidst the selfish crowd, as in troubled waters—none are good,
      because no one sets a good example. Every thing in your world is SELF: in Richard's
      world he sacrifices SELF unto others. Hence his prosperity—his
      happiness——"
"And hence my adversity—my dissatisfied spirit!" exclaimed Greenwood, impatiently. "But talk
      not thus, Ellen, any more: you will drive me mad!"
"Oh! my dear husband, what makes you thus?" cried Ellen, in alarm: "I never saw you so
      before. You who were ever so cool—nay, pardon me, if I say so chilling,—so calculating—so
      inaccessible to the tenderest emotions,—you are now an altered being! But God grant that your
      heart is touched at last, and that you will abandon those paths of selfishness which, as you
      have by this time learnt, are not those of permanent prosperity! Do not be offended with
      me:—heaven knows I would not wound your heart; for I love you ten thousand times better
      to-night than ever I did before—and solely because you are changed, or appear to be.
      Oh! let me implore you to cast aside your assumed name—to throw off all disguise—to return to
      that home where the arms of sincerest affection will be extended to welcome you——"
"No—no, Ellen!" cried Greenwood, almost furiously: "my pride will not permit me to do that!
      Speak no more in this way—or I will quit you immediately. I will fulfil my destiny—whatever it
      may be. Not a day—not an hour before the appointed time must he and I meet! No—broken
      though my fortunes be, they are not irreparable. Had it not been for the flight of that
      villain Tomlinson, I should have retrieved them ere now. I must not, however, despair: my
      credit is still good in certain quarters; and I possess talents for finance and speculation of
      no mean order."
"But you will not again embark in any such desperate venture as—as——"
"As the forged bills, you would say, Ellen," added Greenwood, hastily. "No:—be not alarmed
      on this head. I will not sully that name which he has rendered great."
"Oh! do you not remember," cried Ellen, as a sudden reminiscence shot through her brain,
      "that on the morning when our hands were united, you promised that the name which you then
       gave me should go down to posterity?"
"It will—it will: the prediction is already fulfilled, Ellen," said Greenwood, hastily;—"but
      not by me!" he added mournfully. "I know not why I feel so low spirited to-night; and yet your
      presence consoles me! Richard now clasps his lovely bride in his arms—and we are forced to
      snatch this stolen interview, as if we had no right to each other's society!"
"And whose fault is that?" asked Ellen, somewhat reproachfully. "Is it not in your power to
      put an end to all this mystery?"
"I cannot—I will not," returned Greenwood,
      with renewed impetuosity. "No—let us not touch upon the topic again. My resolves
      are immoveable on that point. If you love me, urge me not to inflict so deep a wound upon my
      pride. This lowness of spirits will soon pass away: I am afraid that envy—or jealousy,
      rather—has in some degree depressed me. And yet envy is not the term—nor does jealousy express
      the true nature, of my sentiments. For, in spite of all my faults, I have loved him,
      Ellen—as you well know. But it is that I feel disappointed—almost disgusted:—I have as yet
      toiled for naught! I contrast my position with his—and that makes me mournful. Still
      I am proud of him, Ellen:—I cannot be otherwise."
"That is a generous feeling," said Ellen, again embracing her husband: "it does me good to
      hear you express such a sentiment."
"I scarcely know what I have been saying," continued Greenwood: "my mind is chaotic—my ideas
      are confused. Let us now separate; we will meet again shortly—and I will tell you of my
      progress towards the fortune which I am resolved to acquire."
"Yes—let us meet again soon," said Ellen; "but not here," she added, glancing towards the
      trees. "It makes you melancholy."
"Well—well: I will find another spot for our interviews. Farewell, Ellen—dearest Ellen."
"Farewell, my dearest husband."
They embraced, and separated—Ellen retracing her steps towards the mansion, and Greenwood
      remaining on the hill.
On the following morning, after breakfast, Richard conducted his lovely bride over the
      grounds belonging to the Place; and when they had inspected the gardens, he said, "I will now
      lead you to the hill-top, beloved Isabella, where you will behold those memorials of affection
      between my brother and myself, which mark the spot where I hope again to meet him."
They ascended the eminence: they stood between the two trees.
But scarcely had Richard cast a glance towards the one planted by the hand of Eugene, when
      he started, and dropped Isabella's arm.
She threw a look of intense alarm on his countenance; but her fears were immediately
      succeeded by delight when she beheld the unfeigned joy that was depicted on his features.
"Eugene is alive! He has been hither again—he has revisited this spot!" exclaimed Richard.
      "See, Isabella—he has left that indication of his presence."
The Princess now observed the inscriptions upon the tree.
They stood thus:—

 Eugene.
 Dec. 25, 1836.
 Eugene.
 May 17th, 1838.
 Eugene.
 March 6, 1841.
"Eugene was here yesterday," said Richard. "Oh! he still thinks of me—he remembers that he
      has a brother. Doubtless he has heard of my happiness—my prosperity: perhaps he even learnt
      that yesterday blest me with your hand, dearest Isabel; and that inscription is a
      congratulation—a token of his kind wish alike to you and to me."
Isabella partook of her husband's joy; and after lingering for some time upon the spot, they
      retraced their steps to the mansion.
The carriage was already at the door: they entered it; and Richard commanded the coachman to
      drive to Woolwich.
On their arrival at the wharf where Richard had landed only two days previously, they found
      a barge waiting to convey them on board the Castelcicalan steamer.
The Grand-Duke and Grand-Duchess, with their suite, received them upon the deck of the
      vessel.
The hour of separation had come: Alberto and his illustrious spouse were about to return to
      their native land to ascend a throne.
The Grand-Duke drew Richard aside, and said, "My dear son, you remember your promise to
      repair to Montoni so soon as the time of appointment with your brother shall have passed."
"I shall only be too happy to return, with my beloved Isabella, to your society," answered
      Markham. "My brother will keep his appointment; for yesterday he revisited the spot where that
      meeting is to take place, and inscribed his name upon the tree that he planted."
"That is another source of happiness for you, Richard," said the Grand-Duke; "and well do
      you deserve all the felicity which this world can give."
"Your Serene Highness has done all that is in mortal power to ensure that felicity,"
      exclaimed Markham. "You have elevated me to a rank only one degree inferior to your own;—you
      have bestowed upon me an inestimable treasure in the person of your daughter;—and you
      yesterday placed in my hands a decree appointing me an annual income of twenty thousand pounds
      from the ducal treasury. Your Serene Highness has been too liberal:—a fourth part will be more
      than sufficient for all our wants. Moreover, from certain hints which Signor Viviani dropped
      when I was an inmate of his house at Pinalla—and subsequently, after his arrival at Montoni to
      take the post of Minister of Finance which I conferred upon him, and which appointment has met
      the approval of your Serene Highness—I am justified in believing that in July, 1843, I shall
      inherit a considerable fortune from our lamented friend Thomas Armstrong."
"The larger your resources, Richard, the wider will be the sphere of your benevolence," said
      the Grand-Duke; then, by way of cutting short our hero's remonstrances in respect to the
      annual revenue, his Serene Highness exclaimed, "But time presses: we must now say
      farewell."
We shall not dwell upon the parting scene. Suffice it to say that the grief of the daughter
      in separating from her parents was attempered by the conviction that she remained behind with
      an affectionate and well-beloved husband; and the parents sorrowed the less at losing their
      daughter, because they knew full well that she was united to one possessed of every
      qualification to ensure her felicity.
And now the anchor was weighed; the steam hissed through the waste-valves as if impatient of
      delay; and the young couple descended the ship's side into the barge.
The boat was pushed off—and the huge wheels of
      the steamer began to revolve on their axis, ploughing up the deep water.
The cannon of the arsenal thundered forth a parting salute in honour of the sovereign and
      his illustrious spouse who were returning to their native land from a long exile.
The ship returned the compliment with its artillery, as it now sped rapidly along.
And the last waving of the Grand-Duchess's handkerchief, and the last farewell gesture on
      the part of the Grand-Duke met the eyes of Isabella and Richard during an interval when the
      wind had swept away the smoke of the cannon.
The Prince and Princess of Montoni landed at the wharf, re-entered their carriage, and were
      soon on their way back to Markham Place.
</div></body></text></TEI>