<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="138">
CHAPTER CXXXVII.   RATS' CASTLE.
Richard Markham, though perfectly unpretending in manner and somewhat reserved or even
      sedate in disposition, possessed the most undaunted courage. Thus was it that, almost
      immediately recovering himself from the sudden check which he had experienced at the hands of
      the Resurrection Man, he hurried in pursuit of the miscreant, followed by the policeman and
      the people whom the alarm which he had given had called to his aid.
The people were, however, soon tired of running gratuitously for an object which they could
      scarcely comprehend; but the police-officer kept close to Markham; and they were speedily
      reinforced by two other constables, who, seeing that something was the matter, and with
      characteristic officiousness, immediately joined them.
From an inquiry put to the waterman of the adjacent cab-stand, who had seen a person running
      furiously along a moment or two before, Markham felt convinced that the object of his pursuit
      had plunged into the maze of Saint Giles's; and, though well aware of the desperate character
      of that individual, and conscious that should he encounter him alone in some dark alley or
      gloomy court, a fearful struggle must ensue between them, he did not hesitate, unarmed as he
      was, to dash into that thicket of dangerous habitations.
Soon outstripping the officers, who vainly begged
      him to keep with them, as they were unacquainted with the person of whom he was in
      pursuit,—forgetting every measure of precaution in the ardour of the chase, Richard rushed
      headlong through the dark and ill-paved streets, following the echo of every retreating
      footstep which he heard, and stopping only to scrutinise the countenances of those who, in the
      obscurity of the hour and place, seemed at first sight to resemble the exterior of the
      Resurrection Man.
Vain was his search. At length, exhausted, he sate down on the steps of a door-way to
      recover his breath, after having expended an hour in his fruitless search up one street, down
      another, and in every nook and corner of that district which we have before described as the
      Holy Land.
Accident shortly led the officers, who had originally entered upon the chase with him, to
      the spot where he was seated.
"Here is the gentleman himself," said one, turning the glare of his bull's-eye full upon our
      hero.
"No luck, I suppose, sir?" observed another. "You had much better have remained with us and
      given us some idea of the person that you want."
"Fool that I was!" exclaimed Markham, now perceiving his imprudence in that respect: "I have
      left you to pursue a shadow, instead of depicting to you the substance. But surely the name of
      Anthony Tidkins——"
"The Resurrection Man, as they call him," hastily remarked one of the constables.
"The same," answered Markham.
"Why—he blew himself up, along with some others and a number of our men, last year, down in
      Bethnal Green," said the constable who had last spoken.
"No—he lives, he lives," exclaimed Richard, impatiently. "My God! I know him but too
      well."
"And it was after him that you gave the alarm just now in Tottenham Court Road?"
"It was. I knew him at once—I could not be mistaken: his voice, laden with a curse, still
      rings in my ears."
"Well, since the gentleman's so positive, I 'spose it must be so," said the constable: "we
      musn't sleep upon it, mates. Ten to one that Tidkins has taken to burrow in one of the low
      cribs about here; and he means to lie quiet for two or three days till the alarm's blown over.
      I know the dodges of these fellers. You two go the round of Plumptre Street; and me and this
      gentleman will just take a promiscuous look into the kens about here."
The two constables to whom these words were addressed, immediately departed upon the mission
      proposed to them, and Richard signified his readiness to accompany the officer who had thus
      settled the plan of proceedings.
"We'll go first to Rats' Castle, sir, if you please," said the policeman: "that is the most
      likely place for a run-away to take refuge in at random."
"What is Rats' Castle?" asked Markham, as he walked by the officer's side down a wretched
      alley, almost as dark as pitch, and over the broken pavement of which he stumbled at every
      step.
"The night-house where all kind of low people meet to sup and lodge," was the reply. "But
      here we are—and you'll see all about it in an instant."
They had stopped at the door of a house with an area protected by thick wooden palings. All
      the upper part of the dwelling appeared to be involved in total darkness: but lights streamed
      through the chinks of the rude shutters of the area-windows; and from the same direction
      emanated boisterous merriment, coarse laughter, and wild hurrahs.
"You knock at the door, sir, if you please," said the policeman, "while I stand aside. I'll
      slip in after you; for if they twig my coat, and Tidkins really happens to be there, they'd
      give him the office to bolt before we could get in."
"Well thought of," returned Markham. "But upon what plea am I to claim admittance?"
"As a stranger, impelled by curiosity. You carry the silver key in your pocket."
The policeman withdrew a few paces; and our hero knocked boldly at the door.
A gruff voice challenged the visitor from the area.
"Who's here?"
"No one that will do you any harm," replied Richard. "I am anxious to witness the interior
      of this establishment; and here is half-a-crown for you if you can gratify my curiosity."
"That's English, any how," said the voice, softening in its tone. "Stop a minute."
Markham heard a door close in the area below; and in a few moments the bolts were drawn back
      inside the one at which he was standing.
"Now then, my ben-cull—in with you," said a man, as he opened the front door, and held a
      candle high up above his head at the same time.
Markham stepped into a narrow passage, and placed his foot against the door in such a way as
      to keep it open. But the precaution was unnecessary, for the policeman had glided in almost
      simultaneously with himself.
"Now, no noise, old feller," said the constable, in a hasty whisper to the man who had
      opened the door: "our business isn't with any of your set."
"Wery good," returned the porter of Rats' Castle: "you know best—it isn't for me to say
      nothink."
"Go first, sir," whispered the officer to Markham. "You seem to know him better
      than me, for I never saw him but once—and then only for a minute or two."
"Which way?" demanded Richard.
"Straight on—and then down stairs. You keep behind us, old feller," added the policeman,
      turning to the porter.
Markham descended a flight of narrow and precipitate steps, and at the bottom found himself
      in a large room formed of two kitchens thrown into one.
Two long tables running parallel to each other the entire length of the place, were laid out
      for supper,—the preparations consisting of a number of greasy napkins spread upon either
      board, and decorated with knives and forks all chained to the tables. Iron plates to eat off,
      galley-pots and chipped tea-cups filled with salt, three or four pepper-boxes, and two small
      stone jars containing mustard, completed the preparations for the evening meal.
The room was lighted by means of a number of candles disposed in tin shades around the
      walls; and as no one gave himself the trouble to snuff them, the wicks were long, and infested
      with what housewives denominate "thieves," while the tallow streamed down in large flakes,
      dripping on the floor, the seats, or the backs of the guests.
Crowded together at the two tables, and anxiously
      watching the proceedings of an old blear-eyed woman, who was occupied at an immense
      fire at the farther end of the room, were about thirty or forty persons, male and female. And
      never did Markham's eyes glance upon a more extraordinary—a more loathsome—a more revolting
      spectacle than that assemblage of rags, filth, disease, deformity, and ugliness.
Mendicants, vagabonds, impostors, and rogues of all kinds were gathered in that room, the
      fetid heat of which was stifling. The horrible language of which they made use,—their
      frightful curses,—their obscene jests,—their blasphemous jokes, were calculated to shock the
      mind of the least fastidious:—it was indeed a scene from which Markham would have fled as from
      a nest of vipers, had not a stern duty to society and to himself urged him to penetrate
      farther into that den.
The appearance of himself and the policeman did not produce any remarkable degree of
      sensation amongst the persons assembled: they were accustomed to the occasional visits of
      well-dressed strangers, who repaired thither to gratify curiosity; and the presence of the
      officers of justice was a matter of frequent occurrence when any great robbery had been
      perpetrated in the metropolis, and while the culprits remained undiscovered.
"He is not here," whispered Markham to his companion, after casting a hasty but penetrating
      glance around.
"He may come: this is the most likely place in Saint Giles's for him to visit," returned the
      policeman. "We will wait half-an-hour."
Richard would gladly have retired; but he was ashamed to exhibit a disgust which the officer
      might mistake for fear. He accordingly seated himself at a small side-table, in compliance
      with a sign from his companion.
A waiter, wearing an apron which, by its colour, seemed also to do the duty of dish-cloth,
      now accosted them, and said, "Please to order anythink, gen'lemen?"
"Two glasses of brandy-and-water," replied the constable.
This command was speedily complied with; and, a few minutes afterwards, supper was served up
      on the two long tables before described. The old woman who presided over the culinary
      department of the establishment had amply catered for those present. Legs of mutton, both
      roasted and boiled,—rounds of beef, flanked with carrots,—huge pies,—boiled legs of
      pork,—immense quantities of sausages,—and sheep's heads, constituted the staple of the
      banquet. These viands, accompanied by piles of smoking potatoes "in their jackets" and heaps
      of cabbages, were all served up on iron dishes, from which no thrifty hand ever removed the
      rust.
Then commenced the clattering of the knives and forks, the din of which upon the iron
      platters was strangely blended with the rattling of the chains that held them to the tables.
      The boisterous merriment and coarse conversation were for a time absorbed in the interest
      occasioned by the presence of the repast.
"What a strange assembly," whispered Markham to the constable.
"Strange to you, sir—no doubt," was the answer, also delivered in a tone audible
      only to him to whom the words were addressed. "That sturdy feller sitting at the head of the
      nearest table, with the great cudgel between his legs, is one of the class that don't take the
      trouble to clothe themselves in rags, but trust to their insolence to extort alms from females
      walking alone in retired parts. That feller next to him, all in tatters, but who laughs louder
      than any one else, is one of them whining, shivering, snivelling wretches that crouch up in
      doorways on rainy days, and on fine ones sit down on the pavement with 'Starving, but dare
       not beg,' chalked on the stone before them. The man over there in sailor's clothes
      tumbled down an area when he was drunk, and broke his leg: he was obliged to have it cut off;
      and so he now passes himself off as one of Nelson's own tars, though he never saw the sea in
      his life. That chap almost naked who's just come in, is going to put on his coat and shoes
      before he sits down to supper; he always goes out begging in that state on rainy days, and is
      a gentleman on fine ones."
"I do not understand you," said Markham, astonished at this last observation.
"Why, sir," replied the policeman, "there's certain beggars that always turn out half-naked,
      on rainy days, or when the snow's on the ground; and people pity them so much on those
      occasions that the rogues get enough to keep them all through the fine weather. If they have
      wives and children to go out with them, so much the better: but that feller there isn't
      married; and so he goes with a woman who frequents this place, and they hire three or four
      children from the poor people in this neighbourhood, at the rate of two-pence a day each
      child, and its grub. To see them go shivering and whining through the streets, with no shoes
      or stockings, you'd think they were the most miserable devils on the face of the earth; and
      then, to make the scene complete, the man and woman always pinch the little children that they
      carry in their arms, to make them cry, whenever they pass a window when several ladies are
      looking out."
"Is this possible?" whispered Markham, his face flushing with indignation.
"Possible, sir! Don't I see it all every day of my life? Look at them men and women blowing
      their hides out with all that good meat; and now look at the pots of porter that's coming in.
      Every soul there has sworn a hundred times during the day that he hasn't tasted food for
      forty-eight hours, and will repeat the same story to-morrow. But they all had good suppers
      here last night, and good breakfasts here this morning; and you see how they are faring this
      evening."
"But there are real cases deserving of charity?" said Markham, interrogatively,—for he
      almost felt disposed to doubt the fact.
"Certainly there are, sir," was the reply; "but it's very difficult for such as you to
      decide between the true and the false. Look at that man who carves at the second table: he can
      see well enough to cut himself the tit-bits; but to-morrow he will be totally blind in one of
      the fashionable squares."
"Totally blind!" said Richard, more and more astonished at what he heard.
"Yes, sir—totally blind; led by a dog, and with a placard upon his chest. He keeps his eyes
      fast shut, and colours the lids with carmine and vermilion. But that is nothing. That feller
      next to him, who uses his knife and fork so well, will to-morrow have lost his right arm at
      the battle of Salamanca."
"But how can that imposture be effected?"

"His right arm is concealed under his clothes, and the coat-sleeve hangs down
      loose," replied the constable. "That tall stout man who has just jumped so nimbly over the
      form in his way back to his place, has walked on crutches in the streets for the last twenty
      years; and when you see him so, you would think he could hardly drag himself along. The feller
      over there is a frozen-out gardener in winter, and a poor Spitalfields' weaver in summer. The
      one next to him will have a black patch over his left eye to-morrow; and yet you may see that
      it is as good as his right. The short man opposite to him bends his left leg back, and has a
      wooden one to support the knee, when he is in the street. That woman there has been dressed in
      widows' weeds for the last fifteen years, and always has a troop of six children with her; but
      the children never grow any bigger, for she hires fresh ones every year or so."
"This is the most extraordinarily combined mass of contradictions and deceptions I ever
      gazed upon," whispered Markham.
"You may well say that, sir," said the policeman. "The ragged feller down at the bottom of
      the second table sits as upright as you or me: well, in the streets he crawls along the ground
      with two iron supporters in his hands. He is the most insolent feller in London. The man next
      to him goes about on a sort of van, or chaise, and the world believes that he has no legs at
      all; but they are all the time concealed in the body of the vehicle, and the stumps of the
      thighs which are seen are false. Those three hulking chaps over there, sitting with the three
      women that laugh so much, are begging-letter impostors. The eldest of the three men has been
      seventeen years at the business, and has been in prison twenty-eight times. One day he is a
      bricklayer who has fallen from a scaffold, and broken his leg, and has a wife and eleven young
      children dependent on him; another day he is a licensed clergyman of the Church of England,
      but unemployed for two years—wife and six children totally dependent on him. Then he changes
      into a stanch Tory, ruined by his attachment to the cause, and proscribed by all his friends
      on account of his principles: in this shape he addresses himself to the old Tory noblemen, and
      makes a good harvest. The very next day he becomes a determined and stanch Reformer, who lost
      his employment through giving his vote for the Tower Hamlets to the liberal candidate at the
      last election, and has since met with an uninterrupted series of misfortunes—sold up by a Tory
      landlord,—his wife been dead only a fortnight, and seven motherless children left dependent on
      him. This kind of letter always draws well. Then he becomes a paralytic with an execution in
      his house; or a Spitalfields' weaver, with nine children, two of which are cripples, and one
      blind; or else a poor Scotch schoolmaster, come to London on business, and robbed by designing
      knaves of the means of returning to his own country. The women are just as bad. They are
      either wives with husbands in hospitals and bed-ridden mothers; or daughters with helpless
      parents and sick brothers and sisters dependent on them;—and so on."
"But if you be aware of all these monstrous impositions, why do you not interfere to protect
      the public?" inquired Markham.
"Lord, sir!" said the constable, "if we took up all persons that we know to be impostors, we
      should have half London in custody. We only interfere when specially called upon, or when we
      see cases so very flagrant that we can't help taking notice of them. Some of these chaps that
      are eating here so hearty now, will seem to be dying in the streets to-morrow."
"Merciful heavens, what a city of deceit and imposture is this!" observed Richard, painfully
      excited by the strange details which he had just heard. "Were the interior of this den but
      once exposed to general view, charity would be at an end, and the deserving poor would suffer
      for the unprincipled impostor."
"True enough, sir. And now look—the cloth is removed, and every one is ordering in something
      strong to wash down the supper. There goes a crown-bowl of punch—that's for the begging-letter
      impostors: and there's glasses of punch, and cold spirits and water, and shrub, and negus.
      That's the way they do it, you see, sir."
Markham did indeed see, and wondered more and more at what he so saw—until his feelings of
      surprise changed into sentiments of ineffable abhorrence and disgust; and he longed to leave
      that odious den.
"The person whom we seek does not appear to come," he said, after a long interval of
      silence. "Two hours have elapsed—and we are only wasting time here."
"He must have taken refuge in some other crib, sir," returned the constable. "Let us leave
      this one, and make the round of the other lodging-houses in this street."
Markham was glad to hurry away from Rats' Castle, the mysteries of which had so painfully
      shocked his generous feelings.
</div></body></text></TEI>