<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="59">
CHAPTER LIX. THE ROYAL LOVERS.
HOLFORD awoke with a start.
At that moment the time-piece upon the mantel struck five. It was still quite dark.
The young man felt cold and nervous. He had dreamt that he was discovered and ejected from
      the palace amidst the jeers and taunts of the servants. He now suddenly recollected that the
      domestics would most probably soon arrive to cleanse and arrange the apartment; and detection
      in that case must be certain.
It struck him that he had better endeavour to escape at once from the royal dwelling. Then
      he thought and fondly flattered himself that the same good fortune which had hitherto attended
      him in this adventure would still follow him. This idea has caused many a hesitating mind to
      decide upon pursuing a career of crime, or folly, or peril. So was it with Holford; and he
      resolved to remain in the palace at least a short time longer.
But he perceived the absolute necessity of seeking out a secure place of concealment; and it
      struck
       him that the highest storeys of the building were those best calculated for this
      purpose. Leaving the apartment in which he had availed himself of the friendly sofa, and
      which, as before stated, was in the immediate vicinity of the Sculpture Gallery upon the
      ground-floor, he passed through the Library, and returned to the great hall. Ascending a
      magnificent marble staircase, he reached the Picture Gallery. Every here and there lamps were
      burning, and thus he was enabled to inspect all the scenes of magnificence and splendour
      through which he passed.
The Picture Gallery in Buckingham Palace is immediately over the Sculpture Gallery, and
      forms a wide passage separating the Green Drawing Room, the Throne Room, and other state
      apartments from the Roman, the Yellow, and the little drawing rooms. The Yellow Drawing Room
      is the largest and most splendid of the suite. The furniture is all richly carved, and is
      overlaid with burnished gilding and covered with yellow satin. The wall is surrounded by
      polished pillars of syenite marble; and on each panel is painted a portrait of some royal
      personage.
The Dining Room also leads out of the Picture Gallery. This gallery itself is decorated and
      adorned upon classic models. The frames of the pictures are very plain, but neat, and
      appropriated to the style of the architecture. There is nothing gorgeous in this gallery:
      every thing is in good taste; and yet the mouldings and fret-work of the ceiling are of the
      most elaborate description. The pictures in the gallery are all originals by eminent masters,
      and are the private property of the sovereign.
It may be here observed that the queen is passionately attached to the Fine Arts, in which,
      indeed, she is a proficient. In every room of the palace there are some excellent paintings;
      and in each apartment occupied by the queen, with the exception of the Throne Room, there is a
      grand pianoforte.
With a lamp in his hand, Henry Holford proceeded through those magnificent apartments which
      communicated with the Picture Gallery. He was astonished at the assemblage of wealth and
      splendour that met his eyes on every side. From time to time he seated himself upon the
      softest ottomans, and in the gilded chairs—in every place where he deemed it probable that the
      queen might have rested. At length he reached the Throne Room. The imperial seat itself was
      covered over with a velvet cloth, to protect it against the dust. Holford removed the cloth;
      and the splendours of the throne were revealed to him.
He hesitated for a moment: he felt as if he were committing a species of sacrilege;—then
      triumphing over this feeling—a feeling which had appeared like a remorse—he ascended the steps
      of the throne;—he placed himself in the seat of England's monarch.
Had the sceptre been there he would have grasped it;—had the crown been within his reach, he
      would have placed it upon his head!
But time pressed; and he was compelled to leave those apartments in which a strange and
      unaccountable fascination induced him to linger. He ascended a staircase leading to another
      storey; and now he proceeded with extreme caution, for he conceived that he must be in the
      immediate vicinity of the royal sleeping apartments. He hastened up to the highest storey he
      could reach, and entered several passages from which doors opened on either side. One of these
      doors was ajar; the light of a lamp in the passage enabled him to ascertain that the chamber
      into which it led was full of old furniture, trunks, boxes, bedding, and other lumber. This
      was precisely the place which suited the adventurous pot-boy; and he hastened to conceal
      himself amidst a pile of mattresses which formed a secure, warm, and comfortable berth.
Here he again fell asleep; and when he awoke the sun was shining brightly. He partook of his
      provisions with a good appetite, and then deliberated within himself what course he should
      pursue. He felt madly anxious to be near the person of the queen once more: he longed to hear
      her voice again;—he resolved to risk every thing to gratify these inclinations.
He began to understand that the vast extent of the palace, and the many different ways of
      reaching the various floors and suites of apartments, constituted the elements of his safety,
      and greatly diminished the risk of encountering any of the inmates of the royal dwelling. He
      was insane enough, moreover, to believe that some good genius or especial favour of fortune
      protected him; and these impressions were sufficiently powerful to induce him to attempt any
      fresh enterprise within the walls of the palace.
While he was debating within himself how he should proceed in order to satisfy his
      enthusiastic curiosity, the door suddenly opened, and two female servants of the royal
      household entered the lumber-room.
Holford's heart sank within him: his limbs seemed paralysed; his breath failed him.
"The entertainment takes place in the Yellow and Roman Drawing Rooms this evening," said
      one.
"The prince is expected at five o'clock," observed the other. "He and his father the Duke of
      Saxe Coburg Gotha, are to land at Woolwich between two and three."
"So I heard. The royal carriages have already left to meet her Majesty's guests."
"Have you ever seen the prince?"
"Once. He was in England, I remember, a short time previous to the accession of her
      Majesty."
"Is he good looking?"
"Very. Of course you believe as I do, and as every one else does that Prince Albert of Saxe
      Coburg will——"
"Soon be Prince Albert of England."
"Hush! walls have ears!"
The servants having discovered the article of furniture which was the object of their
      search, left the room—greatly to the relief of Henry Holford, whose presence they never for a
      moment suspected.
Holford had thus accidentally learnt some information which served to guide his plans. The
      evening's entertainment was to take place in the Yellow Drawing Room—an apartment which he
      could not fail to recognise by the colour, as one which he had visited before day-break that
      morning. He had heard of Prince Albert, whom rumour had already mentioned as the happy being
      who had attracted the queen's favour. Every circumstance now lent its aid to induce the
      enthusiastic lad to resolve upon penetrating into the Yellow Drawing Room, by some means or
      another, during the afternoon.
It struck the intruder that if the queen intended to receive company in the Yellow
      Drawing-room in the evening, she would most probably welcome her illustrious guests from
      Germany in some other apartment. He knew, from the conversation of the two female servants,
      that the Grand Duke of Saxe-Coburg Gotha and Prince Albert, were to arrive at five: he
      presumed that the inmates of the palace would assemble in those points where they could
      command a view of the ducal cortège; and he came
       to the conclusion that the coast would be most clear for his purposes, at five
      o'clock.
Nor was he wrong in his conjectures; for scarcely had two minutes elapsed after the clock
      had proclaimed the hour of five, when Henry Holford was safely ensconced beneath a sofa in the
      Yellow Drawing Room.
At eight o'clock the servants entered and lighted the lamps. The colour of the paper and the
      satin of the furniture enhanced the splendour of the effulgence thus created in that
      magnificent saloon.
At half-past nine the door opened again; and Holford's heart beat quickly, for he now
      expected the appearance of the sovereign and her guests. But, no—not yet. Two ladies attached
      to the court, entered the drawing-room, and seated themselves upon the sofa beneath which
      Holford lay concealed.
"Well—what think you of the young prince?" said one. "Your grace was seated next to
      him."
"Very handsome—and so unassuming," was the reply.
"Does your grace really believe that her Majesty is smitten?"
"No doubt of it. How fortunate for the family of the Grand Duke of Saxe-Coburg!"
"Yes—fortunate on the score of alliance."
"And in a pecuniary point of view."
"Not so much as your grace thinks. There has been an absurd report in circulation that the
      grand duke's revenues are so small, none of his family could venture to appear at the court of
      Vienna: and also, that the means of education for the younger branches were always excessively
      restricted."
"And are not these reports correct, countess?"
"By no means. Your grace probably is aware that the earl and myself visited Germany the year
      before last; and we remained six weeks at Gotha. The Duke of Saxe-Coburg possesses a
      considerable civil list, and a large private fortune. His brother Ferdinand espoused the
      wealthy Princess Kohary of Hungary; and another brother, Leopold, married our lamented
      Princess Charlotte. It has been stated that Prince Leopold himself was a simple major in the
      Austrian service, with nothing but his pay, when he was fortunate enough to obtain the favour
      of the Princess Charlotte: this is so far from being correct, that he never was in the
      Austrian service at all, but was a general officer in the Russian army, enjoying, in addition
      to his full pay, a princely allowance from his country."
"Your ladyship has greatly pleased me with these elucidations."
"Your grace honours me with this mark of satisfaction. Prince Albert was educated at Bonn,
      on the Rhine. His mental qualifications are said to be of a very high order; his disposition
      is amiable; and he has obtained the affections of all who know him in Germany."
"It is to be hoped that her most gracious Majesty will enjoy a long, prosperous, and happy
      reign," said the duchess, in a tone of unfeigned sincerity.
"Long and prosperous it may be," returned the countess, with a strange solemnity of voice
      and manner; "but happy for her—happy for the sovereign whom we all so much love,—no—that is
      impossible!"
"Alas! I know to what you allude," observed the duchess, her tone also changing. "Merciful
      heavens! is there, then, no perfect happiness in this world?"
"Where shall perfect happiness be found?" exclaimed the countess, in a voice of deep
      melancholy, and with a profound sigh. "Never did any sovereign ascend the throne under more
      favourable circumstances than Victoria. Enshrined in a nation's heart—beloved by millions of
      human beings,—wearing the proudest diadem in the universe, and swaying the sceptre of a
      dominion extensive as that of Rome, in her most glorious days,—oh! why should not Victoria be
      completely happy? Alas! she can command the affections of her people by her conduct:—the
      valour of her subjects, the prowess of her generals, and the dauntless courage of her
      admirals, can preserve her empire from all encroachment—all peril;—wealth can surround her
      with every luxury, and all the potentates of the earth may seek her friendship;—but no
      power—no dominion—no wealth—no luxury—no love, can exterminate the seeds——"
"Ah! countess—for God's sake, talk not in this manner!" ejaculated the duchess: "you make me
      melancholy—so melancholy, that I shall be dispirited the entire evening."
"Pardon me, my dear friend; but I know not how our discourse gradually turned upon so sad a
      subject. And yet the transition must have been natural," added the countess, in a mournful and
      plaintive voice; "for, most assuredly, I should not have voluntarily sought to converse upon
      so sad a theme."
"Sad!" cried the duchess; "'tis sufficient to make one's heart bleed. To think that a young
      creature whom millions and millions of beings idolize and adore—whose name is upon every
      lip—whose virtues and qualifications are the theme of every pen—whose slightest wish amounts
      to a command,—oh! to think that this envied and amiable being should be haunted, day and
      night—alone, or when surrounded by all that is most noble or most lovely in England's
      aristocracy,—haunted by that dread fear—that appalling alarm—that dismal apprehension;—oh! it
      is intolerable!"
"Alas!" said the countess; "what poor—what miserable creatures are we! The hand of the Deity
      mingles gall with the cup of nectar which is drunk by his elect! There is no situation in life
      without its vexations."
"Yes—vexations of all kinds!" echoed the duchess; "for those annoyances which are mere
      trifles to the lower classes, are grievous afflictions to us. But——"
At that moment the time-piece upon the mantel proclaimed the half-hour after ten; and the
      two ladies rose from the sofa, observing to each other, that it was time to hasten to attend
      upon the person of their royal mistress. They then withdrew.
It may be supposed that Holford had not lost one word of the above conversation. He had
      greedily drunk in every word;—but the concluding portion of it had filled him with the most
      anxious curiosity, and with wonder. To what did those dark, mysterious hints bear reference?
      And how could the happiness of the sovereign be incomplete? Those two noble ladies had
      detailed all the elements of felicity which formed the basis of the queen's position; and
      surely sufficient had been enumerated to prove the perfection of her happiness. And yet,
      allusion was made to one source of perpetual fear—one cause of unmixed alarm—one object of
      ever-present dread, by which the queen was haunted on all occasions. What could this be?
      Conjecture was vain—imagination could suggest nothing calculated to explain this strange
      mystery.
Shortly after eleven o'clock the doors were thrown open, and the royal train made its
      appearance. On
       the queen's right hand walked Prince Albert, the sovereign leaning gently upon
      his arm. He was dressed in a court-garb, and wore a foreign order upon his breast. Of slight
      form and slender make, his figure was wanting in manliness; but his deportment was graceful.
      His eyes beamed kindness; and there was something peculiarly sweet and pleasant in his smile.
      His countenance was expressive of intellect; his conversation was amusing. He was evidently a
      very pleasant companion; and when Victoria and Albert walked down the saloon together, there
      appeared a certain fitness in their union which was calculated to strike the most common
      beholder.

The queen and the prince seated themselves upon the sofa beneath which the pot-boy was
      concealed; and their conversation was plainly overheard by him. The noble and beauteous
      guests—the lords and the ladies of the court—withdrew to a distance; and the royal lovers—for
      such already were Victoria and Albert—enjoyed the pleasures of a tête-à-tête. We
      shall not record any portion of their discourse—animated, interesting, and tender though it
      were: suffice it to say, that for a short time they seemed to forget their high rank, and to
      throw aside the trammels of court etiquette, in order to give vent to those natural feelings
      which the sovereign has in common with the peasant.
This tête-à-tête lasted for nearly an hour: music and dancing then ensued; and the
      entertainment continued until two o'clock in the morning.
The company retired—the lights were extinguished in the state apartments—and profound
      silence once more reigned throughout the palace.
Holford paid another visit to the larder, and then retraced his steps unobserved to the
      lumber-room, where he slept until a late hour in the morning.
</div></body></text></TEI>