<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="187">
CHAPTER CLXXXVI.   THE NEW CUT.
At nine o'clock on the same evening, Mr. Greenwood, muffled in a cloak, alighted from a
      hackney-cab in the Waterloo Road at the corner of the New Cut.
That wide thoroughfare which connects the Waterloo and Blackfriars' Roads, is one of the
      most busy and bustling, after its own fashion, in all London.
Nowhere are the shops of a more miscellaneous nature: nowhere are the pathways so thronged
      with the stalls and baskets of itinerant venders.
The ingenuity of those petty provision-dealers adapts the spoilt articles of the regular
      fishmongers and butchers to serviceable purposes in the free market of the New Cut. The fish
      is cut in slices and fried in an oil or butter whose rancid taste obviates the putrid flavour
      and smell of the comestible; and the refuse scraps from the butchers shops are chopped up to
      form a species of sausage-balls called "faggots." Then the grease, in which the racy slices of
      fish and savoury compounds of lights and liver have been alike cooked, serves to fry large
      rounds of bread, which, when thus prepared, are denominated "sop in the pan." Of course these
      culinary refinements are prepared by the venders in their own cellars or garrets hard by; but
      when conveyed to the miscellaneous market in the New Cut, the luxuries impart a greasy and
      sickening odour to the air.
It is perfectly wonderful to behold the various methods in which the poor creatures in that
      thoroughfare endeavour to obtain an honest livelihood; and although their proceedings elicit a
      smile—still, God pity them! they had better ply their strange trades thus than rob or beg!
There may be seen, for instance, a ragged urchin holding a bundle of onions in his hand, and
      shouting at the top of his shrill voice, "Here's a ha'porth!"—and, no matter how finely
      dressed the passer-by, he is sure to thrust the onions under his or her very nose, still
      vociferating, "Here's a ha'porth!" Poor boy! he thinks every one must want
      onions!
The immediate vicinity of the Victoria Theatre is infested with women who offer play-bills
      for sale, and who seem to fancy it impossible that the passers-by can be going elsewhere than
      to the play.
Here an orange-girl accosts a gentleman with two or three of the fruit in her hand, but with
      a significant look which gives the assurance that her real trade is of a less innocent
      nature:—there a poor woman with an array of children before her, offers lucifer matches, but
      silently appeals for alms.
A little farther on is a long barrow covered with toys; and a tall man without a nose,
      shouts at intervals, "Only a penny each! only a penny each!" Some of these gimcracks excite
      astonishment by their extreme cheapness; but they are chiefly made by the convicts in Holland,
      and are exported in large quantities to England.
In the middle of the road a man with stentorian voice offers "A hundred songs for a penny;"
      and, enumerating the list, he is sure to announce the "Return of the Hadmiral"
      amongst the rest.
Nearly opposite the Victoria Theatre there is an extensive cook's-shop; and around the
      window stands a hungry crowd feasting their eyes on the massive joints which are intended to
      feast the stomach.
In front of the butchers' shops the serving-men keep up a perpetual vociferation of "Buy!
      buy!"—a sort of running fire that denotes the earnestness with which competition is carried on
      amongst rivals in that delectable trade.
Perhaps a new baker's shop is opened in the New Cut; and then a large placard at the window
      announces that "a glass of gin will be given to every purchaser of a quartern loaf." The
      buyers do not pause to reflect that the price of the cordial is deducted from the weight of
      the bread.
The pawnbrokers' shops seem to drive a most bustling trade in the New Cut; and the fronts of
      their establishments present a more extensive and miscellaneous assortment of second-hand
      garments, blankets, handkerchiefs, and sheets, than is to be seen elsewhere.

The influx and efflux of people at the public-houses and gin-shops constitute not
      the least remarkable feature of that neighbourhood, where every thing is dirty and squalid,
      yet where every one appears able to purchase intoxicating liquor!
On the southern side of the New Cut there are a great many second-hand furniture shops, the
      sheds wherein the articles are principally exposed being built against the houses in a fashion
      which gives the whole, when viewed by the glaring of the gas-lights, the appearance of a
      bazaar or fair.
The New Cut is always crowded; but the multitude is not entirely in motion. Knots of men
      congregate here, and groups of women there—the posts at the corners of the alleys and courts,
      or the doors of the gin-shops, being the most favourite points of such assembly.
The edges of the pathways are not completely devoted to provision dealers. Penny peep-shows,
      emblazoned with a coloured drawing representing the last horrible murder,—itinerant quacks
      with "certain remedies for the toothache,"—stalls covered with odd numbers of cheap periodical
      publications,—old women seated on stools, behind little trays containing combs, papers of
      needles, reels of cotton, pack-thread, stay-laces, bobbin, and such-like articles,—men with
      cutlery to sell, and who flourish in their hands small knives with innumerable blades sticking
      out like the quills on a porcupine,—these are also prominent features in that strange
      market.
In some conspicuous place most likely stands a caravan, surmounted by a picture representing
      a colossal giant and a giantess to match, with an assurance in large letters that the
      originals may be seen inside:—then, as the eye wanders from the enormous canvass to the
      caravan itself, and compares their sizes, the mind is left in a pleasing state of surprise how
      even one of the Brobdingnag marvels—let alone two—could possibly stow itself
      away in that diminutive box.
Branching off from the New Cut, on either side, are numerous narrow streets,—or rather
      lanes, of a very equivocal reputation; their chief characteristics being houses of ill-fame,
      gin-shops, beer-shops, marine-store dealers, pawnbrokers, and barbers' establishments.
There are two facts connected with low neighbourhoods which cannot fail to attract the
      attention of even the most superficial observers in their wanderings amidst the mazes of the
      modern Babylon. The first is that the corner shops of nearly all the narrow and dirty streets
      are occupied by general dealers or people in the chandlery-line; and the second is that all
      the barbers' establishments are ornamented with a blind or placard conveying an assurance that
      each is "the original shaving shop." Here, again, the mind enjoys the excitement of
      uncertainty, as in the matter of the caravan and the giants; for it is impossible to arrive at
      any satisfactory decision whether the aforesaid placard means you to infer that the shop to
      which it belongs was the first ever opened in the world for tonsorial purposes, or
      only the first that shed the light of its civilisation upon that especial
      neighbourhood. We may also observe that some of the proprietors of those establishments are
      not altogether unacquainted with the mysteries of puffing; inasmuch as we frequently read upon
      their shop-fronts the truly exhilarating and inspiring words, "Hair-dresser to the
       Queen."
Such are the New Cut and its tributary lanes.
And it was now along the New Cut that Mr. Greenwood, enveloped in his cloak, was pursuing
      his way.
He scarcely noticed the turmoil, bustle, and business of that strange thoroughfare; for he
      was too much absorbed in his own meditations.
The truth was, that his affairs—once so gloriously prosperous—were now rendered desperate by
      various reverses; and he was about to seek a desperate means of retrieving them.
The reader cannot have failed to observe that the characters of George Montague Greenwood
      and Richard Markham stand out from our picture of London Life in strong contrast with each
      other; and it is not the less remarkable that while the former was rising rapidly to wealth,
      rank, and eminence, the latter was undergoing persecutions and sinking into comparative
      poverty. Now—at the epoch which we are describing—the tables seem to have turned; for while
      George Montague Greenwood is about to seek a desperate remedy for his desperate affairs,
      Richard Markham is leading a gallant army over the fertile plains of Castelcicala.
The former, then, may be deemed the personification of vice, the latter the representative
      of virtue.
They had chosen separate paths:—the sequel will fully demonstrate which of the two
      characters had selected the right one.
In the meantime we will continue our narrative.
Mr. Greenwood pursued his way, and, having crossed over to the southern side of the New Cut,
      repaired to a small row of private houses of which this famous thoroughfare can boast at the
      extremity joining the Blackfriars' Road.
There he stopped for a moment beneath a lamp to consult a memorandum in his pocket-book;
      and, having thereby refreshed his memory in respect to the address of which he was in search,
      he proceeded to knock at the door of a house close by.
A dirty servant-girl opened it just as far as a chain inside would permit; and protruding
      her smutty face, said, with strange abruptness, "Well, what is it?"
"Does Mr. Pennywhiffe live here?" demanded Greenwood.
"No—he don't; and, if he did, you wouldn't come in—'cos I know it's all your gammon,"
      returned that most uninteresting specimen of the female-domestic race.
"Why not?" exclaimed Greenwood, indignantly. "Whom do you take me for?"
"For what you are," replied the girl.
"And what am I, then?"
"Why—a execution, to be sure."
And, with these words, the girl banged the door in Mr. Greenwood's face.
"I must have taken down the wrong number in my memorandum," thought the Member of
      Parliament, as he turned away from the house, which was evidently in a state of siege. "This
      is very provoking!"
He then knocked at the door of the next house.
A woman with a child in her arms answered the summons; and, without waiting for any
      question, said abruptly, "You had better walk in."
Greenwood entered accordingly, supposing that the woman had overheard his inquiry next door,
      and that he had now found the abode of the person whom he sought.

The woman led the way into a back room, almost completely denuded of furniture,
      smelling awfully of tobacco-smoke, and very feebly lighted with a single candle that wanted
      snuffing.
In the midst of a dense cloud of that vapour, a man without a coat was sitting on a trunk;
      but the moment Greenwood entered, this individual threw down his clay-pipe, and advancing
      towards the visitor, exclaimed in a ferocious voice, "So you're going your rounds at this
      hour, are you? Well—I'm as far off from having the tin as I have been all along; and as I am
      going away to-morrow, I don't mind if I give you a good drubbing to teach you how to pester a
      gentleman with shabby bits of paper in future."
Thus speaking, the ferocious individual advanced towards Greenwood, squaring away like
      clock-work.
"Really, sir—you must labour under some mistake," exclaimed the Member of Parliament. "I
      have never called here before in my life."
"Then who the devil are you?" demanded the pugilistic phenomenon.
"That is quite another question," said Greenwood. "I——"
"Do you mean to tell me, then," exclaimed the man, "that you ain't the Water Rates?"
"No—I am not," answered Greenwood, unable to suppress a smile. "I thought that a Mr.
      Pennywhiffe lived here."
"Then he don't—that's all," was the rejoinder. "Blowed if I don't believe it's a plant,
      after all. Come—ain't you a bum? no lies, now!"
Greenwood turned indignantly away from the room, and left the house, muttering to himself,
      "This is most extraordinary! Every one appears to be in difficulties in this street."
He was not, however, disheartened: it was highly necessary for him to see the person of whom
      he was in search; and he accordingly knocked at another door.
"Tell him I'll send round the money to-morrow," shouted a masculine voice inside. "I know
      it's the collector, because he's rapping at every house."
Greenwood did not wait for the door to be opened; he knew very well that Mr. Pennywhiffe
      could not live there.
The fourth house at which he knocked was the right one.
A decent-looking servant girl replied in the affirmative to his inquiry; and he was
      forthwith conducted to a well-furnished room on the first floor, where he found Mr.
      Pennywhiffe seated at a table covered with papers.
This individual was about fifty years of age. In person he was short, thin, and by no means
      prepossessing in countenance. His eyes were deeply set, grey, and restless; and his forehead
      was contracted into a thousand wrinkles. He was dressed in a suit of black, and wore a white
      neckcloth—no doubt to enhance the respectability of his appearance. This was, however, a
      difficult task; for had he figured in the dock of a criminal tribunal, the jury would have had
      no trouble in coming to a verdict, a more hang-dog countenance being seldom seen, even in a
      city where the face is so often the mirror of the mind.
"Ah! Mr. Greenwood," exclaimed Mr. Pennywhiffe, rising to welcome his visitor; "this is an
      unexpected honour. What can I do for you? Pray be seated; and speak plainly. There's no
      listeners here."
"I require your aid in a most important business," answered Greenwood, taking a chair, and
      throwing back his cloak. "To-morrow I must raise twenty or twenty-five thousand pounds, for
      three or four months—upon bills—good bills, Mr. Pennywhiffe."
"To be deposited?" asked that individual.
"To be deposited," replied Greenwood.
"Shall you withdraw them in time?"
"Decidedly. I will convert the money I shall thereby raise into a hundred thousand,"
      exclaimed Greenwood.
"My commission will be heavy for such a business," observed Pennywhiffe; "and that,
      you know is ready money."
"I am aware of it, and am come provided. Name the amount you require."
"Will two hundred hurt you?" said Pennywhiffe. "Remember—the affair is a serious one."
"You shall have two hundred pounds," exclaimed the Member of Parliament, laying his
      pocket-book upon the table.
"That is what I call coming to the point."
Mr. Pennywhiffe rose from his seat, and opening an iron safe, took thence a memorandum-book
      and a small tin box.
Returning to his seat, he handed the memorandum-book to Greenwood, saying, "There is my list
      of noblemen, wealthy gentlemen, and great mercantile firms, whose names are familiar to
       me. Choose which you will have; and make notes of the various sums the bills are to be
      drawn for. Let them be for the most part uneven ones, with fractions: it looks so much
      better."
While Greenwood was employed in examining the memorandum-book, which contained upwards of
      five hundred names of peers, and great landowners, in addition to those of the chief
      commercial firms of London, Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield, Glasgow, and
      other places,—besides several belonging to Paris, Lyons, Bordeaux, Havre, and Lille; Brussels,
      Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Hamburgh; New York, the West Indian Islands, and Montreal; Calcutta,
      Bombay, and Madras;—while Mr. Greenwood, we say, was examining this strange register, and
      copying several of the best names of noblemen, gentlemen, and merchants, upon a slip of paper,
      Mr Pennywhiffe opened his tin-case.
The contents thereof were numerous paid checks, and bills of exchange, respectively bearing
      the signatures of the persons or firms whose names were entered in the memorandum-book.
How Mr. Pennywhiffe became possessed of such important documents,—which, seeing that they
      had all been duly honoured at maturity, ought to have remained in the hands of those who took
      them up,—was a mystery which he kept to himself. Whether he had collected them by degrees, or
      had obtained them in a heap by robbery, or any other means, he never condescended to acquaint
      his clients.
"I have chosen eleven names," said Greenwood; "and have appended to them the various sums
      for which I require the bills to be drawn. The aggregate is twenty-three thousand two hundred
      and seventeen pounds, nine shillings, and sevenpence halfpenny."
"A good total, that," observed Mr. Pennywhiffe,—"an excellent total—sounds uncommon
      well. Nothing could be better. Am I to provide the stamps?"
"If you please. I will pay you extra for them."
Mr. Pennywhiffe once more had recourse to his
      iron safe, and returned to his seat with a small paste-board box, long and
      narrow, and containing a vast number of bill-stamps adapted to sums of all amounts. As the
      usual formula of such documents was printed (though in various ways, they having been procured
      at different stationers' shops) the process of filling them up was by no means a tedious
      one.

But now the ingenuity of Mr. Pennywhiffe mainly exhibited itself. Each bill was filled up
      with a different ink and a different pen; and so skilful a caligrapher was he, that the most
      astute judge of writing could not possibly have perceived that they were all written by the
      same hand. Then, by the aid of red ink, a few flourishes, and little circles containing
      initial letters or figures as if each document corresponded with some particular entry in some
      particular leger or bill-book, the papers speedily assumed a very business-like
      appearance.
And now the most difficult and delicate part of the entire process was to commence—the
      signatures. But Mr. Pennywhiffe went to work with the air of one who fully understood what he
      was about; and with the originals before him as a copy, he perfected acceptance after
      acceptance in so masterly a manner, that Greenwood, when he compared the fictitious signatures
      with the genuine, was astounded at the caligraphic proficiency of that man whose dangerous
      agency he was now rendering available to his purposes.
"So far, all goes well," said Mr. Pennywhiffe.
"The bills are excellent in every point save one," observed Greenwood.
"Which is that?" demanded the caligrapher.
"They look too new—the paper is too clean."
"I know it," returned Mr. Pennywhiffe; "but the process is not entirely complete."
He rose and threw a quantity of small coal upon the fire, so as to smother the flame, and
      create a dense smoke. He then passed each bill several times through the smoke, until the
      documents acquired a slightly dingy hue. Lastly, he placed them between the leaves of a
      portfolio scented with musk, so as to take off the odour of the smoke; and the entire process
      was terminated.
Mr. Greenwood now counted upon the table bank-notes
      to the aggregate amount of the two hundred pounds promised, and the price of the
      stamps; and in exchange he received the bills for twenty-three thousand two hundred and
      seventeen pounds, nine shillings, and sevenpence halfpenny.
"This seems to be a most extraordinary neighbourhood, Mr. Pennywhiffe," said Greenwood, as
      he placed the bills in his pocket-book. "I knocked by mistake at three houses before I came to
      yours, and the inmates of each seemed to be in difficulties."
"No doubt of it, my dear sir. This part of London swarms with members of the Swell Mob,
      broken-down tradesmen, fraudulent bankrupts, insolvents playing at hide-and-seek with the
      sheriff's-officers, railway projectors, and swindlers of all kinds. I have got a very queer
      kind of a lodger in my attic: he has no visible means of living, but is out nearly all day
      long; and he dresses uncommonly well—gold chain—polished boots—figured silk waistcoat—and so
      forth. He only pays me—or ought to pay me—five shillings a week for his furnished bed-room;
      and he is six months in arrears. But what is more remarkable still, I don't even know his
      name; and he never receives any letters, nor has any friends to call. He is about thirty-six
      or thirty-eight years old, a good-looking fellow enough, and an Irishman."
"Perhaps he also is some railway projector," said Mr. Greenwood, rising to take his
      departure.
At this moment a double knock at the front-door was heard.
"That must be my lodger," exclaimed Mr. Pennywhiffe.
Urged by curiosity to catch a glimpse of the mysterious gentleman alluded to, Greenwood
      hurried on his cloak, took leave of the caligrapher, and left the room.
On the stairs he met the lodger, who was ascending to his attic, with a brass candlestick,
      containing an inch of the commonest candle, in his hand.
The moment he and Greenwood thus encountered each other, an ejaculation of surprise issued
      from the lips of each.
"Hush! not a word!" said the gentleman, placing his fore-finger upon his lip. "And, of
      course, Greenwood," he continued, in a whisper, "you will never mention this to a
      soul."
"Never—on my honour!" answered Greenwood.
They then shook hands, and parted—the gentleman continuing his way to the attic, and
      Greenwood hastening to leave the house.
"Wonders will never cease!" thought the latter, as he proceeded towards the cab-stand near
      Rowland Hill's chapel in the Blackfriars Road: "who would have thought of one of the Irish
      Members of Parliament living in an attic in the New Cut?"
</div></body></text></TEI>