<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III. THE TRAP-DOOR.
THE youthful stranger had listened with ineffable surprise and horror to the conversation of
      the two ruffians. His nerves had been worked up by all the circumstances of the evening to a
      tone bordering upon madness—to that pitch, indeed, when it appeared as if there were no
      alternative left save to fall upon the floor and yield to the delirium tremens of
      violent emotions.
He had restrained his feelings while he heard the burglary at Mr. Markham's dwelling coolly
      planned and settled; but when the discourse of those two monsters in human shape developed to
      his imagination all the horrors of the fearful place in which he had sought an asylum,—when he
      heard that he was actually standing upon the very verge of that staircase down which
      innumerable victims had been hurled to the depths of the slimy ditch beneath,—and when he
      thought how probable it was that his bones were doomed to whiten in the dark and hidden
      caverns below, along with the remains of other human beings who had been barbarously murdered
      in cold blood,—reason appeared to forsake him. A cold sweat broke forth all over him; and he
      seemed about to faint under the impression of a hideous nightmare.
He threw his hat upon the floor—for he felt the want of air. That proud forehead, that
      beautiful countenance were distorted with indescribable horror; and an ashy pallor spread
      itself over his features.
Death, in all its most hideous forms, appeared to follow—to surround—to hem him in. There
      was no escape:—a trap-door here—a well, communicating with the ditch, there—or else the
      dagger;—no matter in what shape—still Death was before him—behind him—above him—below him—on
      every side of him.
It was horrible—most horrible!
Then was it that a sudden thought flashed across his brain; he resolved to attempt a
      desperate effort to escape. He summoned all his courage to his aid, and opened the door so
      cautiously that, though the hinges were old and rusted, they did not creak.
The crisis was now at hand. If he could clear the landing unperceived, he was safe. It was
      true that, seen or unseen, he might succeed in escaping from the house by means of his
      superior agility and nimbleness; but he reflected that these men would capture him, again, in
      a few minutes, in the midst of a labyrinth of streets with which he was utterly unacquainted,
      but which they knew so well. He remembered that he had overheard their secrets and witnessed
      their mysterious modes of concealment; and that, should he fall into their power, death must
      inevitably await him.
These ideas crossed his brain in a moment, and convinced him of the necessity of prudence
      and extreme caution. He must leave the house unperceived, and dare the pitiless storm and
      pelting rain; for the tempest still raged without.
He once more approached the window to ascertain if there were any chance of stealing across
      the landing-place unseen. Unfortunately he drew too near the window: the light of the candle
      fell full upon his countenance, which horror and alarm had rendered deadly pale and fearfully
      convulsed.
It was at this moment that the ruffian, in the midst of his unholy vaunts, had caught sight
      of that human face—white as a sheet—and with eyes fixed upon him with a glare which his
      imagination rendered stony and unearthly.
The youth saw that he was discovered; and a full sense of the desperate peril which hung
      over him, rushed to his mind. He turned, and endeavoured to fly away from the fatal spot; but,
      as imagination frequently fetters the limbs in a nightmare, and involves the sleeper in danger
      from which he vainly attempts to run, so did his legs now refuse to perform their office.
His brain whirled—his eyes grew dim: he grasped at the wall to save himself from falling—but
      his senses were deserting him—and he sank fainting upon the floor.
He awoke from the trance into which he had fallen, and became aware that he was being moved
      along. Almost at the same instant his eyes fell upon the sinister countenance of Dick, who was
      carrying him by the feet. The other ruffian was supporting his head.
They were lifting him down the staircase, upon the top step of which the candle was
      standing.
All the incidents of the evening immediately returned to the memory of the wretched boy, who
      now only too well comprehended the desperate perils that surrounded him.
The bottom of the staircase was reached: the villains deposited their burden for a moment in
      the passage, while Dick retraced his steps to fetch down the candle.
And then a horrible conflict of feelings and inclinations took place in the bosom of the
      unhappy youth. He shut his eyes; and for an instant debating within himself whether he should
       remain silent or cry out. He dreamt of immediate—instantaneous death; and yet he
      thought that he was young to die—oh! so young—and that men could not be such barbarians——
But when the two ruffians stooped down to take him up again, fear surmounted all other
      sentiments, feelings, and inclinations; and his deep—his profound—his heartfelt agony was
      expressed in one long, loud, and piercing shriek!
And then a fearful scene took place.
The two villains carried the youth into the front room upon the ground-floor, and laid him
      down for a moment.
It was the same room to which he had first found his way upon entering that house.
It was the room in which, by the glare of the evanescent lightning, he had seen that black
      square upon the dirty floor.
For a few instants all was dark. At length the candle was brought by the man in the fustian
      coat.
The youth glanced wildly around him, and speedily recognised that room.
He remembered how deep a sensation of horror seized him when that black square upon the
      floor first caught his eyes.
He raised himself upon his left arm, and once more looked around.
Great God! was it possible?
That ominous blackness—that sinister square was the mouth of a yawning gulf, the trap-door
      of which was raised.
A fetid smell rose from the depths below, and the gurgling of a current was faintly
      heard.
The dread truth was in a moment made apparent to that unhappy boy—much more quickly than it
      occupies to relate or read. He started from his supine posture, and fell upon his knees at the
      feet of those merciless villains who had borne him thither.
"Mercy, mercy! I implore you! Oh! do not devote me to so horrible a death! Do not—do not
       murder me!"
"Hold your noisy tongue, you fool," ejaculated Bill, brutally. "You have heard and seen too
      much for our safety; we can't do otherwise."
"No, certainly not," added Dick. "You are now as fly to the fakement as any one of us."
"Spare me, spare me, and I will never betray you! Oh! do not send me out of this world, so
      young—so very young! I have money, I have wealth, I am rich, and I will give you all I
      possess!" ejaculated the agonized youth; his countenance wearing an expression of horrible
      despair.
"Come; here's enough. Bill, lend a hand!" and Dick seized the boy by one arm, while his
      companion took a firm hold of the other.
"Mercy, mercy!" shrieked the youth, struggling violently; but struggling vainly. "You will
      repent when you know—— I am not what I——"
He said no more: his last words were uttered over the mouth of the chasm ere the ruffians
      loosened their hold;—and then he fell.
The trap-door was closed violently over the aperture, and drowned the scream of agony which
      burst from his lips.
The two murderers then retraced their steps to the apartment on the first floor.
*   *  *  *  *
On the following day, about one o'clock, Mr. Markham, a gentleman of fortune residing in the
      northern environs of London, received the following letter:—

"The inscrutable decrees of Providence have enabled the undersigned to warn you, that this
       night a burglarious attempt will be made upon your dwelling. The wretches who contemplate
       this infamy are capable of a crime of much blacker die. Beware!
"AN UNKNOWN FRIEND."

This letter was written in a beautiful feminine hand. Due precaution was adopted at Mr.
      Markham's mansion; but the attempt alluded to in the warning epistle was, for some reason or
      another, not made.
</div></body></text></TEI>