<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="56">
CHAPTER LVI. THE ROAD TO RUIN.
ABOUT two months after the period when we first introduced Ellen Monroe to our readers, the
      old woman of whom we have before spoken, and who dwelt in the same court as that poor maiden
      and her father, was sitting at work in her chamber.
The old woman was ill-favoured in countenance, and vile in heart. Hers was one of those
      hardened dispositions which know no pity, no charity, no love, no friendship, no yearning
      after any thing proper to human fellowship.
      
She was poor and wretched;—and yet she, in all her misery, had a large easy chair
      left to sit upon, warm blankets to cover her at night, a Dutch clock to tell her the hour, a
      cupboard in which to keep her food, a mat whereon to set her feet, and a few turves burning in
      the grate to keep her warm. The walls of her room were covered with cheap prints, coloured
      with glaring hues, and representing the exploits of celebrated highwaymen and courtezans;
      scenes upon the stage in which favourite actresses figured, and execrable imitations of
      Hogarth's "Rake's Progress." The coverlid of her bed was of patchwork, pieces of silk, satin,
      cotton, and other stuffs, all of different patterns, sizes, and shapes, being sewn
      together—strange and expressive remnants of a vicious and faded luxury! Upon the chimney-piece
      were two or three scent-bottles, which for years had contained no perfume; and in the cupboard
      was a champagne-bottle, in which the hag now kept her gin. The pillow of her couch was stuffed
      neither with wool nor feathers—but with well-worn silk stockings, tattered lace collars, faded
      ribands, a piece of a muff and a boa, the velvet off a bonnet, and old kid gloves. And—more
      singular than all the other features of her room—the old hag had a huge Bible, with silver
      clasps, upon a shelf!
This horrible woman was darning old stockings, and stooping over her work, when a low knock
      at the door of her chamber fell upon her ear. That knock was not imperative and commanding,
      but gentle and timid; and therefore the old woman did not hurry herself to say, "Come in!"
      Even after the door had opened and the visitor had entered the room, the old hag proceeded
      with her work for a few moments.
At length raising her head, she beheld Ellen Monroe.
She was not surprised: but as she gazed upon that fair thin face whose roundness had yielded
      to the hand of starvation, and that blue eye whose fire was subdued by long and painful
      vigils, she said, "And so you have come at last? I have been expecting you every day!"
"Expecting me! and why?" exclaimed Ellen, surprised at these words, which appeared to
      contain a sense of dark and mysterious import that was ominous to the young girl.
"Yes—I have expected you," repeated the old woman. "Did I not tell you that when you had no
      money, no work, and no bread, and owed arrears of rent, you would come to me?"
"Alas! and you predicted truly," said Ellen, with a bitter sigh. "All the miseries which you
      have detailed have fallen upon me;—and more! for my father lies ill upon the one
       mattress that remains to us!"
"Poor creature!" exclaimed the old woman, endeavouring to assume a soothing tone; then,
      pointing to a foot-stool near her, she added, "Come and sit near me that we may talk together
      upon your sad condition."
Ellen really believed that she had excited a feeling of generous and disinterested sympathy
      in the heart of that hag; and she therefore seated herself confidently upon the stool, saying
      at the same time, "You told me that you could serve me: if you have still the power, in the
      name of heaven delay not, for—for—we are starving!"
The old woman glanced round to assure herself that the door of her cupboard was closed; for
      in that cupboard were bread and meat, and cheese. Then, turning her eyes upwards, the hag
      exclaimed, "God bless us all, dear child! I am dying of misery myself, and have not a morsel
      to give you to eat!"
But when she had uttered these words, she cast her eyes upon the young girl who was now
      seated familiarly as it were, by her side, and scanned her from head to foot, and from foot to
      head. In spite of the wretched and scanty garments which Ellen wore, the admirable symmetry of
      her shape was easily descried; and the old woman thought within herself how happy she should
      be to dress that sweet form in gay and gorgeous garments, for her own unhallowed purposes.
"You do not answer me," said Ellen. "Do not keep me in suspense—but tell me whether it is in
      your power to procure me work?"
The old hag's countenance wore a singular expression when these last words fell upon her
      ears. Then she began to talk to the poor starving girl in a manner which the latter could not
      comprehend, and which we dare not describe. Ellen listened for some time, as if she were
      hearing a strange language which she was endeavouring to make out; and then she cast a sudden
      look of doubt and alarm upon the old hag. The wretch grew somewhat more explicit; and the poor
      girl burst into an agony of tears, exclaiming, as she covered her blushing cheeks with her
      snow-white hands—"No: never—never!"
Still she did not fly from that den and from the presence of that accursed old hag, because
      she was so very, very wretched, and had no hope elsewhere.
There was a long pause; and the old hag and the young girl sate close to each other, silent
      and musing. The harridan cast upon her pale and starving companion a look of mingled anger and
      surprise; but the poor creature saw it not—for she was intent only on her own despair.
Suddenly a thought struck the hag.
"I can do nothing for you, miss, since you will not follow my advice," she said, after a
      while: "and yet I am acquainted with a statuary who would pay you well for casts of your
      countenance for his Madonnas, his actresses, his Esmeraldas, his queens, his princesses, and
      his angels."
These words sounded upon the ears of the unhappy girl like a dream; and parting, with her
      wasted fingers, the ringlets that clustered round her brow, she lifted up her large moist eyes
      in astonishment towards the face of the aged hag.
But the old woman was serious in her offer.
"I repeat—will you sell your countenance to a statuary?" she said. "It is a good one; and
      you will obtain a handsome price for it."
Ellen was literally stupefied by this strange proposal; but when she had power to collect
      her ideas into one focus, she saw her father pining upon a bed of sickness, and surrounded by
      all the horrors of want and privation;—and she herself—the unhappy girl—had not tasted food
      for nearly thirty hours. Then, on the other side, was her innate modesty;—but this was nothing
      in the balance compared to the poignancy of her own and her parent's sufferings.
So she agreed to accompany the old hag to the house of the statuary in Leather Lane,
      Holborn. But first she hurried home to see if her father required any thing—a vain act of
      filial tenderness, for if he did she had nothing to give. The old man slept soundly—worn out
      with suffering, want, and sorrowful meditation; and the landlady of the house promised to
      attend to him while Ellen was absent.
The young maiden then returned to the old woman and they proceeded together to the house of
      the statuary.
Up two flights of narrow and dark stairs, precipitate
       as ladders, did the trembling and almost heartbroken girl follow the hag. They
      then entered a spacious depository of statues modelled in plaster of Paris. A strange assembly
      of images was that! Heathen gods seemed to fraternize with angels, Madonnas, and Christian
      saints; Napoleon and Wellington stood motionless side by side; George the Fourth and Greenacre
      occupied the same shelf; William Pitt and Cobbett appeared to be contemplating each other with
      silent admiration; Thomas Paine elbowed a bishop; Lord Castlereagh seemed to be extending his
      hand to welcome Jack Ketch; Cupid pointed his arrow at the bosom of a pope; in a word, that
      strange pell-mell of statues was calculated to awaken ideas of a most wild and ludicrous
      character, in the imagination of one whose thoughts were not otherwise occupied.
The statuary was an Italian; and as he spoke the English language imperfectly, he did not
      waste much time over the bargain. With the cool criticism of a sportsman examining a horse or
      a dog, the statuary gazed upon the young maiden; then, taking a rule in his hand, he measured
      her head; and with a pair of blunt compasses he took the dimensions of her features. Giving a
      nod of approval, he consulted a large book which lay open upon a desk; and finding that he had
      orders for a queen, an opera-dancer, and a Madonna, he declared that he would take three casts
      of his new model's countenance that very morning.
The old woman whispered words of encouragement in Ellen's ear, as they all three repaired to
      the workshop, where upwards of twenty men were employed in making statues. Some were preparing
      the clay models over which the plaster of Paris was to be laid: others joined legs and arms to
      trunks;—some polished the features of the countenances: others effaced the seams that betrayed
      the various joints in the complete statues. One fixed wings to angels' backs—another swords to
      warriors' sides: a third repaired a limb that had been broken; a fourth stuck on a new nose in
      the place of an old one knocked off.
Ellen was stretched at full length upon a table; and a wet cloth was placed over her face.
      The statuary then covered it with moist clay;—and the process was only complete when she was
      ready to faint through difficulty of breathing. She rested a little while; and then the second
      cast was taken. Another interval to recover breath—and the third and last mould was
      formed.
The statuary seemed well pleased with this trial of his new model; and placing a sovereign
      in the young maiden's hand, he desired her to return in three days, as he should require her
      services again. The poor trembling creature's eyes glistened with delight as she balanced the
      gold in her little hand; and she took her departure, accompanied by the hag, with a heart
      comparatively light.
"You will have plenty to do there," said the old woman, as they proceeded homewards: "I have
      introduced you to a good thing. You must therefore divide your first day's earnings with
      me."
Ellen really felt grateful to the selfish harridan; and having changed her gold for silver
      coin at a shop where she stopped to buy provisions, she counted ten shillings in the withered
      and sinewy hand which the hag thrust forth.
Thus for three months did Ellen earn the means of a comfortable subsistence, by selling her
      countenance to the statuary. And that countenance might be seen belonging to the statues of
      Madonnas in catholic chapels; opera dancers, and actresses in theatrical clubs; nymphs holding
      lamps in the halls of public institutions; and queens in the staircase windows of insurance
      offices.
She never revealed to her father the secret spring of that improved condition which soon
      restored him to health; but assured him that she had found more needle-work, and was well paid
      for it. The old man had too good an opinion of his daughter to suspect her of crime or
      frailty; and he believed her innocent and well-meant falsehood the more readily, inasmuch as
      he saw her constantly engaged with her needle when he was at home.
Three months passed away; and already had a little air of comfort succeeded to the former
      dismal aspect of those two chambers which the father and daughter occupied, when the statuary
      died suddenly.
Ellen's occupation was once more gone; and, after vainly endeavouring to obtain
      needle-work—for that which she did in the presence of her father was merely a pretence to make
      good her tale to him—she again repaired to the abode of the old hag who had introduced her to
      the statuary.
The aged female was, if possible, more wrinkled and hideous than before; the contrast
      between her and her fair young visitant was the more striking, inasmuch as the cheeks of the
      latter had recovered their roundness, and her form its plumpness by means of good and
      sufficient food.
"You have come to me again," said the hag. "Doubtless I should have never seen you more if
      you had not wanted my services."
"The statuary is dead," returned Ellen, "and has left behind him an immense fortune. His son
      has therefore declined the business, and has discharged every one in the employment of his
      late father."
"And what would you have me do for you, miss?" demanded the old woman. "I am not acquainted
      with another statuary."
Ellen heaved a deep sigh.
The hag contemplated her for some time in silence, and then exclaimed, "Your appearance has
      improved; you have a tinge of the carnation upon your cheeks; and your eyes have recovered
      their brightness. I know an artist of great repute, who will be glad of you as a copy for his
      shepherdesses, his huntresses, his sea-nymphs, and heathen goddesses. Let us lose no time in
      proceeding to his residence."
This proposal was far more agreeable to the maiden than the one which had led her into the
      service of the statuary; and she did not for a moment hesitate to accompany the old woman to
      the abode of the artist.
The great painter was about forty years of age, and dwelt in a splendid house in Bloomsbury
      Square. The rooms on the third floor were his studio, as he required a clear and good
      light. He accepted the services of Ellen Monroe as a copy, and remunerated the old woman out
      of his own pocket, for the introduction. But he required the attendance of his copy every day
      from ten till four; and she was accordingly compelled to tell her father another story to
      account for these long intervals of absence. She now assured him that she was engaged to work
      at the residence of a family in Bloomsbury Square; and the old man believed her.
Her countenance having embellished statues, was now transferred to canvass. Her Grecian
      features and classic head appeared surmounted with the crescent of Diana, the helmet of
      Minerva, and the crown of Juno. The painter purchased dresses suitable to the characters which
      he wished her to adopt; and, although she was frequently compelled to appear before him, in a
      state which at first was strongly repugnant to her modesty—with naked
       bust, and naked arms, and naked legs—the feeling of shame gradually wore away.
      Thus, though in body she remained pure and chaste, yet in soul was she gradually hardened to
      the sentiments of maiden delicacy and female reserve!
It is true that she retained her virtue—because it was not tempted. The artist saw not
      before him a lovely creature of warm flesh and blood; he beheld nothing but a beautiful and
      symmetrical statue which served as an original for his heathen divinities and pastoral
      heroines. And in this light did he treat her.
He paid her handsomely; and her father and herself were enabled to remove to better
      lodgings, and in a more respectable neighbourhood, than those which had been the scene of so
      much misery in Golden Lane.
The artist whom Ellen served was a portrait-painter as well as a delineator of classical
      subjects. When he was employed to paint the likeness of some vain and conceited West End
      daughter of the aristocracy, it was Ellen's hand—or Ellen's hair—or Ellen's eyes—or Ellen's
      bust—or some feature or peculiar beauty of the young maiden, in which the fashionable lady
      somewhat resembled her, that figured upon the canvass. Then when the portrait was finished,
      the artist would assemble his friends at the same time that the lady and her friends
      called to see it; and the artist's friends—well tutored beforehand—would exclaim, one, "How
      like is the eye!" another, "The very mouth!" a third, "The hair to the life itself!" a fourth,
      "The exact profile!"—and so on. And all the while it was Ellen's eye, or Ellen's mouth, or
      Ellen's hair, or Ellen's profile, which the enthusiasts admired. Then the lady, flattering
      herself that she alone was the original, and little suspecting that the charms of
      another had been called in to enhance the beauty of her portrait, persuaded her fond
      and uxorious husband to double the amount of the price bargained for, and had the picture set
      in a very costly frame, to hang in the most conspicuous place in her mansion.
It happened one day that the artist obtained the favour of a marchioness of forty-six by
      introducing into her portrait the nose, eyes, and mouth of that fair young maiden of
      seventeen. The great lady recommended him to the Russian Ambassador as the greatest of English
      painters; and the ambassador immediately retained him to proceed to St. Petersburgh to
      transfer to canvass the physiognomy of the Czar.
Ellen thus lost her employment once more; and again did she repair to the den of the old hag
      who had recommended her to the statuary and the artist.
The step of the maiden was less timid than formerly; and her look was more confident. She
      was also dressed in a style which savoured of coquetry, for her occupation at the artist's had
      taught her the value of her charms, and prompted her how to enhance them. She had imbibed the
      idea that her beauty was worth much, and should at least produce her a comfortable livelihood,
      even if it did not lay the foundation for a fortune. She therefore occupied all her leisure
      time in studying how to set it off to the greatest advantage. Thus dire necessity had
      compelled that charming young creature to embrace occupations which awoke all the latent
      female vanity that had slumbered in her bosom throughout the period of her pinching poverty,
      and that now shone forth in her manner—her gait—her glance—her speech—and her attire.
The old hag observed this change, and was not surprised—for she was a woman of the world;
      but she muttered to herself, "A little while, my dear, and you will suit my purposes
      altogether."
"I am come again, you see," said Ellen, seating herself without waiting to be asked. "My
      artist has left England suddenly, and I am once more without occupation."
"Have you any money?" demanded the old hag.
"I have three sovereigns left," replied Ellen.
"You must give me two," said the woman; "and you must promise me half your first week's
      earnings, for the new introduction which I shall presently give you."
Ellen placed two sovereigns in the hand of the beldame; and the old wretch opened her table
      drawer to search for something which she required.
That drawer contained a strange incongruity of articles. Old valentine letters, knots of
      faded riband, cards, prophetic almanacs; tooth powder boxes, and scented oil bottles, all
      alike empty; the visiting cards of several noblemen and gentlemen, play-bills, theatrical
      journals, masquerade tickets never used, pieces of music, magazines of fashion, a volume of
      the "Memoirs of Harriett Wilson," immoral prints, a song book, some leaves torn from the
      "Newgate Calendar," medical drugs wrapped up in papers, a child's caul, pieces of poetry in
      manuscript, amatory epistles on sheets of various tints, writs from the Court of Requests,
      summonses from police courts, etc. etc. The contents of that filthy drawer furnished a
      complete history of that old hag's former life.
The object of the old woman's search was a card, which, having found it, she handed to the
      young maiden, saying, "Here is the address of an eminent sculptor: he requires a model of a
      bust for the statue of a great lady who may be said to have no bust at all. You will suit
      him."
Ellen received the card, and hastened to Halkin Street, Belgrave Square, where the sculptor
      resided. She was shown first into a parlour upon the ground floor, then, when the object of
      her visit was made known, she was requested to walk up stairs to the studio of the
      great man. She found him contemplating with profound satisfaction a head which he had already
      cut from the top part of a block of marble. He was an old man of sixty, and he stooped in his
      gait; but his eyes were dark and piercing.
A bargain between the sculptor and Ellen was soon terminated; and the next morning she
      entered upon her new employment. Stripped to the waist, she had to stand in a certain
      position, for several hours each day, in the presence of the sculptor. The old man laboured
      diligently at his statue, and allowed her little rest; but he paid her munificently, and she
      was contented.
The lady, whose statue was thus supposed to be in progress, called daily, and
      remained at the sculptor's house for hours. She always came alone, and sate in the
       studio the whole time during which her call lasted: it was therefore imagined by all
      her friends that she really formed the model of the statue which was to bear her name. But
      Ellen's neck—and Ellen's shoulders—and Ellen's bosom—and Ellen's arms were in truth the
      pattern of the bust of that statue which was to be a great sculptor's masterpiece, and to hand
      down the name of a great lady to posterity!
The very day upon which Ellen was to leave the sculptor's employment, her services as a
      model being no longer required, this great lady happened to observe that she was in want of a
      nursery governess for her two young daughters. Ellen ventured to offer herself as a candidate
      for the situation. The lady raised her eyes and hands to heaven in astonishment,
       exclaiming, "You, miss, a companion for my children! a girl who gets
      her livelihood by standing half naked in the presence of any body, as a model!" And the lady
      was compelled to have recourse to her scent-bottle to save herself from fainting. She forgot
      that she would have herself stood to the sculptor if she had possessed a good bust!
The answer and the behaviour of this lady opened the eyes of Ellen to the nature of the
      opinion which the world must now form of her. She suddenly comprehended the real position
      which she occupied in society—about one remove above the unfortunate girls who were the avowed
      daughters of crime. Were she now to speak to the world of her virtue, that world would laugh
      insultingly in her face. Thus the dire necessity which had urged her upon this career, began
      by destroying her sense of female delicacy and shame: it now destroyed, in her estimation,
      every inducement to pursue a virtuous career.
Again she sought the dwelling of the old hag: for the fourth time she demanded the
      assistance of the beldame.
"It seems, my child," said the old woman, "that my advice has produced beneficial
      consequences. Each time that you cross my threshold I observe that you are freer and lighter
      in step, and more choice in your apparel."
"You know that I am not detestably ugly, mother," answered Ellen, with a smile of
      complacence; "and surely it is as cheap to have a gown well made as badly made, and a becoming
      bonnet as one altogether out of date."
"Ah! I see that you study the fashions," exclaimed the old woman with a sigh—for she
      recalled to mind the pleasures and pursuits of her own youthful days, over which she
      retrospected with regret:—then, after a pause, she said, "How old are you?"
"Eighteen and a half," replied Ellen.
"And, with all that beauty, is your heart still unoccupied by the image of some favoured
      suitor?"
"Oh!" ejaculated Ellen, laughing heartily, so as to display her brilliant teeth, "I have not
      thought of that yet. I have lately read a great deal about love in novels and
      romances—for I never do any needle-work now,—but I have not experienced the passion. I dare
      say my time will come sooner or later;"—and again she laughed. "But, hasten, mother—I am
      losing my time: tell me, do you know of farther employment for me?"
"I am acquainted with a French gentleman of science at the West End," answered the hag, "who
      has invented a means of taking likenesses by the aid of the sun. I do not know what the
      process is: all that concerns me and you is that the Frenchman requires a beautiful woman to
      serve as a pattern for his experiments."
"Give me his address," said Ellen, "and if he engages me I will pay you liberally. You know
      that you can rely upon me."
The old woman once more had recourse to her filthy drawer, in which her present memoranda
      were mingled with the relics of the luxury of former days; and taking thence a letter which
      she had only received that same morning, she tore off the address for the use of the young
      maiden.
Ellen, who a few months previously had been accustomed to work for seventeen or eighteen
      hours without ceasing, now took a cab to proceed from the neighbourhood of St. Luke's to
      Leicester Square. The French scientific experimentalist was at home; and Ellen was conducted
      up four flights of stairs to a species of belvidere, or glass cabinet, built upon the roof of
      the house. The windows of this belvidere, and the paper with which the wood-work of the
      interior was covered, were of a dark blue, in order to mitigate the strength of the sun's
      rays.
Within this belvidere the Frenchman was at work. He was a short, middle-aged, sallow-faced,
      sharp-featured person—entirely devoted to matters of science, and having no soul for love,
      pleasure, politics, or any kind of excitement save his learned pursuits. He was now busily
      employed at a table covered with copper plates coated with silver, phials of nitric acid,
      cotton wool, pounce, a camera obscura, several boxes, each of about two feet square, and other
      materials necessary for photography.
The Frenchman spoke English tolerably well; and eyeing his fair visitant from head to foot,
      he expressed himself infinitely obliged to the person who had sent her. He then entered into
      particulars; and Ellen found, to her surprise, that the photographer was desirous of taking
      full-length female portraits in a state of nudity. She drew her veil over her countenance, and
      was about to retire in disgust and indignation, when the Frenchman, who was examining a plate
      as he spoke, and therefore did not observe the effect his words had produced upon her,
      mentioned the price which he proposed to pay her. Now the artist paid better than the
      statuary; the sculptor better than the artist; and the photographer better than the sculptor.
      She therefore hesitated no longer; but entered the service of the man of science.
We shall not proceed to any details connected with this new avocation to which that lovely
      maiden lent herself. Suffice it to say, that having sold her countenance to the statuary, her
      likeness to the artist, and her bust to the sculptor, she disposed of her whole body to the
      photographer. Thus her head embellished images white and bronzed; her features and her figure
      were perpetuated in divers paintings; her bust was immortalized in a splendid statue; and her
      entire form is preserved, in all attitudes, and on many plates, in the private cabinet of a
      photographer at one of the metropolitan Galleries of Practical Science.
At length the photographer was satisfied with the results of his experiments regarding the
      action of light upon every part of the human frame; and Ellen's occupation was again gone.
A tainted soul now resided in a pure body. Every remaining sentiment of decency and delicacy
      was crushed—obliterated—destroyed by this last service. Pure souls have frequently resided in
      tainted bodies: witness Lucretia after the outrage perpetrated upon her:—but here was
      essentially a foul soul in a chaste and virgin form.
And what dread cause had consummated this sad result? Not the will of the poor girl; for
      when we first saw her in her cold and cheerless chamber, her mind was spotless at the Alpine
      snow. But dire necessity—that necessity which became an instrument in the old hag's hands to
      model the young maiden to her purposes. For it was with ulterior views that the designing
      harridan had introduced the poor girl to that career which, without being actually criminal,
      led step by step towards criminality. The wretch knew the world well, and was enabled to
      calculate the influence of exterior circumstances upon the mind and the passions. After the
      first conversation which she had with Ellen, she perceived that the purity of the virgin was
      not to be undermined by specious representations, nor by dazzling theories, nor by delusive
      sophistry: and the hag accordingly placed the confiding girl upon a path which, while it
      supplied her with the necessaries of life, gradually presented to her mind scenes which were
      calculated
       to destroy her purity of thought and chastity of feeling for ever!
When Ellen left the service of the photographer, she repaired for the fifth time to the
      dwelling of the hag.
The old woman was seated as usual at her work; and she was humming to herself an opera air,
      which she remembered to have heard many—many years back.
"The Frenchman requires my services no longer," said Ellen. "What next can you do for
      me?"
"Alas! my poor child," answered the old woman, "the times were never so bad as they are at
      present! What is to become of us? what is to become of us?"
And the hag rocked herself backwards and forwards in her chair, as if overcome by painful
      reflections.
"You can, then, do nothing for me?" observed Ellen, interrogatively. "That is a pity! for I
      have not a shilling left in the world. We have lived up to the income which my occupations
      produced. My poor old father fancies up to the present moment that I have been working at
      dress-making and embroidery at the houses of great families; and he will wonder how all my
      engagements should so suddenly cease. Think, mother: are you not acquainted with another
      artist or sculptor?"
"Why, my child, do you pitch upon the artist and the sculptor?" inquired the hag, regarding
      Ellen fixedly in the face.
"Oh!" answered the young maiden, lightly, "because I do not like to have my countenance
      handled about by the dirty fingers of the statuary; and you cannot suppose that out of the
      four services I should voluntarily prefer that of the photographer?"
The old woman looked disappointed, and muttered to herself, "Not quite yet! not quite
      yet!"
"What did you say, mother?" inquired Ellen.
"I say," replied the hag, assuming a tone of kindness and conciliation, "that you must come
      back to me in ten days; and in the mean time I will see what is to be done for you."
"In ten days," observed Ellen: "be it so!"
And she took her departure, downcast and disappointed, from the old hag's abode.
</div></body></text></TEI>