<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="214">
CHAPTER CCXIII.   THE TORTURES OF LADY RAVENSWORTH.
A week had now elapsed since Lydia Hutchinson entered the service of Lady Ravensworth.
The service! Oh! what a service was that where the menial had become the mistress, and the
      mistress had descended to the menial.
From the moment that Lydia had expressed her unalterable resolution to remain at the Hall,
      Lord Ravensworth scarcely ever quitted his private cabinet. He had a bed made up in an
      adjoining room, and secluded himself completely from his wife. Vainly did Adeline seek him—go
      upon her knees before him—and beseech him, with the bitterest tears and the most fervent
      prayers, to return to an active life:—he contemplated her with an apathetic listlessness—as if
      he were verging,
      when but little past the prime of life, into second childhood. Or if he did
      manifest a scintillation of his former spirit, it was merely to command his wife to leave him
      to his own meditations.
And again did he have recourse to the pipe: in fact he was never easy now save when he
      lulled his thoughts into complete stupefaction by means of the oriental tobacco. Even when, in
      the midst of her earnest prayers, his wife implored him to come forth again into the world—to
       live, in fine, for the sake of his as yet unborn babe, the fire that kindled in his
      eyes was so evanescent that an acute observer could alone perceive the momentary—and only
      momentary—effect which the appeal produced.
The guests had all taken their departure the day after the bridal; and the splendid mansion
      immediately became the scene of silence and of woe.
To all the entreaties of his wife—to all the representations of his favourite page Quentin,
      that he would engage eminent medical assistance, Lord Ravensworth turned a deaf ear, or else
      so far roused himself as to utter a stern refusal, accompanied with a command that he might be
      left alone.
Thus was he rapidly accomplishing his own destruction,—committing involuntary suicide by
      slow, certain, and yet unsuspected means,—even as his brother, the Honourable Gilbert Vernon,
      had declared to the Resurrection Man.
Adeline had no inclination to seek the bustle and excitement of society. Her love of display
      and ostentation was subdued—if not altogether crushed. She was so overwhelmed with sorrow—so
      goaded by the tyranny of Lydia Hutchinson—so desperate by the mere fact of having to submit to
      that oppression, and by the consciousness that she dared not unbosom her cares to a single
      sympathising heart,—that she at times felt as if she were on the point of becoming raving mad,
      and at others as if she could lay herself down and die!
We will afford the reader an idea of the mode of life which the once proud and haughty Lady
      Ravensworth was now compelled to lead beneath the crushing despotism of Lydia Hutchinson.
It was on the seventh morning after the arrival of the latter at Ravensworth Hall.
The clock had struck nine, when Lydia repaired to the apartment of her mistress——her
      mistress!
Until she reached the door, her manner was meek and subdued, because she incurred a chance
      of meeting other domestics in the passages and corridors.
But the moment she entered Adeline's apartment—the moment the door of that chamber closed
      behind her—her manner suddenly changed. No longer meek—no longer subdued—no longer wearing the
      stamp of servitude Lydia assumed a stern expression of countenance—so terrible in a vengeful
      woman—and in an instant clothed herself, as it were, with an appearance of truly fiend-like
      malignity.
Adeline slept.
Approaching the bed, Lydia shook her rudely.
Lady Ravensworth awoke with a start, and then glanced hastily—almost franticly—around.
"Ah! you here again!" she murmured, shrinking from the look of bitter hatred which
      Lydia cast upon her.
"Yes—I am here again," said the vindictive woman. "It is time for you to rise."
"Oh! spare me, Lydia," exclaimed Adeline; "allow me to repose a little longer. I have passed
      a wretched—a sleepless night: see—my pillow is still moist with the tears of anguish which I
      have shed; and it was but an hour ago that I fell into an uneasy slumber! I cannot live thus—I
      would rather that you should take a dagger and plunge it into my heart at once. Oh! leave
      me—leave me to rest for only another hour!"
"No:—it is time to rise, I say," cried Lydia. "It has been my destiny to pass many long
      weary nights in the streets—in the depth of winter—and with the icy wind penetrating through
      my scanty clothing till it seemed to freeze the very marrow in my bones. I have been so
      wearied—so cold—so broken down for want of sleep, that I would have given ten years of my life
      for two hours' repose in a warm and comfortable bed:—but still have I often, in those times,
      passed a whole week without so resting my sinking frame. Think you, then, that I can now
      permit you the luxury of sleep when your body requires it—of repose when your mind
      needs it? No, Adeline—no! I cannot turn you forth into the streets to become a houseless
      wanderer, as I have been:—but I can at least arouse you from the indolent enjoyment of that
      bed of down."
With these words Lydia seized Lady Ravensworth rudely by the wrist, and compelled her to
      leave the couch.
Then the revengeful woman seated herself in a chair, and said in a harsh tone, "Light the
      fire, Adeline—I am cold."
"No—no: I will not be your servant!" exclaimed Lady Ravensworth. "You are
       mine—and it is for you to do those menial offices."
"Provoke me not, Adeline," said Lydia Hutchinson, coolly; "or I will repair straight to the
      servants' hall, and there proclaim the astounding fact that Lord Ravensworth's relapse has
      been produced by the discovery of his wife's frailty ere their marriage."
"Oh! my God—what will become of me?" murmured Adeline, wringing her hands. "Are you a woman?
      or are you a fiend?"
"I am a woman—and one who, having suffered much, knows how to revenge deeply," returned
      Lydia. "You shall obey me—or I will cover you with shame!"
Adeline made no reply; but, with scalding tears trickling down her cheeks, she
      proceeded—yes, she—the high-born peeress!—to arrange the wood in the grate—to heap up the
      coals—and to light the fire.
And while she was kneeling in the performance of that menial task,—while her delicate white
      hands were coming in contact with the black grate,—and while she was shivering in her night
      gear, and her long dishevelled hair streamed over her naked neck and bosom,—there, within a
      few feet of her, sate the menial—the servant, comfortably placed in an arm-chair, and calmly
      surveying the degrading occupation of her mistress.
"I have often—oh! how often—longed for a stick of wood and a morsel of coal to make myself a
      fire, if no larger than sufficient to warm the palms of my almost frost-bitten hands," said
      Lydia, after a short pause; "and when I have dragged my weary limbs past the houses of the
      rich, and have caught sight of the cheerful flames blazing through the area-windows of their
      kitchens, I have thought to myself, 'Oh! for one hour to sit within the influence of that
       genial warmth!' And yet you—you, the
      proud daughter of the aristocracy—recoil in disgust from a task which so many
      thousands of poor creatures would only be too glad to have an opportunity of performing!"
Adeline sobbed bitterly, but made no reply.
The fire was now blazing in the grate: still the high-born peeress was shivering with the
      cold—for ere she could put on a single article of clothing, she was forced to wash the black
      dirt from her delicate fingers.
Then that lady, who—until within a week—had never even done so much as take, with her own
      hands, a change of linen from the cupboard or select a gown from the wardrobe, was compelled
      to perform those duties for herself;—and all the while her servant,—her hired servant, to whom
      she had to pay high wages and afford food and lodging,—that servant was seated in the
      arm-chair, warming herself by the now cheerful fire!
"Do not be ashamed of your occupation, madam," said Lydia. "It is fortunate for you that
      there is a well-stocked cupboard to select from, and a well-provided wardrobe to have recourse
      to. Your linen is of the most delicate texture, and of the most refined work: your feet have
      never worn any thing coarser than silk. For your gowns, you may choose amongst fifty dresses.
      One would even think that your ladyship would be bewildered by the variety of the assortment.
      And yet you are indignant at being compelled to take the trouble to make your selections! For
      how many long weeks and months together have I been forced, at times, to wear the same thin,
      tattered gown—the same threadbare shawl—the same well-darned stockings! And how many thousands
      are there, Adeline, who dwell in rags from the moment of their birth to that of their death!
      Ah! if we could only take the daughters of the working classes, and give them good
      clothing,—enable them to smooth their hair with fragrant oil, and to wash their flesh with
      perfumed soaps,—and provide them with all those accessories which enhance so much the natural
      loveliness of woman, think you not that they would be as attractive—as worthy of homage—as
      yourself? And let me tell you, Adeline, that such black ingratitude as I have encountered at
      your hands, is unknown in the humble cottage:—the poor are not so selfish—so hollow-hearted as
      the rich!"
While Lydia Hutchinson was thus venting her bitter sarcasm and her cutting reproach upon
      Lady Ravensworth, the latter was hurriedly accomplishing the routine of the toilet.
She no longer took pride in her appearance:—she scarcely glanced in the mirror as she combed
      out those tresses which it was Lydia's duty to have arranged;—her sole thought was to escape
      as speedily as possible from that room where insults and indignities were so profusely
      accumulated upon her.
But her ordeal of torture was not yet at its end.
So soon as Lady Ravensworth was dressed, Lydia Hutchinson said in a cool but authoritative
      tone, "Adeline, you will comb out my hair for me now."
"Provoke me not, vile woman—provoke me not beyond the powers of endurance!" almost shrieked
      the unhappy lady; "or I shall be tempted—oh! I shall be tempted to lay violent hands upon you.
      My God—my God! what will become of me?"
"I am prepared to stand the risk of any ebullition of fury on your part," said Lydia, in the
      same imperturbable manner in which she had before spoken. "Lay but a finger upon me to do me
      an injury, and I will attack you—I will assault you—I will disfigure your countenance with my
      nails—I will tear out your hair by handfuls—I will beat your teeth from your mouth;—for I am
      stronger than you—and you would gain nothing by an attempt to hurt me."
"But I will not be your servant!" cried Adeline, fire flashing from her eyes.
"I tended your ladyship when you lay upon the humble couch in my garret, in the agonies of
      maternity," replied Lydia; "and your ladyship shall now wait upon me."
"No—no! You would make me a slave—a low slave—the lowest of slaves!" ejaculated Adeline,
      wildly. "You degrade me in my own estimation—you render me contemptible in my own eyes——"
"And you have spurned and scorned me," interrupted Lydia; "you have made me, too, the lowest
      of slaves, by using me as an instrument to save you from shame;—and now it is time that I
      should teach you—the proud peeress—that I—the humble and friendless woman—have my
      feelings, which may be wounded as well as your own."
"Lydia—I beg you—I implore you—on my knees I beseech you to have mercy upon me!" cried
      Adeline, clasping her hands together in a paroxysm of ineffable anguish, and falling at the
      feet of the stern and relentless woman whom she had wronged.
"I can know no mercy for you!" said Lydia Hutchinson, now speaking in a deep and
      almost hoarse tone, which denoted the powerful concentration of her vengeful passions. "When I
      think of all that I have suffered—when I trace my miseries to their source—and remember how
      happy I might have been in the society of a fond father and a loving brother,—when I reflect
      that it was you—you who led me astray, and having blighted all my prospects—demanding
      even the sacrifice of my good name to your interests,—thrust me away from you with scorn,—when
      I ponder upon all this, it is enough to drive me mad;—and yet you ask for mercy! No—never,
      never! I cannot pity you—for I hate, I abhor you!"
"Do not talk so fearfully, Lydia—good Lydia!" cried Adeline, in a voice of despair, while
      she endeavoured to take the hands of her servant, at whose feet she still knelt.
"Think not to move me with a show of kindness," said Lydia, drawing back her hands in a
      contemptuous manner: "your overtures of good treatment come too late!"
"But I will make amends for the past—I will henceforth consider you as my sister," exclaimed
      Adeline, raising her eyes in an imploring manner towards the vengeful woman. "I will do all I
      can to repair my former ingratitude—only be forbearing with me—if not for my sake, at
      least for the sake of my unborn babe!"
"Your maternal feelings have improved in quality of late," said Lydia, with a scornful curl
      of the lip; "for—as you must well remember—your first babe was consigned to me to be
      concealed in a pond, or thrust into some hole—you cared not how nor where, so long as it was
      hidden from every eye."
"Of all the agonies which you make me endure, detestable woman," ejaculated Adeline, rising
      from her knees in a perfect fury of rage and despair, "that perpetual recurrence to the past
      is the most
      intolerable of all! Tell me—do you want to kill me by a slow and lingering death?
      or do you wish to drive me mad—mad?" she repeated, her eyes rolling wildly, and her
      delicate hands clenching as she screamed forth the word.
The scene was really an awful one—a scene to which no powers of description can possibly do
      justice.
The stern, inflexible tyranny of Lydia Hutchinson forced Lady Ravensworth to pass through
      all the terrible ordeal of the most tearing and heart-breaking emotions.
Did the miserable peeress endeavour to screen herself within the stronghold of a sullen
      silence, the words of Lydia Hutchinson would gradually fall upon her, one after the other,
      with an irritating power that at length goaded her to desperation. Did she meet accusation by
      retort, and encounter reproach with upbraiding, the inveteracy of Lydia's torturing language
      wound her feelings up to such a pitch that it was no wonder she should ask, with an agonising
      scream, whether the avenging woman sought to drive her mad? Or, again, did she endeavour to
      move the heart of her hired servant by self-humiliation and passionate appeal, the coldness,
      or the malignant triumph with which those manifestations were received awoke within her that
      proud and haughty spirit which was now so nearly subdued altogether.
"Do you wish to drive me mad?" Lady Ravensworth had said:—then, when the accompanying
      paroxysm of feeling was past, she threw herself on a chair, and burst into an agony of
      tears.
But Lydia was not softened!
She suffered Adeline to weep for a few minutes; and when the unhappy lady was
      exhausted—subdued—spirit-broken—the unrelenting torturess repeated her command—"You can now
      arrange my hair."
Oh! bad as Adeline was at heart—selfish as she was by nature and by education,—it would have
      moved a savage to have seen the imploring, beseeching look which, through her tears, she cast
      upon Lydia's countenance.
"My hair!" said Lydia, imperatively.
Then Lady Ravensworth rose, and meekly and timidly began to perform that menial office for
      her own menial.
"I never thought," observed Lydia, "while I was a wanderer and an outcast in the
      streets,—as, for instance, on the occasion when I accosted you, in the bitterness of my
      starving condition, in Saint James's Street, and when your lacqueys thrust me back, your
      husband declaring that it was easy to see what I was, and your carriage dashing me
      upon the kerb-stone,—little did I think then that the time would ever be when a
      peeress of England should dress my hair—and least of all that this peeress should be
       you! But when, in your pride, you spurned the worm—you knew not that the day could
      ever possibly come for that worm to raise its head and sting you! Think you that I value any
      peculiar arrangement which you can bestow upon my hair? Think you that I cannot even, were I
      still vain, adapt it more to my taste with my own hands? Yes—certainly I could! But I compel
      you to attend upon me thus—I constitute myself the mistress, and make you the menial, when we
      are alone together—because it is the principal element of my vengeance. It degrades you—it
      renders you little in your own eyes,—you who were once so great—so haughty—and so proud!"
In this strain did Lydia Hutchinson continue to speak, while Lady Ravensworth arranged her
      hair.
And each word that the vindictive woman uttered, fell like a drop of molten lead upon the
      already lacerated heart of the unfortunate Adeline.
At length the ordeal—that same ordeal which had characterised each morning since Lydia
      Hutchinson had become an inmate of Ravensworth Hall—was over; and Adeline was released from
      that horrible tyranny—but only for a short time.
</div></body></text></TEI>