<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="198">

CHAPTER CXCVII.   ELLEN AND KATHERINE.
Turn we now to the farm-house of the Bennets near Hounslow—the residence of Katherine
      Wilmot.
The morning was dry and beautiful—one of those mornings which sometimes cheer us towards the
      end of January, and give us a short foretaste of the approaching spring.
It was nine o'clock, when the door of the farm-house opened, and two young females came
      forth to enjoy the fresh air of a charming day.
These were Ellen Monroe—(for by her maiden name must we continue to call her, as she herself
      maintained it for the present)—and Katherine Wilmot.
Never had Ellen appeared more beautiful; nor Katherine more sweetly interesting.
They had evidently been conversing on a subject which gave them pleasure; and they were both
      intent on continuing the same delightful topic during their walk.
The subject of that discourse had inspired Ellen with emotions of pride, as well as of joy.
      She walked with a dignity and yet an elegance of motion which denoted the vigour of that vital
      system which was so highly developed in her voluptuous style of beauty. The generous and noble
      feelings of the heart shone in the light of her deep blue eyes, and in the animation of that
      countenance where the fair and red were so exquisitely blended. They were indicated, too, by
      the expression of that short and somewhat haughty upper lip which belonged to the classic
      regularity of her features, and in the dilation of the rose-tinted nostrils.
Ellen was a finer and far lovelier creature than Katherine;—but the latter was characterised
      by more of that tender sensibility and touching interest which physiologists deem the
      development of the intellectual system. The eyes were intensely expressive; and over her
      features a soft, pale, and modest light seemed to be shed. Her figure was delicate and slight,
      and contrasted strongly with that luxuriant expansion which constituted the fine and not less
      symmetrical proportions of Ellen.
"I shall really experience deep regret to leave your dwelling-place, dear Katherine,"
      observed Ellen, as they entered a hard and dry pathway leading through the fields; "for even
      at this season, it possesses many attractions superior to the vicinity of a great city."
"In the warmer months it is a beautiful spot," returned Katherine. "But you will not leave
      me to-day? Consider—you have only been here a few hours——"
"Since yesterday morning," exclaimed Ellen, with a smile; "and in that time we have formed a
      friendship which may never, I hope, be interrupted."
"Oh! never," said Katherine warmly. "It was so kind of you to come and find me out in my
      seclusion—so considerate to make me acquainted with all those wonderful events which have
      occurred to my benefactor——"
"Nay—neither kind nor considerate," again interrupted Ellen. "Richard's letter, dated from
      the city of Abrantani on the 10th, and received by my father the day before yesterday,
      enjoined him to send me to see you—to make your acquaintance—to assure myself that you are
      well and happy—and to communicate to you tidings which Richard feels will be welcome to all
      his friends."
"Oh! welcome indeed!" exclaimed Katherine, with grateful enthusiasm. "How much do I owe to
      him—and how worthy is he of that rank which has rewarded his grand deeds! Such a man could not
      long remain a humble individual: his great talents—his noble heart—his fine qualities were
      certain to elevate him above the sphere in which he was born."
"And now will the name of Markham go down to posterity," said Ellen, proudly: "and the glory
      which Richard has thrown around it, will be to some degree shared by all who bear it. Oh! this
      was prophesied to me but a little while ago;—and yet, then how far was I from
      suspecting that the realisation of the prediction was so near at hand, especially too, as that
      prediction was not uttered with any reference to Richard—but to another,—that other
       alluding to himself!"
Katherine cast a glance of surprise towards her companion, whose last words were
      unintelligible to her; and Ellen, apparently recollecting herself, hastened to add, "But I was
      speaking of matters which are yet unknown—yet strange to you. Think no more of my observations
      on that topic. There are times when the soul is lost and bewildered in the contemplation of
      the world's strange events and marvellous vicissitudes; and such has often been the case with
      me during the last few days. It was on the 16th of January that we received the letter which
      imparted us the tidings of Richard's first exploit—the capture of Estella. Oh! how sincerely I
      prayed for his success—and yet I trembled for him! My father, too, had some misgivings; but we
      endeavoured to reassure each other, mutually concealing our fears. Two or three days
      afterwards we received the news of his triumphant entry into Villabella;—another interval of a
      few days, and we had a letter from him, giving us a brief account of the Battle of Piacere.
      Our fears were almost entirely dissipated by the tidings of this glorious achievement; and if
      any doubts yet lingered, they were completely dispelled by the news of the great victory of
      Abrantani. Oh! how well has he earned that coronet which now adorns his brow!—how well does
      that proud title of Marquis become the great, the generous, and the good!"
"Would that his struggles were over, and that the civil war was put an end to in
      Castelcicala!" exclaimed Miss Wilmot—for the news of the great victory beneath the walls of
      Montoni were yet unknown in England.
"I have no fears for the result," said Ellen: "a conqueror has he hitherto been—and a
      conqueror will he remain! Heaven itself prospers him in this undertaking: the wise
      dispensations of Providence are apparent throughout his career in the Grand Duchy. Had the
      first expedition, which landed at Ossore, succeeded, there were great chiefs—Grachia and
      Morosino—who would have taken the lead in the State. But the enterprise failed—and those
      patriots were numbered with the slain. The idea of releasing from their captivity his
      companions in that fatal affair, led Richard to the attack of Estella. He succeeded—and he
      stood alone at the head of the movement. There was not a chief amongst the patriots to dispute
      his title to that elevated situation."
"Yes—the finger of heaven was assuredly visible in all those circumstances which led to my
      benefactor's
      greatness," remarked Katherine. "Methinks that when I see him again, I shall be
      strangely embarrassed in his presence:—instead of addressing him by the familiar name of
       Mr. Markham, my lips must tutor themselves to breathe the formal words 'My
       Lord,' and 'Your Lordship;' and——"
"Oh! you wrong our noble-hearted friend—our mutual benefactor," interrupted Ellen. "Rank and
      distinction—wealth and glory cannot change his heart: he will only esteem them as the
      elements of an influence and of a power to do much good."
The young ladies paused in their conversation, because two persons were approaching along
      the pathway.
A man muffled in a large cloak, and with a countenance of cadaverous repulsiveness scowling
      above the collar, advanced first; and behind him walked a female whose bowed form denoted the
      decrepitude of old age. There was an interval of perhaps a dozen yards between them; for the
      woman was unable to keep pace with the more impatient progress of the man.
"Is this the way, young ladies, to Farmer Bennet's?" demanded the foremost individual, when
      he was within a few feet of Ellen and Katherine.
"It is," replied Kate. "You may see the roof appearing from the other side of yonder
      eminence. Mr. Bennet is not, however, within at this moment: he has gone to a neighbouring
      village on business, and will not return till two o'clock."
"Then you know Farmer Bennet?" exclaimed the Resurrection Man—for he was the individual who
      had addressed the young ladies.
But before Katherine could give any reply, an exclamation of astonishment broke from the
      lips of Ellen, whose eyes had just recognised the countenance of the old hag.
"Well, Miss—do I have the pleasure of meeting you once more?" said the detestable woman,
      with a leer comprehensively significant in allusion to the past: then, as her eyes wandered
      from Ellen's countenance to that of Katherine, she suddenly became strangely excited, and
      exclaimed, "Ah! Miss Wilmot!"
"Is this Miss Wilmot?" demanded the Resurrection Man, with an impatient glance
      towards Katherine, while he really addressed himself to the old hag.
"My name is Wilmot," said Kate, in her soft and somewhat timid tone. "Was it for me that
      your visit to the farm was intended?"
"Neither more nor less, Miss," answered the Resurrection Man. "This person," he continued,
      indicating his horrible companion, "has something important to say to you."
"Yes—and we must speak alone, too," said the hag.
"No!" ejaculated Ellen, hastily and firmly; "that may not be. I am Miss Wilmot's friend—the
      friend, too, of one in whom she places great confidence; and whatever you may have to
      communicate to her cannot be a secret in respect to me."
And, as she uttered these words, she glanced significantly at her young companion.
"Yes," said Kate, who understood the hint conveyed in that look, although she was of course
      entirely ignorant of the motives of Ellen's precaution: "yes—whatever you may wish to
      communicate to me must be told in the presence of my friend."
"But the business is a most delicate one," cried the Resurrection Man.
"Oh! I have no doubt of that," exclaimed Ellen, with a contemptuous smile which the hag
      fully comprehended.
"Do you know this young lady?" asked the Resurrection Man, in an under tone, of the old
      woman, while he rapidly indicated Ellen.
"I know that young lady well," said the hag aloud, and with a meaning glance: "I know you
      well,—do I not, Miss Monroe?"
"I am not disposed to deny the fact," replied Ellen, coolly; "and I can assure you that my
      disposition is as resolute and determined as you have always found it to be. Therefore, if you
      have aught to communicate to Miss Wilmot, say it quickly—or come with us to the farm, where
      you will be more at your ease: but, remember, I do not quit this young lady while you are with
      her."
"You will repent of this obstinacy, Miss—you will repent of this obstinacy," muttered the
      hag.
"It may be so," said Ellen: "nevertheless, menaces will not deter me from my purpose."
"If you thwart me, I can proclaim matters that you would wish unrevealed," retorted the hag,
      but in a whisper apart to Ellen.
"Act as you please," exclaimed this young lady aloud, and with a superb glance of
      contemptuous defiance. "Your impertinence only convinces me the more profoundly of the
      prudence of my resolution to remain with Miss Wilmot."
The hag made no reply: she knew not how to act.
Tidkins was not, however, equally embarrassed. He saw that Ellen was acquainted with the old
      woman's character, and that she entertained suspicions of a nature which threatened to mar the
      object of his visit to that neighbourhood.
"Miss Monroe," he said,—"for such, I learn, is your name,—I beg of you to allow my companion
      a few moments' conversation with your young friend. They need not retire a dozen yards from
      this spot; and your eye can remain upon them."
"No," returned Ellen, positively: "your companion shall have no private conference with Miss
      Wilmot. Miss Wilmot's affairs are no secret to me;—she has voluntarily made me acquainted with
      her past history and her present condition—and she cannot now wish me to remain a stranger to
      the object of your visit, however delicate be the nature of that business."
"I am desirous that Miss Monroe should hear your communications," added Kate.
"I will not speak to Miss Wilmot in the presence of witnesses," said the old hag.
"Then we have nothing farther to prevent us from returning to the farm immediately,"
      exclaimed Ellen; and, taking Katherine's arm, she turned away with a haughty inclination of
      her head.
"Neither need we remain here any longer, Mr. Tidkins," said the hag.
"Tidkins!" repeated Ellen, with a convulsive shudder—for the name reached her ear as she was
      leading her young friend homeward:—"Tidkins!" she murmured, the blood running cold in her
      veins; "my God! what new plot can now be contemplated?"
And she hurried Katherine along the path, as if a wild beast were behind them.
"Do you know those people?" asked Miss Wilmot, alarmed by her companion's tone and
      manner.
"Unfortunately," replied Ellen, in a low voice
      and with rapid utterance,—"unfortunately I can attest that the woman whom we have
      just met, is the vilest of the vile; and the mention of that man's name has revealed to me the
      presence of a wretch capable of every atrocity—a villain whose crimes are of the blackest
      dye—an assassin whose enmity to our benefactor Richard is as furious as it is unwearied. Come,
      Katharine—come: hasten your steps;—we shall not be in safety until we reach the farm."
And the two young ladies hurried rapidly along the path towards the dwelling, every now and
      then casting timid glances behind them.
But the Resurrection Man and the old hag had not thought it expedient to follow.
</div></body></text></TEI>