<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
CHAPTER XLI. MR. GREENWOOD.
ABOUT six o'clock in the evening—ten days after the incident which concluded the preceding
      chapter,—a handsome cabriolet drove up to the door of a house in Spring Gardens.
Down jumped the tiger—an urchin not much bigger than a walking stick—and away went the
      knocker, rat-tat-tat, for upwards of fifteen seconds. A servant in livery opened the door, and
      an elegantly-dressed gentleman, about six or seven and twenty years of age, alighted from the
      vehicle.
This gentleman rushed up stairs to his study, drew forth his cheque-book, wrote an order
      upon his banker for a thousand pounds, enclosed it in an envelope, and immediately despatched
      the letter to Lord Tremordyn by one of his numerous domestics. He had that afternoon lost the
      money to his lordship in some sporting-bet; and, "as it was a debt of honour," he could not
      possibly think of sitting down to dinner, or even pulling off his boots (which, being
      fashionable, pinched him excessively) without settling it.
As soon as he had done this, another servant entered the room, and said, "If you please,
      sir, Mrs. Mangles has called, and is waiting below to see you. She has been here these three
      hours, and wishes very much to say a few words to you, sir."
"What! that bothering upholsterer's wife!" ejaculated the gentleman, in a tone of
      indignation which would have induced a stranger to believe that he was the most persecuted man
      in the world. "Why—her husband's account hasn't been owing quite a year yet; and here she is
      boring from morning to night."
"Please, sir, she says that her husband is locked up in a spunging-house."
"Serve him right!"
"But he is a hard-working sober man——"
"He shouldn't run into debt."
"And he has five children."
"It is really disgusting! these lower orders literally swarm with children!"
"And if you would only pay a quarter of the money, he would get out to-night."
"I won't pay a sixpence till January."
"Then he will be totally ruined, sir, his wife says."
"Well—he must be ruined, then. Go and turn her out, and send up Lafleur."
And the fashionable gentleman, who would not owe a debt of honour for half an hour,
      thought no more of the sum which was due to a tradesman, which had been already owing for
      nearly a year, and which he could have immediately settled without the slightest inconvenience
      to himself.
For this man was rich; and, having got his money in the City (God knows how), had now come
      to the West End to make the most of it.
"Lafleur," said the fashionable gentleman to the French valet, "you must dismiss that fellow
      John to-morrow morning."
"Yes, sir."
"He actually had the impertinence to bring me a message from a dun, while I was in a hurry
      to get dressed for dinner."
"Indeed, sir—you don't say so sir!" ejaculated the valet, who had as much horror of a dun as
      an overseer has of a pauper. "Yes, sir—I will dismiss him to-morrow, sir—and without a
      character too."
"Do, Lafleur. And now to dress. Are the company come?"
"Mr. Chichester and Sir Rupert Harborough are in the drawing-room, sir."
"Oh!" said Mr. Greenwood—for such was the gentleman's name—"very well!"
Having carelessly perused three or four letters which he found upon his table, he repaired
      to his dressing-room, where he washed his hands in a silver basin, while the poor
      upholsterer's wife returned to her husband in the lock-up house, to say that their last hope
      had failed, and that nothing but a debtor's gaol awaited them. Accordingly, while the poor man
      was being carried off to Whitecross Street Prison, Mr. Greenwood repaired to his elegantly
      furnished drawing-room to welcome the guests whom he had invited that day to dinner.
"My dear Sir Rupert," said Mr. Greenwood, "I am delighted to see you. Chichester, how are
      you? Where have you both been for the last six months? Scarcely had I the pleasure of forming
      your acquaintance, when you were off like shots:
       and I have never seen nor heard of you till this morning."
"Upon my honour, I hardly know what we have been doing—or indeed, what we have not
      been doing," ejaculated the baronet. "We have been in Paris and Brussels, and enjoyed all the
      pleasures of the Continent."
"And we found our way into the good graces of the Parisian ladies, and the purses of their
      husbands," observed Chichester, with a complacent smile.
"Ah! ah!" said Mr. Greenwood, laughing. "Trust you both for allowing yourselves to starve in
      a land of plenty."
"And so here we are, come back to England quite fresh and ready for new sport," said
      Chichester. "You see that it is useful to go abroad for a season every now and then.
      Immediately after I passed through the Insolvents' Court, two years ago, I went to Paris for
      six months, and came home again with a new reputation, as it were."
"By the bye, Sir Rupert," exclaimed Mr. Greenwood, "I lost a cool thousand to your
      father-in-law this afternoon at Tattersall's."
"What! does the old lord do things in so spirited a way as that?" cried the baronet.
"Yes—now and then. I believe you and he are not on very good terms? When I asked him after
      you a month or two ago, he appeared to evade the conversation."
"The fact is," said the baronet, "old Lord and Lady Tremordyn pretend that I treat their
      daughter with neglect—just because I cannot and will not be tied to my wife's apron strings. I
      did not want to marry her; but Lady Tremordyn intrigued to catch me; and the old lord came
      down handsome—and so the match was made up."
The baronet did not think of informing his friend that he had stipulated for twenty thousand
      pounds to pay his debts, ere he would do justice to the young and beautiful creature whom he
      had seduced, and whose pathetic appeal to her mother has been already laid before the reader
      in the chapter which treats of the Black Chamber of the General Post Office.
"Do you know what has become of your old flame Diana Arlington?" inquired Mr. Greenwood of
      the baronet, after a pause.
"And was she not your old flame too?" said Sir Rupert, laughing. "I believe that
      when you were plain Mr. George Montague, instead of Mr. Montague Greenwood——"
"Oh! I have assumed the name of Greenwood, remember, because a relation of that name has
      left me a considerable fortune."
"Well—that is a very good story to tell the world, but not friends, my dear fellow," said
      the baronet, coolly. "But we were talking of the Enchantress. I presume she is still under the
      protection of the Earl of Warrington?"
"So I understand," replied Greenwood.
"Well—I must say," continued the baronet, "I always liked Diana; and I dare say we should
      have been together up to the present moment, if it had not been for that infernal affair of
      Markham's."
"Ah! Richard Markham!" ejaculated Mr. Greenwood hastily. "I have heard of him—but never seen
      him."
"I and Chichester were compelled to sacrifice him to save ourselves," observed
      Harborough.
"Yes—yes—it was a pity—a great pity," cried Greenwood, poking the fire violently.
"I wonder what has become of that same Markham?" said Chichester.
"I understand that he lost the greater portion of his property by some unfortunate
      speculation or another, but the nature of which I have never learnt," replied Greenwood.
"And what about this Steam-Packet Company of which you were speaking this morning?" inquired
      Sir Rupert Harborough.
"The fact is, I have got a certain Italian count in tow, and I intend to make him useful. He
      is an emigrant from the Grand Duchy of Castelcicala, having been concerned in some treasonable
      proceedings with Prince Alberto, who is the Grand Duke's nephew, and who has also been
      compelled to fly to some other country. Be it as it may, this Count Alteroni and I became
      acquainted; and, in the course of conversation, he observed that a fortune might be made by
      the establishment of a line of steam-packets between London and Montoni, the capital of
      Castelcicala. He added that he should be very willing to embark his own capital in such an
      enterprise. 'How extraordinary!' I immediately exclaimed: 'I had myself
       entertained the very same idea!' The count was enchanted; and he has already advanced a
      considerable sum."
At this moment dinner was announced; and the three gentlemen proceeded to the apartment in
      which it was served up. The repast consisted of all the luxuries in season, and many
       out of season: the choicest wines were produced; and justice was done to each and
      all, while wit and humour flowed as freely, and sparkled as brightly as the juice of the grape
      itself. The baronet was more affable than ever;—Mr. Chichester related several amusing
      anecdotes of midnight sprees, policemen, knockers, station-houses, and magistrates;—and Mr.
      Greenwood explained his plans relative to the steam-packets.
"I should very much like to have you both in the Direction," said Mr. Montague Greenwood,
      when he had terminated his elucidations: "but I have learnt that this Richard Markham, of whom
      we have been talking, is acquainted with the count; and if he saw your names connected with
      the affair, he would instantly blow upon it. I should then have the count upon me for the
      fifteen thousand pounds he has already lodged in my hands."
"Let us write an anonymous letter to the count, and inform him that Markham has been
      convicted at the Old Bailey," suggested Chichester.
"No—no," ejaculated Greenwood emphatically: "you have injured that young man enough
      already."
"And what do you care about him?" cried Chichester. "You said just now that you had never
      seen him."
"I did—and I repeat the assertion," answered Greenwood; then, in a very serious tone, he
      added, "and I will beg you both to remember, gentlemen, that if you wish to co-operate with me
      in any of those speculations which I know so well how to manage, you will leave Mr. Richard
      Markham alone; for I have certain private reasons for being rather anxious to do him a service
      than an injury."
"Well, I will not in any way interfere with your good intentions," said the baronet.
"Nor I," observed Chichester.
"And as it is impossible for you to enter my Steam-Packet Company," added Mr. Greenwood, "I
      will let you into another good thing which I have in view, and in which a certain banker is
      concerned. To tell you the real truth, this banker has been insolvent for some time; and if
      his father had not advanced him about fifty thousand pounds three years ago, he would have
      gone to smash. As it
       was, the Lords of the Treasury got hold of his real position, by some means or
      another—he never could divine how; and they refused a tender which he sent in for a certain
      money contract—I don't know exactly what. Now his petition is more desperate than
      ever, and he and I are going to do an admirable stroke of business. I will let you both into
      it."
We need scarcely remind the reader that the banker now alluded to was the writer of one of
      the letters perused by the Examiner's clerks in the Black Chamber.
The conversation between the three gentlemen was proceeding very comfortably, when a servant
      entered the room, and, handing his master a card upon a silver tray, said, "This gentleman,
      sir, requests to be allowed to see you, if perfectly convenient."
"The Count Alteroni!" exclaimed Mr. Greenwood. "What the devil could have brought him to
      London at this time of night? John—show him into the study—there is a good fire for him; and
      if that won't warm his heart, perhaps a bottle of Burgundy will."
The servant left the room; and in a few moments Mr. Greenwood hastened to join the count in
      the elegant apartment which was denominated "the study."
"My dear sir, I have to apologise for calling thus late," said the count; "but the truth is
      that I had a little business which brought me up to town to-day, and in this neighbourhood
      too; and I thought——"
"Pray offer no excuses, my dear count," interrupted Mr. Greenwood. "The truth is, I wished
      to see you very particularly—upon a matter not altogether connected with our enterprise——"
"Indeed," said the count; "you interest me. Pray explain yourself."
"In the first place, allow me to ask whether the ladies are yet acquainted with the
      undertaking in which you have embarked?"
"Yes—I acquainted them with the fact this very morning."
"And do they approve of it?"
"They approve of every thing of which I think well, and disapprove of all that I abhor."
"And do they know that I am the projector and principal in the enterprise?" demanded
      Greenwood.
"They are acquainted with every thing," answered the count. "Indeed, they have formed of you
      the same exalted opinion which I myself entertain. It would be strange if they had not. We met
      you at the house of Lord Tremordyn; and that nobleman spoke in the highest possible terms of
      you. But what connection exists between all those questions which you have put to me, and the
      matter concerning which you desired to see me?"
"I am not sure that I ought to explain myself at present, nor to you in the first
      instance," was the answer, delivered with some embarrassment of manner: "at all events I
      should wish you to know a little more of me, and to have some reason to thank me for the
      little service which I shall have the means of rendering you, in enabling you to treble your
      capital."
The count appeared mystified; and Mr. Greenwood continued:—
"I had the pleasure of seeing the amiable countess and her lovely daughter many times last
      summer at the house of Lord Tremordyn; and no one could know the Signora Isabella without
      being forcibly struck by her personal and mental qualifications. To render myself agreeable to
      Miss Isabella would be the height of my earthly happiness. You will pardon my presumption;
      but——"
Mr. Greenwood ceased, and looked at the count to ascertain the effect which his words had
      produced.
The honourable and open-hearted Italian was not averse to this proposition. He considered
      his own affairs and prospects in Castelcicala to be so desperate that he was bound to make the
      best provision he could for his daughter in a free, enlightened, and hospitable nation. Mr.
      Greenwood was good looking, moving in the best society, well spoken of by a peer of the realm
      (who, by the way, merely judged of Greenwood's character by the punctuality with which he paid
      his gambling debts), and evidently immensely rich;—his manners were elegant, and his taste
      refined;—and, in a word, he might be called a most eligible suitor for the hand of the count's
      daughter. Not being over-well skilled in affairs of the heart himself, the count had not
      noticed the attachment which decidedly existed between Isabella and Richard Markham; and it
      never for a moment struck him that his daughter might manifest the most powerful repugnance to
      Mr. Greenwood.
"I have no doubt," said he, after a long pause, "that Isabella will feel highly flattered by
      your good opinion of her. Indeed, I shall inform her without delay of the manner in which you
      have expressed yourself."
"My dear sir," interrupted Greenwood hastily, "in the name of heaven tell the signora
      nothing at all about our present conversation. Her delicacy would be offended. Rather give me
      an opportunity of making myself better known to your daughter."
"I understand you. Come and pass a week or two with us at Richmond. We have not a soul
      staying with us at the present moment, Mr. Markham, who was our last guest, having returned to
      his own abode about ten days ago."
"This is a busy time with me," began Mr. Greenwood; "and I could scarcely spare a week with
      justice to yourself and my own interests——"
"True," interrupted the count. "I will bring the ladies up to town at the beginning of the
      new year. We have a very pressing invitation from the Tremordyns, and I will avail myself of
      it."
Mr. Greenwood expressed his gratitude to the count for the favour which his suit thus
      received; and in a few minutes the Italian noble took his leave, more than ever convinced of
      the honour, wealth, and business-like habits of Mr. Greenwood.
"There," said the man of the world, as he once more seated himself at the table in the
      dining-room, where he had left the baronet and Chichester, "I have not passed the last hour
      unprofitably. I have not only demanded the hand of the count's lovely daughter, but have also
      persuaded the count to pay a few weeks' visit to your father-in-law, Lord Tremordyn," he
      added, addressing Sir Rupert.
"And what good do you propose by the latter arrangement?" demanded the baronet.
"I shall get the count's family at a house which Richard Markham stands no chance of
      visiting: for even if the count asked him to call upon him there, Markham would refuse,
      because he is sure to have read or heard that you, Sir Rupert, have married Lady Cecilia
      Huntingfield, and he would be afraid of meeting you at Lord Tremordyn's
      residence."
"And why should you be so anxious to separate the count from Markham, since Chichester and I
      are not to be in the Steam-packet concern?"
"Because I myself could not, for certain reasons, visit the count's family if I stood the
      chance of meeting that same Richard Markham."
Mr. Greenwood then immediately changed the conversation, and pushed the bottle briskly
      about.
      
</div></body></text></TEI>