<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="170">
CHAPTER CLXIX.   THE PURSUIT.
We must now return to the Blossom—the lighter which had only arrived at Mossop's
      wharf the night before the incidents of the last chapter occurred.
When the boat which conveyed the pirates to Gravesend had pushed away from the
       Fairy at day-break, as already described, the Black, who was cleaning the deck of
      the Blossom, cast from beneath his brows a rapid and scrutinising glance at the
      countenances of the four men who were seated in that skiff.
As soon as the boat was out of sight, the Black hastened down into the after-cabin of the
       Blossom, where a person was lying fast asleep in bed.
The Black shook this person violently by the shoulder, and awoke him.
"I have found him, sir,—I have found him!" cried the Black.
"Indeed!" cried Markham, starting up, and rubbing his eyes. "Where? where?"
"He has just gone with three other men in a boat, down the river," answered Morcar; "and one
      of these men is him that spoke to Benstead last night."
"Then they both belong to the Fairy?" exclaimed Richard.
"Both," replied Morcar; "at least they both came from it just now."
"Go and rouse Benstead," said Markham; "and in the meantime I will get up."
The gipsy, who had so well disguised himself as a man of colour, hastened to the cuddy where
      Benstead was wrapped in the arms of Morpheus.
The police-officer was delighted, when awakened and made acquainted with Morcar's discovery,
      to find that the Resurrection Man had been thus recognised; and he lost no time in dressing
      himself.
The gipsy and Benstead afterwards proceeded to Richard's cabin, where they found our hero
      just completing his hasty toilet.
"Thus far our aims are accomplished," said Markham, when they were all three assembled. "It
      has turned out exactly as I anticipated. Morcar, by aid of his disguised appearance, was
      enabled to keep a sharp look out on all the vessels; while the report which you circulated
      that he was deaf and dumb prevented him from being questioned. Had Tidkins himself seen Morcar
      as closely as we are to him now, he would not have known him."
"My suspicions, too, are fully confirmed," observed Benstead. "The moment I saw that feller
      hanging about us last night, I suspected he was up to no good. But how I managed to pump
       him, when he doubtless thought that I was the soft-pated one! By my short,
      evasive, or mysterious answers, I allowed him to think that the Blossom was no better
      than she should be; and then I saw by his manners and language at once, that he was a pirate.
      But when I dropped a hint about wanting two or three hands for a good thing which I had in
      view, how eager the chap was to enlist himself and his pal in the business!"
"And to-morrow night they are coming to talk over the matter with you?" said Richard, half
      interrogatively.
"To-morrow night, or the night after," returned Benstead. "The pal that the man spoke of is
      sure to be Tidkins, since our friend Morcar saw the villains leave the Fairy
      together."
"But there were two other men in the boat," observed the gipsy.
"You say that they sculled the boat round to the Fairy, from some place higher up
      the river?" said Richard.
"Yes. But I could not see where they came from, as it was nearly dark when they got
      alongside the Fairy."
"Well," exclaimed Benstead, "it is very clear that those two men who came in the boat, don't
      belong to the Fairy; but that Tidkins and the person who spoke to me last night do. I
      should think there's no doubt about Tidkins being the pal that the man alluded to."
"Not the slightest," said Markham. "And yet, to make assurance doubly sure, we will not
      alter the plan which we laid down yesterday afternoon when we first came on board the lighter.
      You, Benstead, must remain spokesman—the master, in fact, of the Blossom; you,
      Morcar, will continue a deaf and dumb Black," continued Richard, with a smile; "and I must
      keep close in this cabin until the moment of action arrives. If, to-morrow night or the night
      after, that man should bring Tidkins with him, our object is accomplished at once: if he bring
      a stranger, our precautions must be strictly preserved, and we must devise a means of seizing
      the miscreant on board the Fairy or any other lighter to which we can trace him."
This advice was agreed to by Benstead and Morcar; and while Richard remained below, the
      others took their turns in watching upon the deck.
But all that day passed; and the pirates did not come back to the Fairy—they being
      occupied in the manner related in the last chapter.
Morcar undertook to keep watch during the night; but hour after hour stole away,—another day
      dawned, and still the Fairy was occupied only by the woman whom the pirates had left
      behind.

That day also passed; and it was not until midnight that Morcar's attention was
      attracted towards the Fairy. Then a boat rowed alongside of the pirate-barge.
The night was pitch dark—so dark that Morcar could not see what was going on in the
      direction of the Fairy: but his ears were all attention.
He was enabled to discover, by means of those organs, that the boat transferred one or more
      of its living freight (but he could not tell how many) to the Fairy: then a brief
      conversation was carried on in low whispers, but not a distinct word of which reached the
      gipsy. At length the boat pushed off, and rowed away up the river.
Morcar stood upon the deck of the Blossom for a few minutes, attentively listening
      to catch a sound of any thing that might be passing on board the pirate lighter: but all
      continued silent in that quarter.
Then Morcar descended to the cabin, where Richard and the policeman were waiting.
To them he communicated the few particulars just narrated.
"It is clear that the pirates have returned from their expedition, whatever it might be,"
      said our hero; "and most probably Tidkins and his friend have just been put on board their
      lighter. We must contrive to watch their motions; and should they keep their appointment with
      you, Benstead, to-morrow night, our enterprise will speedily be brought to a conclusion."
"I will keep my watch now on deck till three o'clock," said the policeman; "and Morcar may
      turn in."
This was done; Richard also retired to rest; and the night passed away without any further
      adventure.
But at day-break Morcar, who had again resumed the watch, observed some activity on board
      the Fairy. The Buffer and his wife were in fact making evident preparations for
      departure. They raised the mast by means of the windlass; they shook out the sail; fixed the
      tiller in the rudder, and performed the various preliminaries in a most business-like
      manner.
Morcar speedily communicated these circumstances to Benstead and Markham; and these three
      held a rapid consultation in the after-cabin of the Blossom.
"You are certain you saw no one but that man who first spoke to Benstead, and the woman?"
      asked Markham.
"Not a soul," answered Morcar. "But that is no reason why Tidkins should not be below."
"Certainly not. He has numerous reasons to conceal himself."
"But what is to be done?" said Morcar.
"Benstead must go and speak to the man," observed Richard, after a pause.
The policeman immediately left the cabin.
He crossed the barges and approached the Fairy, which was just ready to put
      off.
"Holloa! my friend," cried Benstead: "you seem busy this morning?"
"Yes—we're going up above bridge a short way," answered the Buffer: "the tide is just
      turning in our favour now, and we haven't a moment to spare."
"And the appointment with me?"
"Oh! that must stand over for a day or two. How long do you mean to remain here?"
"Till I get a couple of good hands to help me in the matter I alluded to the night before
      last," answered Benstead.
"Well, I don't like to disappoint a good feller—and that you seem to be," said the
      Buffer, "but I really can't say whether I shall be able to do any thing with you, or not. I've
      something else on hand now—and I think I shall leave the river altogether."
"You speak openly at all events," said Benstead. "It's very annoying, though; for I relied
      upon you. Can't your pal—the man that you spoke of, you know—have a hand in this matter with
      me?"
"No," answered the Buffer shortly. "But I'll tell you who'll put you up to getting the
      assistance you want:—and that's Mossop's foreman. He's a cautious man, and won't meet you half
      way in your conversation; but you can make a confidant of him, and if he can't help you, he's
      sure not to sell you. So now good bye, old feller; and good luck to you."
With these words the Buffer loosened the rope that held the Fairy alongside the
      barge next to it; and then by means of a boat-hook he pushed the lighter off.
"Good bye," exclaimed Benstead; and he hastened back to the Blossom.
"Now what must be done?" asked Morcar, when these particulars were communicated to him and
      Richard.
"It seems clear to me that these men have endangered themselves by something they have just
      been doing," observed Benstead; "and so they're sheering off as fast as they can."
"And most likely the Resurrection Man is concealed on board the Fairy," added
      Markham. "We must follow them—we must follow them, at any rate!"
"If we take our skiff and pursue them, they will immediately entertain some suspicion," said
      Benstead; "and if you go, sir, the Resurrection Man will recognise you the moment he
      catches a glimpse of you."
"We have no alternative, my good friends," observed Richard. "Let us all three follow them
      in our skiff: we will dog them—we will watch them; and if they attempt to land, we will board
      them."
"Be it so," said Benstead.
This plan was immediately put into operation.
The skiff was lowered: Markham, the policeman, and the gipsy leapt into it; the two latter
      pulled the oars; and our hero, muffled in a pilot coat, with the collar of which he concealed
      his countenance as much as possible, sate in the stern.
"Just keep the lighter in view—and that's all," said Richard. "So long as it does not show
      signs of touching at any place on shore, we had better content ourselves with following it,
      till we are assured that Tidkins is actually on board."
"Certainly, sir," answered Benstead. "We might only get ourselves into trouble by forcibly
      entering the Fairy, unless we knew that we should catch the game we're in search
      of."
The rowers had therefore little more to do than just play with their oars, as the tide bore
      the skiff along with even a greater rapidity than the lighter, although the latter proceeded
      with tolerable speed, in consequence of being empty, and having a fair breeze with it. Thus,
      when the boat drew too near the barge, the rowers backed their oars; and by this manœuvring
      they maintained a convenient distance.

On board the lighter, the Buffer and his wife were too busy with the management of
      their vessel—a task to which they were not altogether equal—to notice the watch and pursuit
      instituted by the little boat.
In the manner described, the two parties pursued their way up the narrow space left by the
      crowds of shipping for the passage of vessels.
The Tower was passed—that gloomy fortalice which has known sighs as full of anguish and
      hearts as oppressed with bitter woe as ever did the prisons of the Inquisition, or the
      dungeons of the Bastille.
Then the Custom House was slowly left behind; and Billingsgate, world-renowned for its
      slang, was passed by the pursued and the pursuer.
To avoid the arch of London Bridge the Buffer lowered his mast; and then midway between that
      and Southwark Bridge, his intentions became apparent.
He was about to put in at a wharf on the Surrey side, where a large board on the building
      announced that lighters were bought or sold.
"Pull alongside the Fairy," cried Markham: "we must board her before she touches
      the wharf, or our prey may escape."
Benstead and Morcar plied the oars with a vigour which soon brought the boat within a few
      yards of the Fairy. The Buffer's attention was now attracted to it for the first
      time; but he did not immediately recognise the two rowers, because they had their backs turned
      towards the lighter.
"I should know that man!" suddenly exclaimed Richard, as he contemplated the Buffer, who was
      standing at the tiller, and who had his eyes fixed with some anxiety upon the boat, which was
      evidently pulling towards him.
"Who?" asked Benstead.
"That man on board the lighter," was the reply.
Benstead cast a glance behind him, and said, "He's the man that spoke to me."
"I remember him—the villain!—I recollect him now!" cried Richard. "Yes—he is a companion in
      iniquity of Anthony Tidkins: it was he who brought me that false message concerning my
      brother, which nearly cost me my life at Twig Folly!"
These words Richard spoke aloud; but they were unintelligible to his two companions, who
      were unacquainted with the incident referred to.
They had no time to question him, nor had he leisure to explain his meaning to them; for at
      that moment the boat shot alongside of the lighter.
"Markham!" cried the Buffer, in alarm, as he recognised our hero who immediately sprang upon
      the deck.
"You know me?" said Richard: "and I have ample reason to remember you. But my present
      business regards another; and if you offer no resistance, I will not harm you."
"Who do you want?" asked the Buffer, somewhat reassured by these words.
"Your companion," replied Richard.
"What! my wife?" ejaculated the Buffer, with a hoarse laugh. "Do you know this gen'leman,
      Moll?"
"Cease this jesting," cried Richard sternly; "and remain where you are. Benstead, take care
      that he does not move from the deck: Morcar, come you with me."
The Buffer cast looks of surprise and curiosity upon Richard's companions, who, having made
      the boat fast to the lighter, had leapt upon the deck.
"What! you, my fine feller?" cried Wicks, addressing himself to Benstead. "I suppose, then,
      this is all a reg'lar plant;—and you're——"
"I am a police officer," answered Benstead coolly. "But, as far as I know, we have no
      business with either you or your wife—since you say that this woman is your wife."
"Well—so much the better," remarked the Buffer. "And I also suppose your negro is about as
      deaf and dumb as I am?"
"About," replied Benstead, unable to suppress a smile. "Keep quiet, and no harm will happen
      to you."
"But who is it that you do want?" asked the Buffer.
"Your friend Tidkins—better known as the Resurrection Man."
"Then you won't find him here."
In the meantime, Richard and the gipsy had descended into the after-cabin; and they now
      re-appeared upon the deck, their search having been fruitless.
"He is not there," said Richard. "Let us look forward."
He and Morcar visited the cuddy; but the Resurrection Man was evidently not in the
      lighter.
They returned to the after deck; and questioned the Buffer.
"I don't know where Tidkins is," was the reply of that individual, who did not dare reveal
      the truth relative to the expedition to the plague ship, and its result; "and even if I did,
      it is not likely that I should blab any thing that would get us both into a scrape, since I
      see that the whole thing with you is a trap, and that man there," he added, pointing to
      Benstead, "is a policeman."
"Now, listen," exclaimed Richard. "It is in my power to have you arrested this moment for
      being concerned in a plot against my life—you know how and when; but I pledge you my honour
      that if you will satisfy me relative to Anthony Tidkins, we will depart, and leave you
      unmolested. I scorn treachery, even among men of your description; and I will not offer you a
      bribe. But I require to know how he came to separate from you—for I am convinced that he was
      with you a day or two ago."
"Well, sir," said the Buffer, who had found time, while Richard thus spoke, to collect his
      ideas and invent a tale, "Tidkins, me, and some other pals went on a little excursion the
      night afore last—you don't want me to get myself into a scrape by saying what the business
      was; but we fell in with a Thames police boat some way down the river; and Tidkins had a swim
      for it."
"Did he escape?" demanded Richard.
"Yes," answered the Buffer, boldly. "I saw him get safe on land; and then of course he took
      to his heels."
"This looks like the truth, sir," said Benstead aside to our hero. "These fellows have been
      baulked in some scheme—the river-police have got scent of 'em—and that's the reason why this
      man gets off so quick with his lighter."
"And as I do not wish to punish this man for the injury he has done me," said Richard,
      glancing towards the Buffer,—"as I can afford to forgive him,—our expedition seems to
      have arrived at its close."
"Without success, too, sir," added Morcar.

"We shall now leave you," continued Richard, turning towards the Buffer; "but rest
      well assured that, though we forbear from molesting you, justice will some day
      overtake you in your evil and wayward courses."
"That's my look out," cried the Buffer, brutally.
Markham turned away in disgust, and descended to the boat, followed by Morcar and
      Benstead.
"We will now proceed to the wharf where I hired the Blossom," said Richard, when
      they had pushed off from the Fairy; "and, my good friends, there I shall dispense
      with your further services. The owner of the lighter can send his men to Rotherhithe to bring
      it up, and thus save us a task which is somewhat beyond our skill."
"It is a great pity we have failed to capture the miscreant," observed Morcar.
"But your reward has not been the less fairly and honestly earned," replied Richard; "as I
      will prove to you when we land."
</div></body></text></TEI>