<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="244">

CHAPTER CCXLIII.   THE FIGHT.—THE RUINED GAMESTER.
The day on which the fight was to take place between the Birmingham Bruiser and the
      Haggerstone Pet, now drew near.
Great was the excitement of the sporting world on the occasion; and all those, who were not
      in the secret of the "cross," felt confident that the Bruiser must win.
Indeed the odds had risen in his favour from five to four, to eleven to five. There were
      numerous betters, and the takers were willing.
The following paragraph appeared in Bell's Life, on the Sunday preceding the
      contest:—
"The Approaching Fight.—The mill between the Birmingham Bruiser and the Haggerstone
      Pet is to come off on Thursday next, at Wigginton Bottom, near Snodsnook Park, in Essex. We
      are assured by persons who have seen the Bruiser in training at Bexley Heath, and the Pet at
      Cheshunt, that the men are in first-rate condition, and full of confidence. The Bruiser has
      vowed that if he is beaten in this fight, he will retire altogether from the Ring; but his
      friends do not for a moment apprehend that the result will be such as to occasion such a step.
      The admirers of this truly British sport have begun to flock to the neighbourhood of the scene
      of action; and every bed at Wigginton is already let. In fact we know of two guineas having
      been offered and refused for a mere 'shake-down' in the tap of the Green Lion, at
      that beautiful little village. The odds in favour of the Bruiser have risen within these few
      days to eleven to five. The Bruiser's backers are not known: they are most likely some swell
      nobs, who prefer keeping out of sight. Some thousands of pounds will change hands next
      Thursday."
On the appointed day Lord Dunstable drove his friends Egerton, Chichester, Harborough, and
      Cholmondeley, down to Wigginton in his four-in-hand—an equipage that he had only very recently
      set up, and which had been purchased and was still maintained by the coin extracted from the
      pocket of the credulous son of the deceased outfitter.
The scene of the contest was thronged with as miscellaneous a collection of persons as could
      possibly be gathered together. There were specimens of all classes, from the peer down to the
      beggar. The fashionable exquisite was jostled by the greasy butcher;—the sporting tradesman
      was crushed between two sweeps;—the flat was knocked down by one black-leg and picked up by
      another;—the country-squire was elbowed by the horse-chaunter;—the newspaper reporter was
      practically overwhelmed by the influence of the "press;"—and, in short, there was such a
      squeezing that many who had paid a guinea to be conveyed thither, would have gladly given ten
      to be removed away again.
Presently a tremendous shout of applause welcomed the arrival of Lord Snodsnook's carriage,
      from which leapt the Haggerstone Pet, who was immediately surrounded by his friends; and
      shortly afterwards a "slap-up turn-out," "tooled" by a sporting publican of the West End, to
      whom it belonged, brought the Birmingham Bruiser upon the scene of action, amidst renewed
      vociferations and another rush of supporters.
The preliminaries being all settled, the combatants stripped, entered the ring, attended by
      their seconds, and then shook hands. The newspapers subsequently declared that no two
      pugilists ever "peeled" better, nor seemed more confident.
It is not our purpose, however, to dwell upon the disgusting exhibition:—those brutal
      displays are loathsome to us, and, to our mind, are a disgrace to the English character.
Suffice it to say, that the Birmingham Bruiser was quite able to beat the Haggerstone Pet,
      if he had so chosen: but he had made his appearance there on purpose to lose. For upwards of
      twenty rounds, however, he secured to himself the advantage; and the general impression
      amongst the uninitiated was that he must win. Those who were in the secret accordingly bet
      heavily upon the Haggerstone Pet; and we need hardly say that, as Egerton backed the Bruiser,
      he found several of his dear friends perfectly willing to accept the odds at his hands.
By the twenty-fifth round, the Bruiser began to grow "groggy," and to hit at random. Of
      course this was mere pretence on his part: but it gave the Pet renewed courage; and in
      proportion as the latter acquired confidence, the former seemed to lose ground rapidly.
Many of the backers of the Bruiser now exhibited elongating countenances; and, when that
      champion was thrown heavily at the thirty-first round, his former supporters manifested a
      desperate inclination to "hedge." Egerton, however, remained confident in favour of the
      Bruiser; but then he knew nothing about prize-fighting—it was the first combat of the kind he
      had ever seen in his life—and, even if he had been inclined to hedge his bets, he would have
      found no persons willing at this stage of the proceeding to afford him the chance.
The Bruiser played his game so well, that even the most experienced in the pugilistic
      science were unable to detect the fraud that was being practised upon them; and thousands were
      deceived into a belief that he was really doing his best to win.
At the fortieth round he fell, apparently through sheer weakness; and it was highly
      ludicrous to behold the discomfited looks of those who had bet most heavily upon him.
He stood up for three rounds more; but time was called in vain for the forty-fourth—and the
      Haggerstone Pet was declared to be the conqueror.
The Bruiser seemed to be in a horrible plight: for some time he remained motionless upon the
      ground, obstinately resisting all the efforts that were made to recover him, until one of his
      friends thrust a huge pinch of snuff up his nose—and then he was compelled to sneeze.
He was now borne to the Green Lion at Wigginton, and put to bed. A surgeon in Sir
      Rupert Harborough's pay volunteered his services to attend upon him; and, although the Bruiser
      had nothing more serious the matter with him than a few bruises and a couple of black eyes,
      the medical gentlemen assured the multitudes who flocked to the inn, that "the poor fellow
      could not possibly be worse." A great deal of medicine was also purchased at the village
      apothecary's shop; but it was all quietly thrown away by the surgeon, and the Bruiser was
      regaled, in the privacy of his chamber, with a good cut off a sirloin of beef and a bottle of
      Port-wine.
Lord Dunstable, Mr. Chichester, Colonel Cholmondeley, and Sir Rupert Harborough divided
      equally amongst themselves the money won by this "cross;"—they sacked a thousand pounds each,
      Egerton alone having lost fifteen hundred upon the fight.

The five friends returned to town in his lordship's four-in-hand, and dined that
      evening at Limmer's, where Egerton speedily drowned the recollection of his heavy losses in
      bumpers of champagne and claret.
The party afterwards repaired to Crockford's; but just as they were ascending the steps,
      they beheld one of the waiters in altercation with a person of emaciated form, haggard
      countenance, and shabby attire, but who had evidently seen better—far better days; for his
      language was correct, and even beneath his rags there was an air of gentility which no tatters
      could conceal—no penury altogether subdue.
"Come, Major, none of this nonsense—it won't do here," said the waiter, in an insolent tone.
      "Be off with you—there's gentlemen coming in."
"I care not who hears me!" cried the person thus addressed: "Mr. Crockford is within—I know
      he is; and I must see him."
"No—he's not here—and he never comes now," returned the waiter. "If you don't make yourself
      scarce, I'll call a policeman. Pray walk in, my lord—walk in, gentlemen."
These last words were addressed to Lord Dunstable and his party; but, instead of entering
      the Club, they remained on the steps to hear the issue of the dispute.
"Call a policeman—oh! do," ejaculated the Major. "I wish you would—for I should at least
      have a roof over my head to-night; whereas I now stand the chance of wandering about the
      streets. But you dare not give me in charge—no, you dare not! You know that I should expose
      all the infamy of this den before the magistrate to-morrow morning. However—in one word, will
      you deliver my message to Mr. Crockford?"
"I tell you that he is not here," repeated the waiter, insolently.
"Did you give him my note?" asked the Major, in an imploring tone.
"Yes—and he said there was no answer," replied the menial, placing his thumbs in the
      arm-holes of his waistcoat.
"My God! no answer for me!" cried the miserable man, in a voice of bitter despair.
      "No answer for me—and I lost so much in his house! Surely—surely he could spare a
      guinea from the thousands which he has received of me? I only asked him for a guinea—and he
      does not condescend to answer me!"
"Well, I tell you what it is," said the waiter, perceiving that not only Lord Dunstable's
      party lingered upon the steps, but that there was also another listener—a gentleman in a
      military cloak—standing at a short distance:—"if you will go away now, I'll give you
      half-a-crown out of my own pocket, and I will undertake that Mr. Crockford shall send you up a
      sovereign to-morrow."
"God knows with what reluctance I accept that miserable trifle from you!" exclaimed
      the unhappy man, tears rolling down his cheeks, as he extended his hand for the pittance
      offered.
At the same instant Egerton, who was much moved by all he had just overheard, drew forth his
      purse with the intention of presenting five sovereigns to the poor Major: but the waiter,
      perceiving his intention, hastened to drop the half-crown into the miserable wretch's palm
      with a view to get rid of him at once;—for the domestic wisely argued to himself that every
      guinea which Egerton might give away would be so much lost to his master's bank up-stairs.
The half-crown piece had just touched the Major's hand, when the individual in the cloak
      sprang forward—seized it—threw it indignantly in the servant's face—and, dragging the Major
      away from the door, exclaimed, "No—never shall it be said that a soldier and an officer
      received alms from an insolent lacquey! Mine be the duty of relieving your wants."
And, leading the Major a few paces up the street, the stranger bade him enter a carriage
      that was waiting, and into which he immediately followed him.
The servant closed the door, received some whispered instructions from his master, and got
      up behind the vehicle, which immediately rolled away at a rapid pace.
But to return to Lord Dunstable and his party.
The moment that the individual in the cloak sprang forward in the manner described, and the
      light of the hall lamps streamed full upon his countenance, both Harborough and Chichester
      uttered ejaculations of surprise, and hastened precipitately into the Club, followed by
      Dunstable, Egerton, and Cholmondeley.
"What's the matter?" demanded Dunstable, when the baronet and Chichester were overtaken on
      the stairs: "and who's that person?"
"The Prince of Montoni," replied Harborough, whose countenance was very pale.
"Yes," said Chichester, hastily; "we know him well—and, as he is very particular in his
      notions, we did not wish him to see us coming here. But, enough of that—let us adjourn to the
      Hazard Room."
The conversation between the Major and the waiter, displaying as it did a fearful instance
      of the results of gaming, had made a deep impression upon Albert Egerton; and for some time he
      was thoughtful and serious.
But Dunstable attacked him so adroitly with the artillery of flattery—the waiter offered him
      claret so frequently—the excitement of the play appeared so agreeable—and the fear of losing
      ground in the good opinion of his aristocratic acquaintances was so strong in his mind, that
      he seized the dice-box, staked his money, lost as usual, and was conducted home in a state of
      intoxication at about half-past three in the morning.
In the meantime the unfortunate Major Anderson—for such was his name—had received
      substantial proofs of that goodness of heart which prompted the Prince of Montoni to espouse
      his cause against the brutal insolence of Crockford's waiter.
Immediately after the carriage rolled away from the corner of St. James's Street, Richard
      drew forth his pocket-book, and placed a bank-note, accompanied by his card, in the Major's
      hand.
"By means of this temporary relief, sir," he said, "you can place yourself in a somewhat
      more comfortable position than that in which I deeply regret to find you; and, when you feel
      inclined to see me again, be good enough to write me a note to that effect, so that I may call
      upon you. For, if it would not be impertinently prying into your affairs, I should wish to
      learn the sad narrative of those reverses
      which have so reduced a gentleman of your rank and station."
"Oh! sir—whoever you are," exclaimed the Major—for it was too dark to permit him to read his
      benefactor's card,—"how can I ever sufficiently thank you for this noble—this generous
      conduct? But think not that your bounty will have been bestowed in vain—think not that I would
      risk one sixpence of this sum—whatever be its amount—at the gaming-table! Oh! my God—who would
      ever play again, that had been in such misery as I? No, sir—no: I would rather throw myself
      headlong from one of the bridges into the silent waters of the Thames, than enter the
      gamblers' den!"
"Then let me tell you frankly," said Markham, much moved by the touching sincerity of the
      ruined officer's tone and manner,—"let me tell you frankly that my object, in wishing to see
      you again, was to satisfy myself that you had in reality abjured the detestable vice which has
      beggared you, and that you are deserving of all I am prepared to do for your benefit."
"To-morrow afternoon, sir," answered the Major, "I will take the liberty of writing to you;
      for by that time I shall once more be the possessor of some humble lodging. And now, with your
      permission, I will alight here."
Richard pulled the check-string; and the carriage stopped in Oxford Street.
The Major alighted—pressed our hero's hand fervently—and hurried away.
When the carriage had disappeared, and the poor man's feelings were somewhat composed, he
      stopped beneath a lamp to learn the name of his benefactor.
"The Prince of Montoni!" he exclaimed joyfully: "oh! then I am saved—I am saved; he will
      never let me want again! All London rings with the fame of his goodness: his whole time seems
      to be passed in benefiting his fellow-creatures! Wherever poverty is known to exist, thither
      does he send in secret his unostentatious charity! But such good deeds cannot remain
      concealed; and I—I for one will proclaim to all who have spurned me in my bitter need, that a
      stranger has saved me—and that stranger a great Prince whose shoes they are not worthy to
      touch!"
Such were the words which the grateful man uttered aloud in the open street; but when he
      glanced at the bank-note, and found himself suddenly possessed of fifty pounds, he burst into
      a flood of tears—tears of the most heart-felt joy!
And Richard returned home with the satisfaction of having done another charitable action:—we
      say another, because charitable deeds with him were far more common than even
      promises on the part of many richer men.
But Markham delighted in doing good. Often of an evening, would he repair into London, and,
      leaving his carriage at the corner of some street, wander about the immediate neighbourhood to
      succour the poor houseless wretches whom he might meet, and to discover new cases in which his
      bounty might be usefully bestowed. Without hesitation—without disgust, did he penetrate into
      the wretched abodes of want—go down even into the cellars, or climb up into the attics, where
      poverty was to be relieved and joy to be shed into the despairing heart.
And when he returned home, after such expeditions as these, to his beloved wife and darling
      child,—for he was now a father—the happy father of a lovely boy, whom he had named Alberto,—he
      found his reward in the approving smiles of the Princess, even if he had not previously reaped
      an adequate recompense in the mere fact of doing so much good.
Indeed, there was not a happier house in the world than Markham Place;—for not only was the
      felicity of Richard complete—save in respect to his anxiety concerning his long-lost brother
      Eugene,—but that of his sister was also ensured. United to Mario Bazzano, Katherine and her
      husband resided at the mansion—beneath the same roof where Mr. Monroe and Ellen also continued
      to enjoy a home!
But let us continue the thread of our narrative.
True to his promise, Major Anderson wrote on the following day to acquaint our hero with his
      place of abode, and to renew the expression of his most fervent gratitude for the generous
      conduct he had experienced at the hands of the Prince of Montoni.
In the evening Richard proceeded to the humble but comfortable lodging which the Major now
      occupied in the neighbourhood of the Tottenham Court Road; and from the lips of the individual
      whom his bounty had restored to comparative happiness, did our hero learn the following
      terrible narrative of a Gambler's Life.
</div></body></text></TEI>