<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="145">
CHAPTER CXLIV.   THE UNFINISHED LETTER.
The dawn was now breaking; and Katherine extinguished the candle.

How gloomily does the young day announce itself to the dwellers in the narrow
      streets and obscure alleys of the poor districts of the metropolis! The struggling gleam
      appears to contend with difficulty against the dense atmosphere and noxious vapours which
      prevail in those regions even in the midst of winter; and as each fitful ray steals through
      the dingy panes, its light seems leaden and dull, not golden and roseate as that of the orb of
      day.
Kate wiped away her tears, and set to work to clear the table of the breakfast-things.
Having performed this duty, she slipped on her neat straw bonnet and warm shawl,—purchased
      by the produce of her own industry,—and repaired to market.
But, alas! poor girl—as she passed rapidly through the streets, she could not help noticing
      the people, that were lounging at their doors, nudge each other, as much as to say, "There
      goes the executioner's niece."
And no friendly voice welcomed her with a kind "Good morning:" no human being had a passing
      compliment,—not even one of those civil phrases which cost nothing to utter, mean perhaps as
      little, but still are pleasing to hear,—to waste upon the executioner's niece.
Some old women, more hard-hearted than the rest, exclaimed, as she hurried timidly by the
      spot where they were gossiping, "Ah! her uncle has got business on his hands this
      morning!"
And when the poor girl reached the shop whither she was going, her eyes were bathed in
      tears.
The shopkeeper was cool and indifferent in his manner towards her—not obsequious and ready
      as towards his other customers. He even examined with suspicion the coin which she tendered
      him in payment for her purchases—as if it were impossible that honesty could dwell in the
      heart of an executioner's niece!
The ill-conditioned fellow! He saw not the mild blue eyes, with a tear glittering in each
      like twin-drops of the diamond-dew;—he marked not the pretty lips, apart, and expressive of
      such profound melancholy;—he observed not the thick folds of the shawl across the
      gently-budding bosom rise and sink rapidly:—no,—he beheld not that interesting young
      creature's grief; but he treated her rudely and harshly, because she was the executioner's
      niece!
Kate retraced her steps homewards. She saw other girls of her own age nod familiarly to
      their acquaintances at the windows, as they passed;—but she had no friend to receive or return
      her smile of recognition!
Shrinking within herself, as it were, from the slightest contact with the world which
      despised her, the poor young creature felt herself an interloper upon the very pavement, and
      even stepped into the muddy street to make way for those who passed.
With a broken spirit she returned home, her fate weighing upon her soul like a crime!
And so it was with her always on those mornings when her uncle was called upon to exercise
      his fearful functions.
She was glad to bury herself once more in that dwelling the threshold of which a friendly
      step so seldom crossed: her little parlour, embellished with her own hands, appeared a
      paradise of peace after the contumely which she experienced in the bustling streets.
She had returned home in so depressed a state of mind that she had forgotten to close the
      front door behind her.
She opened her work-box, seated herself at the table, and commenced her toil of pleasure—for
      that young girl loved her needle, and abhorred idleness.
She then fell into a reverie as she worked.
"To be a hangman is something horrible indeed," she mused aloud; "but to be a member of a
      hangman's family is far worse. He knows that he merits what reproach is levelled
      against him, if indeed his office deserve reproach at all; but I, who abhor the bare
      idea, and never so much as witnessed an execution—why should shame and obloquy redound upon
       me? It is like suffering for a crime of which one is innocent! O God, is this human
      justice? What have I done that the vilest and lowest should despise me? Am I not flesh and
      blood like them? do my clothes carry pollution, that the ragged beggar draws her tatters close
      to her as she passes me? Oh! give me strength, heaven, to support my wretched fate; for there
      are moments when I despair!"
"You are wrong to mistrust the goodness of the Almighty," said a mild voice close behind her
      chair.
Kate started, and looked round.
It was the rector of St. David's who had entered he room, unperceived by the young
      maiden.
"Pardon me, reverend sir," answered Kate; "I know that I am often forgetful of the wholesome
      lessons which I have received from your lips; but——"
"Well, well, poor child," interrupted Reginald Tracy, to whose cheeks the phrase
       "wholesome lessons" brought a flush of crimson—for he remembered how he himself had
      deviated from the doctrines which he had long successfully and sincerely taught: "be consoled!
      I know how sad must be our lot; and I have called this morning to see if I cannot ameliorate
      it."
"What? better my condition, sir?" exclaimed Katherine. "Oh! how is that possible?"
"We will see," answered the rector, taking a chair near the young maiden. "You are not
      altogether so friendless as you imagine."
"I am aware, sir, that through your goodness I received an education at the school which
      your bounty founded; and your excellent housekeeper, Mrs. Kenrick, has furnished me with
      needle-work. Oh! sir, I am not ignorant how much I owe to you both!"
Kate raised her mild blue eyes towards the rector's countenance; but her glance drooped
      again instantaneously, for his looks were fixed upon her in a manner which she had never
      noticed in him before, and which excited a momentary feeling of embarrassment—almost of
      alarm—in her mind.
But that feeling passed away as rapidly as it had arisen; and she blushed to think that she
      should have experienced such a sentiment in the presence of so holy a man and so great a
      benefactor.
"I did not wish to remind you of any trifling services which myself or my housekeeper may
      have rendered you, Katherine," said Reginald. "I alluded to another friend who interests
      himself in you."
"Another friend!" ejaculated the young girl. "Is it possible that I have another
       friend in the whole world?"
"You have," replied Mr. Tracy. "Did not a
      gentleman, accompanied by a police-officer, visit this house about a fortnight
      ago?"
"Yes—I remember—late one night——"
And she stopped short, being unwilling to allude to that instance of her uncle's cruelty
      which had led to the visit mentioned by the rector.
"Well, that gentleman feels interested in you," continued Reginald. "He saw how you were
      treated—he knows that you are unhappy."
"And do strangers thus interest themselves in the wretched?" asked Katherine, her eyes
      swimming in tears.
"Not often," replied the rector. "But this gentleman is one of the few noble exceptions to
      the general rule."
"He must be indeed!" exclaimed Katherine, with an enthusiasm which was almost pious.
"That gentleman learnt from the policeman enough to give him a favourable impression of your
      character, and to render him desirous of serving you. He pondered upon the matter for some
      days, but could come to no determination on the subject. He heard that you were anxious to
      leave this house and earn your own bread."
"Oh! yes—how willingly would I do so!" exclaimed Katherine fervently. "But——"
"But what?" demanded Reginald, in whose eyes the young maiden had never been an object of
      peculiar interest until at present;—and now he observed, for the first time, that her
      personal appearance was far—very far from disagreeable.
The truth was, that, since his fall, he had viewed every woman with different eyes from
      those through which he had before surveyed the female sex. When he himself was chaste and
      pure, he observed only the feminine mind and manner:—now his glances studied and discriminated
      between external attractions. His moral survey had become a sensual one.
"But what?" he said, when Katherine hesitated. "Do you object to leave your uncle?"
"I should be a hypocrite were I to say that I object to leave him," was the immediate
      answer. "Nevertheless, if he demanded my services, I would remain with him, through gratitude
      for the bread which he gave me, and the asylum which he afforded me, when I was a child and
      unable to earn either. But he would not seek to retain me, I know; for he does not—he cannot
      love me! Still, there is one poor creature in this house——"
"My housekeeper has told me of him. You mean your uncle's son?" said Reginald.
"I do, sir. He has no friend in the world but me; and, though my intercessions do not save
      him from much bad treatment, still I have studied to console him."
"If he be grateful, he will feel pleased to think that you may be removed to a happier
      situation," said the rector.
"True!" exclaimed Kate. "And if I only earned more money than I do here, I should be able to
      provide him with a great many little comforts."
"Assuredly," replied the fashionable preacher, who during this colloquy had gradually drawn
      his chair closer to that of the young maiden. "The gentleman, to whom I have before alluded,
      called upon me yesterday. It appears he learnt from the policeman that you had been educated
      at the school in my district, and that my housekeeper was well acquainted with you. He nobly
      offered to contribute a sum of money towards settling you in some comfortable manner."
"The generous stranger!" exclaimed Kate. "What is his name, sir—that I may pray for
      him?"
"Mr. Markham——"
"Markham!" cried the young girl, strangely excited by the mention of that name.
"Yes. Have you ever heard of him before?" asked the rector, surprised at the impression thus
      produced.
Katherine appeared to reflect profoundly for some moments; then, opening a secret drawer of
      her work-box, she drew forth a small satin bag, carefully sewed all round.
She took her scissors and unpicked the thread from one end of the bag.
The rector watched her attentively, and with as much surprise as interest.
Having thus opened one extremity of the bag, she inserted her delicate fingers, and produced
      a sheet of letter-paper, folded, and dingy with age.
Handing it to the rector, she observed, with tears streaming down her cheeks, "These were
      the last words my mother ever wrote; and she had lost the use of her speech ere she penned
      them."
Reginald Tracy unfolded the letter, and read as follows:——
"Should my own gloomy presages prove true, and the warning of my medical attendant be well
      founded,—if, in a word, the hand of Death be already extended to snatch me away thus in the
      prime of life, while my darling child is * * * * and inform Mr. Markham, whose abode is——"
The words that originally stood in the place which we have marked with asterisks, had
      evidently been blotted out by the tears of the writer.
Reginald folded the letter as he had received it, and returned it to Katherine.
The young girl immediately replaced it in the little bag, which she sewed up with scrupulous
      care.
It was the poor creature's sole treasure; and she prized it as the last and only memento
      that she possessed of her mother.
"And you know not to whom that unfinished letter alluded?" said the rector, after a long
      pause, during which the bag, with its precious contents, had been consigned once more to the
      secret drawer in the work-box.
"I have not the least idea," answered Kate, drying her tears. "I was only four years old
      when my mother died, and of course could take no steps to inquire after the Mr. Markham
      mentioned in the letter. My uncle has often assured me that he took some trouble in the
      matter, but without success. Markham, you know, sir, is by no means an uncommon name."
"And your father, Katherine—do you remember him?"
"Oh! no, sir—he died before my mother. When I was old enough to comprehend how dreadful it
      is to be an orphan, Mr. Tracy, I made that little satin bag to preserve the letter which Death
      would not allow my poor mother to finish."
And again the young maiden wept bitterly.
The rector was deeply affected; and for some minutes his sensual ideas concerning the damsel
      were absorbed in a more generous sympathy.
"But did not the medical man who attended your mother in her last moments, and who is also
      alluded to in the letter," asked Reginald,—"did he not afford some clue to unravel the
      mystery?"

"That question I have asked my uncle more than once," answered Kate; "and he has
      assured me that the medical man was a perfect stranger who was casually summoned to attend
      upon my poor mother only the very day before she breathed her last. Since then the medical man
      has also died."
"Your mother was your uncle's own sister, was she not?" asked the rector.
"She was, sir."
"And she married a person named Wilmot?"
"Yes—for my name is Katherine Wilmot."
"I remember that you were so entered upon the school-books," said the rector. "Your mother
      must have been a superior woman, for the language of that fragment of a letter is accurate,
      and the handwriting is good."
"The same thought has often struck me, sir," observed Katherine. "And now how strange it is
      that a person bearing the name of Markham should interest himself in my behalf!"
"Strange indeed!" exclaimed Reginald, whose eyes were once more fixed upon the interesting
      girl near him,—fixed, too, with an ardent glance, and not one of tender sympathy. "Mr. Richard
      Markham—the gentleman of whom I speak—called upon me, as I ere now stated, and besought me to
      exert myself in your behalf. He seems to think that my position and character enable me to do
      for you that which, coming from him, might awaken the tongue of scandal. The cause of my visit
      this morning is now at length explained."
"I am very grateful, sir, for Mr. Markham's good intentions and your kindness," said
      Katherine. "The coincidence in names, which led me to show you that letter, seems a
      providential suggestion to me to follow the counsel of such generous—such disinterested
      friends."
"I thought as I came along," resumed the clergyman, "that I would procure you a situation
      with some friends of mine in the country. But—" and he cast upon her a burning look brimful of
      licentiousness—"I have my doubts whether it would not be better for you to come to my house
      and assist Mrs. Kenrick in her domestic duties—especially as she is getting very
      old—and——"
He paused for a moment:—he hesitated, because at the back of the offer there was an unworthy
      motive at which his guilty soul quaked, lest it should betray itself.
But that pure-minded and artless girl only saw in that offer a noble act of kindness; and
      she frankly accepted it—upon the condition that her uncle approved of her conduct in doing
      so.
The rector rose—he had no farther excuse for protracting his visit.
The young girl thanked him for his goodness with the most heart-felt sincerity.
He then took his leave.
</div></body></text></TEI>