<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="133">
CHAPTER CXXXIII. SKILLIGALEE'S HISTORY.
"You remember the day we parted, after having lived together for nearly six months. I gave
      you two guineas to find your way up to London, where I recommended you to proceed to seek your
      fortune; and I told you that I had as much left for myself, to help me to get away from a part
      of the country where the numerous burglaries I had committed had put all the constables on the
      alert after me. But in reality I had but two or three shillings remaining in my pocket. I knew
      that if I told you the real state of my finances, you would not accept so much as I had given
      you; but I was afraid that you might be implicated in my difficulties, and so I was determined
      that you should have sufficient to convey you clear away from Staffordshire.
"Well, when we parted, I walked along the road leading away from the village, as
      disconsolate as might be; and yet you know that I am not naturally of a very mournful
      disposition. It was nine o'clock in the evening, if you remember, when I put you into the
      waggon that was to take you to London. I went on until I reached a lonely public-house, by the
      way-side. It was then eleven o'clock; and I was both tired and hungry. I entered the Three
       Compasses (which was the sign of the public-house), and sat down in the parlour. There
      was another traveller there—a short stout man, with a very red face, and who was committing
      desperate havoc upon a large cheese and loaf, from which he, however, occasionally diverted
      his attention, in order to pay his respects to a pot of porter. I ordered some refreshment,
      and inquired if I could be accommodated with a bed. The old widow woman who kept the place,
      said that the only bed she had to spare was already engaged by the gentleman then at supper,
      but that I might sleep in the hay-loft if I chose. Thereupon the red-faced man gave a long
      stare at me, shrugged his shoulders, and went on eating. I suppose that my appearance was not
      respectable enough to induce him to resign half of his bed for my accommodation; and, indeed,
      I was dreadfully shabby—almost in rags, as you may well remember. So I accepted the offer of
      the hay-loft; and retired to that place as soon as I had finished my supper.
"But as I clambered up the ladder to my roosting-place, my unfortunate trousers caught a
      nail; and one leg was split completely down to the foot. I was now in a most wretched dilemma,
      not knowing how I should contrive to mend my luckless inexpressibles. But I soon fell asleep,
      in spite of my unpleasant reflections; and when I awoke, the dawn of the mild spring morning
      was just breaking. I examined my garment, and was reduced to despair at its appearance. At
      length I resolved to dress myself, go down stairs, borrow a needle and thread of the old
      woman, and be my own tailor. When I descended into the yard, I found a lad busily employed in
      cleaning a pair of boots, while a pair of trousers lay upon a bench, neatly folded up, having
      evidently gone through the process of brushing. I immediately recognised the stout drab
      pantaloons which the red-faced man wore on the preceding evening; and my eyes dwelt longingly
      upon them. In reply to my questions, the boy said that his grandmother (the old widow who kept
      the public-house) was not up yet, but that he could get me a needle and thread, as he knew
      where she kept her work-bag. I begged him to do so; and he very obligingly went into the house
      for that purpose.
"The moment he had disappeared I snatched up the red-faced man's drab trousers in one hand,
      and his excellent pair of bluchers in the other: then, without waiting to look behind me, I
      jumped over the fence which separated the stable-yard from the fields, and was speedily
      scampering across the open country as fast as my legs would carry me. When I had run about a
      mile, I reached a little grove, situated on the bank of a stream: and there I halted.
"The red-faced gentleman's boots were a wonderful improvement upon my old broken shoes; but
      his pantaloons fitted somewhat awkwardly, being a world too wide round the waist, and a foot
      too short in the legs. However, they were better than my old tattered unmentionables, and I
      could not complain that they were dear!
"I pursued my way along the banks of the stream until past mid-day, when I came to a
      village, where I halted at a public-house to take some refreshment. My two or three shillings
      were still unchanged, because I had not paid a single penny for my entertainment at the
       Three Compasses. While I sate enjoying my bread and cheese and beer, I revolved in
      my mind various plans to better my condition.
       But my attention was speedily averted from that topic to the conversation of two
      old men, who were sitting at another table in the tap-room.

"'So poor old Joe Dobbin's scapegrace nephew is coming home at last?' said one.—'Yea,'
      replied the other: 'he has been seeking his fortune, as a sailor, all over the world, for the
      last ten years; and now that he hasn't a penny, and is a-weary of a sea-faring life, he has
      written to say that he is coming home to his poor old blind uncle.'—'Ah! Tom Tittlebat has
      been a wild 'un in his day, I'll answer for it,' said the first old man. 'But his uncle seems
      quite delighted at the idea of seeing him again,' observed the other old fellow.—'He says that
      he shall persuade upon Tom to stay at home and take care of him; and then he'll be able to
      turn away cross old Margery, who robs him and ill-treats him in a shameful manner.'
"I devoured every word of this conversation; and my mind was instantly made up. I
      accordingly joined in the discourse, called for some ale, of which I made the two old fellows
      partake, and so artfully pumped them that in half an hour I knew all about old blind Dobbin
      and his graceless nephew Tom Tittlebat, without having appeared even to ask a single question
      concerning them. At length, when I had my lesson complete. I burst out into a hearty laugh,
      and cried out, 'What, Master Buckley, don't you remember me then? and you, good Master
      Dottings, am I quite a stranger to you too?' The old men stared; and then, with
      another hearty laugh I boldly announced myself to be Tom Tittlebat. You should have seen the
      old fellows—how glad they were! One swore that he had all along suspected who I was; and the
      other vowed that my features were unchanged since he last saw me, although my face was a
      little tanned! Then I called for more ale, and plied the old boys well, so that they might
      help to favour the imposture which I meditated.
"Away we went to the cottage inhabited by old Dobbin, my two aged companions really showing
      me the way, while I pretended to be quite familiar with it. The moment we came in sight of my
      alleged uncle's residence, old Buckley and Dottings (whose names I had found out from their
      own discourse with me) hobbled forward, exclaiming, 'Here's the prodigal returned, Brother
      Dobbin!'—'Kill the fatted calf, Brother Dobbin!' And in a few moments I was in my alleged
      uncle's arms.
"Then the fatted calf was indeed killed. Dame
       Margery, the old man's housekeeper, was compelled to bustle about to prepare a
      copious supper—a duty which she performed with a very bad grace, and with sundry suspicious
      leers and side-glances towards me. I took no notice of her ill-humour, but rattled away about
      my adventures by sea and land till the three old men were quite astounded at the marvellous
      things I had seen and the tremendous perils that I had escaped. Buckley and Dottings were
      invited to stay to supper; and a merry meal we had. When the things were cleared away, I
      undertook to brew the punch, assuring the old folks that the compound would be made according
      to a recipe which I had obtained from the king of the Inaccessible Islands.
"Well, the punch was made; and there it stood steaming in an enormous bowl upon the table. I
      was determined to enjoy myself; for I purposed to pack up every thing portable during the
      night and decamp before dawn, for fear that the rightful nephew should return before I had
      turned my trick to advantage. So I filled the tumblers, and plied the punch to such an extent
      that even old Margery's ill-humour was overcome by the gaiety of the scene; and she consented
      to sit down and join us.
"I was just in the middle of a most exciting account of a conflict which I had with a shark
      at the South Pole, when a loud knock at the door resounded through the house. Margery hastened
      to obey the summons; and Old Dobbin observed, 'I shouldn't be surprised if this was my cousin
      George, for I wrote to him the day before yesterday to say that my nephew Tom was coming home,
      and invited him down to pass a week or so on the happy occasion.' I heard this remark; but the
      punch had produced such an effect upon me, that I felt no uneasiness. I thought I should be
      able to get over cousin George as easily as I had done Uncle Dobbin; and so I amused myself by
      filling the glasses round from the second bowl, which had only just been mixed.
"Meantime Dame Margery, having answered the door, returned, exclaiming, 'It be Master
      George,' and followed by a person whom her tall gaunt form in some measure hid from me until
      they were both close to the table. Then what a dreadful scene took place! In cousin George, to
      my horror and dismay, I beheld the red-faced man that I'd met at the Three Compasses,
      and whose drab trousers adorned me at that very moment!
"I leapt from my seat, and was making as fast as I could to the door, when cousin George
      shouted out, 'Holloa! who have we here?'—and, springing forward, he collared me in a moment.
      'What's the matter? what's the matter?' demanded old Dobbin.—'My stars! what's this mean?'
      exclaimed Dame Margery.—'Why, it means that this fellow is a robber, and has got on my
      breeches and boots!' vociferated cousin George, growing purple in the face with rage, and
      giving me a violent shake.—'Your breeches!' cried old Buckley.—'Your boots!' mumbled old
      Dottings.—'Yes, to be sure!' shouted the red-faced man. 'Go and fetch a constable.'—Why, you
      don't mean that nephew Tom has done this?' said old Dobbin.—'Nephew Tom!' exclaimed cousin
      George, letting go his hold upon my coat: 'no!'—'But I say yes, though,' said I,
      putting a bold face upon the matter: 'I knew you directly when I met you at the Three
       Compasses last night, and only did it by way of a lark.'
"But this turn did not serve me. While I spoke, cousin George surveyed me attentively; and,
      again rushing upon me, he roared out, 'He's a cheat! he's an impostor! Tom has a mole on the
      left cheek, and he's none: Tom has a cut over the right eye, and he hasn't. Go for a
      constable.'—'Well, I thought all along he was a rogue,' cried Dame Margery, hurrying off to
      execute this most unpleasant order.
"My case now seemed desperate; and not a moment was to be lost. Casting my eyes rapidly
      around in search of some weapon of defence or avenue of escape, I espied the punch-bowl, three
      parts full of steaming liquor, within my reach. With the rapidity of lightning I seized it,
      and dashed it over like a hat upon cousin George's head. He uttered a terrific yell as the hot
      punch streamed down him; and I precipitated myself from the room as if a blood-hound was at my
      heels.
"Away I scudded—a hue and cry after me: but I ran like a race-horse; and in a few minutes
      was beyond the sound of the 'Stop, thief,' raised by cousin George's ominous
      voice.
"That was an excellent adventure; I have often and often laughed at it since, and wondered
      whether the real Tom Tittlebat ever did return. At all events I kept cousin George's trousers
      and boots; but they got me into more scrapes yet.
"I strolled along through the fields, diverting myself with reflection upon the past, and
      pondering upon what might be in store for the future, until I reached a large market town,
      where I went boldly to the tap-room of the principal tavern. I ordered an excellent supper,
      with plenty of ale, feeling convinced that some lucky adventure would enable me to pay for my
      cheer—for I had now but one shilling left, the remainder of my money having been spent at the
      inn where I met the two old acquaintances of blind Dobbin.
"The tap-room was filled with people; and the conversation was pretty general. There was,
      however, one individual who took no part in the discourse, but sate apart in an obscure corner
      smoking his pipe. He did not even appear to listen to what was said around him; but maintained
      his eyes moodily fixed on the floor. His horrible sallow complexion, deep wrinkles, and large
      mustache, gave him an aspect very far from inviting. Nevertheless, I endeavoured to enter into
      conversation with him—simply, I suppose, because he appeared to be so reserved, and my
      curiosity was excited with respect to him; but he threw upon me a look of the most sovereign
      contempt, and made me no answer. I shrank back from the fierce glance of his dark black eyes,
      and felt abashed and cowed—I scarcely knew why. But soon recovering my usual good spirits, I
      also called for my pipe and my pot, and mingled in the conversation. Rattling away with my
      anecdotes, and now and then singing a snatch of a song, I speedily made myself so agreeable to
      the drovers and waggoners assembled in the tap-room, that they called for punch and invited me
      to partake of it with them.
"At twelve o'clock the waiter came in, and bawled out, 'Any more orders, gentlemen? any
       more orders?' No answer being given, he said, 'I will receive each gentleman's
       account, if you please.'—This announcement came like a clap of thunder upon me: I had
      but a shilling in my pocket, and owed nearly three. What to do I could not tell. Meantime the
      waiter went round, collecting the money due to him from each individual; and the nearer he
      drew to the table where I was sitting, the more fidgetty I became. As I glanced round me with
      feverish anxiety, I saw the dark black eyes of the sallow-faced stranger fixed upon me; and I
       thought that they glared with fiendish delight, as if they had penetrated my
      secret. I felt ashamed—and my eyes fell beneath the demon-like glance. In another moment the
      waiter stood before me. 'Now, sir—if you please, sir: steak, one shilling—taturs, penny—bread,
      penny—fourteen-pence; two pints of ale, eight-pence—screw of bakker, penny—pot porter,
      four-pence,—that's two-and-three, sir.' I sat aghast for a few minutes, and then began to
      fumble in my pockets, the waiter every moment growing more impatient. At that instant the
      sallow-faced stranger pointed to the bench on which I was sitting, and said in a surly tone,
      'No wonder, young man, that you can't find your money in your pocket, when you let it roll
      about in all directions.' He then sank back into his corner, and seemed to take no more notice
      of me or my concerns. I thought he had a mind to banter me; but, turning my eyes towards the
      place which he had indicated, to my surprise I perceived a couple of half-crowns lying there.
      I am sure the waiter must have seen how my countenance brightened up with sudden joy; but he
      made no remark; and I paid my bill. He then passed on to the sallow-faced man, who settled his
      own account, and hastily left the room, without condescending to cast another glance upon
      me.
"I was at a loss to make out whether the sallow-faced stranger had done a most generous
      action, or whether some one else had dropped the money there, and he had really fancied it to
      be mine. I did not, however, lose much time in conjecture; but, taking the whole affair for a
      good omen, ordered another glass, and then went jovially to bed. I awoke early, had some
      breakfast, and went out to take a stroll in the town. I naturally directed my steps towards
      the market-place, knowing that it was market-day, and hoping to find a watch or a purse in the
      crowd.
"Elbowing my way through the graziers, drovers, and butchers, I got into the middle of the
      market, and there a most extraordinary spectacle met my eyes. A man was leading a woman along
      by a halter, which was tied round her neck. At first, I thought that a public execution was
      about to take place; but, seeing no gibbet—no police—no sheriffs—and no clergyman,—and
      observing, at a second glance, that the woman was giggling and laughing very much unlike a
      person just going to be hanged, I was at a loss to account for so strange a sight. The crowd
      appeared to enjoy the fun—for fun it evidently was—excessively; and, at length, I learnt that
       'Bob Fosset, the dog's-meat-man, was about to sell his wife to Will Wyatt, the
       costermonger.' And, sure enough, such was the fact. Bob Fossett led his wife—a
      comely-looking woman enough—to the centre of the market, and tied the halter to a sheep-pen.
      He then mounted on the top bar of the pen, and shouted out: 'I hereby put up my wife,
       Jenny Fossett, to public auction; and I declare that she shall go to the highest
       bidder.'—'So I will, Bob,' cried the woman.—'Hooray, Bob Fossett,'
      bawled the crowd assembled; and then there was such laughing, and joking, and sky-larking, it
      seemed for all the world just like a fair. Well, Will Wyatt steps forward, and exclaims:
       'I bid one shilling for that woman.'—'One shilling bid,' said Bob
       Fossett.—'One shilling and a pot of beer,' cries some wag in the crowd.—'One
       shilling and a pot of beer is bid,' shouts Fossett; 'who bids any
       more?'—'One shilling and a gallon of beer!' bawls Will Wyatt.—'One shilling
       and a gallon of beer for this woman!' cries Bob Fossett: 'who'll advance on that?
       Going for one shilling and a gallon of beer: going—going,—will no one bid?—gone! Will Wyatt,
       my lad, that woman's yours!' So Will Wyatt steps forward, kisses the woman, takes off
      the halter, and tacks her under his arm as cozy as if they'd just been spliced at church. Then
      they all three went off to the nearest public-house, the crowds hooraying, and shouting, and
      squeaking, and roaring, as they made way for the party to pass along. I determined to see the
      remainder of the fun, and so I followed them to the public-house.
"The moment we entered the parlour, I saw a person sitting in one corner, whose face seemed
      more or less familiar to me. He was a fine, tall, powerfully-built man; and his countenance
      was very handsome, but so dark that he appeared to be an East-Indian. But it was the peculiar
      expression of the mouth, and the piercing glance of the eyes, that struck me. I looked—and
      looked again; and thought that a slight smile curled the stranger's lips as I surveyed him,
      although he did not seem to take any notice of me, or even to know that I was staring at him.
      'Well,' I thought to myself, 'if you are not my sallow-faced friend of last-sight, I'm
      terribly mistaken—that's all;' for I knew too much of disguises myself to be bothered by the
      difference of complexions. So I went and sat down close by him; and, having ordered something
      to drink, at length boldly whispered to him, 'I have seen you before.'—'Very
       likely,' answered the man, coolly; 'but take care of yourself, or you may still get
       into a scrape on account of cousin George's breeches.' With these words he rose, drained
      his glass, and walked coolly out of the room.
"You may imagine how astonished I was at the ominous words which he had whispered in my ear;
      but, collecting my ideas, I began to feel alarmed for my safety; and, having no longer any
      interest in the party whom I had followed into the public-house, I abruptly departed—without
      partaking of, or paying for, the refreshment which I had ordered. Hurrying away from the
      place, I got out of the town as quick as possible; and, avoiding the main-road, struck into
      the fields.
"I wandered about for two or three days, until all my money was gone; and I was one
      afternoon roaming along a by-lane, wondering what was to become of me, and thinking that it
      would be much better to break into some house, as a last and desperate resource, when I
      suddenly encountered a man and woman at the turning of the road. They were dressed as poor
      country people; but the darkness of their complexions immediately struck my attention; and, at
      a second glance, I recognised in the man the very person who had whispered those mysterious
      words in my ears, concerning cousin George's trousers, and whom I could almost certainly
      identify with the sallow-faced stranger. 'What, not got rid of cousin George's trousers yet!'
      he exclaimed, laughing heartily; and the woman, who seemed to understand the joke, joined in
      her companion's mirth.—'Who are you?' I said, 'and how do you happen to know about that little
      adventure of mine?'—'You see that I do know all about it' returned the man, with
      another laugh; 'and you may perhaps be surprised when I tell you that I consider the
      abstraction of the trousers to be even a more pleasant freak than the personation of Tom
      Tittlebat.—'The deuce!' I cried, now completely bewildered: 'if you are a constable, say so,
      and we will have a fight for it; if not, tell me who you are, and how you came to be
      acquainted with my affairs.'—'I am certainly no constable,' answered the man, 'or I might have
      apprehended you some days since on two several occasions, and when there would have been no
      necessity to fight for
       it. As to how I know any thing about you, ask no questions, because you will
      receive no satisfactory answers. But if you wish to earn a shilling or two, say so; and you
      can do it within an hour.'—I professed my willingness to serve this strange individual.—'Come
      with us,' he said; and, striking into a narrow path, he led the way for about half-a-mile
      across the fields, until we came in sight of a large farm-house. 'You see that farm,' he said:
      'now listen attentively. You must go there, and under any pretence you can think of, obtain
      admission into the kitchen, or get into conversation with one of the servants, so as to glean
      all the information you can about the family. There's three daughters: find out whether they
      are engaged to be married, or who the young men are that principally visit at the house, and
      all particulars of that kind. We will wait for you in yonder copse.'
"The stranger and his companion hastened away towards the place where I was to meet them
      again, and I proceeded towards the farm. It was by no means difficult to gain admittance into
      the kitchen of that hospitable establishment: a simple request for a cup of milk led to an
      invitation from a buxom cook and a smart servant-maid to walk in and rest myself a little.
      Then bread and cheese, and a foaming tankard of home-brewed were set before me; and, while I
      ate and drank, I gradually drew the two women into the conversation which suited my purpose.
      They proclaimed the praises of 'master and missis;' and told me how the old people were very
      well off; and how Miss Jemima, the eldest daughter, was engaged to a young farmer in the
      neighbourhood; how Miss Mary, the second daughter, had been courted by an officer in the army
      who had been quartered in the neighbouring town, but who had since left, and had never written
      to her afterwards; and how Miss Frances, the youngest, had been very melancholy ever since she
      had visited an aunt at Stafford, where it was well known an attorney's clerk had paid her very
      great attention. These, and various other particulars relative to the family, were related to
      me in the course of conversation; and, having remained at the farm for a couple of hours, I
      was about to take my leave, as well informed relative to the inmates as if I had lived with
      them all my life. But just as I was rising to depart, I espied a purse lying in a work-box
      upon a shelf; and I began to reflect how I could make it my own. Accident served my purpose:
      the cook insisted upon drawing me some more ale, and went into the cellar for that purpose;
      and the maid-servant stepped to the door of the kitchen to receive a can of milk which a boy
      brought there at the moment. To dart toward the shelf and secure the purse was the work of an
      instant; and when the maid turned towards me again, I was sitting as composedly as if I had
      never left my chair. The cook made her appearance with the ale, of which I drank; and I then
      took my leave, with many thanks for the kind entertainment I had received.
"I proceeded to the copse, where I found my strange employer and his female companion
      waiting for me. I told them all that I had gleaned relative to the farmer and his family; and
      they were highly delighted with the information so procured. The man gave me five shillings,
      and told me that he did not require my services any farther. I was not sorry to get away from
      the neighbourhood; and, taking leave of the persons who had employed me in so singular a
      service, pursued my way. When at a convenient distance from the spot where I had left them, I
      examined the purse, and, to my joy, found that it contained four sovereigns and about seven
      shillings in silver.
"Considerably cheered at this change in my pecuniary position, I pursued my way until long
      after dusk, when I entered a village where I determined to put up for the night. Having supped
      at a public-house, I inquired about a bed, and found that I could be accommodated with one in
      a double-bedded room, the other being already retained by a traveller who had arrived before
      me, but who had stepped out, I was informed, to transact some business with certain
      inhabitants of his acquaintance. Being tired, I went up to the room where I was to sleep,
      before the return of the person who was to occupy the other bed; but before I sought my own
      nest I looked about for a secure spot where I could conceal my purse, as I fancied that my
      companion might probably be no more honest than myself. I accordingly hid my treasure between
      the mattress and the sacking; and, putting my clothes under my pillow, lay down to rest. I
      soon fell into a deep sleep, from which I did not awake until aroused by the noise of some one
      moving about the room. I started up, and rubbing my eyes, asked what o'clock it was. The
      person who occupied the other bed was shaving himself at a looking-glass, with his back turned
      towards me; but the moment my voice fell upon his ears, he started round; and—to my horror—I
      recognised but too well, beneath a thick coat of lather, the never-to-be-forgotten countenance
      of cousin George.
"Here was a precious scrape! The red-faced man was deaf to my prayers for mercy, and alarmed
      the whole house. Landlord, boots, ostler, and pot-boy rushed up stairs, while cousin George
      vociferated, 'Fetch a constable! this is the rogue who stole my breeches and boots. Fetch a
      constable, I say! Here's the villain that imposed upon poor old blind Dobbin. Fetch a
      constable!' A constable was accordingly fetched; and I was duly given into his charge. While I
      was huddling on my clothes, cousin George exclaimed, with savage malignity, 'Ah! there's the
      boots, the scoundrel! There's the drab trousers, the scamp!' and I really believe he would
      have wrested them from me had it not been necessary for me to wear them in order to accompany
      the constable.
"I did not choose to drag forth my purse from its place of concealment, for fear it might
      involve me in a worse dilemma than that in which I found myself, and which, after all, was not
      particularly serious. I however left it beneath the mattress, with deep regret, and was led
      away by the constable, every soul in the public-house turning out to witness my departure. The
      landlord, moreover, gave me a parting blessing after a fashion—accusing me as a thief who had
      run up a score of three shillings and seven-pence halfpenny at his house, without the
      slightest means of paying it! To this very natural conclusion he came, inasmuch as the
      constable, upon searching me, had found nothing in my pockets.
"The clergyman of the village was a justice of the peace; and before his worshipful
      reverence was I accordingly taken. He was an elderly man, very corpulent and very stern; and
      he frowned upon me in a ferocious manner when I was conducted into the library, where he
      intended to hear the case. Cousin George, who had only shaved one side of his face, and had a
      black bristly beard over the other, stepped forward and stated the entire case, which
      comprised the theft of his garments and the imposture practised upon his relative. In the
      latter business, however, the magistrate refused to interfere, and confined
       his attention to the abstraction of the trousers and boots. I, of course, set up
      the usual defence,—'Had never seen the gentleman before in my life—had bought the trousers
       and boots of a man that I met at a public house, and whose name I did not know; that I was an
       honest hard-working young fellow, out of employment; and had never been in trouble
       before.' The magistrate was, however, obstinate, and would not believe a word I uttered.
      He accordingly ordered me to be committed for trial at the sessions; and I was moved to an
      out-house, there to wait in the custody of the constable, until my mittimus was made
      out, and a cart was obtained to take me to the county gaol. Cousin George, satisfied with what
      he had done so far, threw a glance of triumph upon me as I was moved away from the
      magistrate's library.
"While I was pent up in the out-house, I went up to the window and looked out upon that open
      country which seemed the scene of a freedom now lost to me. As I was standing there, pondering
      on my condition, and wondering whether the numerous burglaries which I had committed in a
      neighbourhood not very far distant, would be brought against me, my attention was suddenly
      attracted to a number of people who were advancing rapidly towards the house. As they drew
      near, to my surprise I recognised the swarthy stranger and his female companion, both
      evidently in the custody of two constables, and followed by the cook, maid-servant, and other
      persons belonging to the farm-house. An idea of the real truth instantly flashed through my
      mind; and I felt sorry—very sorry for the two poor creatures who, I had no doubt, were
      suffering under a suspicion of the robbery which I had perpetrated. Moreover, I could not help
      thinking that the swarthy man and the sallow-faced man were one and the same person, and that
      the two half-crowns had been purposely thrown in my way by him, at the inn in the market-town,
      to relieve me from that embarrassment into which his keen eyes had penetrated. These
      reflections suddenly filled me with deep interest in the stranger and his female
      companion.
"The procession passed the window (from which I drew back), and entered the magistrate's
      house. Half-an-hour passed away; and then the clergyman's man-servant made his appearance with
      a jug of ale and some bread and meat for the constable who had me in charge. But nothing was
      given to me, either to eat or drink! 'There's a new case on in the library,' said the
      servant.—'Ah! what's that?' inquired the constable.—'Two gipsies,' was the answer, 'man and
      woman, have been prigging a purse down at farmer Clodhopper's. The purse belonged to a young
      servant gal, and was missed out of her work-box just after the gipsies had left the house last
      night. But the constables were put on the scent, and soon found the thieves.'—'And was the
      purse recovered?' asked the officer who had me in custody.—'Deuce a bit of it,' said the
      servant, 'those gipsies know a trick worth two of that. It seems that they went down to the
      farm late last night, and told all the young ladies and servant girls their fortunes; so they
      were taken into the kitchen and fed with the best, besides all the money they'd had given to
      them by the young ladies and the servants. Not content with all that, they stole the purse,
      the vagabonds!'—'No, they didn't, though!' I exclaimed, stepping forward; for somehow or
      another my blood boiled and my heart ached to think that those two poor creatures should be
      punished for a crime of which they were innocent. Besides, I made sure that all my past
      offences would be brought against me at the assizes; and I knew in that case that I should be
      booked for transportation; so one robbery more or less could not make much difference to me.
      Well, both the constable and the servant stared when I spoke in that manner. 'Yes,' I
      continued, 'it is perfectly true that those two gipsies are innocent of the theft; and if you
      will take me before his worship again, I will prove my words.' The constable accordingly
      conducted me back to the library.
"The moment I entered the room, the gipsy-man and his companion exhibited the greatest
      surprise and interest. I gave them a re-assuring glance; and then, turning towards the
      magistrate, I said, 'Your worship, these two poor creatures are innocent of the crime imputed
      to them.'—'How do you know?' demanded the justice roughly, for his lunch-time was now drawing
      near.—'Because I stole it myself,' was my answer. The greatest astonishment pervaded the
      assembly; joy animated the countenance of the two gipsies; while the cook and maid servant
      cried out, 'Dear me!' and 'Who would have thought it!' as loud as they
      could. The justice looked tremendous savage, and declared that he would order the room to be
      cleared of strangers if they interrupted the business in that indecent manner! I was then
      called upon to explain the assertion which I had made.—'These two persons,' I said, pointing
      towards the gipsies, 'are accused of stealing a purse from farmer Clodhopper's kitchen?'—'They
      are. Well?'—'Then they didn't steal it, because I stole it myself; and these servants can
      prove that I was there yesterday afternoon.'—'So he was!' exclaimed the cook and maid in the
      same breath.—'And now,' I continued, 'if you will send and search under the mattress of the
      bed which I slept in last night at the public-house where I was arrested, you will find the
      purse.' But this trouble was avoided; for scarcely had I uttered these words, when in came the
      landlord of that public-house, holding the purse in his hands. His wife, it appeared, had
      found it when making the beds; and suspicion instantly pointed to me as the person who had
      placed it in the spot where it was discovered. This circumstance brought the case safe home to
      me; and the gipsies were instantly discharged, with a warning to take care of themselves in
      future!
"Nothing could exceed the looks of deep gratitude which those two innocent persons cast upon
      me as they left the room:—but that of the man was significant of something more than a mere
      sense of obligation for the act of duty which I had done. I don't know how it was, too—but,
      rogue as I was, I felt an inward satisfaction at the part which I had just performed.
"I was taken back to the out-house, with another serious charge hanging over my head; and
      the cart was every moment expected to convey me to the county gaol. But time slipped away, and
      it did not arrive. At length the constable became impatient, and talked about the impropriety
      of trifling with the time of a public officer like him, adding that he didn't know if he
      shouldn't write to the prime minister about it. Presently the man-servant came in with some
      dinner for him—but not a bite nor a sup for me! Neither did the constable offer me any thing.
      'Here's a pretty business,' says the servant; 'the man that was to drive you over to the
      county gaol has got drunk somehow or other, and can't go; and the horse has suddenly gone dead
      lame.'—'What's to be done, then?' cried the constable.—'Why, you must wait till the man's
      sober, and the veterinary surgeon has looked to the horse.
      '
"And sure enough we did wait until eight o'clock in the evening before we started; and then
      no thanks to the man nor the veterinary surgeon, for the former was still too tipsy to move,
      and the latter could do nothing for the horse. However, another man came forward, at a late
      hour, and offered his services. He not only cured the horse in a few minutes, but also
      undertook to drive the cart. The constable accordingly put a pair of handcuffs on me and took
      me out into the yard where the vehicle was waiting. A man with a sallow face and bushy red
      hair, was already seated in front, holding the whip and reins; and as I mounted he gave me a
      look which I immediately understood. That man was no other than my friend, the swarthy gipsy,
      so well disguised that his own mother would have scarcely known him.
"Away we went at a rattling pace: it was soon dark, and the constable told the driver not to
      go at such a rate. But he did not obey the command: on the contrary, he whipped the horse the
      more; and the cart bounded along the road as if it was for wager. The constable swore and
      prayed by turns: the driver laughed; and presently the cart upset into a dry ditch. 'Run for
      your liberty!' cried the driver to me, as he pulled me from the ditch; and I followed him
      across the fields with a speed that was increased by hearing the constable shouting 'Stop,
       thief!' behind me. But in a very few minutes those cries became fainter and fainter,
      until they at length ceased altogether. Still my deliverer pursued his way, and at such a
      rate, too, that I was scarcely able to keep up with him.
"At length we stopped in a thicket, and sat down to rest. My deliverer took a file from his
      pocket and worked away at my manacles with such a skill and energy, that in a few minutes I
      was relieved from them. He then produced some food, and I made a hearty meal. When the meal
      was over, my companion condescended to give me an explanation of certain matters which had
      hitherto remained wrapped up in some degree of mystery.
"'You must be informed,' he said, 'that my name is Morcar, and that I am the son of Zingary,
      king of the gipsies. The female whom you saw with me yesterday and this morning, is my wife. A
      considerable portion of the money earned by our race consists of fees paid by the simple and
      credulous, for having their fortunes told. In order to obtain the necessary information
      relative to the inhabitants of those places or dwellings which we visit, we are compelled to
      assume many disguises, or to make use of the agency of others, not connected with us, to
      gather that information for us. Some days ago, at an early hour in the morning, I was
      loitering about in the neighbourhood of the Three Compasses, and from behind a hedge
      saw you make off with the boots and trousers which a boy had been brushing in the yard. Chance
      led me that same afternoon to the village where you played your famous trick upon old Dobbin;
      and, as the story spread like wild-fire through the place immediately after your detection by
      cousin George, I could not avoid hearing all the particulars. I got a lift in a cart from that
      village to the market-town where I met you the same night at the inn. I could not help
      admiring your boldness and ingenuity; and, while I sat quietly smoking my pipe in the
      tap-room, listening to the discourse of the inmates, and picking up a variety of information,
      to be turned to future account, I noticed your embarrassment at the appearance of the waiter
      to collect the money owing by each individual. I had made a good day's work in a certain way,
      and was disposed to be liberal: accordingly, at a moment when you were turned in another
      direction, I placed the two half-crowns close by where you sate on the bench. Next day I threw
      off what I call my 'sallow disguise', and repaired to another public-house, near the
      market, to glean additional information, all of which our women have since turned to ample
      profit. Then I was enabled to give you a warning which was really important to you, as old
      Dobbin's cousin George had actually arrived that morning in the town to attend the market. A
      few days afterwards I was roving with my wife along the by-lanes in the neighbourhood of
      Clodhopper's farm, endeavouring by some means to glean what we could concerning the young
      women at that place—for our finest harvests are always reaped at farm-houses. Again I met you;
      and I made you the instrument of my design. But,' added Morcar, with a smile, 'you went
      farther than you were instructed: you did a thing which we never do—I mean, steal
      money. We take for our use a sucking-pig, a fowl, or a goose; and we do not consider that
      stealing. We also snare rabbits and game; and we look upon it as no crime. However, you saw
      the scrape into which that business of the purse got me and my wife this morning. You saved
      us, and I vowed to save you also. The moment I was discharged I went to the stable where the
      horse that was to convey you to gaol was kept, and bribed the ostler to drive a nail into his
      foot so as to touch the flesh. Then I found the man who was to drive you, and plied him so
      well with liquor that he was unable to perform his duty. My object was to delay your journey
      until the evening, because I knew that I could ensure your escape in the dark. You have seen
      how well my plans have succeeded, because you are now free.'
"You may suppose that I thanked my kind deliverer most sincerely for all he had done to
      serve me. He, however, cut me short in my expressions of gratitude, by saying, 'What are you
      going to do? If you will join us, you will be assured of your daily food, and will be more or
      less protected from danger. My father has a van, in which you can at any time hide when
      concealment is necessary; and we will do all we can to serve you, for I still consider myself
      to be indebted to you on account of your generous conduct of this morning. I could have borne
      punishment myself; but the idea of my wife being plunged into such misery—no,
      never—never!'
"I accepted the welcome offers of Morcar, and that very night was conducted to the
      encampment where his father and mother had taken up their quarters. Eva presented her son to
      me, saying, 'You have preserved for this little one a father and mother: henceforth the
      Zingarees will know thee as a friend!' From that moment I have lived with the gipsies until
      the present time; and, though some years have passed away since I first joined them, I have
      not yet become weary of our wandering mode of existence."
</div></body></text></TEI>