<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="151">
CHAPTER CL.   MRS. KENRICK.
The rector of Saint David's returned home a prey to the most unenviable feelings.
Rage—disappointment—humiliation conspired to make him mad.
The old hag had raised his hopes to the highest pitch; and at the moment when the cup of
      bliss seemed to approach his lips, it was rudely dashed away.
A woman had triumphed over him—mocked his passion—spurned his offers—read him a lesson of
      morality—taught him that proud man must not always domineer over feminine weakness.
Oh! it was too much for that haughty—that vain—that self-sufficient ecclesiastic to
      endure!
As he returned home in a hired cab, he threw from the window of the vehicle the Carmelite
      gown and cowl which he had worn; and bitterly did he reproach himself for his folly in having
      been seduced into the degradation of that masqued mummery.
Arrived at his own house, he rushed past the housekeeper who opened the door, and was
      hurrying up-stairs to the solitude of his chamber, when the voice of the old lady compelled
      him to pause.
"Mr. Tracy—Mr. Tracy," she exclaimed; "here is a note from Lady Harborough."
"Tell Lady Harborough to go to the devil, Mrs. Kenrick!" cried the rector, goaded almost to
      madness by this new proof of Cecilia's indiscretion.

The old housekeeper dropped the candle and the note, as if she were
      thunderstruck.
Was it possible that she had heard aright? could such an expression have emanated from the
      lips of her master—of that man whom the world idolized?
"What is the matter now, Mrs. Kenrick?" asked the rector, suddenly recovering his presence
      of mind, and perceiving the immense error into which his excited feelings had betrayed
      him.
"Nothing, sir—nothing," answered the housekeeper, as she re-lighted her candle by means of a
      lamp which was standing on the hall-table; "only I thought that something very terrible had
      occurred to annoy you."
"Yes—yes—I have indeed been grievously annoyed," said Reginald; "and you must forgive my
      hasty conduct. I was wrong—very wrong. Do not think anything more of it, Mrs. Kenrick. But did
      you not observe that Lady Harborough had sent a message——"
"A note, sir. Here it is."
And as the housekeeper handed her master the perfumed billet, she cast a
      scrutinizing glance upon his countenance.
He was as pale as death—his lips quivered—and his eyes had a wild expression.
"I am afraid, sir, that something very dreadful has happened to you," she observed timidly.
      "Shall I send for the physician?"
"No—no, Mrs. Kenrick: I shall be quite well in the morning. I have received a violent
      shock—the sudden communication of ill news—the death of a dear friend——"
"Ah! sir, I was convinced that all was not right," observed the housekeeper. "If you would
      follow my advice you would take something to compose you—to make you sleep well——"
"An excellent thought, Mrs. Kenrick! If it be not too late, I wish you would send and
      procure me a little laudanum: I will take a few drops to ensure a sound slumber."
"I will do so, sir," answered the housekeeper.
She then repaired to the kitchen, while Reginald hurried up to his own chamber to read Lady
      Cecilia's letter, the contents of which ran as follow:—
"Nearly a week has elapsed, dearest Reginald, and I have not seen you! neither have I heard
      from you. What is the meaning of this? Is it neglect, or extreme caution? At all events the
      interval which you enjoined for the cessation of my visits to you, has nearly expired; and my
      impatience will brook no longer delay. I must see you to-night! Precisely as the clock strikes
      twelve, I will be at your front-door, when you must admit me as on previous occasions—or I
      shall imagine that you are already wearied of your
"CECILIA." 
"After all," said the rector, "the presence of Cecilia will in some degree console me for my
      disappointment of this evening! I cannot remain alone with my reflections—it drives me mad to
      think of what I am, and what I have been! And laudanum is a miserable resource for one who
      dreads a sleepless night: it peoples slumber with hideous phantoms. Yes—I will admit Cecilia
      at the appointed hour:—my housekeeper does not suspect me—my guilty conscience alone makes me
      think at times that she reads the secrets of my soul?"
The rector seated himself before the cheerful fire which burnt in the grate, and fell into a
      long train of voluptuous meditation.
He had become in so short a time a confirmed sensualist; and now that his long pent-up
      passions had broken loose, they never left him a moment of repose.
His reverie was interrupted by a knock at the door; and Mrs. Kenrick entered.
"Kate was fortunate enough to find a druggist's shop open, sir," she said, "and procured
      some laudanum. But pray be cautious how you use it."
"Never fear," returned the rector: "I may not avail myself of it at all—for I feel more
      composed now."
The housekeeper wished her master a good night's rest, and withdrew.
The rector then took a decanter of wine from a cupboard, and tossed off two glasses full,
      one immediately after the other.
The idea that Cecilia would shortly be there and the effects of the wine inflamed his blood,
      and brought back the colour to his cheeks.
Midnight soon sounded: the rector threw off his shoes, took a candle in his hand, and
      hastened down stairs.
He opened the front-door with the utmost caution; and a female, muffled in an ample cloak,
      darted into the hall.
"Cecilia?" whispered the rector.
"Dearest Reginald," answered the lady, in the same under tone.
They then stole noiselessly up stairs, and reached the rector's chamber without having
      scarcely awakened the faintest echo in the house.
The remainder of the night was passed by them in the intoxicating joys of illicit love.
      Locked in Cecilia's arms, the rector forgot the humiliation he had received at the hands of
      Ellen, and abandoned himself to those pleasures for which he risked so much!
It was still dark—though at a later hour in the morning than Cecilia had been previously in
      the habit of quitting the rector's house—when the guilty pair stole softly down stairs,
      without a light.
"Hasten, Cecilia," murmured the rector: "it is later than you imagine."
"My God!" whispered the lady: "I hear a step ascending!"
The rector listened for a moment, and then said in a faint tone, "Yes: we are lost!"
A light flashed on the wall a few steps beneath those on which they were standing: it was
      too late to retreat; and in another moment Mrs. Kenrick made her appearance on the stairs.
"What! Mr. Tracy?" ejaculated the housekeeper, her eyes glancing from the rector in his
      dressing-gown to the lady in her cloak.
Then the good woman stood motionless and silent—her tongue tied, and her feet rooted to the
      spot, with astonishment.
Lady Cecilia drew her veil hastily over her countenance; but not before Mrs. Kenrick had
      recognised her.
A thousand ideas passed rapidly through the rector's brain during the two or three moments
      that succeeded this encounter.
At first he thought of inventing some excuse for his awkward situation;—next he felt
      inclined to spring upon his old housekeeper and strangle her;—then he conceived the desperate
      idea of rushing back to his room and blowing his brains out.
"Mrs. Kenrick," at length he exclaimed, "I hope you will say nothing of this."

The housekeeper made no reply to her master; but, turning a contemptuous glance
      upon the lady, said, "Madam, allow me to conduct you to the front door."
Cecilia followed her mechanically; and Reginald rushed up the stairs to his room, a prey to
      emotions more readily conceived than described.
The housekeeper preceded Lady Cecilia in silence, and opened the front door.
"My dear Mrs. Kenrick," said the frail patrician, who had now nearly recovered her presence
      of mind, "I hope you will take no notice of this unpleasant discovery."
"I shall remain silent, madam," answered the housekeeper; "but through no respect for you. I
      however value the reputation of a master whom I have served for many years, too much to be the
      means of ruining him."
She then closed the door unceremoniously, and, seating herself on one of the mahogany
      benches in the hall, burst into tears.
That good woman loved her master with a maternal affection; and she was shocked at this
      dread confirmation of the faint suspicions which she had already entertained, and which had so
      sorely afflicted her.
"It is then true!" she thought within herself. "He has fallen! He is a living, breathing
      falsehood. His eloquence is a mere talent, and not the spontaneous outpouring of holy
      conviction! The world adores an idle delusion—worships a vain phantom. Oh! what a discovery is
      this! How can I ever respect him more? how can I ever talk with others of his virtues again?
      And yet he may repent—oh! God grant that he may! Yes—he must repent: he must again become the
      great, the good man he once was! It behoves me, then, to shield his guilt:—at the same time
      all temptation should be removed from his presence. Ah! now I bethink me that he has cast
      wistful eyes upon that poor girl whom he has taken into the establishment. I must remove her:
      yes—I will remove her, upon my own authority. He will thank me hereafter for my prudence."
Thus did the good woman reason within herself.
When she had somewhat recovered from the first shock which the unpleasant discovery of her
      master's criminality had produced upon her, she repaired to her domestic avocations.
Kate was already in the kitchen, occupied with her usual duties.
"Katherine, my dear child," said Mrs. Kenrick, "I am going to give you my advice—or rather
      to propose to you a plan which I have formed—relative to you——"
"To me, ma'am?" exclaimed the young maiden, desisting from her employment, and preparing to
      listen with attention.
"Yes, my dear girl," continued the housekeeper; "and when I tell you that it is for your
      good—entirely for your good—you would thank me——"
"Oh! I do, ma'am—I thank you in advance," said Kate; "for I have already experienced too
      much kindness at your hands not to feel convinced that all you propose is for my good."
"Well, then, my dear—without giving you any reasons for my present conduct—I am anxious that
      you should leave this house——"
"Leave, ma'am?" cried Kate, astonished at this unexpected announcement.
"Yes, Katherine: you must leave this house," proceeded Mrs. Kenrick. "But think not that you
      will be unprovided for. I have a sister who resides a few miles from London; and to her care I
      shall recommend you. She will be a mother to you."
"But why would you remove me from the roof of my benefactor?" asked Kate: "why would you
      send me away from London, where my only relations on the face of the earth reside?" she added,
      bursting into tears; for she thought of her poor persecuted cousin the hump-back.
"Do not ask me, my good child," returned Mrs. Kenrick: "my reasons are of a nature which
      cannot be communicated to you. And yet—if you knew them, and could rightly understand them—you
      would not object——"
"Alas! ma'am, I am afraid that I understand them but too well," interrupted the girl: "the
      executioner's niece brings discredit upon the house of her benefactor."
"Oh! no—no," exclaimed the good-natured housekeeper; "do not entertain such an idea! Not for
      worlds would I have you labour under such an error. You know I would not tell a falsehood; and
      I declare most solemnly that you have totally misunderstood me and my motives."
There was an earnestness in the way in which Mrs. Kenrick spoke that immediately removed
      from Katherine's mind the suspicion she had entertained.
"Why should you send the poor girl away, Mrs. Kenrick?" said the footman, now suddenly
      emerging from the pantry, which joined the kitchen.
"Have you overheard our conversation, then, Thomas?" exclaimed Mrs. Kenrick, angrily.
"I couldn't very well avoid it," answered the footman, "since I was in there all the
      time."
"It would have been more discreet on your part to have let us know that you were there, when
      you heard a private conversation begin," remarked the housekeeper.
"How should I know the conversation was private?" exclaimed Thomas. "I suppose you're
      jealous of the girl, and want to get rid of her."
"You must value your place very little by speaking to me in this way," said Mrs. Kenrick.
      "However, I scorn your base allusions. And you, my dear," she continued, now addressing
      herself to Katherine, "look upon me as your friend—your very sincere friend. What I am doing
      is for your good: to-day I will write to my sister—and to-morrow you shall, proceed to her
      abode."
The housekeeper then resumed her avocations with the complacency of one conscious of having
      performed a duty.
"Thomas," she said, after a pause, "go up and inquire if your master will have breakfast
      served in his own chamber, or in the parlour."
The footman hastened to obey this order.
"Master says he is very unwell, and desires no breakfast at all," was the information which
      the man gave on his return to the kitchen.
The housekeeper made no reply: she was however pleased when she reflected that the rector
      felt his situation—a state of mind which she hoped would lead to complete repentance and
      reform.
The morning passed: the afternoon arrived: and still Reginald Tracy kept his room.
The housekeeper sent the footman up to ask if he required any thing.
Thomas returned with a negative answer, adding
      "Master spoke to me without opening the door, and seemed by his tone of voice to
      be very unwell."
Again the housekeeper remained silent, more convinced than before that contrition was
      working its good effects with her master.
Hour after hour passed; the sun went down; and darkness once more drew its veil over the
      mighty city.
Mrs. Kenrick again sent up Thomas with the same inquiry as before.
The servant returned to the kitchen with a letter in his hand.
"This time master opened the door," he said; "and gave me this letter to take up to Mr.
      Markham at Holloway. But I shall take the omnibus there and back."
Thomas then departed to execute his commission.
Shortly after he was gone, the bell of the rector's room rang.
Mrs. Kenrick hastened to answer it.
She found Mr. Tracy sitting in a musing attitude before the fire in his bed-room.
"My dear Mrs. Kenrick," he said, "I wish to have some conversation with you—I need scarcely
      now explain upon what subject. I have sent Thomas out of the way with an excuse: do you get
      rid of Katherine for an hour; I am faint—and require refreshment; and I will take my tea with
      you in the kitchen."
"In the kitchen, sir!" exclaimed the housekeeper, in surprise.
"Yes—if you will permit me," answered the rector: "I can then converse with you at the same
      time."
Mrs. Kenrick left the room to execute her master's wishes; and, as she descended the stairs,
      she thought within herself, "I am right! he has repented: he will become the virtuous and
      upright man he once was!"
And the good woman experienced a pleasure as sincere as if any one had announced to her that
      she was entitled to a princely fortune.
To send Katherine out of the way for an hour was no difficult matter. The old housekeeper
      gave her leave to repair to Saint Giles's to visit her relatives; and the young girl, thinking
      that her uncle might repent of his recent harshness towards her, now that she was no longer
      dependant upon him, gladly availed herself of this permission.
Katherine accordingly proceeded to Saint Giles's; and the moment she had left the house Mrs.
      Kenrick spread the kitchen table with the tea-things.
</div></body></text></TEI>