<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="252">
CHAPTER CCLI.   THE OBSTINATE PATIENT.
It was about a week after the exposure which had taken place in Stratton Street, that the
      following events occurred at the splendid mansion of the Marquis of Holmesford.
Although the time-piece upon the mantel of this nobleman's bed-room had only just proclaimed
      the hour of three in the afternoon, yet the curtains were drawn close over the windows, and
      the chamber was rendered as dark as possible.
In that apartment, too, there was a profound silence—broken only by the low but irregular
      breathing of some one who slept in the bed.
By the side of the couch sate two elderly men, dressed in black, and who maintained a strict
      taciturnity—doubtless for fear of awakening the sleeper.
On a small table between them were various bottles containing medicines.
The bed stood upon a sort of dais, or raised portion of the floor, this platform being
      attained by two steps. High over the couch was a canopy of velvet and gold, surmounted by the
      coronet of a Marquis, and from whence the rich satin curtains, of dark purple, flowed over
      that voluptuous bed.
The room itself was furnished in the most luxurious manner. The rosewood tables were inlaid
      with mother of pearl: the chairs were of antique form, with high backs carved in the most
      exquisite manner;—the mirrors were large, the pictures numerous, and all set in magnificent
      frames;—and the toilette-table was of the most elegant and costly description.
And yet he, for whom all this gorgeousness and splendour had been devised,—he, whose wealth
      had converted the entire mansion into a palace that would have even delighted the proudest
      Sultan that ever sate on an oriental throne,—this man, for whom earth had such delights—the
      world so many enjoyments,—this man—the Marquis of Holmesford—was about to succumb to the power
      of the Angel of Death.
Oh! what a mockery was it to behold,—when the window-curtains were drawn back, upon the
      Marquis awaking from his uneasy slumber,—what a
      mockery was it to behold that truly imperial magnificence surrounding the couch
      whereon lay a thin, weak, haggard, and attenuated old man, in whose eyes was already seen that
      stony glare which marks the last looks of dissolving nature!
The nobleman awoke, and turned round towards his physicians, who watched at the
      bed-side.
One of them rose and drew back the window-curtains as noiselessly as possible; and then the
      pure light of a lovely day streamed into the apartment.
The other medical attendant took the nobleman's hand, felt his pulse, and inquired in a low
      whisper "how his lordship felt now?"
"Just the same—or may be a little worse," answered the Marquis, in a hollow but feeble tone.
      "And yet it is impossible that I should be in any real danger! Oh! no—I was only taken ill
      last night; and men do not—do not—die," he added, pronouncing the fatal word with a
      most painful effort, "upon so slight a warning."
"Your lordship is far from well—very far from well," said the physician, emphatically; "and
      it is my duty to assure you of that fact."
"But you—you do not think, doctor," stammered the Marquis, "that I am in any—any real—real
      danger?"
And as he spoke, his glassy eyes were for a few moments lighted up with the evanescent fire
      of intense excitement—the agitation of a suspense ineffably painful.
"My lord," answered the physician, in a solemn tone, "if you have any affairs of a worldly
      nature to settle——"
"No—no: it can't be! You are deceiving me!" almost shrieked the old nobleman, starting up
      wildly to a sitting posture: "do you mean to offend—to insult me when I am a little
      indisposed? For I am convinced that this is only a trifling indisposition—a passing
      illness."
"My dear Marquis," said the second physician, advancing towards the bed, "my colleague
      performs but his duty—painful though it be—when he assures you——"
"Oh! yes—I understand you," again interrupted the nobleman, catching at a straw: "you do
      right to prepare me for the worst! But mine is not an extreme case—is it? Oh! no—I am certain
      it cannot be! You are both clever men—well versed in all the mysteries of your profession—and
      you can soon restore me to health. There! I will give you each a cheque for five thousand
      pounds the day that you tell me that I may get up again!"
And once more did he contemplate them with eager—anxious glances, expressive alike of
      feverish hope and tremendous terror.
"Speak—speak!" he cried: "answer me! Five thousand pounds for each of you, the day that I
      leave this bed!"
"Were your lordship to offer us all your fortune," answered the elder physician—he who had
      first spoken,—"we could not do more for you than we are now doing. And if you excite yourself
      thus——"
"Excite myself, indeed!" ejaculated the Marquis, attempting a laugh—which, however, rather
      resembled a death-rattle that seemed to shake his crazy old frame even to the very vital
      foundations: "is it not enough to make me excited, when you are so foolish as to joke with me
      about my being in danger—although you know that I must recover soon? Don't you know
       that, doctor?—tell me dear doctor—shall I not be well in a few days—or at all events
      a few weeks? Come—reassure me: say that you only spoke in jest! Danger, indeed! Why, doctor, I
      possess a constitution of iron!"
And, thus speaking, the Marquis fell back upon his pillow, in a state of extreme
      exhaustion.
The younger physician forced him to swallow some medicine; and for a few minutes he lay
      panting and moaning as if the chords of existence were snapping rapidly one after the
      other.
At length he turned again towards his medical attendants.
"Well, I do believe that I am rather worse than I just now fancied myself to be," he said,
      in a very faint and feeble tone: "but still I am sure of getting better soon. That medicine
      has already done me good. Three or four bottles of it—and I shall be quite well. Ah! my dear
      friends, you are profoundly skilled in all the secrets of the human frame; and with two such
      physicians as you, it would be impossible to—to—die so soon!"
"Pray, my lord, do not excite yourself," observed the elder medical attendant. "Repose and
      rest often prove more efficacious than drugs and potions."
"Well—well—I will be quiet—I will tranquillise myself," said the Marquis. "But you must not
      frighten me any more—you must not talk to me about settling my worldly affairs—just as if I
      were indeed about to die," he added, with a ghastly attempt to smile away that expression of
      profound terror which he felt to be imprinted on his countenance. "No—no: it is too
      ridiculous to put such ideas into one's head! Why—how old do you take me to be, doctor?"
"My lord, you afflict me greatly by this style of discourse," said the elder physician, who
      was thus appealed to. "Most solemnly do I adjure your lordship to compose your mind to that
      state in which every Christian should be prepared for the worst."
"Doctor—doctor, you cannot be serious!" again half shrieked the affrighted nobleman. "What!
      am I indeed so very ill? No—no: consider the strength of my constitution—remember how able I
      am to procure by my wealth every means that may conduce to my recovery—think of what you
      yourself can do for me——"
"My lord," said the physician, solemnly, "we will exert all human efforts to save you: but
      the result is with God!"
The Marquis uttered a hollow groan, and, closing his eyes, appeared to be suddenly wrapt in
      profound meditation.
The scene which we have just described, was a most painful one—even to those two physicians
      whose experience in such matters was so extensive. There was something peculiarly horrible in
      that old man of shattered health and exhausted vigour, boasting of the strength of a
      constitution ruined by a long career of debauchery,—boasting, too, even against his own
      internal convictions!
But, like all men who fear to die, the Marquis would not admit in words what his soul had
      acknowledged to itself. He seemed to feel as if there were a possibility of staving off the
      approach of death, merely by reiterating a disbelief that the destroyer was advancing at all.
      Thus, though his mind
      was filled with the most appalling apprehensions, he nevertheless clung—he knew
      not how nor wherefore—to a hope that his physicians might be deceived—that they had
      exaggerated his danger—that their skill was potent enough to wrestle with the dissolution of
      nature—in a word, that it was quite possible for him to recover.
And, if he feared to die, it was not precisely because he dreaded the idea of being suddenly
      plunged into eternity; for he had been a sceptic all his life, and was by no means convinced
      that there was any future state at all. But his mind shrank from the thought of death as from
      a revolting spectacle; and moreover the world had so many charms—such boundless attractions
      for him—that he could not endure the prospect of being called away from those delicious scenes
      for ever!
He remained for nearly a quarter of an hour buried in the most profound meditation.
"My worthy friends," he at length said, opening his glassy eyes once more, and turning
      towards his physicians, "I am now prepared to hear without excitement any thing you may deem
      it advisable or proper to communicate. In one word, is my state really one of great
      peril?"
"Your lordship now speaks as becomes a man of strong mind," answered the elder physician;
      "and in this altered mood you will receive with due tranquillity the sad announcement which I
      am bound to make."
"And that announcement?" said the Marquis, hastily.
"Is that your lordship's recovery is in the hands of heaven," replied the physician,
      solemnly: "for no human agency can enable you to quit that bed in health again."
"And this is your serious conviction?" said the Marquis, grasping the bed-clothes tightly
      with both his hands, as if to restrain an explosion of his agonising feelings.
"My duty towards your lordship compels me to answer in the affirmative," returned the
      physician.
A pause of some minutes ensued: the Marquis could not trust himself to speak. Silence was
      for a time the only safeguard against a relapse into those wildly-expressed doubts,
      adjurations, and frantic wanderings which had ere now denoted the real condition of his
      mind.
"It is then decided—and I must prepare for death!" he at length said, in a low and measured
      tone. "With a candour equal to that which you have already shown, doctor, tell me how long I
      may hope yet to live?"
"Do not press me, my lord, on that head——"
"Nay: now you are yourself adopting the very means to excite me," interrupted the Marquis,
      angrily. "I am nerved to hear the worst: but I wish that the worst may be
      communicated to me. Speak, doctor—speak fearlessly—and say how long I may expect yet to
      live?"
The two physicians consulted each other with a rapid interchange of glances; and both
      thereby intimating an affirmative, the elder one said, "Your lordship might probably survive
      four-and-twenty hours."
"Four-and-twenty hours!" repeated the Marquis, the bed actually shaking with the cold
      shudder that passed through his frame at this appalling announcement: "four-and-twenty hours!"
      he said a second time: "that is a very short reprieve, indeed! Has your skill no means,
      doctor, of prolonging my existence for a few days—for a few hours, even, longer than the
      amount which you have named?"
"There is no hope of accomplishing such a result, my lord," was the reply.
"No hope!" murmured the Marquis: then after another short pause, he said in a tone which it
      cost him a dreadful effort to render firm, "Have the kindness to direct that my solicitor may
      be sent for without delay."
This desire was immediately complied with; and as the lawyer lived in the neighbourhood,
      scarcely half an hour elapsed ere he was ushered into the presence of the Marquis.
The physicians were desired to remain in the room; and the solicitor, seating himself by the
      nobleman's directions at the table near the bed, prepared his writing materials.
The Marquis of Holmesford then gave instructions relative to the disposal of his property;
      and the lawyer drew up the will in due form.
Having detailed various bequests and legacies, and disposed of the great bulk of his
      fortune, the Marquis, who spoke in a firm and distinct tone of voice, addressed the lawyer in
      the following manner:—
"And now, sir, have the kindness to insert the words which I am about to dictate to
       you:—'Also I will and bequeathe to Katherine Bazzano, half-sister of his Highness
       Richard, Prince of Montoni, the sum of fifty thousand pounds, as a proof of the sincere
       contrition and deep regret which I experience on account of certain proceedings on my part,
       whereby the mother of the said Katherine Bazzano endured grievous wrong and great affliction,
       although perfectly innocent of any evil thought or deed in respect to her husband, the
       deceased father of the above-mentioned Richard Prince of Montoni.'—Have you written to
      my dictation?"
"I have followed your lordship as accurately as the introduction of a few necessary legal
      technicalities into that last clause would permit," was the solicitor's reply.
"Then naught now remains for me but to sign the will," said the Marquis; and he sate up in
      the bed, apparently with but little exertion.
He affixed his name with a firm hand to the document, and requested the physicians to
      witness it.
The ceremony was then completed; and the solicitor took his departure.
So soon as he had left the room, the Marquis addressed himself to the physicians in these
      terms:—
"My good friends, the ordeal which I most dreaded has been accomplished; and I feel as if a
      considerable weight were taken off my mind. What I now require is that you give me some
      powerful medicament or a strong cordial, that will endow me with sufficient energy to rise
      from this bed and proceed—alone and unattended—to another room in the house,—a room which I
       must visit—or I should not die in peace! And as a reward for this last service, I
      desire you to divide equally between you the amount which you will find in yonder
      writing-desk. That sum consists of a few thousands, and will, I hope, amply repay the kindness
      which I now expect at your hands."
"While I thank your lordship for this instance of your bounty towards me and my colleague,"
      said the elder physician, "I am convinced that I express his feelings as well as my own, in
      stating that we
      cannot possibly allow you to quit your couch. The excitement might prove almost
      immediately fatal."
"I have no time to waste in hearing or answering objections," said the Marquis, his glazing
      eyes lighting up with the fever of impatience, and a hectic flush appearing on his sallow,
      sunken, withered cheeks. "Do what I request—or leave me this moment: give me such a cordial as
      you may think suitable to the purpose—or my valet will supply me with a bumper of
      champagne."
"My dear Marquis——"
"My lord—my lord——"
"In one word, do as I desire—or leave me," exclaimed the nobleman, cutting short the
      ejaculations of the two physicians by an imperious wave of his skeleton-like hand: "there
      shall be no other master save myself in this house, until the breath be out of my body."
The physicians essayed farther remonstrances—but in vain. The Marquis grew fearfully
      irritated with their opposition, and then fell back so exhausted upon his pillow, that the
      medical attendants were compelled to administer as a restorative the cordial which he had
      demanded as an artificial stimulant a few minutes previously.
The effect of the cordial was really surprising: that old man, whom its influence had just
      snatched—but snatched only for a time—from the out-stretched arms of death, sate up in his
      bed, smiled, and seemed to bid defiance to the destroying angel.
"You must humour me now, my friends," he said, in a jocose manner, which contrasted awfully
      with the inevitable peril of his condition: "go to the writing-desk in yonder corner, and let
      me be assured you have possessed yourselves of that token of my good feeling which I bequeathe
      to you."
The physicians, rather to please their obstinate patient than to gratify any avaricious
      longing on their part, did as they were desired: but, scarcely had they opened the desk, where
      they observed a bundle of Bank-notes, when a low chuckle met their ears.
They turned and beheld the Marquis, clad in a long dressing-gown and with slippers on his
      feet, hurrying out of the room by a small door near the foot of his bed.
To hasten after him was their first and most natural impulse; but the key was turned on the
      other side ere they even reached the door.
Without losing a moment, they hastened from the room by a door at the opposite extremity;
      but in the adjoining passage they were met by the nobleman's principal valet.
"Gentlemen," said the domestic, "his lordship desires me to inform you that he has no
      farther need of your services."
"But, my good fellow," exclaimed the younger physician, "your master is dying—he cannot live
      another day; and this excitement—this rash proceeding——"
"Is sheer madness!" added the senior medical attendant. "Whither has your master gone?"
The valet whispered a few words to the physicians: they understood him full well, and
      exchanged looks of mingled disgust and horror.
"The unnatural excitement of this proceeding," at length observed the elder physician, "will
      kill the Marquis within an hour!"
</div></body></text></TEI>