<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="37">
CHAPTER XXXVII. THE LAPSE OF TWO YEARS.
SHAKSPEARE said, "All the world is a stage:" we say, "All the world is an
       omnibus."
The old and young—the virtuous and wicked—the rich and the poor, are invariably thrown and
      mixed up together; and yet their interests are always separate. Few stretch out a hand to help
      a ragged or a decrepit man into the vehicle; and the well-dressed draw back and avert their
      heads as the impoverished wretch forces his way with difficulty past them up to the vacant
      seat in the farthest corner. The moment a well-dressed individual mounts the steps of the
      omnibus, every hand is thrust out to help him in, and the most convenient seat is
      instantaneously accorded to him. And then the World's omnibus hurries along, stopping
      occasionally at the gates of a church-yard to put down one of its passengers, and calling at
      some palace or some cottage indiscriminately to fill up the vacant seat.
Away—away thunders the World's omnibus again, crushing the fairest flowers of the earth in
      its progress, and frequently choosing rough, dreary, and unfrequented roads in preference to
      paths inviting, even, and pleasant. Sometimes, by the caprice of the passengers, or by the
      despotic commands of the masters of the World's omnibus, the beggar and the rich man change
      garments and places; and the former then becomes the object of deference and respect, while
      the latter is treated with contempt and scorn. In the World's omnibus might makes
       right;—but cunning frequently secures a more soft and comfortable seat than
      either.
If a dispute ensues, and the question at issue is referred to the conductor for arbitration,
      he glances at the personal appearance of the complainant and defendant, and decides in favour
      of him who wears the better coat. When stones or other impediments obstruct the way of the
      World's omnibus, the poor and the ragged passengers are commanded to alight and clear them
      away; and yet, when the vehicle stops for dinner at the inn by the way side, the well-dressed
      and the affluent appropriate to themselves the luxuries, while those who cleared away the
      stones and who grease the wheels, get only a sorry crust—and sometimes nothing at all.
And then, away—away the World's omnibus goes again, amidst noise, dust, and all variations
      of weather. In the inclement seasons extra garments are given to the well-dressed and the
      rich, but none to the ragged and the poor:—on the contrary, their very rags and tatters are
      frequently taken from them to pay the prices of the hard crusts at the road-side inns. So goes
      the World's omnibus; and the moment the driver and conductor, who are its masters and owners,
      are deposited in their turns at the gates of some cemetery, their sons succeed them, whether
      competent or not—whether infants in swaddling clothes, or old men
       in their dotage. And few—very few of those drivers know how to hold the
      reins;—and thus is it that the World's omnibus is frequently hurried at a thundering rate over
      broken ground, even unto the very verge of some precipice, down which it would be inevitably
      dashed, did not some bold intrepid passenger emerge from his obscurity in the corner, rush
      upon the box, hurl the incompetent driver from his seat, and assume the reins in his stead.
      But mark the strange opinions of those who journey in the World's omnibus! The passengers,
      instead of being grateful to him who has thus rescued them from ruin, pronounce him the
      usurper of a seat to which he has no hereditary claim, and never rest till they have succeeded
      in displacing him, and restoring the incompetent driver to his functions.
So goes the World's omnibus! None of the passengers are ever contented with their seats,
      even though they may have originally chosen those seats for themselves. This circumstance
      leads to a thousand quarrels and mean artifices; and constant shiftings of positions take
      place. One passenger envies the seat of another; and, when he has succeeded in working his way
      into it, he finds to his surprise that it is not so agreeable as he imagines, and he either
      wishes to get back to his old one or to shove himself into another. The passengers in the
      World's omnibus are divided into different sects and parties, each party professing certain
      opinions for the authority of which they have no better plea than "the wisdom of their
      forefathers." Thus one party hates and abhors another; and each confidently imagines itself to
      be in the right, and all other parties to be in the wrong. And for those differences of
      opinion the most sanguinary broils ensue; and friendship, honour, virtue, and integrity are
      all forgotten in the vindictive contention.
But the World's omnibus rolls along all the same; and the Driver and Conductor laugh at the
      contests amongst the passengers, which they themselves have probably encouraged, and which
      somehow or another always turn to their individual benefit in the long run.
So goes the World's omnibus;—so it has always hurried onwards;—and in like manner will it
      ever go!
Oh! say not that Time has a leaden wing while it accompanies the World's omnibus on its
      way!
Two years elapsed from the date of the Old Bailey trials described in preceding
      chapters.
It was now the beginning of December, 1837.
The morning was dry, fine, and bright: the ground was as hard as asphalte; and the air was
      pure, cold, and frosty.
From an early hour a stout, elderly man—well wrapped up in a large great coat, and with a
      worsted "comforter" coming up to his very nose, which was of a purple colour with the cold—was
      seen walking up and down the front of the Giltspur Street Compter, apparently dividing his
      attention between the prison entrance and the clock of Saint Sepulchre's church.
At a quarter to ten o'clock, on that same morning, a private carriage, without armorial
      bearings upon the panels, and attended by two domestics, whose splendid liveries were
      concealed beneath drab great-coats, drove up to the door of the house inhabited by the
      Governor of Newgate. Inside that carriage was seated a lady—wrapped up in the most costly
      furs, and with a countenance whose beauty was enhanced by the smile of pleasure and
      satisfaction which illuminated it.
Precisely as the clock of Saint Sepulchre's church struck ten, the doors of the Compter and
      Newgate opened simultaneously, and with a similar object.
From the Compter issued Richard Markham:—the portal of Newgate gave freedom to Eliza
      Sydney.
They were both restored to liberty upon the same day—the terms of their imprisonment dating
      from the commencement of the sessions during which they were tried.
The moment Richard set foot in the street, he was caught in the arms of the faithful
      Whittingham, who welcomed him with a kind of paternal affection, and whimpered over him like a
      child.
Eliza Sydney entered the carriage awaiting her at the door of Newgate, and was clasped to
      the bosom of Mrs. Arlington. The vehicle immediately drove rapidly away in a north-easterly
      direction.
"Mr. Monroe is waiting for you at your own house at Holloway," said Whittingham to his young
      master, when the first ebullition of joy was over. "He has been ailing lately—and he thought
      that this happy and fortitudinous event would be too much for his nerves."
"Let us make haste home, my excellent friend," observed Markham. "I am dying to behold once
      more the haunts of my childhood."
Whittingham summoned a cab; and he and his young master were soon rolling along the road
      which led to home.
Two years' imprisonment had produced a great effect upon Richard Markham. The intellectual
      cast and faultless beauty of his countenance still remained; but the joyous expression,
      natural to youth, had fled for ever; and in its place was a settled melancholy which
      proclaimed an early and intimate acquaintance with misfortune. His spirit was broken; but his
      principles were not undermined:—his heart was lacerated to its very core,—but his integrity
      remained intact. Even though the gate of his prison had closed behind him, he could not shake
      off the idea that his very countenance proclaimed him to be a Freed Convict.
At length the cab reached Markham Place.
Richard glanced, with a momentary gleam of satisfaction upon his pale countenance, towards
      the hill on which stood the two trees—the rallying point for the brothers who had separated,
      more than six years back, beneath their foliage. Tears started to his eyes; and the ray of
      sunshine upon his brow gave place to a cloud of deep and sombre melancholy. He thought of what
      he was when he bade adieu to his brother at that period, and what he was at the present
      moment. Then all was blooming and encouraging in his path; and now he felt
      as if the mark of Cain were upon him!
He alighted from the vehicle, and entered the library, where Mr. Monroe awaited him. He and
      his guardian were at length alone together.
But how altered was Monroe since Richard had last seen him! His form was bowed down, his
      countenance was haggard, his eyes were sunken, and his brow was covered with wrinkles. He
      glanced furtively and anxiously around him the instant the young man entered the room; and,
      instead of hastening forward to welcome him, he sank upon a chair, covering his face with his
      hands. The tears trickled through his fingers; and his breast was convulsed with deep
      sobs.
"In the name of heaven, what ails you, sir?" demanded Richard.
"My boy—you have come back at last," exclaimed the old gentleman, scarcely able to
      articulate
       a word, through the bitterness of his grief;—"and this much-dreaded day has at
      length arrived!"
"Much-dreaded day," repeated Markham, in unfeigned astonishment. "I should have thought,
      sir," he added coldly, "that you, who professed yourself so convinced of my
      innocence, would have received me with a smile of welcome!"
"My dear—dear boy," gasped the old man, "God knows I am rejoiced to hail your freedom; and
      that same Almighty power can also attest to my sincere conviction of your innocence. Believe
      me, I would go through fire and water to serve you,—I would lay down my life, miserable and
      valueless as it is, to benefit you;—but, oh! I cannot—cannot support your presence!"
And the old gentleman seemed absolutely convulsed with agony as he spoke.
"I presume," said Richard, leaning over him, so as to be enabled to whisper in his ear,
      although there was none else at hand to listen,—"I presume that you scorn the man who has been
      convicted of felony? It is natural, sir—it is natural; but such a demonstration of aversion is
      not the less calculated to wound one who never injured you."
"No—no, Richard; you never injured me; and that makes me feel the more acutely now. But—hear
      me. I take God to witness that I love you as my own son, and that I am above such unnatural
      conduct as that which you would impute to me."
"My God!" cried Markham, impatiently, "what does all this mean? Are you ill? Has anything
      unpleasant occurred? If so, we will postpone all discussion upon my affairs until a period
      more agreeable to yourself."
As Markham uttered these words, he gently disengaged the old man's hands from his
      countenance, and pressed them in his own. He was then for the first time struck by the altered
      and care-worn features of his guardian; and, without thinking of the effect his words might
      produce, he exclaimed, "My dear sir, you have evidently been very—very ill!"
"Ill!" cried the old man, bitterly. "When the mind suffers, the body is sympathetically
      affected; and this has been my case! If you have suffered much, Richard, during the last two
      years—so have I; and we have both only the same consolation—our innocence!"
"You speak in enigmas," ejaculated Markham. "What can you have to do with innocence or
      guilt—you who never wronged a human being?"
So strange became the expression of the old man's countenance, as Richard uttered these
      words, that the young man was perfectly astonished, and almost horrified; and undefined alarms
      floated through his brain. He was in a painful state of suspense; and yet he was afraid to ask
      a question.
"Richard!" suddenly exclaimed the old man, now looking our hero fixedly and fearlessly in
      the face, "I have a terrible communication to make to you."
"A terrible communication!" repeated Markham; "is it in respect to my brother? If so, do not
      keep me in suspense—let me know the worst at once—I can bear anything but suspense!"
"I have never heard from nor of your brother," answered Mr. Monroe; "and
      cannot say whether he be dead or living."
"Thank God, you have nothing terrible to communicate relative to him," exclaimed
      Markham; for he always had, and still entertained a presentiment that the appointment on the
      hill, beneath the two trees, would be punctually kept;—and this hope had cheered him during
      his horrible imprisonment.
"But I will not keep you in suspense, Richard," said the old man; "it is better for me to
      unburthen my mind at once. You are ruined!"
"Ruined!" said Markham, starting as that dread word fell upon his ears; for the word
       ruin does not express one evil, like other words, such as sickness, poverty,
      imprisonment; but it comprises and expresses an awful catalogue of all the miseries which can
      be supposed to afflict humanity. "Ruined!" he cried;—then catching at a straw, he added, "Aye!
      ruined in reputation, doubtless; but rich in the possessions which this world principally
      esteems. My property was all vested in you by my deceased father—I was not of age when I was
      condemned—and consequently the law could not touch my fortune when it filched from me my good
      name!"
"Ruined—ruined in property and all!" returned Mr. Monroe, solemnly. "Unfortunate
      speculations on my part, but in your interest, have consumed the vast
      property entrusted to me by your father!"
Markham fell into an arm chair; and for a moment he thought that every fibre in his heart
      would break. A terrible load oppressed his chest and his brain;—he was the victim of deep
      despair. As one looks forth into the darkness of midnight, and sees it dense and motionless,
      so did he now survey his own prospects. The single consolation which, besides the hope of
      again meeting his brother,—the real, the present, the tangible consolation, as it might be
      called, which would have enabled him to forget a portion of his sufferings and his
      wrongs,—this was now gone; and, a beggar upon the face of the earth, he found that he had not
      even the advantage of a good name to help him onwards in his career. Hope was quenched within
      him!
A long pause ensued.
At its expiration Markham suddenly rose from the arm-chair, approached his guardian, and
      said in a low and hollow voice. "Tell me how all this has happened; let me know the
      circumstances which led to this calamity."
"They are brief," said Monroe, "and will convince you that I am more to be pitied than
      blamed. Long previous to your unfortunate trial I commenced a series of speculations with my
      own property, all of which turned out unhappily. The year 1832 was a fatal one to many
      old-established houses; and mine was menaced with absolute ruin. In an evil hour I listened to
      the advice of a Mr. Allen, a merchant who had been reduced by great losses in America trading;
      and by his counsel, I employed a small portion of your property with the view of
      recovering my own, and augmenting your wealth at the same time. Allen acted as my agent in
      these new speculations. At first we were eminently successful; I speedily released myself from
      difficulty, and doubled the sum that I had borrowed from your fortune. At the beginning of
      1836 Mr. Allen heard of a gentleman who required the loan of a considerable sum of money to
      work a patent which was represented to be a perfect mine of gold. Mr. Allen and I consulted
      upon the eligibility of embarking money in this enterprise: in a word, we were dazzled by the
      immense advantages to be derived from the speculation. At that time—it was shortly after your
      trial and sentence, Richard—I was ill and confined to my bed. Mr. Allen therefore managed this
      for me; and it is an extraordinary fact that I have never once seen the
       individual to whom I lent an enormous sum of money—for I did advance
      the sum required by that person; and I drew largely upon your fortune to procure it! Oh!
      Richard—had this speculation succeeded, I should have been a wealthy man once more, and your
      property would have been more than doubled. But, alas! this individual to whom I advanced that
      immense amount, and whose securities I had fancied unexceptionable, defrauded me in the most
      barefaced manner! And yet the law could not touch him, for he had contrived to associate
      Allen's name with his own as a partner in the enterprise. Rendered desperate by this appalling
      loss, I embarked in the most extravagant speculations with the remainder of your money. The
      infatuation of the gambler seized upon me: and I never stopped until the result was ruin—total
      ruin to me, and comparative ruin to you!"

"Comparative ruin—only comparative ruin!" ejaculated Markham, his countenance
      suddenly brightening up at these words: "is there any thing left from the wrecks of my
      property—is there any thing available still remaining? Speak;—and if you answer me in the
      affirmative—if you announce the existence of never so small a pittance, I will yet forgive you
      all!"
"This house and the small estate attached to it are left," answered the old man, "and
      totally unincumbered. I neither could nor would touch your paternal possessions."
Markham felt indescribable relief from this statement; and he wrung his guardian's hand with
      the same gratitude which he would have shown had he that day received his inheritance
      entire.
"Thank God, I am not totally ruined!" cried Markham. "I can at least bury myself in this
      retreat;
      —I can daily ascend that hill where the memorials of fraternal affection
      stand;—and I can there hope for the return of my brother! My dear sir, what has been done
      cannot be recalled: reproaches, even were I inclined to offer any, would be useless; and
      regrets would be equally unavailing. This estate will produce me a small income—but enough for
      my wants. Two hundred pounds a-year are certainly a beggar's pittance, when compared with the
      inheritance which my father left me;—but I am still grateful that even the means of
      subsistence are left. And you, Mr. Monroe—upon what are you subsisting?"
"I still attend to the wrecks of my affairs," replied the old man; "and then I have my
      daughter Ellen—who earns a little with her needle——"
"You shall come and take up your abode with me—you and your daughter—and share my income,"
      interrupted the generous young man, who saw not before him an individual that had deprived him
      of a large fortune, but an old—old man, bent down by the weight of numerous and deep
      afflictions.
Monroe wept at this noble conduct on the part of his ward, and strenuously refused to accept
      the proffered kindness and hospitality. Markham urged, begged, and entreated;—but the old man
      would not accede to his wish.
"You have not told me what became of your friend Mr. Allen," said Richard, after a
      pause.
"He was an honourable and an upright man," was the reply; "and the ruin which he had been
      the means of entailing, though innocently, upon me, broke his heart, he died three months
      ago."
"And what became of the infamous cheat whose schemes have thus killed one person and ruined
      two others?"
"I know not," answered Mr. Monroe. "I never saw him myself; nor did he even know that there
      was such a person as myself connected with the loan which he received. Certain commercial
      reasons—too long to be explained now—made me put forward Allen as the person who advanced the
      money, and conducted the entire business as a principal, and not as an agent. Thus no
      communication ever took place between me and this George Montague."
"George Montague!" ejaculated Richard.
"Yes—he was the villain who has plundered us."
"George Montague again!" murmured Richard, as he paced the room with hurried and uneven
      steps. "Why is it that this name should constantly obtrude itself upon my notice? wherefore
      should I be perpetually condemned to hear it uttered, and always coupled with epithets of
      abhorrence and reproach? and why should I be amongst the number of that miscreant's victims?
      Strange combination of circumstances!"
"Are you acquainted with this Montague?" demanded his guardian: "the name seemed to produce
      a singular effect upon you."
"I am not acquainted with him: like you, I have never even seen him," said Markham. "But I
      have heard much concerning him; and all that I have heard is evil. Surely—surely
      justice will some day overtake a miscreant who is constantly preying upon society, and who
      enriches himself at the expense of his fellow-creatures' happiness!"
Some time longer was devoted to conversation upon topics of interest to Markham and his
      guardian; and when the former had partially succeeded in tranquillising the mind of the
      latter, the old man was suffered to take his departure.
</div></body></text></TEI>