<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER XII.
EFFECTS OF PLEASURE.—THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN.—ILL-TEMPER, ITS ORIGIN AND
      CONSEQUENCES.
The return to the quiet routine of work, and less exciting recreation after the Christmas
      pleasures, was of course a trial to all our young friends. Not so much to the boys, as to
      their sisters; Percy's elastic spirits found pleasure in every thing, being somewhat too old
      to care for his studies, or feel them now as a restraint. Herbert only exchanged one kind of
      happiness for another. Edward looked to every month that passed, as bringing nearer the
      attainment of his wishes; and he was so fond of Mr. Howard, and so quick at learning, and such
      a favorite with all his schoolfellows, that he did not care at all when the time of work came
      again. Ellen and Emmeline both found it very difficult to like their lessons again; especially
      the latter, who felt as if work and regularity were most particularly disagreeable things, and
      sometimes was almost in despair as to her ever enjoying them again; but she tried very hard to
      overcome indolence, and never give way to petulance, and succeeded, so as to win her the
      delight of both her parents' approbation. Indulgence always made her feel as if no effort on
      her part was too great to prove how much she felt it; and when any one, old or young,
      experiences this sort of feeling, they need never be afraid but that they will succeed in
      their efforts, painful and hard as they may at first seem. It was not so difficult for Ellen
      as for Emmeline, because she was less able to realize such an intensity of pleasure. She
      seemed safer when regularly employed; and besides, to work hard at her respective studies, was
      one of the very few things which she could do to prove how much she loved her aunt; and
      accustomed from such early childhood to conquer inclination, and, in fact, never to fancy
      pleasure and indulgence were her due, there was happiness enough for her even in their more
      regular life: but to Caroline the change was actually unbearable. While admiration and praise
      only incited Emmeline to greater exertions, they caused Caroline completely to relax in hers,
      and to give, in consequence, as much trouble and annoyance as she had received pleasure. The
      perseverance in her various studies, especially in music, the unceasing control over her
      temper, which before the holidays she had so striven for, had now entirely given way.
      It was much less trouble for her to learn than Emmeline, therefore her studies with Miss
      Harcourt were generally well performed; but the admiration she had excited made her long for
      more, and believe herself a person deserving much more consideration and respect than she
      received from her own family. These thoughts persisted in, of course, produced and retained
      ill-temper; which, as there was no longer any fear of her being debarred by its indulgence
      from any pleasure, she made no attempt to overcome. The praise bestowed on her music, made her
      fancy herself a much greater proficient than she really was, and though her love of music was
      great, her love of praise was greater; and so she not only relaxed in her practice, but
      inwardly murmured at the very little praise she received from her mother.
"How can you give mamma so much trouble, Caroline, when you know you can do so much better?"
      Herbert exclaimed, one day, when an attack of weakness, to which he was liable, had confined
      him to a sofa.
Mrs. Hamilton, after giving her usual hour's lesson, in which Caroline had chosen to do
      nothing, had left her in very evident displeasure, and even Herbert was roused to most unusual
      indignation.
"What is the use of practicing day after day?" was her angry reply; "I am sure I should play
      just as well if I practiced less."
"You did not think so a month ago, Caroline."
"No, because then I had something to practice for."
"And have you nothing now?—Is mamma's approbation nothing?—Is the pleasure you give all of
      us, by your talent for music, nothing?—Oh, Caroline, why will you throw away so much real
      gratification, for the vain desire of universal admiration?"
"There surely can be no harm, Herbert, in wishing to be universally loved and admired."
"There is, when it makes you discontented and unhappy, and blind to the love and admiration
      of your home. What is the praise of strangers worth, compared to that of those who love you
      best?"
"There is not much chance of my receiving either at present," was the cold reply.
"Because you will not try for the one most easily and happily obtained; and even without
      thinking of praise, how can you be so ungrateful, as to repay all mamma's care and trouble by
      the indolence, coldness, and almost insolence, you have shown to-day? How few mothers of her
      rank would—"
"You may spare your sermon, Herbert; for at this moment I am not disposed either to listen
      to or profit by it," interrupted Caroline, and she left the room in anger. A faint flush rose
      to the pale cheek of her brother, but he quickly conquered the natural irritation, and sought
      his mother, by every fond attention on his part, to remove the pain of Caroline's conduct.
This continued for about a fortnight, at the end of which time, Caroline suddenly resumed
      her music with assiduity, and there were no more ebullitions of ill-temper. Herbert hoped his
      expostulations were taking effect; Mrs. Hamilton trusted that her child was becoming sensible
      of her past folly, and trying to conquer it, and banish its memory herself: both, however,
      were mistaken. Annie Grahame had imparted to her friend, in strict confidence, that her mother
      intended giving a grand ball about the end of February, and meant to entreat Mrs. Hamilton, as
      a personal favor, to let Caroline be present. Caroline little knew the very slight foundation
      Annie had for this assertion. Lady Helen had merely said, perhaps she would ask; and
      this was only said, because she was too indolent and weak to say "No" at once. Not that she
      had any unkind feeling toward Caroline, but simply because she was perfectly certain Mrs.
      Hamilton would not consent, and to persuade as earnestly as Annie wished was really too much
      trouble.
Caroline's wishes in this instance triumphed over her better judgment, for had she allowed
      herself to think soberly, she ought to have known her mother's principles of action
      sufficiently, not to entertain the slightest hope of going.
The invitations (three weeks' notice) for her parents and brothers came. In them she did not
      expect to be included, but when above a week passed, and still not a word was said,
      disappointment took the place of hope, and it was only the still lingering belief that she
      might go, even at the last moment, that prevented the return of ill-temper.
Now Lady Helen really had asked, though she did not persuade; and Mrs. Hamilton thanked her,
      but, as she expected, decidedly refused. "Caroline was much too young," she said, "for such a
      party. Did she know any thing about being asked?" Lady Helen said, with truth, that she had
      not mentioned the subject to her, and had desired Annie to be equally silent.
Mrs. Hamilton quite forgot that Miss Grahame was not famous for obedience, and, relying on
      her friend's assurance, determined on not saying any thing to Caroline about it; wishing to
      spare her the pain which she knew her refusal would inflict. As it happened, it would have
      been better if she had spoken. The weather had prevented Caroline from seeing Annie, but she
      was quite sure she would not deceive her; and her proud heart rebelled against her mother, not
      only for refusing Lady Helen's request, but for treating her so much like a child, as to hide
      that refusal from her. Under the influence of such thoughts, of course, her temper became more
      and more difficult to control and as a natural consequence, anger and irritation against her
      mother, and self-reproach for the indulgence of such feelings increased, till she became
      actually miserable.
It happened that about this time Miss Harcourt left Oakwood for a week on a visit to an
      invalid friend at Dartmouth. Mrs. Hamilton had given her full liberty, promising that her
      pupils should lose nothing by her absence. She left on the Saturday, and the Thursday was Lady
      Helen's ball. On the Monday, Mr. Hamilton, detained Edward as he was leaving the library,
      after morning prayers, and told him that he had received a letter, which he thought might
      chance to interest him. Ten minutes afterward, Edward rushed into the breakfast-room, in a
      state of such joyous excitement that he could scarcely speak.
"Wish me five, ten, twenty thousand joys!" he exclaimed, springing from chair to chair, as
      if velocity of movement should bring back speech. "In one month the Prince William sails, and
      I am to meet her at Portsmouth, and be a sailor, a real sailor; and to-morrow fortnight uncle
      says we are to start for London, and have ten days there to see all the fine sights, and then
      go to Portsmouth, and see all that is to be seen there, and then—and then—"
"Take care you do not lose your wits before you leave Oakwood," interposed Percy laughing
      heartily. "I should not at all wonder, before you go, that you will be fancying the river Dart
      the Atlantic, and set sail in a basket, touch at all the islets you may pass, imagining them
      various cities, and finally land at Dartmouth, believing it Halifax, your destined port—that
      will be the end of your sailorship, Edward, depend upon it."
"I rather think I should stand a chance of being ducked into my sober senses again, Percy,
      unless wicker be waterproof, which I never heard it was."
"But I have, though," eagerly interrupted Emmeline; "the Scots and Picts invaded England in
      wicker boats, and to have held so many men, they must have been strong and waterproof too. So
      you see, Percy's basket is only an ancient boat, Edward. You are much better off than you
      thought you were."
"Give me Alfred's wooden walls instead, Emmy; your Picts and Scots were very little better
      than savages—Alfred is my man; he deserves to be called great, if it were only for forming the
      first English navy. But neither my aunt nor Ellen have wished me joy. I think I shall be
      offended."
Mrs. Hamilton could not speak at the first moment, for the joy, the animation of her nephew
      so recalled the day when her own much-loved brother, her darling Charles, had rushed into her
      room, to tell her all his glee, for no one ever listened to and shared in his joys and
      troubles as she did. He was then scarcely older than Edward, as full of hope and joy and
      buoyancy—where was he? Would his fate be that of the bright, beautiful boy before her? And as
      Edward threw his arms round her neck, and kissed her again and again, telling her he could not
      be quite sure it was not all a dream, unless she wished him joy too it was the utmost effort
      to prevent the fast gathering tears, and so command her voice, that he should not hear her
      tremble. Poor Ellen looked and felt bewildered. She had always tried to realize that Edward,
      to be a sailor, must leave her; and in fact aware that his summons would soon come, her aunt
      and uncle had often alluded to his departure before her, but still she had never thought it
      near; and now the news was so sudden, and Edward was so wild with joy she fancied she ought to
      rejoice too, but she could not; and Percy was obliged to ask her merrily, what ailed her, and
      if she could not trust to his being a much more worthy brother than such a water-rat, who had
      no business whatever on land, before she could take her place at the breakfast table and try
      to smile. But her eyes would rest on Edward even then, and she felt as if there were something
      across her throat and she could not swallow the nice roll which Herbert, had so kindly
      buttered and cut, and so quietly placed in her plate; and when Edward said something very
      funny, as he was in the habit of doing, and made them all laugh, she tried to laugh too, but
      instead of a laugh it was a sob that startled herself, for she was quite sure she did not mean
      to be so foolish: but instead of being reproved, as she was afraid she should be, she felt her
      aunt's arm thrown gently round her, till she could hide her face on her shoulder, and cry
      quite quietly for a few minutes, for they went on talking and laughing round the
      breakfast-table, and nobody took any notice of her, which she was quite glad of, for she could
      not bear Edward to think she was unhappy when he was so pleased. And after breakfast, though
      he was in such a desperate hurry to tell Mr. Howard the good news, that when he did set off,
      he left even Percy far behind him, he found time to give her a hearty kiss, and to tell her
      that he loved her very much, though he could not help being so glad he was going to sea; and
      that he was quite proud of her, because though he knew she was very sorry he was going, she
      did not cry and make a fuss as some selfish people would; and then she really did smile.
"It is Monday morning, my dears, and I find Ellis and Morris require my attention for a
      longer time than I expected," Mrs. Hamilton said, as she entered the school-room, and found
      the three girls preparing their books, "so I must set you all to work, and see how well you
      can get on without me till eleven, when I will rejoin you. I shall order the carriage at
      half-past twelve, and if all I require is completed, we will pay your favorite old ruin a
      visit, Emmy; the morning is so lovely, that I think we may venture to take our sketch-books,
      and see what other part of Berry Pomeroy we can take pencil possession of."
Such an anticipation was quite enough for Emmeline. Her dance about the room was only
      checked by the idea that her lessons would never be ready, nor her exercises and sums done,
      unless she sat quietly down, and so, with a great effort, she gave all her attention to her
      various tasks, and mastered them even before her mother returned. Ellen, though she tried
      quite as much, was not so successful. The Prince William would sail in miniature on her slate,
      over all her figures. The recollection of the awful storm they had encountered on their voyage
      to England would return so vividly, that the very room seemed to heave. And then—but she could
      not make out why she should think about that then—her mother's death-bed came before her and
      her promise, and it seemed harder still to part with Edward, from a vague dread that came over
      her, but still she tried to attend to what she had to do, and congratulated herself on its
      completion before her aunt appeared.
Caroline, alone, was determined not to work. Because she had not made herself miserable
      enough already, the most unfounded jealousy entered her head from seeing her mother's
      caressing kindness toward Ellen at breakfast; why was not her manner as kind to her! She was
      quite as unhappy, and her mother must see it, but she took no notice of her—only of Ellen. She
      might be cross sometimes, but she never told stories or tried to hide her faults, and it was
      very hard and unjust that she should be treated so like a child, and Ellen made so much of;
      and so she thought and thought, not attempting to do a single thing till she actually made
      herself believe, for the time, that her kind, indulgent mother had no love for her; and every
      thing looked blacker than before.
She made no effort to rouse herself even in Mrs. Hamilton's presence, but listened to her
      remonstrances with such extreme carelessness, almost insolence, that her mother felt her
      patience failing. The self-control, however, for which she had successfully striven, enabled
      her so to overcome the irritation, as to retain her own quiet dignity, and simply to desire
      Caroline to give her attention at once to her studies, and conquer her ill-temper, or not to
      think of accompanying them on their excursion, as idleness and peevishness were better left to
      themselves. An insolent and haughty reply rose to Caroline's lips; but with an effort she
      remained silent, her flushed forehead alone denoting the internal agitation. Emmeline's
      diligence and the approbation she received irritated her still more; but she rejoiced when she
      heard her mother tell Ellen there was not a correct line in her French exercise, and her sum,
      a compound long division, wrong from the very first figure. But the pleasure soon gave place
      to indignant anger, when, instead of the reproof which she believed would follow, Mrs.
      Hamilton said very kindly—
"I should very much like these done correctly, Ellen, before we go out; suppose you ensconce
      yourself in that bay window, there are a table and chair all ready for you, and we shall not
      interrupt you as we should if you remain at this table. I know they are both very difficult,
      to-day especially, but the more merit in their accomplishment, you know the more pleased I
      shall be."
Ellen obeyed directly; a little care, and with the assistance of her grammar, which her aunt
      permitted her to refer to, instead of depending entirely on her memory that morning, enabled
      her to succeed with her French; but four times was that tormenting sum returned to, till at
      last her tears effaced the figures as fast as they were written. Still, patience and
      resolution in both teacher and pupil conquered, and the fifth time there was not a figure
      wrong; and Mrs. Hamilton, fondly putting back the heavy ringlets which in Ellen's absorbed
      attention had fallen over her tearful cheeks, said, playfully—
"Shall I tell you a secret, my little Ellen? I was quite as disinclined to be firm this
      morning as you were to be patient; so you see we have both gained a grand victory. My
      conjuring propensities, as Emmy thinks them, told me that you had real cause for some little
      inattention, and, therefore that it was very cruel in me to be so determined; but my
      judgment would tell me that my feeling was wrong, and that to conquer
      disinclination and overcome a difficulty, was a much better way of lessening even natural
      sorrow than to give up. I do not expect you to think so just now, but I fancy you are not very
      sorry this disagreeable, terribly tiresome sum has not to be done to-morrow, which it must
      have been, had you left it to-day."
Ellen was so glad, that she felt almost happy, and her few other duties were done quite
      briskly, for Mrs. Hamilton had been so kind as to countermand the carriage till one, that she
      and Caroline might have time to finish. But Caroline, if she had not tried before, was now
      still less capable of doing so. Every word of kindness addressed to Ellen increased the storm
      raging within, and the difficulty of restraining it in Mrs. Hamilton's presence caused it to
      burst forth with unmitigated violence the moment she quitted the apartment, desiring Emmeline
      and Ellen to make haste, and put away their books, but still without taking the least notice
      of her. Invective, reproach, almost abuse, were poured against Ellen, who stood actually
      frightened at the violence she had so very innocently excited, and at the fearful and
      deforming passion which inflamed her cousin's every feature. Caroline's anger had miscounted
      time, or she must have known that her mother could not have gone far enough, for such unusual
      tones of excitement to escape her quick hearing. Mrs. Hamilton, startled and alarmed, returned
      directly, and so vividly did her child's appearance and words recall her own misguided sister
      in those uncontrolled fits of fury, under which she had so often trembled, that present
      disappointment and dread for the future, took possession of her, and for the moment rendered
      her powerless. Caroline was too much engrossed to perceive her at first, and she had,
      therefore time to rally from the momentary weakness.
"What does this mean?" she exclaimed, fixing her eyes on Caroline, with that expression of
      quiet but stern reproof, which when she did use it—and it was very seldom—had the power of
      subduing even the wildest excitement. "What has Ellen done, that you should abuse her with
      this unjust and cruel and most unfeminine violence? You have indulged your ill-temper till you
      do not know what you say or do, and you are venting on another the anger which my displeasure
      has caused you to feel toward me and toward yourself. I desire that you will control it
      directly, or retire to your own room, till you can behave with some degree of propriety, and
      not disturb the comfort and happiness of others in this most uncalled-for manner."
"I will not go," answered Caroline, bursting into violent tears, and scarcely aware of what
      she was saying, "I know I dislike Ellen, and I have reason to dislike her, for before she
      came, you were never so often displeased with me; you are always kind and indulgent to her,
      always treat her as a reasonable being, not as the child, the infant you think me. I know you
      have lost all love for me, or you must have seen I was unhappy, and spoken kindly to me, as
      you did to Ellen; I have every reason to dislike her, stealing your affection from me as she
      has, and I do with all my heart!"
"Go, and prepare for our drive, my dear children," Mrs. Hamilton said, as she calmly turned
      for a moment to Emmeline and Ellen, who both stood bewildered, the former from actual terror
      that her sister should dare so to address her mother, and the latter from pain at the violent
      avowal of a dislike which she had intuitively felt, but had always tried to disbelieve. "The
      beauty of the day will be gone if we linger much longer, and I do not intend to be
      disappointed of our promised ramble. Do not think any thing of what this unhappy girl is
      saying; at present she scarcely knows herself, and will by-and-by wish it recalled, far more
      intensely than ever we can."
Emmeline longed to throw her arms round her mother, and with tears beseech her to forget
      what Caroline had said; but, though Mrs. Hamilton had spoken cheerfully, and in quite her
      usual tone of voice to them, there was something in her countenance, that checked any display
      of softness even in her affectionate child; something that almost awed her, and she left the
      room with Ellen to prepare for the promised excursion, which had, however, lost all its
      anticipated enjoyment from the uncontrolled temper of another.
"Now, Caroline, I will answer you," said Mrs. Hamilton, as soon as they were alone, and
      again regarding Caroline, who was sobbing violently, with that same searching look. "Your
      charges are such very heavy ones, that I really must request you during my absence to arrange
      and define them in some order. I am so perfectly ignorant of having given you any foundation
      for them, that, before I can attempt defense, you must inform me exactly and definitely of
      what you complain. That this morning my manner was kinder to Ellen than to you I quite
      acknowledge. Her inattention and depression had a cause, yours had none; for if you were
      unhappy, it was from your own fearful temper, which by encouragement has blackened every thing
      around you. You may employ your time till dinner as you choose; but at five o'clock come to me
      in my dressing-room, prepared to define and inform me of every charge you can bring against
      me. You will consider this a command, Caroline, disregard or evasion of which will be
      disobedience."
She left the room, and in a very short time afterward Caroline heard the carriage drive off;
      but for nearly three long hours she never moved from her seat, so utterly miserable, as
      scarcely even to change her position. Never in her life before, not in her most angry moments,
      had she so spoken to her mother, and her remorse was almost intolerable. Again and again she
      remembered what Mrs. Hamilton had told her so often, that, if she did not strive and pray
      against the dominion of ill-temper while young, it would become more and more uncontrollable,
      and the older she became, the more difficult to subdue, even in a moderate degree; and her
      words were indeed true. It had been many months since temper had gained such an ascendency,
      and its effects were far, far more violent, and its power over her more determined, and if, as
      she grew older, it should be still worse, what would become of her? how insufferably wretched?
      what would she not have given to have recalled her words? The jealousy which had arisen, now
      she knew not how, had sunk into air before those few calm inquiring sentences from her mother,
      and in her excessive misery every kind deed and word and look, every fond indulgence and
      forbearance, in fact, all the love her mother had so lavished on her from her infancy, rushed
      back upon her, till she actually hated herself, and longed the more intensely for the comfort
      of that soothing affection, which, in real pain or childish sorrow, had never been refused
      her.
"Why, why did Annie tell me any thing about that hateful ball?" she exclaimed, at length, as
      the sound of many joyous voices and the dressing-bell proclaimed the return of the various
      members of her family only in time to prepare for dinner. "It was all, all from that; I know
      now, only from that one thought—one wish. Why was I such a fool, as not to tell mamma at once
      that I knew I was to be asked, and wished so much to go?—if she had refused me, it would not
      have been half the pain I have made for myself. And how can I meet papa's eye and Percy's
      unkind jokes with eyes like these?" she added, as on rising to go to her own room, she caught
      sight of her own face in a mirror, and actually started at the disfigurement which the
      violence of her emotion had wrought. "Oh, how I wish mamma had not desired me to go to her;
      that I could but hide myself from every body—or get rid of this horrible black cloud."
From every eye but her mother's she could and did hide herself; for saying that her head
      ached, which was the truth, and she did not wish any thing to take, she refused to go down to
      dinner. Mrs. Hamilton had successfully exerted herself during their excursion, and Emmeline
      and Ellen enjoyed themselves so thoroughly as almost to forget the alloy of the morning; and
      even when Caroline's message recalled it, the boys were all so merry, that it did not disturb
      them. Percy always declared that Caroline's headache was only another term for temper-ache,
      and he would certainly have sent her some message of mock pity, if his quick eye had not
      discovered or fancied that his mother did not look quite as well as usual, and so he contented
      himself by trying still more to be the life of the dinner-table. Mr. Hamilton had seen at a
      single glance that all was not quite right, and Caroline's non-appearance and message
      explained it, to his extreme regret, for he had begun to hope and believe that his wife's
      extreme solicitude, on her account, was beginning to decrease.
Mrs. Hamilton had not much doubt that silence and solitude had so far had effect on Caroline
      as to subdue passion, and bring her to a sense of her misconduct; but that had scarcely power
      to lessen the anxiety and the pain which Caroline's words had so wantonly inflicted. Had she
      indeed evinced any thing like undue partiality? the idea alone almost brought a smile; fondly,
      and almost as her own child, as she loved her little niece. The very anxiety Caroline
      occasioned her, deepened her affection; the very control she was obliged to exercise in her
      mode of guiding her, strengthened every feeling toward her. She was so enwrapped in these
      painfully engrossing thoughts, in the strict examination of her own own heart, that she was
      not aware the time she had appointed had passed by full ten minutes, till she was roused by
      the handle of her door being softly turned, and left again, as if some one had wished to
      enter, but hesitated. The very hesitation gave her hope, for she really did not know that the
      utmost penalty she could have inflicted on Caroline, in the moment of natural indignation,
      would have failed in producing such an effect as the simple command to seek her, and define
      her charges against her, when that angry excitement had so calmed, that Caroline would have
      given worlds, if she might but have not referred to it again. She knew she dared not disobey,
      but her daring had left her so powerless that she had stood at her mother's door full ten
      minutes before she could command courage sufficient to open it and enter.
Mrs. Hamilton looked at her changed aspect, the bitter humiliation expressed in every
      feature, with such pity, that it required even more than her usual exercise of control, to
      retain the grave, and apparently unmoved tone with which she said—
"You have had a long time in which to reflect on your charges against me, Caroline. I hope
      they are now sufficiently defined for me to understand and answer them. You may sit down, for
      you do not seem very capable of standing."
Caroline gladly obeyed, by sitting down on a low ottoman, some little distance from her
      mother, on whose neck she absolutely longed to throw herself and beseech forgiveness; but Mrs.
      Hamilton's tone was not such as to give her courage to do so. She remained silent, burying her
      face in her hands.
"I am waiting your pleasure, Caroline; I should have thought that you had had plenty of time
      to think during my absence. Of what do you accuse me?"
"Oh, nothing, nothing! mamma, dear mamma, do not speak to me in that tone, I can not bear
      it; indeed, indeed, I am miserable enough already; condemn me to any punishment, the severest
      you can, I know I deserve it—but do not, do not speak so."
"No, Caroline; were I to condemn you to any punishment, it would seem more like vengeance
      for the pain you have inflicted on me by your accusation of partiality and injustice, than
      from the hope of producing any good end. You are no longer a child, who must be taught the
      line of duty to a parent. You know it now as well as I can teach it, and if you fail, must be
      answerable only to yourself. I can not help you any further, than by requesting you to explain
      clearly the origin of your complaint against me. Its main ground of offense is, I believe,
      that since Ellen has become an inmate of my family I have treated you with more harshness and
      unkindness than I ever did before. Can you look back on the last eighteen months and recall
      one instance in which this has been the case? I must have an answer, Caroline; you may now
      think explanation is not necessary, and that you meant nothing when you spoke, but that will
      not satisfy me nor you, when ill-temper regains ascendency. You need not refrain from
      answering for fear of wounding me. You can scarcely do that more than you have done
      already."
Caroline tried to speak, but she could only sob forth, that she could not recall one
      instance, in which her mother had been more displeased with her than her conduct merited.
      Acknowledging, but almost inarticulately, that she had sometimes fancied that she had remained
      longer cold with her than with Ellen, after the committal of a fault—and that—(she
      stopped).
"Go on, Caroline."
"I could not feel my faults such heavy ones as Ellen's."
"They are of equal, if not greater weight than your cousin's, Caroline. You have been, from
      your earliest infancy, the object of the most tender and devoted care to your father and
      myself. Miss Harcourt has followed out our plans; you have never been exposed to any
      temptation, not even that of casual bad example. Ellen, till she became mine, encountered
      neglect, harshness, all that could not fail in such a character to engender the faults she
      has. You can not compare yourself with her, for, had you been situated as she was, I fear you
      would have had still heavier failings."
"I should never have told untruths," exclaimed Caroline with returning temper.
"Perhaps not, for some persons are so physically constituted that they do not know what fear
      is; and harshness would harden, not terrify and crush, as with such dispositions as Ellen's.
      But Caroline, when temper gains dominion over you, as it has done to-day, do you always think
      and utter nothing but the truth?"
Caroline turned from that penetrating look and burst into tears. Few as the words were, they
      seemed to flash light into the very inmost recesses of her heart, and tell her that in moments
      of uncontrolled temper, in her brooding fancies, she really did forfeit the truth, on
      adherence to which she so prided herself; and that there was no excuse for her in the idea
      that she did not know what she said or did—for why had religion and reason been so carefully
      implanted within her, but to enable her to subdue the evil temper, ere it acquired such
      fearful dominion.
"Perhaps you have never thought of this before, Caroline," resumed Mrs. Hamilton, and her
      tone was not quite so cold; "but think of it in future, and it may help you to conquer
      yourself. Remember, words can never be recalled, and that, though you may have lost such
      command over yourself, as scarcely to know the exact sense of what you say, yet those to whom
      they are addressed, or those who may have only heard them, must believe, and so receive, and
      perhaps act on false impressions, which no after effort will remove. Now to your next charge,
      that I treat Ellen as a reasonable being, and you as a child:—if you have the least foundation
      for this supposition, speak it without hesitation—whence has it arisen?"
For one minute Caroline hesitated, but then resolved she would atone for her fault at least
      by a full confession. She told all the wishes, the hopes Annie's information of Lady Helen's
      promise had imparted, and the pain it was to feel that her mother thought her such a child as
      not to speak to her on the subject.
"And if you did think so, Caroline, why did you not from the first moment that Annie told
      you of it, come to me, and tell me how very much you wished it? I could not, indeed, have
      granted your wishes, but your confidence would have been met with such indulgence as would at
      least have saved you some degree of pain. Believing, as I did, and as Lady Helen assured me I
      might with safety, that you knew nothing about it—would you have thought it kind or judicious
      in me, had I said, 'Lady Helen has persuaded me to take you to her ball, but I have refused
      her.' I was silent to spare you pain, as, had you permitted yourself calmly to think, you
      would have believed. However, as appearances were, I grant that I have not treated you, in
      this instance, with the consideration that your age might perhaps have demanded; and from
      Annie not obeying Lady Helen's desire, that she should not mention the subject to you, have
      failed in sparing you the pain of disappointment, as I had hoped. But another time, instead of
      brooding over that which seems want of consideration on my part, come to me at once, and spare
      yourself and me the pain you have caused me to-day. I do not think you can accuse me of ever
      meeting your confidence with so much harshness as to check such openness on your part."
Caroline looked hastily up; her mother's tone was almost as fond as usual, and, unable to
      restrain the impulse any longer, she started from her low seat, and kneeling down close by
      her, clung round her, passionately exclaiming—
"Mamma! mamma! pray, forgive me; I am so very miserable—I can not bear myself—I do not know
      when I shall be happy again; for even if you forgive me, I know—I know—I never can forgive
      myself."
"I do not wish you to forgive yourself just yet, my dear child," replied her mother, not
      refusing the kiss Caroline's eyes so earnestly besought. "Your fault has been such an
      aggravated one, that I fear it must cause you many days of remorse, the most painful kind of
      suffering which error can bring; but do not try to shake it off; I would rather see you endure
      it, and not expect happiness for a few days. You know where to seek the only source which can
      bring peace and comfort, and you must endeavor by earnest prayer to strengthen yourself for
      the conflict you have so often to encounter. You have a very difficult task, my poor child,
      that I know; and, therefore, do I so try to provide you with a guard and help."
"If I could but conquer it at first," answered Caroline, whose violent excitement had given
      way to tears of real repentance; "but at first it seems almost a pleasure to me to be cross to
      every body, and answer pettishly, and as if it were pleasanter to encourage disagreeable
      thoughts than to read or do any thing that would remove them. And then, when I would give any
      thing to escape from them, it seems every body's fault but my own, and I can not."
"If you accustomed yourself constantly to pray against this great fault, my dear child, you
      would find, that its very first approach would so startle you, that you would use every energy
      to subdue it. But I fear, it is only when temper has made you miserable, as it has to-day,
      that you are quite aware of its enormity. You do not think the fault great enough to demand
      the watchfulness and care without which it never will be subdued."
"I am afraid I do not indeed, mamma. I know I do not make it a subject of prayer, as you
      have so often advised me, except when every thing looks so black, and I am so miserable; and
      then, I fear, I ask more to be happy again, than for forgiveness of my sin, and for grace and
      strength to overcome it. I never felt this to be the case so strongly as to-day, but your
      coldness seems to have shown me my whole self, and I never thought I was so wicked, and so I
      must be miserable."
Mrs. Hamilton involuntarily drew her child more closely to her. The humility, the bitterness
      of self-reproach, was so unlike Caroline's usual haughtiness—so very much deeper than they had
      ever been before, that she hoped, in spite of her anxiety, and her voice audibly trembled as
      she answered—
"If you really feel this, my Caroline, you will not hesitate to follow my advice, and really
      pray and watch against this unhappy temper, even when every thing is so smooth and happy, that
      you can not imagine why you need. Sin always gains ascendency by using pleasure as his
      covering. Do not let a single cross word, or momentary unkind thought, pass unnoticed; never
      cease in your petition for grace and strength, but do not be content with only prayer; you
      must use effort as well, and if your thoughts will be black, and you feel as if you could not
      conquer them by yourself, nor banish them even by your favorite employments, come to me,
      confess them without fear or hesitation to me, and let us try if we can not conquer them
      together. Will you promise me to try this plan, Caroline?"
Caroline could not reply, for every kind word her mother spoke, seemed to heighten
      self-reproach, and make her still more wretched. Mrs. Hamilton felt that there was no refusal
      in her silence, and continued talking to her in that same gentle strain a little while longer,
      and then rose to leave her—but Caroline looked so sorrowful that she hesitated.
"No, mamma, I do not deserve that you should stay with me, and so deprive Emmeline and
      Ellen, and the boys of their favorite hour," she said, though the tears started again to her
      eyes, for she felt as if it would be an indescribable comfort still to be alone with her
      mother. "I am too unhappy and too ashamed to join them, if I may remain away?" Mrs. Hamilton
      answered in the affirmative. "I have not a thing prepared for to-morrow, and—and I do
      not—indeed, I do not mean to give you any more trouble with my studies. I hate myself for
      that, too."
"Do not attempt to study to-night, my dear Caroline; get up a little earlier to-morrow, to
      be ready for me, if you like; but though it will be much more painful to you to remain idle
      the remainder of this evening than to employ yourself, even with the most disagreeable task, I
      would much rather you should do so. Once let temper be quite subdued, and your heart receive
      its necessary government, and I have no fear but that you will very quickly make up for lost
      time; and even if you did not, believe me, my dear child, the graces of the mind, precious as
      in general they are considered, and as they are, still are to me actually nothing worth, if
      unaccompanied by a gentle temper and womanly heart. Do not shrink from the suffering which it
      will be to sit alone and think on all that has passed to-day; but let your remorse be
      accompanied by a resolution (which you are quite capable of not only forming, but of keeping)
      not to rest till by prayer and effort you have sought God's blessing on your difficult task,
      and so feel strengthened for its fulfillment; and also for persevering in it, for you must not
      hope to succeed in subduing yourself all at once. Do this, and I shall be better pleased than
      if to-morrow morning you brought me a treble quantity of mental work."
She embraced and left her—to meditations, from whose bitter, though salutary pain, Caroline
      made no attempt to escape; though, had it not been for her mother's advice, she would gladly
      have flown to her studies, and worked with double assiduity, believing that she was, by doing
      so, atoning for her fault, instead of merely shrinking from its remembrance. It was a trial to
      join her family even for prayers; for she felt so self-convicted, so humbled, that she fancied
      every one must despise her; and when, after the service, Percy approached, and, with mock
      sympathy, inquired how her headache was, and if she had recovered her appetite, and begged her
      not to be ill at such a critical time, as he most particularly wished to go to Lady Helen's
      ball, and he could not be so cruel, if she were not well, her spirit was so broken that the
      large tears rolled down her cheeks, and she turned away without uttering a single word.
"If you had taken the trouble to look in your sister's face, Percy, you would not have
      spoken so unkindly," said Mrs. Hamilton, more hastily than she was in the habit of
      interfering; and as Caroline came to her, she whispered some few fond words, that enabled her
      to wish her father good-night and leave the room, without any farther display of emotion.
"Do you wish your sister to dislike you, Percy?" she said gently detaining him, as he was
      following Caroline.
"Dislike me, mother? No! how can you think so?"
"Because you act as if you wished it; you never see her uncomfortable, without trying to
      make her more so, and is that kind? How can she ever look up to and love you, while such is
      the case?"
"I only mean it for fun, mother. It is such glorious enjoyment to me to torment, when I see
      people cross and miserable for nothing."
"And in the enjoyment of your fun, my dear boy, you forget other people's feelings. I must
      beg you as an especial favor to myself, that you will do all you can to soothe rather than
      irritate Caroline, in the short time that intervenes before you go to London. She will have a
      hard struggle with herself, so do not you make her trial more difficult."
"Do you wish it, mother, dear? you know I would refrain from teasing even for a whole year,
      if it would please you, and give me the privilege of a kiss whenever I like," he laughingly
      answered, looking up in her face so archly and yet so fondly, that his mother could not help
      smiling; promising she would not sentence him to any thing so terrible as not to tease for a
      whole year, as she was quite sure he would fall into his old propensities before a quarter of
      the time had expired.
</div></body></text></TEI>