<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER V.
A YOUNG GENTLEMAN IN A PASSION.—A WALK.—A SCENE OF DISTRESS.
One very fine morning in May, Mrs. Hamilton invited Edward to join her in a walk, intending
      also to call at Moorlands and Greville Manor on their way. The lads were released for a few
      days from their attendance on Mr. Howard, that gentleman having been summoned on some clerical
      business to Exeter. Percy was to accompany his father on an equestrian excursion; Herbert had
      been commissioned by Emmeline some days before to take some books to Mary Greville, and had
      looked forward himself to spending a morning with her. Edward, delighted at being selected as
      his aunt's companion, prepared with haste and glee for his excursion. Robert was, however,
      unfortunately not at hand to give him a clean pair of shoes (he had already spoiled two pair
      that morning by going into the stream which ran through the park to sail a newly-rigged
      frigate), and angry at the delay, fearing that his aunt would not wait for him, he worked
      himself into such a violent passion, that when Robert did appear he gave vent to more abusive
      language than he had ever yet ventured to use, concluding by hurling both his discarded shoes
      at the domestic, who only escaped a severe blow by starting aside, and permitting them to go
      through the window.
"Robert, leave the room: I desire that you will not again give your assistance to Master
      Fortescue till he knows how to ask it," was Mrs. Hamilton's most unexpected interference, and
      Edward so started at her voice and look, that his passion was suddenly calmed.
"Finish your toilet, and when you have found your shoes and put them away, you may join me
      in the breakfast-room, Edward. I only wait your pleasure."
And never did Edward leave her presence more gladly. Shame had suddenly conquered anger; and
      though his chest still heaved and his cheeks were still flushed, he did not utter another word
      till nearly a quarter of a mile on their walk. Twice he had looked up in his aunt's face as if
      about to speak, but the expression was so very grave, that he felt strangely afraid to
      proceed. At length he exclaimed—
"You are displeased with me, dear aunt; but indeed I could not help feeling angry."
"I am still more sorry than displeased, Edward; I had hoped you were learning more control,
      and to know your duty to a domestic better. Your uncle—"
"Oh, pray do not tell him!" implored Edward, "and I will ask Robert's pardon the moment I go
      home."
"I certainly shall not complain of you to him, Edward, if my arguments can convince you of
      your error; but if you are only to ask Robert's pardon for fear of your uncle, I would rather
      you should not do so. Tell me the truth; if you were quite sure your uncle would know nothing
      about it, would you still ask Robert's pardon?"
Edward unhesitatingly answered "No!"
"And why not?"
"Because I think he ought to ask mine for keeping me waiting as he did, and for being
      insolent first to me."
"He did not keep you waiting above five minutes, and that was my fault not his, as I was
      employing him; and as for insolence, can you tell me what he said?" Edward hesitated.
"I do not remember the exact words, but I know he called me impatient, and if I were, he had
      no right to tell me so."
"Nor did he. I heard all that passed, and I could not help thinking how very far superior
      was Robert, a poor country youth, to the young gentleman who abused him."
The color rose to Edward's temples, but he set his teeth and clenched his hand, to prevent
      any farther display of anger; and his aunt, after attentively observing him, continued—
"He said that his young master Percy never required impossibilities, and though often
      impatient never abused him. You heard the word, and feeling you had been so, believed he
      applied it to yourself."
"But in what can he be my superior?" asked Edward, in a low voice, as if still afraid his
      passion would regain ascendency.
"I will answer your question by another, Edward. Suppose any one had used abusive terms
      toward you, and contemptuously desired you to get out of their sight, how would you have
      answered?"
"I would have struck him to the earth," replied Edward, passionately, and quite forgetting
      his wished for control. "Neither equal nor superior should dare speak so to me again."
"And what prevented Robert acting in the same manner? Do you think he has no feeling?—that
      he is incapable of such emotions as pain or anger?"
Edward stood for a minute quite still and silent.
"I did not think any thing about it," he said, at length; "but I certainly supposed I had a
      right to say what I pleased to one so far beneath me."
"And in what is Robert so far beneath you?"
"He is a servant, and I am a gentleman in birth, rank—"
"Stop, Edward! did you make yourself a gentleman? Is it any credit to you, individually, to
      be higher in the world, and receive a better education than Robert?"
Edward was again silent, and his aunt continued to talk to him so kindly yet so earnestly,
      that at length he exclaimed—
"I feel I have indeed been wrong, dear aunt; but what can I do to prove to Robert I am
      really sorry for having treated him so ill?"
"Are you really sorry, Edward, or do you only say this for fear of your uncle's
      displeasure?"
"Indeed, I had quite forgotten him," replied Edward, earnestly; "I deserve his anger, and
      would willingly expose myself to it, if it would redeem my fault."
"I would rather see you endeavor earnestly to restrain your passions my dear boy, than
      inflict any such pain upon you. It will be a great pleasure to me if you can really so conquer
      yourself as to apologize to Robert; and I think the pain of so doing will enable you more
      easily to remember all we have been saying, than if you weakly shrink from it. The life you
      have chosen makes me even more anxious that you should become less passionate—than were you to
      remain longer with me; I fear you will so often suffer seriously from it."
"I very often make resolutions never to be in a passion again," returned Edward,
      sorrowfully; "but whenever any thing provokes me, something seems to come in my throat, and I
      am compelled to give way."
"You will not be able to conquer your fault, my dear Edward, without great perseverance; but
      remember, the more difficult the task, the greater the reward; and that you can
      control anger I have, even during our walk, had a proof."
Edward looked up surprised.
"Did you not feel very angry when I said Robert was your superior?"
"Yes," replied Edward, blushing deeply.
"And yet you successfully checked your rising passion, for fear of offending me. I can not
      be always near you; but, my dear boy, you must endeavor to remember that lesson I have tried
      to teach you so often—that you are never alone. You can not even think an angry
      thought, much less speak an abusive word and commit the most trifling act of passion, without
      offending God. If you would but ask for His help, and recollect that to offend Him is far more
      terrible than to incur the displeasure of either your uncle or myself, I think you would find
      your task much easier, than if you attempted it, trusting in your own strength alone, and only
      for fear of man."
Edward did not make any reply, but his countenance expressed such earnest thought and
      softened feeling, that Mrs. Hamilton determined on not interrupting it by calling at Moorlands
      as she had intended, and so turned in the direction of Greville Manor. They walked on for some
      little time in silence, gradually ascending one of those steep and narrow but green and
      flowery lanes peculiar to Devonshire; and on reaching the summit of the hill, and pausing a
      moment by the little gate that opened on a rich meadow, through which their path lay, an
      exclamation of "How beautiful!" burst from Edward.
Fields of alternate red and green sloped down to the river's edge, the green bearing the
      glistening color peculiar to May, the red from the full rich soil betraying that the plow had
      but lately been there, and both contrasting beautifully with the limpid waters, whose deep
      azure seemed to mock the very heavens. The Dart from that point seemed no longer a meandering
      river: it was so encompassed by thick woods and fertile hills that it resembled a lake, to
      which there was neither outlet nor inlet, save from the land. The trees all presented that
      exquisite variety of green peculiar to May, and so lofty was the slope on which they grew,
      that some seemed to touch the very sky, while others bent gracefully over the water, which
      their thick branches nearly touched. The hills themselves presented a complete mosaic of red
      and green; the fields divided by high hedges, from which the oak and elm and beech and ash
      would start up, of growth so superb as to have the semblance of a cultivated park, not of
      natural woodland.
Greville Manor, an Elizabethan building, stood on their right, surrounded by its ancient
      woods, which, though lovely still, Mr. Greville's excesses had already shorn off some of their
      finest timber. Some parts of the river were in complete shade from the overhanging branches,
      while beyond them would stretch the bright blue of heaven: in other parts, a stray sunbeam
      would dart through an opening in the thick branches, and shine like a bright spot in the
      surrounding darkness; and farther on, the cloudless sun so flung down his full refulgence,
      that the moving waters flashed and sparkled like burning gems.
"Is it not beautiful, dear aunt? Sometimes I feel as if I were not half so passionate in the
      open air as in the house; can you tell me why?"
"Not exactly, Edward," she replied, smiling; "but I am very pleased to hear you say so, and
      to find that you can admire such a lovely scene as this. To my feelings, the presence of a
      loving God is so impressed upon his works—we can so distinctly trace goodness, and love, and
      power, in the gift of such a bountiful world, that I feel still more how wrong it is to
      indulge in vexation, or care, or anxiety, when in the midst of a beautiful country, than when
      at home; and perhaps it is something of the same feeling working in you, though you do not
      know how to define it."
"But you can never do or feel any thing wrong, dear aunt," said Edward, looking
      with surprised inquiry in her face.
"Indeed, my dear boy, I know that I very often have wrong thoughts and feelings; and that
      only my Father in Heaven's infinite mercy enables me to overcome them. It would be very sad,
      if I were as faulty, and as easily led into error, as you and your cousins may be, when I have
      had so many more years to think and try to improve in; but just in the same way as you have
      duties to perform and feelings to overcome, so have I; and if I fail in the endeavor to lead
      you all in the better and happier path—or feel too much anxiety, or shrink from giving myself
      pain, when compelled to correct a fault in either of you, I am just as likely to incur the
      displeasure of our Father in Heaven, as you are when you are passionate or angry; and perhaps
      still more so, for the more capable we are of knowing and doing our duty, the more wrong we
      are when we fail in it, even in thought."
There was so much in this reply to surprise Edward, it seemed so to fill his mind with new
      ideas, that he continued his walk in absolute silence. That his aunt could ever fail, as she
      seemed to say she had and did, and even still at times found it difficult to do right, was
      very strange; but yet somehow it seemed to comfort him, and to inspire him with a sort of
      courage to emulate her, and conquer his difficulties. He had fancied that she could not
      possibly understand how difficult it was for him always to be good; but when he found that she
      could do so even from her own experience, her words appeared endowed with double force, and he
      loved her, and looked up to her more than ever.
Ten minutes more brought them to the Gothic lodge of the Manor, and instead of seeking the
      front entrance, Mrs. Hamilton led the way to the flower-garden, on which Mrs. Greville's usual
      morning-room opened by a glass door.
"Herbert was to tell Mary of our intended visit; I wonder she is not watching for me as
      usual," observed Mrs. Hamilton, somewhat anxiously; and her anxiety increased, as on nearing
      the half open door she saw poor Mary, her head leaning against Herbert, deluged in tears. Mrs.
      Greville was not there, though the books, work, and maps upon the table told of their
      morning's employment having been the same as usual. Herbert was earnestly endeavoring to speak
      comfort, but evidently without success; and Mary was in general so controlled, that her
      present grief betrayed some very much heavier trial than usual.
"Is your mother ill, my dear Mary? What can have happened to agitate you so painfully?" she
      inquired, as at the first sound of her voice the poor girl sprung toward her, and tried to say
      how very glad she was that she had come just then; but the words were inarticulate from sobs;
      and Mrs. Hamilton, desiring Edward to amuse himself in the garden, made her sit down by her,
      and told her not to attempt to check her tears, but to let them have free vent a few minutes,
      and then to try and tell her what had occurred. It was a very sad tale for a child to tell,
      and as Mrs. Hamilton's previous knowledge enabled her to gather more from it than Mary's
      broken narrative permitted, we will give it in our own words.
Mr. Greville had been at home for a month, a quarter of which time the good humor which some
      unusually successful bets had excited, lasted; but no longer. His amusement then consisted, as
      usual, in trying every method to annoy and irritate his wife, and in endeavoring to make his
      son exactly like himself. Young as the boy was—scarcely twelve—he took him to scenes of riot
      and feasting, which the society of some boon companions, unhappily near neighbors, permitted;
      and though Alfred's cheek became pale, his eye haggard, and his temper uneven, his initiation
      was fraught with such a new species of excitement and pleasure, that it rejoiced and
      encouraged his father in the same measure as it agonized his mother, and, for her sake, poor
      Mary.
That morning Alfred had declared his intention of visiting a large fair, which, with some
      races of but ill repute, from the bad company they collected, was to be held at a neighboring
      town, and told his father to prepare for a large demand on his cash, as he meant to try his
      hand at all the varieties of gaming which the scene presented. Mr. Greville laughed heartily
      at what he called the boy's right spirit, and promised him all he required; but there was a
      quivering on her mother's lip, a deadly paleness on her cheek, that spoke volumes of suffering
      to the heart of the observant Mary, who sat trembling beside her. Still Mrs. Greville did not
      speak till her husband left the room; but then, as Alfred was about to follow him, she caught
      hold of his hand, and implored him, with such a tone and look of agony, only to listen to her,
      for her sake to give up his intended pleasure; that, almost frightened by an emotion which in
      his gentle mother he had scarcely ever seen, and suddenly remembering that he had lately been
      indeed most unkind and neglectful to her, he threw his arms round her neck, and promised with
      tears that if it gave her so much pain, he would not go; and so sincere was his feeling at the
      moment that, had there been no tempter near, he would, in all probability, have kept his word.
      But the moment Mr. Greville heard from his son his change of intention and its cause, he so
      laughed at his ridiculous folly, so sneered at his want of spirit in preferring his mother's
      whims to his father's pleasures, that, as could not fail to be the case, every better feeling
      fled. This ought to have been enough; but it was too good an opportunity to vent his
      ill-temper on his wife, to be neglected. He sought her, where she was superintending Mary's
      lessons, and for nearly an hour poured upon her the most fearful abuse and cutting taunts,
      ending by declaring that all the good she had done by her saintly eloquence was to banish her
      son from her presence, whenever he left home, as in future Alfred should be his companion; and
      that he should begin that very day. Mrs. Greville neither moved nor spoke in reply; and the
      expression of her countenance was so sternly calm, that poor Mary felt as if she dared not
      give way to the emotion with which her heart was bursting.
Mr. Greville left the room, and they heard him peremptorily desire the housekeeper to put up
      some of Master Alfred's clothes. In a perfectly composed voice Mrs. Greville desired Mary to
      proceed with the exercise she was writing, and emulating her firmness, she tried to obey.
      Fortunately her task was writing, for to have spoken or read aloud would, she felt, have been
      impossible. So full half an hour passed, and then hasty footsteps were heard in the hall, and
      the joyous voice of Alfred exclaiming—
"Let me wish mamma and Mary good-by, papa."
"I have not another moment to spare," was the reply. "You have kept me long enough, and must
      be quicker next time; come along, my boy."
The rapid tread of horses' hoofs speedily followed the sullen clang with which the hall-door
      closed, and as rapidly faded away in the distance. With an irresistible impulse, Mary raised
      her eyes to her mother's face; a bright red flush had risen to her temples, but her lips were
      perfectly colorless, and her hand tightly pressed her heart; but this only lasted a minute,
      for the next she had fallen quite senseless on the floor. Her poor child hung over her almost
      paralyzed with terror, and so long did the faint last, that she was conveyed to her own room,
      partially undressed, and laid on her bed before she at all recovered. A brief while she had
      clasped Mary to her bosom, as if in her was indeed her only earthly comfort, and then in a
      faint voice desired to be left quite alone. Mary had flung herself on the neck of the
      sympathizing Herbert Hamilton (who had arrived just in the confusion attendant on Mrs.
      Greville's unusual illness), and wept there in all the uncontrolled violence of early
      sorrow.
Mrs. Hamilton remained some time with her afflicted friend, for so truly could she
      sympathize with her, that her society brought with it the only solace Mrs. Greville was
      capable of realizing from human companionship.
"It is not for myself I murmur," were the only words that in that painful interview might
      have even seemed like complaint; "but for my poor child. How is her fragile frame and gentle
      spirit to endure through trials such as these; oh, Emmeline, to lose both, and through their
      father!"
And difficult indeed did it seem to realize the cause of such a terrible dispensation; but
      happily for Mrs. Greville, she could still look up in love and trust, even when below all of
      comfort as of joy seemed departed; and in a few days she was enabled to resume her usual
      avocations, and, by an assumption of cheerfulness and constant employment, to restore some
      degree of peace and happiness to her child.
Neither Herbert nor Edward seemed inclined to converse on their walk home, and Mrs. Hamilton
      was so engrossed in thought for Mrs. Greville, that she did not feel disposed to speak either.
      Herbert was contrasting his father with Mary's, and with such a vivid sense of his own happier
      lot, that he felt almost oppressed with the thought, he was not, he never could be, grateful
      enough; for, what had he done to be so much more blessed? And when Mr. Hamilton, who,
      wondering at their long absence, had come out to meet them, put his arm affectionately round
      him, and asked him what could possibly make him look so pale and pensive, the boy's excited
      feelings completely overpowered him. He buried his face on his father's shoulder, and burst
      into tears; and then leaving his mother to explain it, for he felt quite sure she could,
      without his telling her, darted away and never stopped till he found himself in the sanctuary
      of his own room; and there he remained, trying to calm himself by earnest thought and almost
      unconscious prayer, till the dinner-bell summoned him to rejoin his family, which he did,
      quiet and gentle, but cheerful, as usual.
Edward did not forget the thoughts of the morning, but the struggles so to subdue his pride
      as to apologize to Robert, seemed very much more difficult when he was no longer hearing his
      aunt's earnest words; but he did conquer himself, and the fond approving look, with
      which he was rewarded, gave him such a glowing feeling of pleasure, as almost to lessen the
      pain of his humiliation.
</div></body></text></TEI>