<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER VIII.
AN UNPLEASANT PROPOSAL.—THE MYSTERY SOLVED.—A FATHER'S GRIEF FROM A MOTHER'S WEAKNESS.—A
      FATHER'S JOY FROM A MOTHER'S INFLUENCE.
Meanwhile the young heir of Oakwood had passed no very pleasant day. His thoughts since Mr.
      Howard's return had been so pre-occupied, that his studies had been unusually neglected; so
      much so, as rather to excite the displeasure of his gentle and forbearing preceptor. The
      emotion of the morning had not tended to steady his ideas, and a severe reproof and long
      imposition was the consequence. Not one word did he deign to address Herbert and Edward, who,
      perceiving him leave the Vicarage with every mark of irritation, endeavored, during their walk
      home, to soothe him. His step was even more rapid than that in which he had left home, and he
      neither stopped nor spoke till he had reached his father's library, which, fortunately for the
      indulgence of his ire in words, was untenanted. He dashed his cap from his brow, flung his
      books with violence on the ground, and burst forth—
"Am I not a fool—an idiot, thus to torment myself, and for one act of folly, when hundreds
      of boys, at my age, are entirely their own masters? do what they please—spend what they
      please—neither questioned nor reproved—and that poem—how many would glory in its authorship,
      and not care a whit whom it might wound. Why am I such a fool, as to reproach myself about it,
      and then be punished, like a school-boy, with an imposition to occupy me at home, because I
      did not choose to learn in the hours of study?—Not choose! I wish Mr. Howard could feel as I
      have done to-day, nay, all this week; and I challenge him to bore his head with Greek and
      Latin! But why am I so cowed as to feel so? Why can not I have the same spirit as
      others—instead of being such a slave—such a—"
"Percy!" exclaimed Mrs. Hamilton, who, having sought him the moment she heard the hall-door
      close, had heard nearly the whole of his violent speech, and was almost alarmed at the unusual
      passion it evinced. Her voice of astonished expostulation checked his words, but not his
      agitation; he threw himself on a chair, leaning his arms upon the table, buried his face upon
      them, while his whole frame shook. His mother sat down by him, and laying her hand on his arm,
      said gently—
"What is it that has so irritated you, my dear Percy? What has made you return home in such
      a very different mood to that in which you left it? Tell me, my boy."
Percy tried to keep silence, for he knew if he spoke he should, as he expressed it, be a
      child again, and his pride tried hard for victory. Even his father or Herbert at that moment
      would have chafed him into increased anger, but the almost passionate love and reverence which
      he felt for his mother triumphed over his wrath, and told him he was much more unhappy than
      angry; and that he longed for her to comfort him, as she always had done in his childish
      griefs; and so he put his arms round her, and laid his head on her shoulder and said, in a
      half-choked voice:—
"I am very unhappy, mother; I feel as if I had been every thing that was bad, and cruel, and
      foolish, and so it was a relief to be in a passion; but I did not mean you to hear it, and
      cause you more grief than I have done already."
"You have been very thoughtless, very foolish, and not quite so firm as we could have
      wished, my own dear boy, but I will not have you accuse yourself of any graver faults,"
      replied Mrs. Hamilton, as she lightly pushed back the clustering hair from his heated
      forehead, and the gentle touch of her cool hand seemed as restorative as her soothing words;
      and Percy, as he listened to her, as she continued speaking to him in the same strain for some
      little time, felt more relieved than five minutes before he thought possible, and more than
      ever determined that he would never act so thoughtlessly; or, if he were tempted to do so,
      never keep it concealed so long again. Mrs. Hamilton's anxious desire with him was, always to
      do justice to his better qualities, at the same time that she blamed and convinced him of his
      faults. It was a very delicate thing, and very difficult to succeed in, perhaps impossible to
      minds less peculiarly refined, and hearts less intensely anxious than Mrs. Hamilton's; but no
      difficulty, no failure, had ever deterred her—and in Percy she was already rewarded. He was of
      that high, fine spirit, that any unjust harshness would have actually confirmed in error—any
      unguarded word bring argument on argument, and so, for the mere sake of opposition, cause him
      to abide in his opinions, when the acknowledgment of his being right in some things, produced
      the voluntary confession of his error in others.
"And now about these unfortunate verses, my dear boy; I am not quite clear as to their fate,
      how it happened that you did not destroy them directly you returned home."
"I fully intended, and believed I had done so, mother, but the whirl of that night seemed to
      extend to the morning, and I dressed and prepared for Mr. Howard in such a hurry (I had
      overslept myself, too), that though I had quite resolved they should not pollute my
      pocket-book any longer, I had no time to look over my papers—thought I could not be mistaken
      in their outside—burnt those I really wished to keep, and threw those which have caused me all
      this pain into my portfolio. If I had but been firm enough to have followed my father's
      advice, and left my companions before supper!—or, if I did join them, had not been so weak, so
      mad, as to yield to the temptation, but adhered to my principles, notwithstanding they might
      have been laughed at, I might have been spared it all; but I was so excited, so heated, with a
      more than sufficient quantity of wine, that I did not know what I was about—not its extent of
      wrong, at least."
"And you have suffered enough for an evening's excitement, my poor boy; but I am sure you
      would atone for it, if you could."
"Atone for it, mother! I would give all I possess to cancel that odious poem, and blot it
      from Mr. Morton's memory, as from my own."
"And I think you can do both, Percy."
He looked at her in utter bewilderment.
"Do both, mother!" he repeated.
"Yes, my boy! it is a painful remedy, but it would be an effectual one. Seek Mr. Morton, and
      tell him yourself your whole story."
Percy crimsoned to the very temples.
"Do not ask me such a thing, mother," he answered very hurriedly; "I can not do it."
"You think so at this moment, my dear boy; I am not at all astonished that you should, for
      it will be very humiliating, and very painful; and if I could spare you either the humiliation
      or the pain, yet produce the same good effects, I need not tell you how gladly I would; but no
      one can remove the sting of that poem from Mr. Morton's sensitive feelings but yourself; and I
      am quite sure if you will allow yourself a little time for quiet thought, you will agree with
      me."
"But why should I inflict such pain upon myself, granting I deserve it?" answered Percy,
      still much heated; "when, though my poem is the only one that has unfortunately met his eye,
      the others were quite as galling, and my companions quite as much to blame—why should I be the
      sufferer?"
"Because, by many errors, you have brought it on yourself. Your companions did indeed act
      very wrongly, but are we quite sure that the principles which your father and Mr. Howard have
      so carefully impressed upon you, have been as carefully impressed upon them? and in such a
      case are not you the more responsible? They had evidently no inward check to keep them from
      such an amusement; you had, for you have acknowledged that you kept aloof at first,
      knowing it was wrong, and only yielded from want of sufficient firmness. Inflict the
      pain of an avowal upon yourself, my boy, and its memory will help you in future from yielding
      to too great weakness—and the act prove to us that, though for a moment led into great error,
      you are still as brave and honest as we believe you."
Percy did not reply, but his countenance denoted an inward struggle, and his mother
      added—
"Suppose, as is very likely, Mr. Morton becomes intimate here, how can you, with your open,
      truthful heart, associate with him, with any comfort or confidence even though perfectly
      satisfied that we would not betray you, and that he would never know the truth? You may fancy
      now that you could, but I know my Percy better; but I must not talk to you any more, for the
      dressing-bell rang some minutes ago. Remember, my dear boy, that I lay no command on you to
      seek Mr. Morton; I have only told you that which I believe would restore you to happiness and
      atone for your faults, more effectually than any thing else; but you are quite at liberty to
      act as you think proper."
She left the room as she spoke, but Percy remained for some few minutes longer in deep
      thought, and when he prepared for dinner, and joined his family, it was still in the same
      unbroken silence. Mr. Hamilton took no notice of him, and two or three times the little
      affectionate Emmeline felt the tears rising to her eyes, for she could not bear to see that
      brother, who was in general the life of the family group, so silent and abstracted.
Sliding after him, as he quitted the room after dinner, she took his hand, and looked
      coaxingly in his face, longing, but not daring to tell him her father's promise, for fear he
      should discover her share in the transaction.
"Well, dear Emmy?"
"Are you going to take a walk, Percy?—let me go with you."
"I do not think I am, love. I may be going to ride."
"To ride!" repeated the little girl; "will it be worth while?"
"You forget, Emmy, it is summer now, I have full four hours before prayers; but do not say
      any thing about my intentions, Emmeline, for I do not know them myself yet."
He kissed her forehead and left her, and a few minutes afterward she was summoned to join
      her mother, Caroline, and Ellen, in a walk. They sauntered through the grounds in the
      direction of the northern lodge, which opened on the road leading to Dartmoor; when, not a
      quarter of an hour after they had left the house, they were overtaken by Percy, riding at what
      seemed almost a hand gallop, but he had time as he passed his mother to gracefully doff his
      cap, and her fond heart throbbed, as she caught the expression of his flushed, but earnest
      face. He was out of sight in another moment, followed by Robert, who was the lads' constant
      attendant.
Before they had concluded their walk, they met Mrs. Greville and Mary, and returned with
      them to the house. Emmeline, who had not seen Mary for nearly a fortnight, was in an ecstasy
      of enjoyment, and Ellen always felt it a real pleasure quietly to walk by Mary's side, and
      answer the many questions with which she always contrived to interest her. On entering the
      house, Mr. Hamilton, Herbert, and Edward joined them, and Mrs. Hamilton was somewhat surprised
      at the even more than ordinary warmth with which her son was greeted by her friends, and at
      the flush which stained his cheek at Mrs. Greville's first words—
"You were not too much fatigued last Thursday, I hope, my dear Herbert?" she inquired, and
      as she looked at him, her eyes glistened in tears.
"Oh, not in the least," he replied instantly, and as if he would exceedingly like to change
      the subject; but Mrs. Greville, turning to Mrs. Hamilton, continued—
"Will you forgive me, Emmeline, if I confess that my visit this evening was more to inquire
      after your son, than even to see you. I was so anxious to know that he had suffered no
      inconvenience from his unusual, and I am sure fatiguing, exertion."
"I suppose I must not be jealous, as you are so candid," replied Mrs. Hamilton, smiling;
      "but I feel very much inclined to be so, finding that you are more in my son's confidence than
      I am myself. I know Herbert was from home on Thursday, but I was not aware of any particular
      exertion on his part."
"Did you not know then where he went?" exclaimed Mary and her mother at the same moment; and
      the former continued, with unusual eagerness, "Did you not know that he went to the races, to
      try and hear something of Alfred? and that by hunting about both the fair and the
      race-ground—scenes which I know he so much dislikes—he actually found him, and amused him so
      successfully, that he kept him with him all day. Papa was so engaged that he had no time to
      look after Alfred, who, from being left entirely to himself, might have sought the worst
      companions; I can not think what charm Herbert used, but Alfred was quite contented to be with
      him; they dined together, and—"
"He brought me what, next to my boy himself, was the greatest consolation I could have,"
      interposed Mrs. Greville, her voice so faltering, that tears almost escaped,—"a few lines
      which, he assures me, Alfred thought of writing himself, telling me, he could not bear to
      think he had left home without kissing me, and that, though he was so happy with his father,
      that he could not wish to return home, he still loved me and Mary very, very much, and would
      continue to love us, and come and see us, whenever he could. Oh, Emmeline, can you not imagine
      the relief of such a letter, of hearing of him at all? and it was all through the kindness,
      the goodness of your boy!"
When Mrs. Greville and Mary had first begun to speak, Herbert tried to retreat; but Edward
      placing himself against the door, so that to open it was impossible, and Caroline and
      Emmeline, both at once catching hold of him, to keep him prisoner, egress was not to be
      thought of; so, in laughing despair, he broke from his sisters, flung himself on his usual
      seat, his mother's stool, and almost hid himself in her dress.
"It must have been a relief, indeed," answered Mr. Hamilton; "and rejoiced am I that my
      quiet Herbert thought of such a plan. Look up, Master Shamefaced, and tell us the reason of
      your most extraordinary mystery on this occasion. Why did you so carefully conceal your
      intentions from your mother and myself?"
"Because, papa, I feared you might not approve of them; I hardly dared think about it
      myself, for it seemed as if I were doing actually wrong in disregarding your principles, for
      only the chance of effecting good. I know, if I had mentioned my wish to find Alfred,
      or hear something about him, you would not have refused my going; but then mamma must have
      known it, and she would have been anxious and uncomfortable, if I had not appeared the very
      moment I had named; would you not?" he continued, looking up in her face with that expression
      of affection, which very few, even comparative strangers, had power to remit.
"I should indeed, my dear boy; I fear I should have condemned your scheme as a very wild
      one, and really am glad you thought so much of my comfort, as not to tell me more than you
      did. So I must not even be jealous, Jessie, but rather propose a vote of thanks to you and
      Mary for solving the mystery. I do not think Herbert ever excited so much curiosity and
      speculation, in his life, before."
The entrance of Mr. Grahame changed the current of the conversation, greatly to Herbert's
      relief, for he did not at all like being thus brought forward. Austere as Grahame was at home,
      he was always welcomed with pleasure by the young Hamiltons, who never could understand why
      Annie and Cecil should so fear him. That something unusual had annoyed him, Mr. Hamilton
      perceived at the first glance; but he took no notice, for Grahame seemed to find relief in
      talking gayly to the young people.
"And where is my friend Percy?" he inquired, as he joined the happy group at tea, and Percy
      was still absent. Mr. Hamilton repeated the question in some surprise; but his wife replying
      that he had gone to ride, and might not be back yet, the subject dropped.
After tea, Mrs. Greville and Mary, attended by Herbert and Edward, returned to the Manor;
      and the little girls went to finish some business for the next day, and amuse themselves as
      they liked. Grahame remained alone with his friends, who at length drew from him the cause of
      his solicitude. He had that morning discovered, that, notwithstanding his positive commands,
      Cecil had gone to the prohibited places of amusement. His wife had prevaricated when he
      questioned her; at one moment almost denying her connivance at the boy's disobedience, at
      another unconsciously acknowledging it, by insisting that there was no harm in it; and if
      Grahame would persist in so interfering with his children's amusements, he must expect to be
      disobeyed. If such were his home, where was he to look for truth, honor, and affection? What
      would be his son's after career, if such were the lessons of his childhood? He had punished
      him severely, but there was little hope of its producing any good effect, when his wife was
      yet more to blame than his child. It would only alienate the boy's affections still more from
      him. Yet what could he do? Could he let such disobedience and untruthfulness—for Cecil had
      denied his having been at the races—pass unnoticed? He had shut himself up in his library the
      remainder of the day; but at length, unable to bear his own thoughts, had walked over to
      Oakwood, feeling sure, if peace were to be found, he should find it there.
Their sympathy it was easy for Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton to give—for they felt it sincerely—but
      to advise was both delicate and difficult. To interfere in a household is not the part even of
      the most intimate friends. And when Lady Helen herself encouraged the boy in his disobedience,
      and showed him an example of equivocation, what could be said? Grahame could not bear the idea
      of a public school for a boy scarcely eleven, and whose home-influence was so injurious, and
      Mr. Hamilton could not advise it. He tried, therefore, merely to raise the depressed spirits
      of his friend, bringing forward many instances, when even the best training failed; and others
      where the faults of childhood were subdued by circumstances, and became fair promising youth.
      Grahame shook his head despondingly.
"You can scarcely be a fit judge of my trial, Hamilton," he said; "you have known nothing
      but the blessing of hand-in-hand companionship, in the training of your children, as in every
      thing else. There must be unity between father and mother, or there is little hope of
      joy in their offspring for either; were my wife only in some things like yours—but I see I
      must not speak so," he added hurriedly, as he met a glance of reproach from Mrs. Hamilton, and
      he turned to address the two lads, who at that instant entered from their walk. The bell for
      prayers rung soon afterward, and Grahame rose to say good night.
"Nay, stay with us," said Mr. Hamilton, earnestly. "Why should the call for devotion be the
      signal for separation? join us, Grahame. It is not the first time by very many that we have
      prayed together."
Grahame yielded without an instant's hesitation. Still Percy had not returned, and his
      mother became dreadfully anxious. Her husband, at her request, waited a quarter of an hour,
      but reluctantly; for he was more particular that every member of his household should assemble
      at the stated hour of prayer, than in any other point relating to his establishment. Scarcely,
      however, had the first word been said, when Percy and Robert entered, and the former, with a
      very rapid, but noiseless step, traversed the large room, and kneeled in his accustomed place.
      In vain did Mrs. Hamilton try to keep her thoughts fixed on the service. Had he really been to
      Mr. Morton, and if he had, how had he been received? had his fine spirit been soothed or
      irritated? and a thousand other nameless but natural fears thronged her heart. But one look on
      her son as he rose reassured her; his cheek was flushed with rapid riding, but his dark eye
      sparkled, and he looked more bright and joyous than he had done for weeks. He advanced without
      hesitation to Mr. Hamilton the moment the domestics had quitted the library and said, eagerly,
      but still respectfully—
"Will you, too, forgive me, my dear father? Mr. Morton knows the whole truth, and has not
      only pardoned my cruel folly, but assured me, that I have more than atoned for the pain my
      hateful verses inflicted; that he will laugh at them himself and declare he knows their author
      as a most particular friend—which he hopes you will permit me to become—whenever he has the
      opportunity; for that such notice of them will be the surest way to consign them to oblivion.
      I have endured so much pain the last few weeks that I do not think I shall be so thoughtless
      and weak in a hurry again. Will you try me once more?"
Astonished and touched, far more than he was ever in the habit of allowing himself to feel,
      much less to display, Mr. Hamilton had some difficulty in replying; but his words were even
      more than satisfactory to his son's eager heart, for he answered earnestly—
"Pray, do not give me any praise for my courage, papa; I am quite sure, if it had not been
      for mamma's suggestion, I never could have done it. It might have crossed my mind, but I fear
      pride would not have permitted me to listen to it; but when mamma put the case before me as
      she did, I could not prevent my conscience from feeling the truth of all she said, and if I
      had not followed her advice, I should have been more miserable still. Dearest mother," he
      continued, as he turned with even more than his usual affection to receive her nightly
      embrace, "you have made me so happy! how can I thank you?"
If she made him happy, he certainly had returned the blessing, for Mrs. Hamilton had seldom
      felt more exquisite pleasure than she did at that moment; and her little Emmeline, though she
      could not quite understand all her mother's feelings, felt, in her way, almost as glad.
"Well, Mrs. Hamilton will not your son's words confirm mine?" said Mr. Grahame trying to
      speak cheerfully, when the young party had retired, and he was again alone with his friends.
      "Can he go far wrong with such a friend?"
"Indeed, he has done me more than justice, and himself not enough. When I left him, I had
      scarcely a hope that my very disagreeable advice would be followed; besides, Mr. Grahame," she
      added, more playfully, "it was not from disagreeing with you on a mother's influence that my
      look reproached you, you know well enough what it meant; and I still say, that even now, if
      you would but be less reserved and stern, would but see Helen's many better qualities, as
      clearly as you do her faults, you might still win her to your will even with regard to your
      children."
"Not now, Mrs. Hamilton, it is too late; but you have no idea how your look transported me
      back to years past," he added, evidently resolved to change the subject, "when I actually
      almost feared to approach you. Do you remember, Hamilton, when I told you, if Miss Manvers had
      a fault, she was too cold?"
"I shall not easily forget the incidents of that night," replied Mr. Hamilton, with a fond
      glance toward his wife. "Poor Eleanor, when her conduct that evening fell under my lash, I
      little thought her orphan children would be living under my roof, and to me almost like my
      own."
"And one her very image," observed Grahame. "Does either resemble her in mind or
      disposition?"
"Edward almost as much in mind as in personal beauty," replied Mrs. Hamilton; "But not in
      all points of his disposition. Ellen does not resemble her poor mother in any thing."
"Is she like her father?"
"I did not know him sufficiently to judge, but I fancy not.—In fact, I hardly yet understand
      Ellen."
"Indeed!" answered Grahame, smiling; "is your penetrative genius here at fault?"
"I fear it is," she answered, in the same tone; "Ellen is my youngest child—and that which
      has been my successful help five times, has become blunted at the sixth, and refuses to aid me
      further."
"Grahame, do not heed her," interposed her husband, laughing; "she fancies there is
      something extraordinary about Ellen, which she can not comprehend; and I feel certain that
      imagination has been playing with my wife's sober judgment, and that our little niece is a
      very ordinary child, only rather more sad and quiet than is usual at her age, which may be
      easily accounted for by her early trials and constant ill-health. So I solve what my wife
      pronounces a mystery. She has so few fancies, however, that I do not quarrel with this, for it
      has all the charm of novelty."
There were more than usual subjects of thought on the minds of all the young inmates of
      Oakwood, before they went to sleep that night. Percy's, Herbert's, and Emmeline's were all
      peculiarly happy and peaceful. Caroline's were not so agreeable. Praise lavished on others
      never gave her pleasure: the question would always come, Why did she not receive it too? It
      was very hard that she so seldom received it, and self-love was always ready to accuse her
      parents of some degree of partiality rather than herself of unworthiness. But these thoughts
      only came when she was alone; the moment she heard her father's voice, or met her mother's
      smile, they fled from her till they were pertinaciously recalled.
Ellen thought mostly of Herbert. She had been as curious as the rest to know where he had
      been, though she had not said so much about it. But that it was for some good, kind deed she
      had never doubted.
"No wonder Mary loves him so much," she said internally; "but how can I ever hope he will
      love one so often naughty as I am. If Edward be so much superior, what must Herbert be? How I
      wish I were his sister, and then he would love me, deserving or not."
That poor Ellen was often thought, as she expressed it, "naughty" was true; and it was this
      mingling of many apparent faults, especially disregard to her aunt's commands, and but too
      often endeavor to conceal and equivocate, instead of an open confession, with a sorrow and
      repentance too deep and painful for her years, that so fairly bewildered Mrs. Hamilton, and
      really, as she had told Mr. Grahame, prevented her from understanding Ellen. If she could but
      have known of that unfortunate promise, and the strong hold it had taken of the child's vivid
      imagination; that by dwelling on it she had actually made herself believe that, by always
      shielding Edward from blame or punishment, she was obeying and making her mother love her from
      Heaven, and so, still more deepening her father's affection for her; and that this idea
      enabled her to bear the suffering of that most painful of all punishments, her aunt's
      displeasure, Mrs. Hamilton would have left no means untried to remove such a mistaken
      impression, and no doubt would have succeeded; but she had not the slightest conception of the
      real origin of her niece's incomprehensible contradictions. She had believed and hoped the
      influences of her earlier life would disappear before the quiet, wholesome routine of the
      present, and often and often she found herself fearing that it could not be only maternal
      neglect, but actual disposition, at fault. When convinced of the great importance of truth,
      Ellen frequently, instead of attempting to conceal what Edward might have heedlessly done,
      actually took it upon herself, not being able to define that in such self-sacrifice she was
      also forfeiting truth; or, if she did believe so, it was also clear, that to tell the real
      truth to her aunt and betray Edward, was breaking her solemn promise to her mother; and,
      either way, she was doing wrong. To describe or define the chaos in the poor child's mind,
      from these contending feelings, would be almost as impossible to us as it was to herself. She
      only knew that she was often naughty when she most wished to be good; that her aunt must think
      she did not care for her displeasure; when it made her so very unhappy, that she was scarcely
      ever in disgrace without being ill. That she never could feel happy, for even when "good"
      there always seemed a weight hanging over her, and therefore she must be different to, and
      worse than any body else. Little do mere superficial observers know the capabilities for joy
      or suffering in a young child's heart, the exquisitely tender germ which is committed to us;
      the awful responsibility which lies in the hands of adults, for the joy or grief, good or
      evil, as the portion of a child! Happily for Ellen, Mrs. Hamilton's love was as inexhaustible
      as her patience, or her niece might have been still more unhappy, for few would have so
      understood and practiced the delicate and difficult task of constantly being called upon to
      correct, and yet to love.
Our young readers must not think Edward very cowardly and very dishonorable, always to let
      his sister bear the penalty of his faults. He had never been taught, and therefore could not
      understand, the imperative necessity, when guilty of heedlessness or disobedience, boldly to
      step forward, whether others were injured or not, and avow it. He did not understand how not
      to say any thing about it, unless he was asked, could be a want of truth.
It was also Mrs. Hamilton's constant custom never to mention to the members of her family,
      who might have been absent at the time, any thing of fault or disgrace which had fallen under
      her own immediate jurisdiction, unless their nature absolutely demanded it; and the absence of
      the young offenders from the happy family circle, either at meals or hours of recreation, when
      such an unusual proceeding was necessary, in consequence, never excited any remark, but a very
      general feeling of regret. Edward, therefore, scarcely ever heard the actual cause of his
      sister's disgrace, and sometimes did not even know she had incurred it. He did, indeed, when
      she was sometimes absent, feel very uncomfortable; but his immovable awe of his really
      indulgent uncle (an impression of his mother's creating, quite as strong as Ellen's idea of
      the sanctity of her promise) caused him to adopt every means of removing the uncomfortable
      consciousness that he was far more to blame than Ellen, but the right one, a fearless inquiry
      as to why she was punished, and an open avowal that it was he who had either led her into
      error, or was the real offender. His thoughts on Percy's conduct were very different to those
      of his cousins.
"No!" he exclaimed, almost aloud, in the energy of his feelings, "no! I would have suffered
      any thing, every thing, rather than have done this—seek Mr. Morton, humble myself by avowing
      the truth to him, and ask his pardon for a mere clever joke, that Percy ought to have been
      proud of, instead of regretting! If I did not know him well, I should believe him a craven
      milk-and-water lad, without a particle of the right spirit within him. What could have
      possessed him?—my uncle's look must have frightened him out of his sober senses: to be sure it
      was very terrible; poor mamma was, indeed, right as to his unbending sternness; but I think I
      could have dared even his anger, rather than beg Mr. Morton's pardon, when there really was no
      necessity." And sleep overtook him, with the firm conviction resting on his mind, that though
      in some things Percy might be his equal, yet in manliness and spirit, he (Edward) was
      decidedly the superior.
</div></body></text></TEI>