<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER VIII.
THE STRUGGLE.
Mrs. Hamilton had been told at the lodge of her nephew's arrival, and so powerful was her
      emotion, that she leaned back in the carriage, as it drove rapidly from the lodge to the Hall,
      without the power of uttering a word. Caroline was surprised, for his return seemed to her
      only a cause of rejoicing; she had no idea of the mingled dread and joy, the trembling, lest
      Edward had indeed deceived them all, and, if he had not, the redoubled mystery of Ellen's
      conduct. While he was absent she could think calmly on him as the cause of all, but now that
      he was returned, her heart seemed to turn sick with apprehension, and she had hardly strength
      to inquire where he was, and great was her surprise when she found his arrival was still
      unknown. Caroline's joyful exclamation as she ran into the school-room to put away some of her
      purchases, drew her there at once; and for the first five minutes the intense thankfulness
      that he was indeed safe and comparatively well—that whatever might be the secret change, his
      affection for her, to judge by the warmth, and agitation of his embrace, was unchanged, and
      she had that to work on, alone occupied her mind and enabled her to regain her calmness.
"You do indeed look as if you wanted English air and home nursing, my dear boy," she said,
      after some little time had elapsed, and Edward had seated himself by her, his hand still
      clasped in hers; "Sir Edward was quite right to invalid you. Emmeline does nothing but talk of
      your wounds as making you a complete hero; I am unromantic enough to wish that you had brought
      me home more color and more flesh, and less glory; but, I suppose from being so pale, you are
      more like your poor mother than ever;" and she looked at him so earnestly, that Edward's eyes,
      spite of all his efforts, sunk beneath hers. He answered gayly, however, and, in reply to
      Caroline's numerous queries, entered into an animated description of their voyage home and the
      causes of their detention, in their being so often compelled to put into port from the fearful
      storms they had encountered, and time slipped away so fast that the dinner-bell rung before
      any one was prepared.
That Ellen should look paler than even when she had left her in the morning, and be still
      more silent, did not astonish Mrs. Hamilton; the agitation of meeting her brother was quite
      enough to occasion it; and she advised her to remain quiet while they were at dinner, that she
      might rejoin them afterward. She looked as if she had been so very lately ill, that Edward was
      not surprised at her having dined already; but many little things that occured during the
      evening—her excessive quietness, the evident restraint between her and Caroline, and, he at
      first fancied, and then was quite certain, between her and his aunt, startled and perplexed
      him. She seemed restrained and shy, too, with him, as if in constant terror. Poor child! her
      aunt had advised quietness while alone, and her brother's words rung in her ears, till repose
      seemed farther off than ever. After all she had suffered before, and after the sending that
      fatal letter, it had never reached him: she had utterly failed in her attempt to save him. If
      she had, indeed, confided at first in Mrs. Hamilton, measures would have been taken, she was
      sure, to have secured him the necessary relief, for whenever her uncle had sent him his
      allowance it was through Sir Edward, not encountering the risk of the loss of the letter.
      There had been times when, in the midst of her sufferings, Ellen could realize a sort of
      comfort in the idea that she had saved Edward and kept his secret; but where was this comfort
      now? All she had endured all she was still to endure, was for nothing, worse than nothing; for
      if Edward knew her sin, feeling that it had brought him no good, and given up, as she felt he
      must be, to unrestrained passion, or he could not have given vent to such fearful sentiments,
      she actually trembled for its effect upon him and his anger on herself. She had sometimes
      fancied that, perhaps, his errors were not so great as he believed them, that he would confess
      them when he found only his kind, indulgent aunt at home, and so peace and hope gradually dawn
      for both him and her. All her wish, her hope now was that Mrs. Hamilton could be prevailed
      upon not to tell him what she had done, for whether it made him think he ought to confess
      himself its cause or not, its effect on him would be so terrible, that she felt any additional
      suffering to herself could be better borne.
With these thoughts, no wonder she was silent, utterly unable to subdue them as she wished,
      and evince natural interest in all that had occurred to Edward; and tell him all that had
      happened to herself during their long separation. Caroline, however, was so animated; and when
      Emmeline and Miss Harcourt returned, unable to comprehend what they could possibly be sent
      for, a full hour earlier than usual, the astonishment and delight at seeing Edward, prevented
      any thing like a pause in conversation, or unnatural restraint. His cousins found so much to
      tell as well as to listen to, about Percy and Herbert, as well as themselves; and Emmeline
      made Edward tell her such minute particulars of their engagements with the pirates, and how he
      was wounded, and what Sir Edward said to him, that Mrs. Hamilton, anxious as she was—for the
      longer she was with her nephew, the more convinced she was that he could not meet her eye, and
      that his gayety was not natural—could not help being amused in spite of herself.
Engrossed with thought how to arrive at the truth, for which she ardently longed, she
      entered the library, when the prayer-bell rung, with her children; quite forgetting, till she
      had taken the place at the reading-desk, which, in the absence of her husband and sons, she
      always occupied herself, that she had intended to desire Ellen to resume her usual place by
      Emmeline, wishing to spare her any additional suffering the first night of Edward's return,
      and to prevent any painful feeling on his part. It was an oversight, but it vexed her
      exceedingly. She looked hastily round, in the hope of being in time, but Ellen was already in
      her place, though she had evidently shrunk still more into the recess of the lower window, as
      if longing for its massive curtains to hide her, and her face was buried in her hands. Mrs.
      Hamilton would have been still more grieved, if she had seen, as Ellis did, the beseeching,
      humble look, which, as they entered, Ellen had fixed upon her, and that her pale lips had
      quivered with the half-uttered supplication, which she failed in courage to fully pronounce.
      Edward appeared too wrapped in his own thoughts to notice it then; and as his aunt's gentle
      but impressive voice fell on his fear, the words, the room, the whole scene so recalled the
      happy, and comparatively innocent past, that it was with difficulty he could restrain his
      feelings, till the attitude of kneeling permitted them full vent in tears, actual tears, when
      he had thought he could never weep again. The contrast of his past and present self, rendered
      the one more brightly happy, the other more intensely dark than the actual reality. The
      unchecked faults and passions of his early childhood had been the sole cause of his present
      errors; but, while under the gentle control of his aunt and uncle, and Mr. Howard, he had not
      known these faults, and, therefore, believed they had all come since. He longed intensely to
      confide all his errors, all his remorse, to Mr. Howard, whom he still so dearly loved; but he
      knew he had not courage to confess, and yet hated himself for his cowardice.
Only too well accustomed to control, he banished every trace of tears (from all save the eye
      rendered even more than usually penetrating from anxiety), as he arose, and became aware, for
      the first time, that Ellen was not where he was accustomed to see her. He kissed her fondly as
      she hurriedly approached him; but perceiving she left the room with merely a faint good-night
      to the rest of the family, and no embrace, as usual, from Mrs. Hamilton, he darted forward,
      seized his aunt's hand, and exclaimed—
"What is the matter with Ellen, aunt Emmeline? Why is she so changed, and why is your manner
      to her so cold and distant? and why did she kneel apart, as if unworthy to join us even in
      prayers? Tell me, for pity's sake!"
"Not to-night, my dear Edward. It is a long tale, and a painful one, and I rely on
      you to help me, that Ellen and myself may be again as we have been. It is as much
      pain to me as to her that we are not. To-morrow, I promise you, you shall know all. You have
      had excitement enough for to-day, and after your exhausting voyage must need rest. Do not
      fancy this an evasion of your request; I have longed for your return to influence Ellen,
      almost as much as for the happiness of seeing you again."
Edward was compelled to be satisfied and retire; but though he did feel sufficient physical
      exhaustion, for the comfort of his room to be unusually luxurious, his sleep was restless and
      disturbed by frightful dreams, in which, however varied the position, it always seemed that he
      was in danger, and Ellen sacrificing herself to save him.
On retiring for the night, Mrs. Hamilton discovered a note on her dressing-table. She
      thought she knew the writing, but from tremulousness it was so nearly illegible, that it was
      with great difficulty she deciphered the following words:

"I am so conscious I ought not to address you, know so well that I have no right to ask any
      favor from you, when I have given you so much trouble and pain, that I could not have asked
      it, if you had not been so very, very kind this morning. Oh! aunt Emmeline, if indeed you can
      feel any pity for me, do not, pray, do not tell Edward the real reason of my banishment from
      Oakwood; tell him I have been very wicked—have refused to evince any real repentance—but do
      not tell him what I have done. He is ill, unhappy at having to resign his profession even for
      a few months. Oh! spare him the misery of knowing my sin. I know I deserve nothing but
      severity from you—I have no right to ask this—but, oh! if you have ever loved me, do not
      refuse it. If you would but grant it, would but say, before I go, that in time you will
      forgive me, it would be such comfort to the miserable—Ellen."
Mrs. Hamilton's eyes filled with tears; the word "your" had evidently been written
      originally, but partially erased, and "the" substituted in its stead, and she could
      not read the utter desolation of one so young, which that simple incident betrayed, without
      increase of pain; yet to grant her request was impossible. It puzzled her—for why should she
      so persist in the wish expressed from the beginning, that Edward should not know it? unless,
      indeed—and her heart bounded with the hope—that she feared it would urge him to confess
      himself the cause, and her sacrifice be useless. She locked up the note, which she would not
      read again, fearing its deep humility, its earnest supplication, would turn her from her
      purpose, and in praying fervently for guidance and fitful sleep her night passed.
For some time after breakfast the following morning, Edward and his aunt were alone together
      in the library. It was with the utmost difficulty, he suppressed, sufficiently to conceal, the
      fearful agitation which thrilled through every nerve as he listened to the tale he had
      demanded. He could not doubt the use to which that money had been applied. His sister's
      silence alone would have confirmed it; but in that hour of madness—for what else is passion
      unrestrained by principle or feeling?—he was only conscious of anger, fierce anger against the
      unhappy girl who had borne so much for him. He had utterly forgotten the desperate words he
      had written. He had never received the intended relief. Till within a week, a short week of
      his return, he had been in Harding's power, and as Ellen's devotion had saved him nothing,
      what could it weigh against the maddening conviction, that if he had one spark of honor
      remaining, he must confess that he had caused her sin? Instead of saving, she had
      betrayed him; and he left his aunt to seek Ellen, so evidently disturbed and heated, and the
      interview itself had been so little satisfactory in softening him, as, she had hoped to win
      him to confession at once, for she had purposely spoken as indulgently of error and difficulty
      as she could, without betraying her strengthened suspicions, that if she had known how to do
      so, she would have forbidden his seeing Ellen till he was more calm.
Unhappily, too, it was that part of the day when Ellis was always most engaged, and she was
      not even in her own room, so that there was no check on Edward's violence. The control he had
      exercised while with his aunt but increased passion when it was removed. He poured forth the
      bitterest reproaches—asked how she could dare hope relief so obtained, would ever have been
      allowed to reach him?—what had she done but betrayed him? for how could he be such a
      dishonored coward as to let her leave Oakwood because she would not speak? and why had she not
      spoken?—why not betrayed him at once, and not decoyed him home to disgrace and misery? Passion
      had so maddened him that he neither knew what he said himself, nor heard her imploring
      entreaties not to betray himself and she never would. She clung to his knees as she kneeled
      before him, for she was too powerless to stand, reiterating her supplication in a tone that
      ought to have recalled him to his better self, but that better self had been too long
      silenced, and infuriated at her convulsive efforts to detain him, he struck her with
      sufficient force to make her, more by the agony of a blow from him, than the pain itself,
      loose her hold at once, and darted from the room.
The hall door was open, and he rushed through it unseen into the park, flying he neither
      knew where nor cared, but plunging into the wildest parts. How he arrived at one particular
      spot he knew not, for it was one which of all others, in that moment of excitement, he would
      gladly have avoided. It was a small glade in the midst of the wood, shelving down to the
      water's edge, where he and Percy, with the assistance of Robert, had been permitted to erect a
      miniature boat-house, and where Edward had kept a complete flotilla of tiny vessels. There
      were the trees, the glade, the boat-house still, aye, and the vessels, in such beautiful
      repair and keeping, that it brought back the past so vividly, so overpoweringly, from the
      voiceless proof which it was of the affectionate remembrance with which he and his favorite
      tastes had been regarded, even in his absence, that he could not bear it. He flung himself
      full length on the greensward, and as thought after thought came back upon him, bringing Ellen
      before him, self-sacrificing, devoted, always interposing between him and anger, as she had
      done from the first hour they had been inmates of Oakwood, the thought of that craven blow,
      those mad reproaches, was insupportable; and he sobbed for nearly an hour in that one spot,
      longing that some chance would but bring Mr. Howard to him, that he might relieve that fearful
      remorse at once; but utterly unable to seek him of himself.
Edward's disposition, like his mother's, was naturally much too good for the determined
      pursuit of evil. His errors had actually been much less grave, than from Harding's artful
      representations he imagined them. He never indulged in passion without its being followed by
      the most agonized remorse; but from having pertinaciously banished the religion which his aunt
      had so tried to instill, and been taught by Harding to scoff at the only safe guide for youth,
      as for every age, God's holy word, he had nothing whereon to lean, either as a comfort in his
      remorse, a hope for amendment, or strength for self-conquest; and terrible indeed might have
      been the consequences of Harding's fatal influence, if the influence of a home of love had not
      been still stronger.
Two hours after he had quitted his aunt, he rejoined the family, tranquil, but bearing such
      evident traces of a mental struggle, at least so Mrs. Hamilton fancied, for no one else
      noticed it, that she still hoped she did not exactly know what, for she failed in courage to
      ask the issue of his interview with Ellen. She contented herself with desiring Emmeline to
      tell her cousin to bring her work or drawing, and join them, and she was so surprised, when
      Emmeline brought back word that Ellen had said she had much rather not, that she sought her
      herself.
Ellen's cheeks, in general so pale, were crimson, her eyes in consequence unnaturally
      brilliant, and she looked altogether so unlike herself, that her aunt was more anxious than
      ever; nor did her manner when asked why she refused to join them, when Edward had so lately
      returned, tend to decrease the feeling.
"Emmeline did not say you desired it, or I should have known better than disobey,"
      was her reply, and it was scarcely disrespectful; the tone seemed that of a spirit, crushed
      and goaded to the utmost, and so utterly unable to contend more, though every nerve was
      quivering with pain. Mrs. Hamilton felt bitter pain that Ellen at length did indeed shrink
      from her; that the disregard of her entreaty concerning her brother appeared so to have
      wounded, that it had shaken the affection which no other suffering had had power to move.
"I do not desire it, Ellen, though I wish it," she replied, mildly; "you are of
      course at liberty to act as you please, though I should have thought it most natural that, not
      having been with Edward so long, you should wish to be with him as much as possible now he is
      at home."
"He will not wish it; he hates me, spurns me, as I knew he would, if he knew my sin! To-day
      I was to have gone to Seldon Grange; let me go at once! then neither he, nor you, nor any one
      need be tormented with me any more, and you will all be happy again; let me go, aunt Emmeline;
      what should I stay for?"
"If you wish it, Ellen, you shall go next week. I did not imagine that under any
      circumstances, you could have expressed a desire to leave me, or suppose that it would make me
      particularly happy to send you away."
"Why should it not? you must hate me, too, or—or you would not have refused the only—only
      favor I asked you before I went," answered poor Ellen, and the voice, which had been
      unnaturally clear, was choked for the moment with sobs, which she resolutely forced back. Mrs.
      Hamilton could scarcely bear it; taking her ice-cold hands in both hers, she said, almost
      tenderly—
"You have reason to condemn me as harsh and cruel Ellen; but time will perhaps explain the
      motives of my conduct, as I trust and pray it will solve the mystery of yours; you are not
      well enough to be left long alone, and Ellis is so much engaged to-day that I do wish you to
      be with me, independent of your brother's society. If you so much prefer remaining here, I
      will stay with you, though of course, as Edward has been away from us so long, I should wish
      to be with him also."
It was almost the first time Mrs. Hamilton had ever had recourse in the management of her
      family to any thing that was not perfectly straightforward; and though her present motives
      would have hallowed much deeper stratagems, her pure mind shrunk from her own words. She
      wished Ellen to be constantly in Edward's presence, that he might not be able to evade the
      impulse of feeling and honor, which the sight of such suffering, she thought, must call forth;
      she could not bear to enforce this wish as a command, when she had already been, as she
      felt—if Ellen's silence were indeed self-devotion, not guilt—so cruelly and so unnecessarily
      severe. Ellen made neither reply nor resistance, but, taking up her work, accompanied her aunt
      to the usual morning-room, from which many a burst of happy laughter, and joyous tones were
      echoing. Caroline and Emmeline were so full of enjoyment at Edward's return, had so many
      things to ask and tell, were so perfectly unsuspicious as to his having any concern with his
      sister's fault, that if they did once or twice think him less lively and joyous, than when he
      left home, they attributed it simply, to his not having yet recovered the exhausting voyage
      and his wounds. Miss Harcourt, just as unsuspicious, secretly accused Ellen as the cause of
      his occasional abstraction: her conduct was not likely to pass unfelt by one so upright, so
      honorable, and if he had been harsh with her, as from Ellen's fearfully shrinking manner, and
      complete silence when they were together, she fancied, she thought it was so deserved, that
      she had no pity for her whatever.
The day passed briskly and happily enough, in seeming to Mrs. Hamilton and Edward,
      in reality to all the other members of the party—but one. The great subject of regret was Mr.
      Howard's absence, he might be back at the rectory that evening, and Emmeline was sure he would
      come to see Edward directly. As the hours waned, Ellen became sensible of a sharp and most
      unusual pain darting through her temples, and gradually extending over her forehead and head,
      till she could scarcely move her eyes. It had come at first so suddenly, and lasting so short
      a time, that she could scarcely define what it was, or why she should have felt so suddenly
      sick and faint; but it increased, till there was no difficulty in tracing it, and before
      prayer-time, had become such fearful agony, that, if she had not been inured to pain of all
      kinds, and endowed with extraordinary fortitude and control, she must more than once have
      betrayed it by either giving way to faintness, or screaming aloud. She had overheard Mrs.
      Hamilton desire Robert to request Mr. Maitland to come to Oakwood as soon as he could, and not
      hearing the reply that he was not expected home till late at night, expected him every moment,
      and thought he would give her something to relieve it, without her complaining.
Edward had asked his cousins for some music, and then to please Emmeline, had sketched the
      order of their engagement with the pirates, and no one noticed her, for Mrs. Hamilton's heart
      was sinking with disappointed hope, as the hours passed, and there was no sign to prove that
      her surmise was correct, and if it were, that the truth would be obtained.
The prayer-bell rang, and as they rose, Edward's eyes, for the first time since she had
      joined them, sought and fixed themselves on his sister's face. The paroxysm of pain had for a
      few minutes subsided, as it had done alternately with violence all day, but it had left her so
      ghastly pale, that he started in actual terror. It might have been fancy, but he thought there
      was the trace of his cowardly blow on her pale forehead, raised, and black, and such a feeling
      of agony and remorse rushed over him, that it was with difficulty he restrained himself from
      catching her in his arms, and beseeching her forgiveness before them all; but there was no
      time then, and they proceeded to the library. Every step Ellen took appeared to bring back
      that fearful pain, till as she sat down, and then knelt in her place, she was sensible of
      nothing else.
The service was over; and as Mrs. Hamilton rose from the private prayer, with which each
      individual concluded his devotions, her nephew stood before her, white as marble, but with an
      expression of fixed resolution, which made her heart bound up with hope, at the very moment it
      turned sick and faint with terror.
Several of the lower domestics had quitted the library before Edward regained voice, and his
      first word, or rather action, was to desire those that remained to stay.
"My sister has been disgraced, exposed before you all" he exclaimed, in a tone of misery and
      determination, that so startled Miss Harcourt and his cousins, they gazed at him bewildered,
      "and before you all must be her exculpation. It was less for her sin than her silence, and for
      the increased guilt which that appeared to conceal, you tell me, she has been so severely
      treated. Aunt Emmeline, I am the cause of her silence—I was the tempter to her sin—I have
      deceived my commander, deceived my officers, deceived you all—and instead of being what you
      believe me, am a gambler and a villain. She has saved me again and again from discovery and
      disgrace, and but for her sin and its consequences would have saved me now. But what has sin
      ever done but to betray and render wretched? Take Ellen back to your love and care, aunt
      Emmeline, and tell my uncle, tell Sir Edward the wretch I am!"
For a full minute after these unexpected, startling words there was silence, for none could
      speak, not even Emmeline, whose first thought was only joy, that Ellen's silence was not so
      guilty as it seemed. Edward had crossed his arms on the reading-desk, and buried his face upon
      them. The instantaneous change of sentiment which his confession excited toward Ellen in those
      most prejudiced can scarcely be described; but Mrs. Hamilton, now that the words she had
      longed for, prayed for, had been spoken, had scarcely strength to move. Address Edward she
      could not, though she felt far more pity toward him than anger; she looked toward Ellen, who
      still remained kneeling, though Ellis stood close by her, evidently trying to rouse her, and
      with a step far more hurried, more agitated than her children or household had ever seen, she
      traversed the long room, and stood beside her niece.
"Ellen," she said, as she tried to remove the hands which clasped the burning forehead, as
      if their rooted pressure could alone still that agonizing pain, "my own darling, devoted
      Ellen! look up, and forgive me all the misery I have caused you. Speak to me, my child! there
      is nothing to conceal now, all shall be forgiven—Edward's errors, difficulties, all for your
      sake, and he will not, I know he will not, cause you wretchedness again; look up, my poor
      child; speak to me, tell me you forgive me."
Ellen unclasped her hands from her forehead, and looked up in Mrs. Hamilton's face. Her lips
      moved as if to speak, but in a moment an expression of agony flitted over her face, a cry
      broke from her of such fearful physical pain, that it thrilled through the hearts of all who
      heard, and consciousness deserted her at the same moment that Mr. Maitland and Mr. Howard,
      entered the room together.
</div></body></text></TEI>