<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
CHAPTER VI.
DOMESTIC DISCORD AND ITS END.
The displeasure of her husband, his reproaches for her conduct to Ellen, by causing some
      degree of annoyance, increased Mrs. Fortescue's feelings of dislike toward the object who had
      caused it, and this was soon afterward heightened by self-reproach.
A malignant fever broke out in the British settlement where Colonel Fortescue was stationed;
      his wife and children were with him, and, dreadfully alarmed, Eleanor determined to remove
      with her children to some less unhealthy spot. The colonel willingly consented; but before
      their hasty preparations were concluded Ellen sickened. Alarm for Edward, however, so
      engrossed the mother, that she appeared incapable of any other thought. In vain Colonel
      Fortescue urged that his son would be safe with the friends who had promised to take charge of
      him, and who were on the point of leaving the city; that there were none on whom he could
      depend so to tend the little sufferer as not to require a guiding head, and she knew how
      impossible it was for him to be with his child as his heart prompted. He urged, entreated,
      commanded in vain, Mrs. Fortescue was inexorable. She declared that the idea of her son being
      away from her at such a time would drive her mad; and as for duty, one child demanded her care
      as much as another; that her husband might not care about thus exposing her to infection, but
      she really thought, for Edward's sake, it was her duty to take care of herself. It might be
      nothing to the colonel or Ellen whether she lived or died, but to Edward it was a great deal;
      and so as she must choose between them, she would go with him who loved her best, and who
      would be miserable without her. The haughty, angry tone with which she spoke, the unjust
      taunt, roused every indignant feeling, and Colonel Fortescue said more in that moment of
      irritation than he could have believed possible. But it only awakened the cold, sustaining
      pride which Eleanor always called to her aid when conscience smote her, and she departed with
      her son, hardening every better feeling, and rousing anger against her husband and child to
      conquer the suffering of self-reproach. But when many miles from the city of death, and there
      were no fears for Edward, anxiety and wretchedness so assailed her, that pride itself gave
      way. To communicate with the infected city was difficult, and very infrequent, and again and
      again did she wish that she had remained.
During the continuance of Ellen's illness her father's anguish was indeed terrible. Every
      leisure moment he spent by her side, moistening her parched lips, bathing her burning
      forehead, and listening to the plaintive accents of delirium with an acuteness of suffering,
      that injured his own health more than he had the least idea of. The attendants were really
      both kind and skillful, but the colonel fancied, when he was not with her, she was neglected,
      and in still greater suffering; and the struggle between his duties and his child was almost
      more than he could bear. He had never been a religious man—never known what it was to pray,
      except in the public services of his regiment, but now prayer, earnest, heartfelt, poured from
      him, and the thankfulness to God, which so overpowered him, when she was pronounced out of
      danger, as to compel him to weep like a child, planted a sense of a Father's infinite love and
      infinite compassion within him, which was his sole sustainer the short remainder of his
      life.
Eleanor's letters, few as they were, had in some degree softened his anger toward her; but
      as he beheld the ravages of disease on his poor child's face and form, rendering her still
      less attractive than she had been, and perceived that bodily weakness had extended to her
      mind, and often and often forced tears from her eyes and momentary complainings, he trembled
      lest Eleanor should find still more to dislike and reprove; and often his heart bled as Ellen
      would ask with tears, for her dear mamma, adding, plaintively, "Mamma never kisses me or loves
      me as she does Edward; but I like to be near her, and look at her dear beautiful face, and
      wish I was good and pretty enough for her to love me. Why does she never come to me?—and why
      may I not go to her?"
And what could the colonel reply, except that her mother feared Edward would take the
      infection, and therefore she was obliged to go with him to some place of safety? And his child
      was satisfied, repeating so fondly her delight that her dear, dear Edward had been saved from
      being as ill as she was, that her father clasped her closer and closer to his heart, feeling
      the intrinsic beauty of a disposition that, instead of repining that she was left alone to
      suffer, could rejoice that her brother had been spared.
Colonel Fortescue obtained a few weeks' leave, that he might take his child to the sea-side
      as recommended, ere she joined her mother. And alone with him, gradually regaining a moderate
      degree of strength, Ellen was very happy; but such bright intervals were indeed few and far
      between. There was no change in her mother's conduct toward her, when reunited. Her heart had,
      indeed, risen to her lips as she again beheld the child so nearly lost; and had she followed
      impulse, she would have clasped her in her arms and wept over her, but that would have seemed
      tacitly to acknowledge that she had been wrong, and had suffered from it; and so she
      refrained, causing suffering to herself, anguish to her child, and pain to her husband, all
      from that fell demon, pride. She only chose to remember that it was Ellen who had been the
      cause of her husband's anger—Ellen, the constant subject of contention between them—Ellen,
      always causing the pang of self-reproach: and so how was it possible that she could love
      her?
About a year after Ellen's dangerous illness, when she was nearly ten, and Edward just
      eleven, Colonel Fortescue was ordered to take command of some troops to be stationed at a
      fort, whose vicinity to some hostile natives rendered it rather a post of danger. The wives
      and children of the officers were permitted to accompany them, if they wished it, and, except
      in the colonel's own family, there had been no hesitation in their choice. The colonel was
      strangely and painfully depressed as with some vague dread, and all his affection for his wife
      had returned with such force as to make him shrink in unusual suffering from the idea of
      leaving her; and conquering reluctance, for he felt as if she would not accede, he implored
      her to accompany him, confessing he felt ill and unhappy, and shrank from a separation. His
      wife looked at him with astonishment; he had never asked nor thought of such a thing before,
      she said, in their many brief partings, and she really could not understand him. The place was
      decidedly unhealthy, and Edward must not be exposed to its malaria; besides which, she had
      promised him to go to a juvenile ball, which was given by an English family of rank, in a
      fortnight's time, and she could not possibly disappoint him; and why her husband should wish
      for her in such a place she could not imagine, but she knew she should die of terror before
      she had been there a week. Not a word did the colonel utter in reply, but he felt as if an
      ice-bolt had struck his heart and frozen it at once. He fixed his eyes upon her, with a
      strange, sad, reproaching look, which haunted her till her death, and turning from her, sought
      the room where Ellen was preparing her lessons for the joyful hour when he could attend to
      her. As she sprung toward him with a cry of glee, he clasped her to his bosom, without the
      power of uttering a sound, save a groan so deep and hollow, that the child's unusual glee was
      checked, and she clung to him in terror; and when he could tell her that he was about to leave
      her, and for an indefinite time, her passionate grief seemed almost to comfort him, by its
      strong evidence of her childish love.
"Let me go with you, papa, dear papa! oh! I will be so good—I will not give you any trouble,
      indeed, indeed I will not. Pray, pray, take me with you, dear, dear papa?" And she looked in
      his face so beseechingly, that the colonel had no strength to resist, and fondly kissing her,
      he promised that if Mrs. Cameron would permit her to join her little family, she should go
      with him: and, to Ellen's intense thankfulness, the permission was willingly accorded.
Mrs. Fortescue had indeed replied, when her husband briefly imparted his intention, that he
      certainly must intend Ellen to be ill again, by exposing her to such an unhealthy climate; and
      that if she were, he must not be angry if she refused to go and nurse her, as it would be all
      his weak indulgence, and no fault of hers. The colonel made no answer, and irritated beyond
      measure at his manner, Eleanor parted from her husband in coldness and in pride.
The fortnight passed, and Mrs. Fortescue felt as if her own youth were indeed renewed, the
      longings for universal admiration again her own; but now it was only for her son, and her
      triumph was complete; many and lovely were the youthful beings called together on that festive
      night, seeming as if England had concentrated her fairest and purest offspring in that far
      distant land; but Edward, and his still lovely mother, outshone them all. That she was herself
      admired as much, if not more, than she had ever been in her palmy days of triumph, Eleanor
      scarcely knew; her every feeling was centered in her boy, and consequently the supercilious
      haughtiness which had so often marred her beauty in former days was entirely laid aside, and
      maternal pride and pleasure gratified to the utmost, added a new charm to her every movement
      and every word. She heard the universal burst of admiration which greeted her, as to oblige
      Edward she went through a quadrille with him, and never in her whole career had she felt so
      triumphant, so proud, so joyous. During the past fortnight she had often been tormented by
      self-reproach, and her husband's look had disagreeably haunted her; but this night not a
      fleeting thought of either the colonel or Ellen entered her mind, and her pleasure was
      complete.
Tired with dancing, and rather oppressed with the heat, Eleanor quitted the crowded
      ball-room, and stood for a few minutes quite alone in a solitary part of the verandah, which,
      covered with lovely flowers, ran round the house. The music in the ball-room sounded in the
      distance as if borne by the night breeze in softened harmony over the distant hills. The moon
      was at the full, and lit up nearly the whole garden with the refulgence of a milder day. At
      that moment a cold chill crept over the heart and frame of Eleanor, causing her breath to come
      thick and gaspingly. Why, she knew not, for there was nothing visible to cause it, save that,
      in one part of the garden, a cluster of dark shrubs, only partly illuminated by the rays of
      the moon, seemed suddenly to have assumed the shape of a funeral bier, covered with a military
      pall. At the same moment the music in the ball-room seemed changed to the low wailing plaint
      and muffled drums, the military homage to some mighty dead. And if it were indeed but excited
      fancy, it had a strange effect, for Eleanor fainted on the marble floor.
That same afternoon Colonel Fortescue, with some picked men, had set off to discover the
      track of some marauding natives, who for some days had been observed hovering about the
      neighborhood. Military ardor carried him farther than he intended, and it was nearly night,
      when entering a narrow defile, a large body of the enemy burst upon them, and a desperate
      contest ensued. The defile was so hemmed in with rock and mountain, that though not very
      distant from the fort, the noise of the engagement had not been distinguished. Captain Cameron
      was quietly sitting with his wife and elder children, awaiting without any forebodings the
      return of the colonel. Though it was late, Ellen's fears had been so visible, that Mrs.
      Cameron could not send her to bed; the child seemed so restless and uneasy that the captain
      had tried to laugh her out of her cowardice, as he called it, declaring that her father would
      disown her if she could not be more brave. Hasty footsteps were at length heard approaching,
      and Ellen started from her seat and sprung forward, as the door opened; but it was not the
      colonel, only a sergeant, who had accompanied him, and whose face caused Captain Cameron to
      exclaim, in alarm, "How now, Sergeant Allen, returned, and alone; what has chanced?"
"The worst those brown devils could have done!" was the energetic reply. "We've beaten them,
      and we will beat them again, the villains! but that will not bring him
      back—captain—captain—the colonel's down!"
The captain started from his chair, but before he could frame another word, Ellen had caught
      hold of the old man's arm, and wildly exclaimed, "Do you mean—do you mean, pray tell me,
      Sergeant Allen!—Have the natives met papa's troop, and have they fought?—and—is he hurt—is he
      killed?" The man could not answer her—for her look and tone, he afterward declared to his
      comrades, went through his heart, just for all the world like a saber cut; and for the moment
      neither Captain nor Mrs. Cameron could address her. The shock seemed to have banished voice
      from all, save from the poor child principally concerned.
"Stay with me, my dear Ellen!" Mrs. Cameron at length said, advancing to her, as she stood
      still clinging to the sergeant's arm: "the captain will go and meet your father, and if he be
      wounded, we will nurse him together, dearest! Stay with me."
"No, no, no!" was the agonized reply; "let me go to him, he may die before they bring him
      here, and I shall never feel his kiss or hear him bless me again. He told me he should fall in
      battle—oh! Mrs. Cameron, pray let me go to him?"
And they who knew all which that father was to his poor Ellen, could not resist that appeal.
      The sergeant said the colonel was not dead, but so mortally wounded they feared to move him.
      It was a fearful scene. Death in its most horrid form was all around her; her little feet were
      literally deluged in blood, and she frequently stumbled over the dusky forms and mangled and
      severed limbs that lay on the grass, but neither sob nor cry escaped her till she beheld her
      father. His men had removed him from the immediate scene of slaughter, and tried to form a
      rough pallet of military cloaks, but the ghastly countenance, which the moon's light rendered
      still more fixed and pallid, the rigidity of his limbs, all seemed to denote they had indeed
      arrived too late, and that terrible stillness was broken by the convulsed and passionate sobs
      of the poor child, who, flinging herself beside him, besought him only to open his eyes, to
      look upon her once more, to call her his darling, and kiss her once, only once again: and it
      seemed as if her voice had indeed power to recall the fluttering soul. The heavy eyes did
      unclose, the clenched hand relaxed to try and clasp his child, and he murmured feebly—
"How came you here, my poor darling Ellen? are friends here?—is that Cameron's voice?" The
      captain knelt down by him and convulsively pressed his hand, but he could not speak.
"God bless you, Cameron! Take my poor child to her mother—implore her—to—and it is to-night,
      this very night—she and my boy are happy—and I—and my poor Ellen—" A fearful convulsion choked
      his voice, but after a little while he tried to speak again—
"My poor child, I have prepared you for this; but I know you must grieve for me. Take my
      blessing to your brother, tell him to protect—love your mother, darling! she must love you at
      last—a ring—my left hand—take it to her—oh! how I have loved her—God have mercy on her—on my
      poor children!" He tried to press his lips again on Ellen's cheek and brow, but the effort was
      vain—and at the very moment Mrs. Fortescue had stood transfixed by some unknown terror, her
      husband ceased to breathe.
It was long before Ellen rallied from that terrible scene. Even when the fever which
      followed subsided, and she had been taken, apparently perfectly restored to health, once more
      to her mother and brother, its recollection so haunted her, that her many lonely hours became
      fraught with intense suffering. Her imagination, already only too morbid, dwelt again and
      again upon the minutest particular of that field of horror; not only her father, but the
      objects which, when her whole heart was wrapped in him, she seemed not even to have seen. The
      ghastly heaps of dead, the severed limbs, the mangled trunks, the gleaming faces all fixed in
      the distorted expressions with which they died—the very hollow groans and louder cry of pain
      which, as she passed through the field, had fallen on her ear unheeded, returned to the poor
      child's too early awakened fancy so vividly, that often and often it was only a powerful
      though almost unconscious effort that prevented the scream of fear. Her father's last words
      were never forgotten; she would not only continue to love her mother because he had desired
      her to do so, but because he had so loved her, and on her first return home this
      seemed easier than ever to accomplish. Mrs. Fortescue, tortured by remorse and grief, had
      somewhat softened toward the child who had received the last breath of her husband; and could
      Ellen have overcome the reserve and fear which so many years of estrangement had engendered,
      and given vent to the warmth of her nature, Mrs. Fortescue might have learned to know, and
      knowing, to love her—but it was then too late.
So torturing were Mrs. Fortescue's feelings when she recalled the last request of her
      husband, and her cruel and haughty refusal; when that which had seemed so important, a
      juvenile ball—because not to go would disappoint Edward—became associated with his fearful
      death, and sunk into worse than nothing—she had parted with him in anger, and it proved
      forever;—that even as England had become odious to her, twelve years before, so did India now;
      and she suddenly resolved to quit it, and return to the relatives she had neglected so long,
      but toward whom she now yearned more than ever. She thought and believed such a complete
      change would and must bring peace. Alas! what change will remove the torture of remorse?
Though incapable of real love, from her studied heartlessness, it was impossible for her to
      have lived twelve years with one so indulgent and fond as Colonel Fortescue, without realizing
      some degree of affection, and his unexpected and awful death roused every previously dormant
      feeling so powerfully, that she was astonished at herself, and in her misery believed that the
      feeling had only come, to add to her burden—for what was the use of loving now? and determined
      to rouse herself, she made every preparation for immediate departure, but she was painfully
      arrested. The selfish mother had fled from the couch of her suffering child, and now a
      variation of the same complaint laid her on a bed of pain. It was a desperate struggle between
      life and death; but she rallied, and insisted on taking her passage for England some weeks
      before her medical attendant thought it advisable. The constant struggle between the
      whisperings of good and the dominion of evil, which her whole life had been, had unconsciously
      undermined a constitution naturally good; and when to this was added a malignant disease,
      though brief in itself, the seeds of a mortal complaint were planted, which, ere the long
      voyage was concluded, had obtained fatal and irremediable ascendency, and occasioned those
      sufferings and death which in our first chapters we described.
To Edward, though the death of his father had caused him much childish grief, still more
      perhaps from sympathy with the deep suffering of his mother, than a perfect consciousness of
      his own heavy loss, the manner in which he died was to him a source of actual pride.
      He had always loved the histories of heroes, military and naval, and gloried in the idea that
      his father had been one of them, and died as they did, bravely fighting against superior
      numbers, and in the moment of a glorious victory. He had never seen death, and imagined not
      all the attendant horrors of such a one; and how that Ellen could never even hear the word
      without shuddering he could not understand, nor why she should always so painfully shrink from
      the remotest reference to that night, which was only associated in his mind with emotions of
      pleasure. In the tedious voyage of nearly six months (for five-and-twenty years ago the voyage
      from India to England was not what it is now), the character of Edward shone forth in such
      noble coloring as almost to excuse his mother's idolatry, and win for him the regard of
      passengers and crew. Captain Cameron had impressed on his mind that he now stood in his
      father's place to his mother and sister; and as the idea of protecting is always a strong
      incentive to manliness in a boy, however youthful, Edward well redeemed the charge, so
      devoting himself not only to his mother, but to Ellen, that her affection for him redoubled,
      as did her mistaken idea of his vast superiority.
His taste had always pointed to the naval in preference to the military profession, and the
      voyage confirmed it. Before he had been a month on board he had become practically an expert
      sailor—had learned all the technical names of the various parts of a ship, and evinced the
      most eager desire for the acquirement of navigation. Nor did he fail in the true sailor
      spirit, when, almost within sight of England, a tremendous storm arose, reducing the vessel
      almost to a wreck, carrying her far from her destined moorings, and compelling her, after ten
      days' doubt whether or not she would reach land in safety, to anchor in Milford Haven, there
      to repair her injuries, ere she could be again seaworthy.
The passengers here left her, and Mrs. Fortescue, whose illness the terrors of the storm had
      most alarmingly increased, was conveyed to Pembroke in an almost exhausted state; but once on
      land she rallied, resolved on instantly proceeding to Swansea, then cross to Devonshire, and
      travel direct to Oakwood, where she had no doubt her sister was. But her temper was destined
      to be tried still more. The servant who had accompanied her from India, an Englishwoman, tired
      out with the fretful impatience of Mrs. Fortescue during the voyage, and disappointed that she
      did not at once proceed to London, demanded her instant discharge, as she could not stay any
      longer from her friends. The visible illness of her mistress might have spared this unfeeling
      act, but Eleanor had never shown feeling or kindness to her inferiors, and therefore, perhaps,
      had no right to expect them. Her suppressed anger and annoyance so increased physical
      suffering, that had it not been for her children she must have sunk at once; but for their
      sakes she struggled with that deadly exhaustion, and set off the very next morning, without
      any attendant, for Swansea. They were not above thirty miles from this town when, despite her
      every effort, Mrs. Fortescue became too ill to proceed. There was no appearance of a town or
      village, but the owners of a half-way house, pitying the desolate condition of the travelers,
      directed the postboy to the village of Llangwillan; which, though out of the direct road and
      four or five miles distant, was yet the nearest place of shelter. And never in her whole life
      had Mrs. Fortescue experienced such a blessed sensation of physical relief, as when the
      benevolent exertions of Mr. Myrvin had installed her in widow Morgan's humble dwelling, and by
      means of soothing medicine and deep repose in some degree relieved the torture of a burning
      brain and aching frame. Still she hoped to rally, and obtain strength sufficient to proceed;
      and bitter was the anguish when the hope was compelled to be relinquished.—With all that
      followed, our readers are already acquainted, and we will, therefore, at once seek the
      acquaintance of Mrs. Hamilton's own family, whose "Traits of Character" will, we hope,
      illustrate other and happier home influences than those of indiscreet indulgence and culpable
      neglect.
</div></body></text></TEI>