<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER XIII.
SUSPICION.—A PARTING, A DOUBLE GRIEF.—INNOCENCE PROVED.—WRONG DONE AND EVIL CONFIRMED BY
      DOUBT.
Lady Helen's ball took place; and Caroline had so conquered herself, that she could listen
      to Percy's flowing account of its delights with actual cheerfulness. It was so associated with
      self-reproach, that she could scarcely think of it without pain; but she was so convinced of
      her folly in permitting such a very little thing so to affect her temper as to cause all the
      misery she had endured, that she had resolved to punish herself, not only by listening to
      Percy, but by herself inquiring the details. She was a girl of really a strong mind, and once
      convinced of error, once released from the fell dominion of temper, she did not care what pain
      she endured, or what difficulty she encountered, so that she could but convince her mother how
      truly she regretted, and tried to atone for past misconduct. It was very easy, as Mrs.
      Hamilton had told her, to regain lost time in her studies, but not quite so easy to check the
      cross word or unkind thought, and to break from the black cloud that still at times would
      envelop her. But she did not give way, constantly even making opportunities for self-denial,
      and doing little kindnesses for Ellen, though she was too truthful to profess an affection
      which as yet she could not feel.
Early in the following week Mr. Grahame came over to Oakwood with a petition. Annie having
      taken cold at the party, had been obliged to enact the invalid, much against her inclination,
      and so entreated her mother to invite Caroline to spend a few days with her; and to her
      astonishment, her cold, harsh father volunteered to go himself for her. Mr. Hamilton at once
      acceded; his wife hesitated; but she went at once to Caroline, who chanced to be reading alone
      in the school-room, for it was the time of recreation, and told her. For a moment her
      countenance was actually radiant with delight, the next it clouded over.
"You would like it very much, but you are afraid I shall not permit you to go—is that the
      meaning of your change of countenance?" asked her mother, half smiling.
"I am afraid of myself, mamma; for I fear I am always more ill-tempered and proud after any
      such pleasure as going to Moorlands would be."
"Would you rather not go, then?"
"I can not say quite that, mamma; I should like it very much, if I could but be sure of
      myself afterward."
"Did you ever feel such a doubt of yourself before, Caroline, when going to stay with
      Annie?"
"No, mamma; I seem to have thought a great deal more the last few days, and not to feel half
      so sure of myself."
"Then I think there is less danger for you, that is, of course, if you are willing to risk
      the temptation of Lady Helen's too kind consideration and lavish praises, which make mine so
      very tame."
"Oh, mamma, pray do not say so," interrupted Caroline, very eagerly. "Indeed, I would rather
      hear you speak and see you smile as you do now, than listen to all that Lady Helen is so kind
      as to say. I know I did like it very much, and that it did sometimes make me fancy when I came
      home, that you were almost cold. But, indeed, indeed, I hope I am learning to know you
      better."
"I hope so, too, dearest. But Mr. Grahame is waiting for you; and, by-the-by, begged me to
      ask you for some lines you promised to copy out for a print in Lady Helen's album. You may do
      just as you like about going, because you are quite old and wise enough to decide for
      yourself. Ill-temper always brings such suffering with it, that if pleasure must recall it,
      you will be wiser not to go; but if you can resist it—if you think you can return to your
      quiet daily routine as forbearing and gentle and happy as you are now, go, my love, and enjoy
      yourself as much as you can."
"I will try and remember all you said about prayer when we think we are most secure, dear
      mamma," answered Caroline, in a very earnest and somewhat lowered voice. "I know, whenever I
      have been to Moorlands before, I have felt so elated, so sure I should never be in an
      ill-temper, so proud from being made so much of, that I fear I have very often relaxed even in
      my daily prayers, and never thought it necessary to pray against ill-temper. Do you think if I
      watch myself, and still pray against it, it will save me from being cross and unkind on my
      return?"
"It will undoubtedly help you, my dear child, very considerably, and render your trial very
      much easier, but I can not promise you that it will entirely prevent the inclination
      to feel pettish and unhappy. I have no doubt that in time it will prevent even that; but now,
      you know, it is very early days, and you have not yet forgotten the bitter pain of last week;
      still I think you may venture to go, love, and if I do see you happy and gentle on your
      return, it will do much toward convincing me you are striving in earnest. Make haste and get
      ready, and do not forget the poem. I will send over your things. Tell Lady Helen I shall
      expect all her family next Monday evening, to join Edward's little farewell-party, and you can
      return with them."
With the most delighted alacrity Caroline hastened to get ready, and in her hurry forgot the
      poem till she re-entered the school-room, which was still untenanted.
"What shall I do for some writing-paper?" she thought; "the desks are all put away, and it
      will detain me so long to go up again for the keys, and the volume is too large to carry—oh, I
      will tear out a blank page from this book, it will not be very elegant, but I can recopy it at
      Moorlands."
And she hastily tore out a page from an exercise-book which lay open on the table; not
      perceiving that by doing so, a fellow-leaf, which was written on, was loosened, and fell to
      the ground, mingling with some torn papers which had been put in a heap to be cleared away.
      She had just finished it, when Fanny came to tell her Mr. Grahame could not wait any longer,
      and asking if all the papers on the ground were to be removed, Caroline hastily answered in
      the affirmative, without looking at them, and the girl bore them off in her apron, the written
      leaf among them.
Now it so happened that this written leaf had already occasioned trouble. Miss Harcourt had
      been so displeased with Ellen's careless performance of a French exercise that morning, that
      she had desired her to write it again. It was very difficult, and had materially shortened the
      time which she had promised to devote to Edward, who was this week released from his
      attendance on Mr. Howard, to permit him and Ellen to be as much together as possible. Hurried
      by him, she left her book open on the table to dry, and, finding it closed on her return, put
      it away, without looking at it. The following day Miss Harcourt, of course, requested to see
      it, and, to Ellen's utter astonishment, her exercise was not there; only the faulty and
      blotted theme, with no sign to explain its disappearance. Now we know Miss Harcourt was rather
      prejudiced against Ellen, and, as she had unhappily failed in truth more than once (perhaps
      she was not so unjust and harsh as poor Ellen felt her to be), she refused to believe her
      assurance that she had written it. No one had been in the school-room at the time to whom she
      could refer: if Ellen had never disobeyed or deceived, of course her word would be sufficient,
      as her brother's and cousins' would.
"That you have failed again, both in obedience and truth, Ellen, I can not for a moment
      doubt, and it certainly would be my duty to inform your aunt directly; but as I know it would
      cause her real suffering to be compelled to punish you just this last week that Edward will be
      with us for some time, I shall say nothing about it to her, nor inflict any penalty on you to
      attract her notice, but it is entirely for her sake I forbear. One so hardened in falsehood as
      you must be, so soon to forget her kind indulgence after your fault only a few weeks ago, can
      deserve nothing but harshness and contempt. I shall certainly, after this week, warn her not
      to trust too implicitly in your artful professions of repentance."
Poor Ellen felt too bewildered and too miserable even to cry. That she had written her
      exercise, she was as positive as that she had been told to do so; but if she had—what had
      become of it? Harsh as Miss Harcourt seemed, appearances were certainly very much against her.
      She had not a single proof that she had obeyed, and her word was nothing; even Emmeline looked
      at her doubtingly, and as if she could scarcely even pity her. It was very little comfort to
      think her aunt was not to be told. Her own impulse was to go to her, and tell her at once; but
      how could she be believed? and Mrs. Hamilton's words—"If I ever discover another untruth, you
      will compel me to adopt still severer measures, pain as it will be to myself," the remembrance
      of all she had suffered, the disappointment it would be to her aunt to think all she had said
      and read to her were forgotten, when in reality she was constantly thinking of and trying to
      act on them, all checked the impulse, and terrified her into silence.
Miss Harcourt was not an acute physiognomist; she could only read in Ellen's face hardihood
      and recklessness. We rather think Mrs. Hamilton would have read something very different; but
      she was very much engaged with Edward, and if she did think Ellen looked much more out of
      spirits, she attributed it to natural feeling at the rapid approach of the day of separation.
      For her brother's sake, to prove to him she could enter into his joy, she tried very hard not
      to evince the least symptom of depression, and never to cry before him at least; though every
      night, that told her another day had gone, and brought before her all sorts of vague feelings
      and fancies of dread, she either cried herself to sleep, or laid awake, still more unhappy.
      The suspicion attached to her seemed to double the severity of the trial of parting. Edward
      was her own; Edward must love her, with all her faults; but even her aunt, her kind, dear,
      good aunt, must cease to have any affection for her, if so constantly believed guilty of a sin
      so terrible as falsehood. And she seemed to love her brother still more than ever, every day
      that brought the hour of parting nearer—sometimes as if she could not bear the pain
      of not being able to look at his bright face, and listen to his glad laugh and dear voice for
      three, perhaps six long years. Her aunt's gentle kindness seemed to increase her unhappiness,
      for though she knew she was innocent, still she felt, if Miss Harcourt had told Mrs. Hamilton,
      she could not be so caressed and cared for and she was receiving that which she was believed
      to have forfeited. Miss Harcourt's face certainly seemed to ask her as distinctly as words,
      how she could be so artful—so deceitful—as to permit her aunt to take such notice of her; and
      so she often shrunk away, when she most longed to sit by and listen to her.
Edward's spirits never sobered, except now and then, when he thought of leaving Mrs.
      Hamilton, to whom he had given the same love he had lavished on his mother, perhaps to a still
      greater extent, for reverence was largely mingled with it. Mr Howard, too, was another whom he
      grieved to leave, and Mrs. Hamilton so trusted in these apparently strong affections and his
      good disposition, as to feel but little anxiety; merely sorrow that she was to lose him for a
      profession of danger. She did not know, nor did Mr. Howard, nor Edward himself, that he was
      one who would be guided more by the influence of those with whom he was intimately thrown,
      than by any memory of the absent, or judgment of his own.
Ellen's manner on Monday evening annoyed and prejudiced Miss Harcourt still more; Mrs.
      Greville and Mary, Lady Helen and all her family, bringing Caroline home with them, Mr.
      Howard, and some of Edward's favorite companions, all assembled at Oakwood, and every one was
      determined to be gay and cheerful, and Edward's voice was the merriest, and his laugh the
      happiest there; and Ellen, though her head ached with the effort, and the constant struggle of
      the preceding week, was quite cheerful too, and talked to Mary Greville, and Lilla and Cecil
      Grahame, and even to Mr. Howard, as Miss Harcourt felt she had no right to do; and as must
      prove her to be that which she had always fancied her. Mrs. Hamilton, on the contrary, saw
      that in the very midst of a laugh, or of speaking, her niece's eye would rest upon Edward, and
      the lip quite quiver, and her smile become for the moment so strained, that she was satisfied
      Ellen's cheerfulness proceeded from no want of feeling; she wondered, indeed, at so much
      control at such an early age, but she loved her for it, notwithstanding. Once only Ellen was
      nearly conquered. Mary had begged her to sing a little Hindoo air, of which she was
      particularly fond, and Edward, hearing the request, said eagerly—
"Do sing it, dear Ellen; I am quite as fond of it as Mary is, for it seems to make me think
      of India and poor mamma, and it will be such a long time before I hear it again."
She had never in her whole life felt so disinclined to sing, so as if it were quite
      impossible—as if she must cry if she did; but Edward would think it so unkind if she refused,
      for she did not know herself why his very words should have increased the difficulty, and what
      reason could she give him? Mary went and asked Mrs. Hamilton to accompany her; and Ellen did
      her very best, but her voice would tremble, and just before the end of the second verse it
      failed entirely; but still she was glad she had tried, for on Mrs. Hamilton saying, very
      kindly, and in a voice that only she and Mary could hear, "I was half afraid you would not
      succeed to-night, my dear Ellen, but you were quite right to try," Mary seemed to understand
      at once why it had been so difficult for her to oblige her, and to be quite sorry she had
      pressed it so much, and Edward had thanked her, and told her he should sing it in idea very
      often. She tried to be merry again, but she could not succeed as before, and so she kept as
      near her aunt as she could, all the remainder of the evening, as if she were only safe
      there.
Edward, too, had a hard battle with himself, as one by one his favorite companions took
      leave of him with a hearty shake of the hand, and eager—but in some, half-choked wishes for
      his health and prosperity; and when all had gone, and Mr. Howard, who had remained for
      prayers, took him in his arms, and solemnly prayed God to bless him, and save him from danger
      and temptation, and permit him to return to his family, improved in all things that would make
      him an affectionate guardian to his orphan sister, and repay all the love and care of his aunt
      and uncle, it was a desperate effort that prevented him from sobbing like a child; but he had
      his midshipman's uniform on for the first time, and he was quite resolved he would not
      disgrace it; therefore he only returned Mr. Howard's embrace very warmly, and ran out of the
      room. But when his aunt went into his room an hour afterward, it appeared as if he had put off
      his pride and his uniform together, for, though he was fast asleep, his pillow was quite wet
      with tears.
The next morning was a very sad one, though Percy and his father did all they could to make
      it cheerful (we ought to have said before that Percy and Herbert were both going with Mr.
      Hamilton and Edward). No one liked the idea of losing Edward for so long a time. He had made
      himself a favorite with all, even with every one of the servants, who, when the carriage was
      ready at eleven o'clock, thronged into the hall to take a last look at him. He was so altered,
      that he had that morning, actually of his own accord, shaken hands with every one of them who
      had ever done any thing for him, especially Ellis and Morris, and Robert, to whom he had given
      a very handsome present, and thanked him for all his attention.
He kept up very manfully till he came to his aunt, whose emotion, as she held him in a close
      embrace, was so unusually visible, and for the moment he seemed so to love her, that the idea
      of the sea lost half its delight, and he felt as if he could almost have liked to remain with
      her. But Percy's joyous voice—
"Come, Master Edward, I thought you were a sailor, not a school-boy. Off with you; you will
      not give me time or room for one kiss from mamma before we go," roused him, and he tried to
      laugh in the midst of his tears, gave Ellen another kiss, and ran into the carriage, where he
      was quickly followed by his uncle and cousins, and in a very few minutes Oakwood, dear, happy
      Oakwood, as his whole heart felt it at that moment, was hidden from his sight.
Ellen remained by the window, looking after the carriage, long after it was impossible to
      see or hear it, very pale, and her eyes very heavy, but not in tears; and as her aunt went to
      her, and put her arm round her, and began talking to her very cheerfully of all Edward would
      have to write to her about, and how soon they might hear from him, and that Ellen should
      answer him as often and as fully as she liked, and that she would not even ask to see her
      letters to him, or all his to her, as they might have many little affectionate things to say
      to each other, that they might not care about any one else seeing, and she would trust them
      both—Ellen seemed as if one pain was soothed, and if indeed she heard often from him, she
      might bear his departure. But there was still the other source of unhappiness, recalled every
      time she met Miss Harcourt's cold suspicious look, which had not changed even then. Still she
      tried to join her cousins, and get her work, for there were no studies that morning, and so
      some little time passed, by Mrs. Hamilton's exertions, almost cheerfully; but then Ellen left
      the room to get something she wanted, and, in seeking her own, passed Edward's room, the door
      of which stood half open. She could not resist entering, and every thing spoke of him so
      vividly, and yet seemed so to tell her he had gone, really gone, and she was quite alone, that
      all the pain came back again worse than ever, and she laid her head on his pillow, and her
      long-checked tears flowed with almost passionate violence.
"My dear Ellen, I have been looking for you every where," said her aunt's kind voice, full
      an hour afterward; "Emmeline went into your room and could not find you, and I could not
      imagine what had become of you. It was not wise of you to come here just this morning, love.
      You have been so brave, so unselfish all this week, that I must not let you give way now. Try
      and think only that Edward will be happier as a sailor than he would be remaining with you;
      and though I know you must miss him very, very painfully, you will be able to bear it better.
      Poor Alice Seaton, of whom you have heard me speak, has no such comfort; her brother could not
      bear the idea of a sea life, and is scarcely strong enough for it; and yet, poor fellow, it is
      the only opening his uncle has for him, and his poor sister had not only that pain to bear—for
      you can fancy how dreadful it would be, if Edward had left us for a life in which he thought
      he should be miserable—but is obliged to leave the aunt she loves, as much, I think, as you
      love me, Ellen, and go as a teacher in a school, to bear her accumulated sorrow quite alone.
      Sad as your trial is, you have still many things to bless God for, dearest, as I am sure you
      will acknowledge, if, when the pain of the present moment has subsided, you think of Alice,
      and try to put yourself in her place."
"It is not only parting from Edward," answered Ellen, trying to check her tears, but
      clasping her arms still closer round her aunt, as if dreading that her own words should send
      her from her.
"Not only parting from Edward, Ellen, love! what is it then? tell me," replied Mrs.
      Hamilton, surprised and almost alarmed. But Ellen could not go on, much as she wished it, for
      her momentary courage had deserted her, and she could only cry more bitterly than before.
      "Have you done any thing wrong, Ellen? and have you forgotten my promise?" inquired her aunt,
      after waiting several minutes, and speaking very sorrowfully.
"Miss Harcourt thinks I have, aunt; but indeed, indeed, I have not; I have not been so very
      wicked as to tell another falsehood. I know no one can believe me, but I would rather you
      should know it, even if—if you punish me again."
"You must try to be more calm, my dear Ellen, and tell me clearly what is causing you so
      much additional suffering; for I can not quite understand you. I certainly shall not punish
      you, unless quite convinced you have failed in truth again, which I do not think you
      have. Tell me exactly what it is, and look at me while you are speaking."
Ellen tried to obey, but her grief had gained such an ascendency, that it was very
      difficult. Mrs. Hamilton looked very thoughtful when she ceased, for she really was more
      perplexed than she allowed Ellen to perceive; and the poor child, fancying her silence could
      only mean disbelief and condemnation, remained quiet and trembling by her side.
"I promised you that I would not doubt you, Ellen, and I will not now, though appearances
      are so strong against you," she said, after several minutes' thought. "Come with me to the
      school-room, and show me your exercise-book; I may find some clew to explain this
      mystery."
Ellen thought that was quite impossible; but, inexpressibly comforted by her aunt's trust,
      she went with her directly.
"Ellen has been telling me that you have been very much displeased with her, my dear Lucy,"
      Mrs. Hamilton said, directly she entered, addressing Miss Harcourt, who was sitting reading
      with Caroline and Emmeline, "and certainly with great apparent justice; but she is so unhappy
      about it, that I can scarcely believe that she has forgotten all which passed between us a
      short time ago, and I am going, therefore, with your permission, to try if I can not discover
      something that may throw a light on the subject."
"I am afraid that will scarcely be possible," replied Miss Harcourt; "however, I am glad she
      has had the candor to tell you, instead of continuing to receive your notice, as she has done
      the last week." Ellen had brought her book while Miss Harcourt was speaking, and Mrs. Hamilton
      attentively examined it.
"Did you not begin one like this the same day, Caroline?"
"Yes, mamma; don't you remember we were obliged to send to Harris for them? as the parcel
      with the stationery did not come from Exeter as soon as we expected. And we noticed how much
      thinner they were, though they were the same sized books."
"And did I not hear you say something about their having the same number of leaves, and
      therefore it must have been only the quality of the paper which made the difference?"
"What a memory you have, mamma," answered Caroline, smiling. "I did not think you were
      taking the least notice of us, but I do remember saying so now, and, indeed, I very often wish
      the quality had been the same, for our writing looks horrid."
"Do you happen to remember the number of leaves they contained, and if they were both
      alike?"
"I know they had both the same number, and I think it was two-and-twenty, but I can tell you
      in a moment." And with her usual quickness of movement, Caroline unlocked her desk, drew forth
      her book, and ran over the leaves.
"I am right—two-and-twenty."
"And you are quite sure they had both the same number?"
"Perfectly certain, mamma."
"Then, by some incomprehensible means, two leaves have disappeared from Ellen's—here are
      only twenty. Have you ever torn a leaf out, Ellen?"
"No, aunt, indeed I have not."
"When did Miss Harcourt tell you to write this missing exercise?"
"Last Monday week—I mean yesterday week."
"Where did you write it, and what did you do with your book afterward?"
"I wrote it at this table, aunt: I was so sorry I had to do it, when Edward depended so much
      on my going out with him, that I thought it would save time not to get my desk; and as soon as
      it was done, I left it open to dry. When I came home it was closed, and I put it away without
      looking at it, and the next morning the exercise was not there."
"Who was in this room after you left it? by-the-by, it was the morning you went to Lady
      Helen's, Caroline; did you notice Ellen's book open, as she said? Why, what is the matter, my
      dear?" she added, observing that Caroline looked as if some sudden light had flashed upon her,
      and then, really grieved.
"I am so very, very sorry, mamma; I do believe it has been all my haste and
      carelessness that has caused Ellen all this unhappiness. I was in such a hurry to copy the
      poem for Lady Helen, that I tore a blank leaf out of an open book on the table, without
      thinking whose it was. In my haste the book fell to the ground, I picked it up to write on it,
      but never noticed if the fellow-leaf fell out, which it must have done, and no doubt Fanny
      carried it away with some other torn papers, which she asked me if she were to destroy. I am
      more sorry than I can tell you, Ellen; pray believe that I did not do it purposely."
"I am sure she will, if it be only for the comfort of our knowing the truth," said Mrs.
      Hamilton, truly relieved, not only from the explanation, but perceiving Caroline's voluntarily
      offered kiss was willingly and heartily returned by Ellen. It was almost the first she had
      ever seen exchanged between them.
"I must believe you, dear Caroline, for you never say what you do not mean," said Ellen,
      earnestly; "but I do so wish Miss Harcourt could see my exercise; she would quite believe me
      then."
"And we should all be more satisfied," replied Mrs. Hamilton, perceiving in a moment that
      Miss Harcourt still doubted, and ringing the bell, she desired the footman to send Fanny to
      her.
"Do you remember taking some torn papers from this room the morning you went to tell Miss
      Hamilton that Mr. Grahame was waiting?" she asked.
"Yes, madam."
"And were they all torn up in small pieces?"
"No, madam; there was one like the page out of a book, which made me ask Miss Hamilton if
      they were all to be destroyed. It was such a nice clean piece, only being written on one side,
      that I wrapped up some lace in it—Mrs. Ellis having only half an hour before scolded me for
      not keeping it more carefully."
"Bring me the leaf, my good girl, and Miss Ellen will give you a still better piece for the
      purpose," replied her mistress, quite unable to suppress a smile, and Ellen hastily took out a
      large sheet of writing paper, and the moment Fanny returned (she seemed gone an age) gave it
      to her, and seized her own, which she placed in her aunt's hand, without being able to speak a
      single word.
"I think that is the very theme, and certainly Ellen's writing, my dear Lucy; we can have no
      more doubt now," said Mrs. Hamilton, the moment Fanny had left the room, delighted with the
      exchange, and drawing Ellen close to her, for the poor child could really scarcely stand.
"I have done you injustice, Ellen, and I beg your pardon," replied Miss Harcourt directly,
      and Mrs. Hamilton would have been better pleased had she stopped there, but she could not help
      adding, "You know I should never have doubted you, if you had not so often forfeited
      truth."
Ellen's first impulse had been to go to her, but her last words caused her to bury her face
      on her aunt's shoulder.
"I really think, Ellen, you ought to thank Ellis for giving Fanny a scolding, as it has done
      you such excellent service," resumed Mrs. Hamilton, playfully; "and what fee are you going to
      give me for taking upon myself to prove your innocence in open court? I think myself so very
      clever, that I shall tell Percy I am a better lawyer without study, than he can hope to be
      with. You don't seem very capable of doing any thing but kissing me now, and so I will not be
      very exacting. You have cried yourself almost ill, and so must bear the penalty. Go and lie
      down in my dressing-room for an hour or two; Emmeline, go with your cousin, and see what a
      kind, affectionate nurse you can be till I come. It is never too early to practice such a
      complete woman's office."
Emmeline, quite proud of the charge, and more grieved than she very well knew how to
      express, till she was quite alone with Ellen, that she, too, had suspected and been cold to
      her the last week, left the room with her cousin. Caroline seemed to hesitate for a moment,
      but she was quite certain by her mother's face that she wished to speak with Miss Harcourt,
      and so, without being told, took up her book, and went into the library.
"And now, Lucy, I am going to ask you a personal favor," began Mrs. Hamilton, the moment
      they were alone.
"That I will try and not judge Ellen so harshly again," was her instant reply; "you have
      every right to desire it, my dear friend, not to ask it as a favor; I was
      too prejudiced and too hasty; but your own dear children are so truthful, so open, that I fear
      they have quite spoiled me for the necessary patience and forbearance with others."
"You have not quite guessed it, Lucy. Appearances were so very strongly against that poor
      child, that I am not at all astonished you should have disbelieved her assertion. In the
      moment of irritation, it is not unlikely I should have done so myself; but the favor I am
      going to ask you, is merely that you will try and never show that you doubt her word,
      or refer to her past failures. I am quite convinced that untruth is not Ellen's natural
      disposition, but that it has been caused by the same circumstances which have made her such a
      painfully timid, too humble character. If, with all her efforts to conquer herself, she still
      finds her word doubted, and the past brought forward, she never will be able to succeed.
      Examine as strictly and carefully as you please, and as I am sure she will desire, if
      necessary—as she did to-day—but oblige me, and never doubt her. If she finds we never
      do, it will raise her self-esteem, and give her a still further incentive to adhere as
      strictly to the truth, as she sees we believe she does. I am certain the habit of falsehood
      has often been strengthened by the injudicious and cruel references to one or two childish
      failures. If I am never to be believed, what is the use of trying to tell the truth? is the
      very natural question; and the present pain of carefulness being greater than the visible
      amount of evil, the habit is confirmed. Will you oblige me?"
"Of course I will, dearest Mrs. Hamilton; how can you talk so! Have you not a right to
      desire what you think proper, in my guidance of your children, instead of so appealing to me
      as an equal?"
"And are you not? My dear Lucy, have I ever, in act or word, considered you otherwise? In
      the very intrusting my children to your care, do I not prove that I must think you so? Have
      you lived with me all these years, and not yet discovered that I have some few notions
      peculiar perhaps to myself, but that one among them is, that we can never consider too much,
      or be too grateful to those invaluable friends who help us in the training of our
      children?"
"I have lived long enough with you to know that there never was, never can be, any woman
      like you, either as wife, mother, mistress, or friend!" exclaimed Miss Harcourt, with most
      unusual fervor.
"You did not know your own mother, dearest Lucy, as how I wish you had, or you would not
      think so. Every firm, truthful, estimable quality I may possess, under God's blessing, I owe
      to her. As a young child, before she came to me, and some years afterward, I was more like
      Ellen than either of my own darlings; and that perhaps explains the secret of my love for, and
      forbearance with her."
"Like Ellen!" repeated Miss Harcourt, much surprised; "forgive me, but, indeed, I can
      scarcely believe it."
"It is truth, notwithstanding; my poor father's great preference for Eleanor, when we were
      children, her very superior beauty and quickness, threw me back into myself; and I am quite
      certain if it had not been for your excellent mother, who came to live with us when I was only
      seven, my character would have suffered as much from neglect on the one side, and too painful
      humility on my own, as Ellen's has done. I can understand her feelings of loneliness,
      misappreciation, shrinking into herself, better even than she does herself."
"But your affection and kindness ought to have altered her character by this time."
"Hardly—eighteen months is not long enough to remove the painful impressions and influences
      of eleven sorrowful years. Besides, I scarcely know all these influences; I fear sometimes
      that she has endured more than I am aware of. So you must think charitably of my fancy,
      dearest Lucy," she added, smiling, "and help me to make Ellen as much like me as a woman, as I
      believe she is to me as a child; and to do so, try and think a little, a very little, more
      kindly and hopefully of her than you do."
"I really do wish you were not quite so penetrating, dearest Mrs. Hamilton; there is no
      hiding a single feeling or fancy from you," answered Miss Harcourt, slightly confused, but
      laughing at the same time. "What with your memory, and your quick observation, and your
      determined notice of little things, you really are a most dangerous person to live with; and
      if you were not more kind, and indulgent, and true than any body else, we should all be
      frightened to come near you."
"I am glad I have some saving qualities," replied Mrs. Hamilton, laughing also; "it would be
      rather hard to be isolated because I can read other people's thoughts. However, we have
      entered into a compact," she continued, rather more seriously; "you will never show that you
      doubt Ellen, and in any difficult matter, come at once to me," and Miss Harcourt willingly
      assented.
The day passed much more happily than the morning could have anticipated. Emmeline's nursing
      was so affectionate and successful, that Ellen was quite able to join them at dinner, and her
      aunt had selected such a very interesting story to read aloud, in which one character was a
      young sailor, that the hours seemed to fly; and then they had a long talk about poor Alice
      Seaton and her brother, whether it would be possible for Mr. Hamilton to place young Seaton in
      a situation that he liked better, and that his health was more fitted for. Ellen said she
      should like to see and know Alice so much, for her trial must be such a very hard one, that
      her aunt promised her she should in the midsummer holidays, for Alice should then come and
      spend a week with them. It seemed as if not to be able to wish Edward good-night, and kiss
      him, brought back some of the pain again; but she found that thinking about poor Alice, and
      fancying how miserable she must be, if she loved her aunt as dearly as she did Mrs. Hamilton,
      to be obliged to part from her as well as her brother, and live at a school, made her pain
      seem less absorbing; as if to help Alice would do more toward curing it than any thing. And
      though, of course, every day, for a little while, she seemed to miss Edward more and more,
      still her aunt's affection and her own efforts, prepared her to see her uncle and cousins
      return, and listen to all they could tell her about him, without any increase of pain.
</div></body></text></TEI>