<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER IX.
TEMPTATION AND DISOBEDIENCE.—FEAR.—FALSEHOOD AND PUNISHMENT.
It was the Christmas vacation—always a happy season in the halls of Oakwood. The previous
      year, the general juvenile party with which Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton indulged their children on
      the first or sixth of January, as circumstances permitted, had not taken place on account of
      Mrs. Fortescue's death, and was therefore this year anticipated with even more than usual joy.
      Caroline and Emmeline were never permitted to go to indiscriminate parties. Two or three,
      really confined to children, their mother allowed their joining, with Miss Harcourt, in the
      course of the year, but their own ball was always considered the acme of enjoyment, especially
      now that Caroline began to fancy herself very much too old for only children's parties. Annie
      went almost every where with Lady Helen, and quite laughed at the idea of joining children;
      and Caroline this year began to wish most intensely that her mother would take her out to
      grown-up parties too, and lost all relish for the pleasant parties she had enjoyed. Mrs.
      Hamilton never obliged her to go out with Emmeline and Ellen, if she really did not wish it;
      but Caroline could not get any farther in considering herself a woman.
The week before Christmas, Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton did not allow to be all holiday and
      amusement. The season was to their feelings of religion one of earnest, intense thankfulness,
      and they wished to make it equally so to their children—a source of joy and hope indeed, but
      the joy and hope of Heaven, not the mere amusements and pleasures of earth. They had thought
      long and tried earnestly to make their children so to love serious things, as never to
      associate them with gloom or sadness—never to fancy that to be truly and spiritually religious
      demanded a relinquishment of the joys and pleasures and innocent happiness of their age, and
      admirably had they succeeded. Christmas week was always anticipated with quiet gladness, for
      they were still more with their father and mother; and the few serious readings and lessons
      they had, were from and with them alone; Miss Harcourt's time was then entirely her own. As
      soon as Christmas-day was passed, the young party, with the sole exception of two hours' work
      by themselves, in the morning or some part of the day if the mornings were wanted—(for Mrs.
      Hamilton never permitted all duty to be suspended, believing—and her children had
      experienced the wisdom of the belief—that pleasure and recreation were infinitely more
      enjoyable after the performance of some duty, however brief and easy, than had they nothing to
      do but to amuse themselves all day)—were allowed to be just as free, happy, and noisy as they
      pleased; and the exuberance of their innocent happiness would have been envied by many, who
      might have thought the quiet routine of their usual life irksome indeed.
Edward Fortescue was looking forward with the greatest delight to becoming a midshipman in
      the course of the following year. He hoped, indeed, it would be in a very few months; but his
      uncle and Mr. Howard had only told him to work on as hard as he could, for the summons might
      come for him to join at a very short notice, and it would be very dreadful, if the commission
      should be refused because his guardians did not think him forward enough in his various
      studies to leave them. They had looked very mischievous when they had told him this, and
      Edward had enjoyed the joke, and resolved they should not have any such amusement. He would go
      to sea, if he worked night and day for the privilege; and he really did so well, that his
      uncle gave him great praise, which was as unexpected and delightful as his anger was
      terrible.
It happened that on the morning after Christmas-day, Edward and Ellen were quite alone in
      the school room; the former was in one of his most impatient moods, for at his own request,
      his uncle was to examine him in a favorite study, and one of the necessary books was wanting.
      He had read it a few evenings previous, but something had crossed him, and in a desperate
      passion he had flung the book from him, and where it fell he neither knew nor cared. Caroline
      and Emmeline had already gone on an expedition to some poor people, with their mother; Ellen
      had asked and received permission to put some seeds in her little garden, Percy having kindly
      promised to show her where, and to do some harder work in it for her. He was, however, still
      engaged with his father, and would be, he had told her, for perhaps an hour longer, but he
      would be sure to come to her then; and, to employ the interval, she had intended to work hard
      at a purse she was making for him. Edward, however, entirely engrossed her, and for nearly
      half an hour they hunted in every nook and corner of the room, at length—
"I see it! I see it! Edward," Ellen exclaimed, adding, however, in a very desponding tone,
      "but what shall we do? we can not get it."
"Why not?" answered Edward, impatiently; "where is it, Ellen?"
"Behind that stand of flowers," she replied, pointing to one that filled a corner of the
      room and which, though it was winter, was filled with some beautiful flowering geraniums of
      all colors, and some few rare myrtles in full flower.
"There!" said Edward joyfully; "Oh, that is very easily moved—I shall get it in a
      minute."
"But you know aunt Emmeline desired us not to touch it," implored Ellen, clinging to his
      arm; "and the flowers are almost all Caroline's. Dear Edward—pray do not move it."
"Stuff and nonsense, Ellen! How is aunt to know any thing about it? and what do I care about
      the flowers being Caroline's; they may be whose they like, but they shall not prevent my
      getting my book."
"But it will be disobeying aunt. Edward—pray, pray, don't; you know how displeased she was
      with Emmeline last week for a much more trifling disobedience than this will be. And if any
      thing should happen to the flowers, Caroline will be so angry."
"And what do I care for Caroline's anger," retorted Edward impatiently; "My uncle's indeed
      is something to care about, and if I don't get my book and go to him directly, I shall have
      it. I don't like to disobey aunt, but in this case there is no help for it. I am sure I can
      reach it without doing any harm; besides, I must get my book—I can not do without
      it."
"Then only wait till aunt comes home, or at least let me ask uncle if we may move it, dear
      Edward; do let me go—I will not be a minute."
"And so betray my being in a passion the other day, and get me a reproof for that, and for
      my carelessness into the bargain! Nonsense, Ellen; I will get it, and, you must help me, for I
      have not a moment to lose."
"No, Edward! indeed, indeed, I can not touch it," she replied imploringly, and shrinking
      back.
"Say, rather, you wish to get me into disgrace, and perhaps prevented from going out this
      evening, and to-morrow, and Friday too!" exclaimed Edward, irritated beyond all forbearance;
      "and the other day you were so very sorry I was going from home so soon—much you must care
      about me, that you can not do such a trifling thing as this to oblige me! I hate deceit."
Ellen made no reply, though the tears started to her eyes; but as usual her firmness
      deserted her. The heavy stand was carefully moved a little forward, without injuring any of
      the plants; the book was obtained, and at that moment the voice of Percy was heard
      exclaiming—
"Edward! Edward! what are you about? papa has been expecting you the last half-hour; he says
      if you do not come directly, you will not have time to do all you wish—what can you be
      about?"
Edward did not wait to hear much more than his name, but darted off, leaving his sister to
      push back the stand. Ellen felt almost sure she could not do it by herself; but how was she to
      act? To ask assistance would not only be confessing her own disobedience, but inculpating her
      brother, and really, perhaps, deprive him of the enjoyments he anticipated, and so confirm his
      unkind words. She tried to replace it, and thought she had quite succeeded; but as she moved
      it, one of the myrtles fell to the ground, and its beautiful blossom hung on the stalk,
      preserved from being quite broken off only by three or four delicate fibers. It was Caroline's
      favorite plant; one she so cherished and tended, that Percy called it her petted child; and
      poor Ellen stood paralyzed; she raised the pot mechanically, and rested the broken head of the
      flower against the still uninjured sprig, and it looked so well and natural, that the thought
      for a moment darted across her mind that after all it might not be discovered. Then came all
      her aunt's lessons of the many ways of acting an untruth without words, and, therefore, even
      if it should not be discovered, it was no comfort; but could she, dared she, voluntarily
      confess what must appear a willful disobedience? If her aunt had been at home, she might in
      that first moment have gained the necessary courage; but she was not expected back for two or
      three hours, and Ellen sat with her face buried in her hands, only conscious of misery, till
      her cousin's joyous voice called out from the hall—
"Come along, Nelly, I have kept you long enough; Tiny would never have left me quiet so
      long; but there is no tiring your patience. However, I will make up for it now."
And glad to escape from her own thoughts, she hastily collected the various seeds, and ran
      after him. And Percy was so active, so obliging, so amusing in his queer ways of working and
      talking, that she almost forgot the impending trial, till she met her aunt and cousins at
      luncheon. Edward had been so intent, so happy at his business with his uncle, that he had
      never cast a thought as to how the stand got back; and after lunch he had to go for a row on
      the river, and after dinner to attend a lecture on astronomy, which, that night and the one
      following, was to be given in the town-hall in T—. His uncle and Percy and Herbert were to
      accompany him, and so, that he should give a thought to any thing disagreeable, was not
      likely.
The day wore on; Ellen's little courage had all gone, and she almost unconsciously hoped
      that nothing would be discovered. Mr. Hamilton and the lads departed at six, and Mrs. Hamilton
      proposed adjourning to her daughters' room, to finish an entertaining book that they were
      reading aloud. She had noticed, with her usual penetration, that all day Ellen evidently
      shrunk from her eye, and felt quite sure something was wrong again; but she asked no
      questions, fearing again to tempt equivocation. Caroline's passionate exclamation that
      somebody had broken her beautiful flower, drew the attention of all to the stand, and one
      glance sufficed to tell Mrs. Hamilton that it had been moved. Her anxious suspicions at once
      connected this with Ellen's shrinking manner, and she turned to ask her if she knew any thing
      about it. But Ellen had disappeared; and she rang the bell, and inquired of the only domestics
      whose department ever led them into the room, if they could explain the accident. But neither
      of them could; all uniting in declaring, that in the morning the myrtle was quite perfect.
"Ellen was at home, mamma; she must know something about it. Percy said they did not begin
      gardening till more than an hour after we were gone," exclaimed Caroline, whose temper was
      sorely tried by this downfall of all her cares. "I dare say she did it herself—spiteful
      thing!—and has gone to hide herself rather than confess it—it is just like her!"
"Stop, Caroline, do not condemn till you are quite certain; and do not in your anger say
      what is not true. Ellen has given no evidence as yet of being spiteful or mischievous.
      Emmeline, go and tell your cousin that I want her."
The child obeyed. Miss Harcourt had continued working most industriously at the table,
      without uttering a word, though Mrs. Hamilton's countenance expressed such unusual perplexity
      and pain, that it would have seemed kinder to have spoken. One look at Ellen convinced her
      aunt, and she actually paused before she spoke, dreading the reply almost as much as the child
      did the question. It was scarcely audible; it might have been denial, it certainly was not
      affirmative, for Miss Harcourt instantly exclaimed—
"Ellen, how can you tell such a deliberate falsehood? I would not tell your aunt, for I
      really wished you to have the opportunity of in some degree redeeming your disobedience; but I
      saw you move back the stand, and your sinful attempt at concealment by replacing the broken
      flower—and now you dare deny it?"
"I did not replace the flower with the intention of concealing it," exclaimed Ellen,
      bursting into tears; for that one unjust charge seemed to give back the power of speech,
      though the violent reproach and invective which burst from Caroline prevented any thing
      further.
"I must beg you to be silent, Caroline, or to leave the room, till I have done speaking to
      your cousin," said her mother, quietly; "the fate of your flower seems to make you forget that
      I have never yet permitted disrespect or any display of temper in my presence."
"But what right had Ellen to touch the stand?"
"None—she has both disobeyed and again tried to deceive me; faults which it is my duty to
      chastise, but not yours to upbraid. Answer me, Ellen, at once and briefly; your fault is
      known, and, therefore, all further equivocation is useless. Did you move that
      flower-stand?"
"Yes," replied the child, almost choked with sobs, called forth the more from the contrast
      which her aunt's mildness presented to Miss Harcourt's harshness, and Caroline's violent
      anger, and from the painful longing to say that her first disobedience was not entirely her
      own fault.
"Did you remember that I had expressly forbidden either of you to attempt to move it?"
"Yes," replied Ellen again, and an exclamation at the apparent hardihood of her conduct
      escaped from both Miss Harcourt and Caroline.
"And yet you persisted, Ellen: this is indeed a strange contradiction to your seemingly
      sincere sorrow for a similar fault a few months back. What did you move it for?"
For full a minute Ellen hesitated, thus unhappily confirming the suspicion that when she did
      reply it was another equivocation.
"To get a book which had fallen behind."
"I do not know how a book could have fallen behind, unless it had been put or thrown there,
      Ellen; you said, too, that you did not replace the broken flower for the purpose of
      concealment. I hardly know how to believe either of these assertions. Why did you leave the
      room just now?"
"Because—because—I knew you would question me, and—and—I felt I should not have courage to
      speak the truth—and I knew—you would be so—so displeased." The words were scarcely
      articulate.
"I should have been better satisfied, Ellen, if your fear of my displeasure had prevented
      the committal of your first fault, not to aggravate it so sinfully by both acted and spoken
      untruths. Painful as it is to me in this season of festivity and enjoyment to inflict
      suffering, I should share your sin if I did not adopt some measures to endeavor at least to
      make you remember and so avoid it in future. I have told you so very often that it is not me
      you mostly offend when you speak or act falsely but God himself—who is Truth—that I fear words
      alone will be of no avail. Go to your own room, Ellen; perhaps solitude and thought, when your
      brother and cousins are so happy and unrestrained, may bring you to a sense of your aggravated
      misconduct better than any thing else. You will not leave your apartment, except for the hours
      of devotion and exercise—which you will take with Ellis, not with me—till I think you have had
      sufficient time to reflect on all I have said to you on this subject."
Ellen quitted the room without answering; but it was several minutes before Mrs. Hamilton
      could sufficiently conquer the very painful feelings which her niece's conduct and her own
      compelled severity excited, to enter into her daughters' amusements; but she would not punish
      them for the misconduct of another; and, by her exertions, temper to Caroline and cheerfulness
      to Emmeline (whose tears of sympathy had almost kept pace with Ellen's of sorrow), gradually
      returned, and their book became as delightful a recreation as it had been before.
Great was Edward's grief and consternation when he found the effects of what was actually in
      the first instance his fault; but he had not sufficient boldness to say so. His aunt had
      expressly said it was the untruth that had occasioned her greatest displeasure, that if the
      disobedience had been confessed at once, she would, in consideration of the season, have
      forgiven it with a very slight rebuke. "Now," he thought, "it is only the disobedience in
      which I am concerned, and if I confess it was mostly my fault, it won't help Ellen in the
      least—so what is the use of my acknowledging it? Of course, if she wishes it, I will; but how
      could she tell such a deliberate story?"
That he was acting one of equal deliberation, and of far more culpability, if possible—for
      he was permitting her to bear the whole weight of his fault—never struck him; if it did, he
      did not at all understand or believe it. He went to his sister, and offered to confess his
      share in her fault, and when—as he fully expected—she begged him not, that it could do her no
      good, and perhaps only get him punished too, his conscience was so perfectly satisfied, that
      he actually took upon himself to ask her how she could be so foolish and wrong as, when she
      was asked, not to allow that she had moved it at once—
"It would have been all right, then," he said; and added, almost with irritation, "and I
      should not have been teased with the thought of your being in disgrace just now, when I wanted
      so much to enjoy myself."
"Do not think about me, then, Edward," was his sister's reply; "I know the untruth is
      entirely my own fault, so why should it torment you; if I could but always tell and act the
      truth, and not be so very, very frightened—oh, how I wonder if I ever shall!" and she leaned
      her head on her arms, which rested on the table, so despondingly, so sorrowfully, that Edward
      felt too uncomfortable to remain with her. He was satisfied that he could not help her; but
      the disagreeable thought would come, that if he had not tempted her to disobey, she would have
      had no temptation to tell an untruth, and so he sought a variety of active amusements to get
      rid of the feeling. The continuation of the entertaining astronomical lecture, too, was so
      very delightful, and Thursday and Friday morning brought so many enjoyments, that he almost
      forgot her, till startled back into self-reproach by finding that she was not to accompany
      them on Friday evening to Mr. Howard's, whose great pleasure was to collect young people
      around him, and whose soirée in the Christmas holidays, and whose day in the country at
      midsummer, were anticipated by girls and boys, great and small, with such delight as to
      pervade the whole year round. Caroline never refused to join Mr. Howard's parties though they
      were "juvenile;" and Percy always declared they were as unlike any other person's as Mr.
      Howard was unlike a schoolmaster. Ellen had so enjoyed the day in the country, that, timid as
      she was, she had looked forward to Friday with almost as much delight as Emmeline.
In vain Emmeline, Edward, Percy, Herbert, and even Mr. Hamilton entreated, that she might be
      permitted to go. Mrs. Hamilton's own kind heart pleaded quite as strongly, but she remained
      firm.
"Do not ask me, my dear children," she said, almost as beseechingly as they had implored; "I
      do assure you it is quite as much, if not more pain to me on this occasion to refuse, as it is
      for you all to be refused. If it were the first, second, or even third time that Ellen had
      disregarded truth, I would yield for your sakes; and in the hope that the indulgence would
      produce as good an effect as continued severity; but I can not hope this now. The habit, is, I
      fear, so deeply rooted, that nothing but firmness in inflicting pain, whenever it is
      committed, will succeed in eradicating it. God grant I may remove it at last."
The tone and words were so earnest, so sad, that not only did her children cease in their
      intercession, but all felt still more forcibly the solemn importance of the virtue, in which
      Ellen had so failed, from the effect of her conduct upon their mother. She was always grieved
      when they had done wrong, but they never remembered seeing her so very sad as now. Edward,
      indeed, could scarcely understand this as his cousins did; but as his aunt still only alluded
      to the untruth, the qualm of conscience was again silenced, for he had only caused the
      disobedience. Emmeline asked timidly if she might remain with Ellen, and Edward followed her
      example, thinking himself very magnanimous in so doing; but both were refused—and surely he
      had done enough!
All went—Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton and Miss Harcourt, as well as the young people; and it was
      such a happy evening! First, there was the orrery, that Mr. Howard had prevailed on the
      lecturer to display first at his house, and Edward was almost wild in his delight; and then
      there were some games and intellectual puzzles, that made them all think, as well as enjoy;
      and then there were some music and singing and dancing, and every thing was so quiet and
      orderly, and yet so full of youthful enjoyment, that it was not much wonder there was no
      longer any room for a sorrowful thought, in any of the young party from Oakwood. Mrs. Hamilton
      alone thought of Ellen, and again and again accused herself of too great harshness; for,
      perhaps, after all, it might have no better effect than kindness; but what could she do? She
      almost envied the quiet, unruffled unconcern of less anxious guardians; but for her to feel
      indifferent to her responsibility was impossible. Ellen was so often unwell that her absence
      did not occasion so much remark as her brother's or either of her cousins' would. "Mamma did
      not wish her to come," was the answer she had desired the children to give to any inquiries,
      and her character for indulgence was so generally known, that no one suspected any thing more
      than indisposition. Annie Grahame's dislike to Ellen might have made her more suspicious, but
      she was not there. Cecil and Lilla were, with their father, but Miss Grahame did not
      condescend to attend Mr. Howard's "juvenile" parties; and Caroline, though she would not have
      allowed it, even to herself, was both happier, and much more inclined to enjoy herself, with
      the amusements and society offered to her when Annie was not at a party, than when she
      was.
The next night, to Ellen's disposition, was a greater trial than the Friday. She neither
      expected, nor hardly wished to be allowed to go to Mr. Howard's, though, as the affectionate
      Emmeline had come to wish her good night, and with tears in her eyes repeated the regrets that
      she was not to go, she felt the bitter disappointment more than in the morning she had thought
      possible; but Saturday night it had been her aunt's custom, from the time she had been at
      Oakwood, to visit her daughters and niece before they went to sleep, and prepare them for the
      Sabbath's rest and enjoyment, by an examination of their conduct during the past week, and
      full forgiveness of any thing that had been wrong. When younger, Mrs. Hamilton had attended to
      this duty every night; but wishing to give them a habit of private prayer and
      self-examination, independent of her, she had, after Emmeline was twelve years old, set apart
      the Saturday night, until they were fifteen—old enough for her to relinquish it altogether. It
      had been such a habit with her own children, that they felt it perfectly natural; but with
      Ellen and Edward, from their never having been accustomed to it as young children, she had
      never felt the duty understood by them, or as satisfactorily performed by herself as with her
      own. Still, Ellen looked forward to this night as the termination of her banishment; for great
      indeed was the offense whose correction extended over the Sabbath. Ellen could not remember
      one instance since she had been at Oakwood, and when she heard the doors of her cousins' rooms
      successively close, and her aunt's step retreating without approaching hers, she did, indeed,
      believe herself irreclaimably wicked, or her kind, good aunt, would, at least, have come to
      her. Mrs. Hamilton had purposely refrained from indulging her own inclinations, as well as
      comforting Ellen, hoping still more to impress upon her how greatly she had sinned. The
      impossibility of her perfectly comprehending her niece's character, while the poor child felt
      it such a sacred duty to victimize herself, made her far more severe than she would have been,
      could she have known her real disposition; but how was it possible she could believe Ellen's
      grief as deep and remorseful as it seemed, when a short time afterward she would commit the
      same faults? Her task was infinitely more difficult and perplexing than less anxious mothers
      can have the least idea of.
</div></body></text></TEI>