<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mary Barton, by Elizabeth
      Cleghorn Gaskell</title><author>Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn (1810-1865)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1848</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER XXVII.
IN THE LIVERPOOL DOCKS.

"Yon is our quay!
 Hark to the clamour in that miry road,
 Bounded and narrowed by yon vessel's load;
The lumbering wealth she empties round the place,
 Package and parcel, hogshead, chest and case:
 While the loud seaman and the angry hind,
 Mingling in business, bellow to the wind."
Crabbe.
Mary staggered into the house. Mrs. Jones placed her tenderly in a chair, and there stood
     bewildered by her side.
"Oh, father! father!" muttered she, "what have you done?—What must I do? must the innocent
     die?—or he—whom I fear—I fear—oh! what am I saying?" said she, looking round affrighted, and
     seemingly reassured by Mrs. Jones's countenance, "I am so helpless, so weak,—but a poor girl
     after all. How can I tell what is right? Father! you have always been so kind to me,—and you to
     be—never mind—never mind, all will come right in the grave."
"Save us, and bless us!" exclaimed Mrs. Jones, "if I don't think she's gone out of her
     wits!"
"No, I'm not!" said Mary, catching at the words, and with a strong effort controlling the
     mind she felt to be wandering, while the red blood flushed to scarlet the heretofore white
     cheek, "I'm not out of my senses; there is so much to be done—so much—and no one but me to do
     it, you know,—though I can't rightly tell what it is," looking up with bewilderment into Mrs.
     Jones's face. "I must not go mad whatever comes—at least not yet. No!" (bracing herself up)
     "something may yet be done, and I must do it. Sailed! did you say? The John Cropper?
     Sailed?"
"Ay! she went out of dock last night, to be ready for the morning's tide."
"I thought she was not to sail till to-morrow," murmured Mary.
"So did Will (he's lodged here long, so we all call him 'Will')," replied Mrs. Jones. "The
     mate had told him so, I believe, and he never knew different till he got to Liverpool on Friday
     morning; but as soon as he heard, he gave up going to the Isle o' Man, and just ran over to
     Rhyl with the mate, one John Harris, as has friends a bit beyond Abergele; you may have heard
     him speak on him, for they are great chums, though I've my own opinion of Harris."
"And he's sailed?" repeated Mary, trying by repetition to realise the fact to herself.
"Ay, he went on board last night to be ready for the morning's tide, as I said afore, and my
     boy went to see the ship go down the river, and came back all agog with the sight. Here,
     Charley, Charley!" She called out loudly for her son: but Charley was one of those boys who are
     never "far to seek," as the Lancashire people say, when any thing is going on; a mysterious
     conversation, an unusual event, a fire, or a riot, any thing, in short; such boys are the
     little omnipresent people of this world.
Charley had, in fact, been spectator and auditor all this time; though for a little while he
     had been engaged in "dollying" and a few other mischievous feats in the washing line, which had
     prevented his attention from being fully given to his mother's conversation with the strange
     girl who had entered.
"Oh, Charley! there you are! Did you not see the John Cropper sail down the river
     this morning? Tell the young woman about it, for I think she hardly credits me."
"I saw her tugged down the river by a steam-boat, which comes to same thing," replied he.
"Oh! if I had but come last night!" moaned Mary. "But I never thought of it. I never thought
     but what he knew right when he said he would be back from the Isle of Man on Monday morning,
     and not afore—and now some one must die for my negligence!"
"Die!" exclaimed the lad. "How?"
"Oh! Will would have proved an alibi,—but he's gone,—and what am I to do?"
"Don't give it up yet," cried the energetic boy, interested at once in the case; "let's have
     a try for him. We are but where we were if we fail."
Mary roused herself. The sympathetic "we" gave her heart and hope. "But what can be done? You
     say he's sailed; what can be done?" But she spoke louder, and in a more life-like tone.
"No! I did not say he'd sailed; mother said that, and women know nought about such matters.
     You see" (proud of his office of instructor, and insensibly influenced, as all about her were,
     by Mary's sweet, earnest, lovely countenance) "there's sand-banks at the mouth of the river,
     and ships can't get over them but at high-water; especially ships of heavy burden, like the
      John Cropper. Now, she was tugged down the river at low water, or pretty near, and
     will have to lie some time before the water will be high enough to float her over the banks. So
     hold up your head,—you've a chance yet, though may be but a poor one."
"But what must I do?" asked Mary, to whom all this explanation had been a vague mystery.
"Do!" said the boy, impatiently, "why, have not I told you? Only women (begging your pardon)
     are so stupid at understanding about any thing belonging to the sea;—you must get a boat, and
     make all haste, and sail after him,—after the John Cropper. You may overtake her, or
     you may not. It's just a chance; but she's heavy laden, and that's in your favour. She'll draw
     many feet of water."
Mary had humbly and eagerly (oh, how eagerly!) listened to this young Sir Oracle's speech;
     but try as she would, she could only understand that she must make haste, and
     sail—somewhere—
"I beg your pardon," (and her little acknowledgment of inferiority in this speech pleased the
     lad, and made him her still more zealous friend). "I beg your pardon," said she, "but I don't
     know where to get a boat. Are there boat-stands?"
The lad laughed outright.
"You're not long in Liverpool, I guess. Boat-stands! No; go down to the pier,—any pier will
     do, and hire a boat,—you'll be at no loss when once you are there. Only make haste."
"Oh, you need not tell me that, if I but knew how," said Mary, trembling with eagerness. "But
     you say right,—I never was here before, and I don't know my way to the place you speak on; only
     tell me, and I'll not lose a minute."
"Mother!" said the wilful lad, "I'm going to show her the way to the pier; I'll be back in an
     hour,—or so,—" he added in a lower tone.
And before the gentle Mrs. Jones could collect her scattered wits sufficiently to understand
     half of the hastily formed plan, her son was scudding down the street, closely followed by
     Mary's half-running steps.
Presently he slackened his pace sufficiently to enable him to enter into conversation with
     Mary, for once escaped from the reach of his mother's recalling voice, he thought he might
     venture to indulge his curiosity.
"Ahem!—What's your name? It's so awkward to be calling you young woman."
"My name is Mary,—Mary Barton," answered she, anxious to propitiate one who seemed so willing
     to exert himself in her behalf, or else she grudged every word which caused the slightest
     relaxation in her speed, although her chest seemed tightened, and her head throbbing, from the
     rate at which they were walking.
"And you want Will Wilson to prove an alibi—is that it?"
"Yes—oh, yes—can we not cross now?"
"No, wait a minute; it's the teagle hoisting above your head I'm afraid of;—and who is it
     that's to be tried?"
"Jem; oh, lad! can't we get past?"
They rushed under the great bales quivering in the air above their heads and pressed onwards
     for a few minutes, till Master Charley again saw fit to walk a little slower, and ask a few
     more questions.
"Mary, is Jem your brother, or your sweetheart, that you're so set upon saving him?"
"No—no," replied she, but with something of hesitation, that made the shrewd boy yet more
     anxious to clear up the mystery.
"Perhaps he's your cousin, then? Many a girl has a cousin who has not a sweetheart."
"No, he's neither kith nor kin to me. What's the matter? What are you stopping for?" said
     she, with nervous terror, as Charley turned back a few steps, and peered up a side street.
"Oh, nothing to flurry you so, Mary. I heard you say to mother you had never been in
     Liverpool before, and if you'll only look up this street you may see the back windows of our
     Exchange. Such a building as yon is! with 'natomy hiding under a blanket, and Lord Admiral
     Nelson, and a few more people in the middle of the court! No! come here," as Mary, in her
     eagerness, was looking at any window that caught her eye first, to satisfy the boy. "Here,
     then, now you can see it. You can say, now, you've seen Liverpool Exchange."
"Yes, to be sure—it's a beautiful window, I'm sure. But are we near the boats? I'll stop as I
     come back, you know; only I think we'd better get on now."
"Oh! if the wind's in your favour, you'll be down the river in no time, and catch Will, I'll
     be bound; and if it's not, why, you know, the minute it took you to look at the Exchange will
     be neither here nor there."
Another rush onwards, till one of the long crossings near the docks caused a stoppage, and
     gave Mary time for breathing, and Charley leisure to ask another question.
"You've never said where you come from?"
"Manchester," replied she.
"Eh, then! you've a power of things to see. Liverpool beats Manchester hollow, they say. A
     nasty, smoky hole, bean't it? Are you bound to live there?"
"Oh, yes! it's my home."
"Well, I don't think I could abide a home in the middle of smoke. Look there! now you see the
     river! That's something now you'd give a deal for in Manchester. Look!"
And Mary did look, and saw down an opening made in the forest of masts belonging to the
     vessels in dock, the glorious river, along which white-sailed ships were gliding with the
     ensigns of all nations, not "braving the battle," but telling of the distant lands, spicy or
     frozen, that sent to that mighty mart for their comforts or their luxuries; she saw small boats
     passing to and fro on that glittering highway, but she also saw such puffs and clouds of smoke
     from the countless steamers, that she wondered at Charley's intolerance of the smoke of
     Manchester. Across the swing-bridge, along the pier,—and they stood breathless by a magnificent
     dock, where hundreds of ships lay motionless during the process of loading and unloading. The
     cries of the sailors, the variety of languages used by the passers-by, and the entire novelty
     of the sight compared with any thing which Mary had ever seen, made her feel most helpless and
     forlorn; and she clung to her young guide as to one who alone by his superior knowledge could
     interpret between her and the new race of men by whom she was surrounded,—for a new race
     sailors might reasonably be considered, to a girl who had hitherto seen none but inland
     dwellers, and those for the greater part factory people.
In that new world of sight and sound, she still bore one prevailing thought, and though her
     eye glanced over the ships and the wide-spreading river, her mind was full of the thought of
     reaching Will.
"Why are we here?" asked she of Charley. "There are no little boats about, and I thought I
     was to go in a little boat; those ships are never meant for short distances, are they?"
"To be sure not," replied he, rather contemptuously. "But the John Cropper lay in
     this dock, and I know many of the sailors; and if I could see one I knew, I'd ask him to run up
     the mast, and see if he could catch a sight of her in the offing. If she's weighed her anchor
     no use for your going, you know."
Mary assented quietly to this speech, as if she were as careless as Charley seemed now to be
     about her overtaking Will; but in truth her heart was sinking within her, and she no longer
     felt the energy which had hitherto upheld her. Her bodily strength was giving way, and she
     stood cold and shivering, although the noon-day sun beat down with considerable power on the
     shadeless spot where she was standing.
"Here's Tom Bourne!" said Charley; and altering his manner from the patronising key in which
     he had spoken to Mary, he addressed a weather-beaten old sailor who came rolling along the
     pathway where they stood, his hands in his pockets, and his quid in his mouth, with very much
     the air of one who had nothing to do but look about him, and spit right and left; addressing
     this old tar, Charley made known to him his wish in slang, which to Mary was almost inaudible,
     and quite unintelligible, and which I am too much of a land-lubber to repeat correctly.
Mary watched looks and actions with a renovated keenness of perception.
She saw the old man listen attentively to Charley; she saw him eye her over from head to
     foot, and wind up his inspection with a little nod of approbation (for her very shabbiness and
     poverty of dress were creditable signs to the experienced old sailor); and then she watched him
     leisurely swing himself on to a ship in the basin, and, borrowing a glass, run up the mast with
     the speed of a monkey.
"He'll fall!" said she, in affright, clutching at Charley's arm, and judging the sailor, from
     his storm-marked face and unsteady walk on land, to be much older than he really was.
"Not he!" said Charley. "He's at the mast-head now. See! he's looking through his glass, and
     using his arms as steady as if he were on dry land. Why, I've been up the mast, many and many a
     time; only don't tell mother. She thinks I'm to be a shoemaker, but I've made up my mind to be
     a sailor; only there's no good arguing with a woman. You'll not tell her, Mary?"
"Oh, see!" exclaimed she (his secret was very safe with her, for, in fact, she had not heard
     it). "See! he's coming down; he's down. Speak to him, Charley."
But unable to wait another instant she called out herself,
"Can you see the John Cropper? Is she there yet?"
"Ay, ay," he answered, and coming quickly up to them, he hurried them away to seek for a
     boat, saying the bar was already covered, and in an hour the ship would hoist her sails and be
     off. "You've the wind right against you, and must use oars. No time to lose."
They ran to some steps leading down to the water. They beckoned to some watermen, who,
     suspecting the real state of the case, appeared in no hurry for a fare, but leisurely brought
     their boat alongside the stairs, as if it were a matter of indifference to them whether they
     were engaged or not, while they conversed together in few words, and in an under-tone,
     respecting the charge they should make.
"Oh, pray make haste," called Mary. "I want you to take me to the John Cropper.
     Where is she, Charley? Tell them—I don't rightly know the words,—only make haste!"
"In the offing she is, sure enough, miss," answered one of the men, shoving Charley on one
     side, regarding him as too young to be a principal in the bargain.
"I don't think we can go, Dick," said he, with a wink to his companion; "there's the
     gentleman over at New Brighton as wants us."
"But, mayhap, the young woman will pay us handsome for giving her a last look at her
     sweetheart," interposed the other.
"Oh, how much do you want? Only make haste—I've enough to pay you, but every moment is
     precious," said Mary.
"Ay, that it is. Less than an hour won't take us to the mouth of the river, and she'll be off
     by two o'clock!"
Poor Mary's ideas of "plenty of money," however, were different to those entertained by the
     boatmen. Only fourteen or fifteen shillings remained out of the sovereign Margaret had lent
     her, and the boatmen, imagining "plenty" to mean no less than several pounds, insisted upon
     receiving a sovereign (an exorbitant fare, by the bye, although reduced from their first demand
     of thirty shillings).
While Charley, with a boy's impatience of delay, and disregard of money, kept urging,
"Give it 'em, Mary; they'll none of them take you for less. It's your only chance. There's
     St. Nicholas ringing one!"
"I've only got fourteen and ninepence," cried she, in despair, after counting over her money;
     "but I'll give you my shawl, and you can sell it for four or five shillings,—oh! won't that
     much do?" asked she, in such a tone of voice, that they must indeed have had hard hearts who
     could refuse such agonised entreaty.
They took her on board.
And in less than five minutes she was rocking and tossing in a boat for the first time in her
     life, alone with two rough, hard-looking men.
 
 
</div></body></text></TEI>