<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mary Barton, by Elizabeth
      Cleghorn Gaskell</title><author>Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn (1810-1865)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1848</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER XXX.
JOB LEGH'S DECEPTION.

"Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;
The clock gives warning for eleven;
 'Tis on the stroke—'He must be near,'
 Quoth Betty, 'and will soon be here,
As sure as there's a moon in heaven.'
 The clock is on the stroke of twelve,
And Johnny is not yet in sight,
 —The moon's in heaven, as Betty sees,
 But Betty is not quite at ease;
And Susan has a dreadful night."
Wordsworth.
Job found Mrs. Wilson pacing about in a restless way; not speaking to the woman at whose
     house she was staying, but occasionally heaving such deep oppressive sighs as quite startled
     those around her.
"Well!" said she, turning sharp round in her tottering walk up and down, as Job came in.
"Well, speak!" repeated she, before he could make up his mind what to say; for, to tell the
     truth, he was studying for some kind-hearted lie which might soothe her for a time. But now the
     real state of the case came blurting forth in answer to her impatient questioning.
"Will's not to the fore. But he'll may be turn up yet, time enough."
She looked at him steadily for a minute, as if almost doubting if such despair could be in
     store for her as his words seemed to imply. Then she slowly shook her head, and said, more
     quietly than might have been expected from her previous excited manner,
"Don't go for to say that! Thou dost not think it. Thou'rt well-nigh hopeless, like me. I
     seed all along my lad would be hung for what he never did. And better he were, and were shut
      [49] of this weary world, where there's neither justice nor
     mercy left."
She looked up with tranced eyes as if praying to that throne where mercy ever abideth, and
     then sat down.
"Nay, now thou'rt off at a gallop," said Job. "Will has sailed this morning for sure, but
     that brave wench, Mary Barton, is after him, and will bring him back, I'll be bound, if she can
     but get speech on him. She's not back yet. Come, come, hold up thy head. It will all end
     right."
"It will all end right," echoed she; "but not as thou tak'st it. Jem will be hung, and will
     go to his father and the little lads, where the Lord God wipes away all tears, and where the
     Lord Jesus speaks kindly to the little ones, who look about for the mothers they left upon
     earth. Eh, Job, yon's a blessed land, and I long to go to it, and yet I fret because Jem is
     hastening there. I would not fret if he and I could lie down to-night to sleep our last sleep;
     not a bit would I fret if folk would but know him to be innocent—as I do."
"They'll know it sooner or later, and repent sore if they've hanged him for what he never
     did," replied Job.
"Ay, that they will. Poor souls! May God have mercy on them when they find out their
     mistake."
Presently Job grew tired of sitting waiting, and got up, and hung about the door and window,
     like some animal wanting to go out. It was pitch dark, for the moon had not yet risen.
"You just go to bed," said he to the widow. "You'll want your strength for to-morrow. Jem
     will be sadly off, if he sees you so cut up as you look to-night. I'll step down again and find
     Mary. She'll be back by this time. I'll come and tell you every thing, never fear. But, now,
     you go to bed."
"Thou'rt a kind friend, Job Legh, and I'll go, as thou wishest me. But, oh! mind thou com'st
     straight off to me, and bring Mary as soon as thou'st lit on her." She spoke low, but very
     calmly.
"Ay, ay!" replied Job, slipping out of the house.
He went first to Mr. Bridgenorth's, where it had struck him that Will and Mary might be all
     this time waiting for him.
They were not there, however. Mr. Bridgenorth had just come in, and Job went breathlessly
     up-stairs to consult with him as to the state of the case.
"It's a bad job," said the lawyer, looking very grave, while he arranged his papers. "Johnson
     told me how it was; the woman that Wilson lodged with told him. I doubt it's but a wild-goose
     chase of the girl Barton. Our case must rest on the uncertainty of circumstantial evidence, and
     the goodness of the prisoner's previous character. A very vague and weak defence. However, I've
     engaged Mr. Clinton as counsel, and he'll make the best of it. And now, my good fellow, I must
     wish you good-night, and turn you out of doors. As it is, I shall have to sit up into the small
     hours. Did you see my clerk as you came up-stairs? You did! Then may I trouble you to ask him
     to step up immediately?"
After this Job could not stay, and, making his humble bow, he left the room.
Then he went to Mrs. Jones's. She was in, but Charley had slipped off again. There was no
     holding that boy. Nothing kept him but lock and key, and they did not always; for once she had
     him locked up in the garret, and he had got off through the skylight. Perhaps now he was gone
     to see after the young woman down at the docks. He never wanted an excuse to be there.
Unasked, Job took a chair, resolved to await Charley's re-appearance.
Mrs. Jones ironed and folded her clothes, talking all the time of Charley and her husband,
     who was a sailor in some ship bound for India, and who, in leaving her their boy, had evidently
     left her rather more than she could manage. She moaned and croaked over sailors, and sea-port
     towns, and stormy weather, and sleepless nights, and trousers all over tar and pitch, long
     after Job had left off attending to her, and was only trying to hearken to every step and every
     voice in the street.
At last Charley came in, but he came alone.
"Yon Mary Barton has getten into some scrape or another," said he, addressing himself to Job.
     "She's not to be heard of at any of the piers; and Bourne says it were a boat from the Cheshire
     side as she went aboard of. So there's no hearing of her till to-morrow morning."
"To-morrow morning she'll have to be in court at nine o'clock, to bear witness on a trial,"
     said Job, sorrowfully.
"So she said; at least somewhat of the kind," said Charley, looking desirous to hear more.
     But Job was silent.
He could not think of any thing further that could be done; so he rose up, and, thanking Mrs.
     Jones for the shelter she had given him, he went out into the street; and there he stood still,
     to ponder over probabilities and chances.
After some little time he slowly turned towards the lodging where he had left Mrs. Wilson.
     There was nothing else to be done; but he loitered on the way, fervently hoping that her
     weariness and her woes might have sent her to sleep before his return, that he might be spared
     her questionings.
He went very gently into the house-place where the sleepy landlady awaited his coming and his
     bringing the girl, who, she had been told, was to share the old woman's bed.
But in her sleepy blindness she knocked things so about in lighting the candle (she could see
     to have a nap by fire-light, she said), that the voice of Mrs. Wilson was heard from the little
     back-room, where she was to pass the night.
"Who's there?"
Job gave no answer, and kept down his breath, that she might think herself mistaken. The
     landlady, having no such care, dropped the snuffers with a sharp metallic sound, and then, by
     her endless apologies, convinced the listening woman that Job had returned.
"Job! Job Legh!" she cried out, nervously.
"Eh, dear!" said Job to himself, going reluctantly to her bed-room door. "I wonder if one
     little lie would be a sin as things stand? It would happen give her sleep, and she won't have
     sleep for many and many a night (not to call sleep), if things goes wrong to-morrow. I'll
     chance it, any way."
"Job! art thou there?" asked she again with a trembling impatience that told in every tone of
     her voice.
"Ay! sure! I thought thou'd ha' been asleep by this time."
"Asleep! How could I sleep till I knowed if Will were found?"
"Now for it," muttered Job to himself. Then in a louder voice, "Never fear! he's found, and
     safe, ready for to-morrow."
"And he'll prove that thing for my poor lad, will he? He'll bear witness that Jem were with
     him? Oh, Job, speak! tell me all!"
"In for a penny, in for a pound," thought Job. "Happen one prayer will do for the sum total.
     Any rate, I must go on now.—Ay, ay," shouted he, through the door. "He can prove all; and Jem
     will come off as clear as a new-born babe."
He could hear Mrs. Wilson's rustling movements, and in an instant guessed she was on her
     knees, for he heard her trembling voice uplifted in thanksgiving and praise to God, stopped at
     times by sobs of gladness and relief.
And when he heard this, his heart misgave him; for he thought of the awful enlightening, the
     terrible revulsion of feeling that awaited her in the morning. He saw the short-sightedness of
     falsehood; but what could he do now?
While he listened, she ended her grateful prayers.
"And Mary? Thou'st found her at Mrs. Jones's, Job?" said she, continuing her inquiries.
He gave a great sigh.
"Yes, she was there, safe enough, second time of going.—God forgive me!" muttered he, "who'd
     ha' thought of my turning out such an arrant liar in my old days?"
"Bless the wench! Is she here? Why does she not come to bed? I'm sure she's need."
Job coughed away his remains of conscience, and made answer,
"She was a bit weary, and o'er done with her sail; and Mrs. Jones axed her to stay there all
     night. It was nigh at hand to the courts, where she will have to be in the morning."
"It comes easy enough after a while," groaned out Job. "The father of lies helps one, I
     suppose, for now my speech comes as natural as truth. She's done questioning now, that's one
     good thing. I'll be off before Satan and she are at me again."
He went to the house-place, where the landlady stood wearily waiting. Her husband was in bed,
     and asleep long ago.
But Job had not yet made up his mind what to do. He could not go to sleep, with all his
     anxieties, if he were put into the best bed in Liverpool.
"Thou'lt let me sit up in this arm-chair," said he at length to the woman, who stood,
     expecting his departure.
He was an old friend, so she let him do as he wished. But, indeed, she was too sleepy to have
     opposed him. She was too glad to be released and go to bed.
 
 
</div></body></text></TEI>