<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mary Barton, by Elizabeth
      Cleghorn Gaskell</title><author>Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn (1810-1865)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1848</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="28">
CHAPTER XXVIII.
"JOHN CROPPER, AHOY!"

"A wet sheet and a flowing sea,
A wind that follows fast
 And fills the white and rustling sail,
And bends the gallant mast!
And bends the gallant mast, my boys,
While, like the eagle free,
 Away the good ship flies, and leaves
Old England on the lee."
Allan Cunningham.
Mary had not understood that Charley was not coming with her. In fact, she had not thought
     about it, till she perceived his absence, as they pushed off from the landing-place, and
     remembered that she had never thanked him for all his kind interest in her behalf; and now his
     absence made her feel most lonely—even his, the little mushroom friend of an hour's growth.
The boat threaded her way through the maze of larger vessels which surrounded the shore,
     bumping against one, kept off by the oars from going right against another, overshadowed by a
     third, until at length they were fairly out on the broad river, away from either shore; the
     sights and sounds of land being lost in the distance.
And then came a sort of pause.
Both wind and tide were against the two men, and labour as they would they made but little
     way. Once Mary in her impatience had risen up to obtain a better view of the progress they had
     made, but the men had roughly told her to sit down immediately, and she had dropped on her seat
     like a chidden child, although the impatience was still at her heart.
But now she grew sure they were turning off from the straight course which they had hitherto
     kept on the Cheshire side of the river, whither they had gone to avoid the force of the
     current, and after a short time she could not help naming her conviction, as a kind of
     nightmare dread and belief came over her, that every thing animate and inanimate was in league
     against her one sole aim and object of overtaking Will.
They answered gruffly. They saw a boatman whom they knew, and were desirous of obtaining his
     services as steersman, so that both might row with greater effect. They knew what they were
     about. So she sat silent with clenched hands while the parley went on, the explanation was
     given, the favour asked and granted. But she was sickening all the time with nervous fear.
They had been rowing a long, long time—half a day it seemed, at least—yet Liverpool appeared
     still close at hand, and Mary began almost to wonder that the men were not as much disheartened
     as she was, when the wind, which had been hitherto against them, dropped, and thin clouds began
     to gather over the sky, shutting out the sun, and casting a chilly gloom over every thing.
There was not a breath of air, and yet it was colder than when the soft violence of the
     westerly wind had been felt.
The men renewed their efforts. The boat gave a bound forwards at every pull of the oars. The
     water was glassy and motionless, reflecting tint by tint of the Indian-ink sky above. Mary
     shivered, and her heart sank within her. Still now they evidently were making progress. Then
     the steersman pointed to a rippling line in the river only a little way off, and the men
     disturbed Mary, who was watching the ships that lay in what appeared to her the open sea, to
     get at their sails.
She gave a little start, and rose. Her patience, her grief, and perhaps her silence, had
     begun to win upon the men.
"Yon second to the norrard is the John Cropper. Wind's right now, and sails will
     soon carry us alongside of her."
He had forgotten (or perhaps he did not like to remind Mary) that the same wind which now
     bore their little craft along with easy, rapid motion, would also be favourable to the John
      Cropper.
But as they looked with straining eyes, as if to measure the decreasing distance that
     separated them from her, they saw her sails unfurled and flap in the breeze, till, catching the
     right point, they bellied forth into white roundness, and the ship began to plunge and heave,
     as if she were a living creature, impatient to be off.
"They're heaving anchor!" said one of the boatmen to the others, as the faint musical cry of
     the sailors came floating over the waters that still separated them.
Full of the spirit of the chase, though as yet ignorant of Mary's motives, the men sprang to
     hoist another sail. It was fully as much as the boat could bear, in the keen, gusty east wind
     which was now blowing, and she bent, and laboured, and ploughed, and creaked upbraidingly as if
     tasked beyond her strength; but she sped along with a gallant swiftness.
They drew nearer, and they heard the distant "ahoy" more clearly. It ceased. The anchor was
     up, and the ship was away.
Mary stood up, steadying herself by the mast, and stretched out her arms, imploring the
     flying vessel to stay its course by that mute action, while the tears streamed down her cheeks.
     The men caught up their oars and hoisted them in the air, and shouted to arrest attention.
They were seen by the men aboard the larger craft; but they were too busy with all the
     confusion prevalent in an outward-bound vessel to pay much attention. There were coils of ropes
     and seamen's chests to be stumbled over at every turn; there were animals, not properly
     secured, roaming bewildered about the deck, adding their pitiful lowings and bleatings to the
     aggregate of noises. There were carcases not cut up, looking like corpses of sheep and pigs
     rather than like mutton and pork; there were sailors running here and there and everywhere,
     having had no time to fall into method, and with their minds divided between thoughts of the
     land and the people they had left, and the present duties on board ship; while the captain
     strove hard to procure some kind of order by hasty commands given in a loud, impatient voice,
     to right and left, starboard and larboard, cabin and steerage.
As he paced the deck with a chafed step, vexed at one or two little mistakes on the part of
     the mate, and suffering himself from the pain of separation from wife and children, but showing
     his suffering only by his outward irritation, he heard a hail from the shabby little river-boat
     that was striving to overtake his winged ship. For the men fearing that, as the ship was now
     fairly over the bar, they should only increase the distance between them, and being now within
     shouting range, had asked of Mary her more particular desire.
Her throat was dry; all musical sound had gone out of her voice; but in a loud harsh whisper
     she told the men her errand of life and death, and they hailed the ship.
"We're come for one William Wilson, who is wanted to prove an alibi in Liverpool
     Assize Courts to-morrow. James Wilson is to be tried for a murder, done on Thursday night, when
     he was with William Wilson. Any thing more, missis?" asked the boat-man of Mary, in a lower
     voice, and taking his hands down from his mouth.
"Say I'm Mary Barton. Oh, the ship is going on! Oh, for the love of Heaven, ask them to
     stop."
The boatman was angry at the little regard paid to his summons, and called out again;
     repeating the message with the name of the young woman who sent it, and interlarding it with
     sailors' oaths.
The ship flew along—away,—the boat struggled after.
They could see the captain take his speaking-trumpet. And oh! and alas! they heard his
     words.
He swore a dreadful oath; he called Mary a disgraceful name; and he said he would not stop
     his ship for any one, nor could he part with a single hand, whoever swung for it.
The words came in unpitying clearness with their trumpet-sound. Mary sat down, looking like
     one who prays in the death-agony. For her eyes were turned up to that Heaven, where mercy
     dwelleth, while her blue lips quivered, though no sound came. Then she bowed her head and hid
     it in her hands.
"Hark! yon sailor hails us."
She looked up. And her heart stopped its beating to listen.
William Wilson stood as near the stern of the vessel as he could get; and unable to obtain
     the trumpet from the angry captain, made a tube of his own hands.
"So help me God, Mary Barton, I'll come back in the pilot-boat, time enough to save the life
     of the innocent."
"What does he say?" asked Mary wildly, as the voice died away in the increasing distance,
     while the boatmen cheered, in their kindled sympathy with their passenger.
"What does he say?" repeated she. "Tell me. I could not hear."
She had heard with her ears, but her brain refused to recognise the sense.
They repeated his speech, all three speaking at once, with many comments; while Mary looked
     at them and then at the vessel now far away.
"I don't rightly know about it," said she, sorrowfully. "What is the pilot-boat?"
They told her, and she gathered the meaning out of the sailors' slang which enveloped it.
     There was a hope still, although so slight and faint.
"How far does the pilot go with the ship?"
To different distances they said. Some pilots would go as far as Holyhead for the chance of
     the homeward-bound vessels; others only took the ships over the Banks. Some captains were more
     cautious than others, and the pilots had different ways. The wind was against the homeward
     bound vessels, so perhaps the pilot aboard the John Cropper would not care to go far
     out.
"How soon would he come back?"
There were three boatmen, and three opinions, varying from twelve hours to two days. Nay, the
     man who gave his vote for the longest time, on having his judgment disputed, grew stubborn, and
     doubled the time, and thought it might be the end of the week before the pilot-boat came
     home.
They began disputing, and urging reasons; and Mary tried to understand them; but
     independently of their nautical language, a veil seemed drawn over her mind, and she had no
     clear perception of any thing that passed. Her very words seemed not her own, and beyond her
     power of control, for she found herself speaking quite differently to what she meant.
One by one her hopes had fallen away, and left her desolate; and though a chance yet
     remained, she could no longer hope. She felt certain it, too, would fade and vanish. She sank
     into a kind of stupor. All outward objects harmonised with her despair.
The gloomy leaden sky,—the deep, dark waters below, of a still heavier shade of colour,—the
     cold, flat yellow shore in the distance, which no ray lightened up,—the nipping, cutting
     wind.
She shivered with her depression of mind and body.
The sails were taken down, of course, on the return to Liverpool, and the progress they made,
     rowing and tacking, was very slow. The men talked together, disputing about the pilots at
     first, and then about matters of local importance, in which Mary would have taken no interest
     at any time, and she gradually became drowsy; irrepressibly so, indeed, for in spite of her
     jerking efforts to keep awake she sank away to the bottom of the boat, and there lay couched on
     a rough heap of sails, rope, and tackle of various kinds.
The measured beat of the waters against the sides of the boat, and the musical boom of the
     more distant waves, were more lulling than silence, and she slept sound.
Once she opened her eyes heavily, and dimly saw the old gray, rough boatman (who had stood
     out the most obstinately for the full fare) covering her with his thick pea-jacket. He had
     taken it off on purpose, and was doing it tenderly in his way, but before she could rouse
     herself up to thank him she had dropped off to sleep again.
At last, in the dusk of evening, they arrived at the landing-place from which they had
     started some hours before. The men spoke to Mary, but though she mechanically replied, she did
     not stir; so, at length, they were obliged to shake her. She stood up, shivering and puzzled as
     to her whereabouts.
"Now tell me where you are bound to, missis," said the gray old man, "and maybe I can put you
     in the way."
She slowly comprehended what he said, and went through the process of recollection; but very
     dimly, and with much labour. She put her hand into her pocket and pulled out her purse, and
     shook its contents into the man's hand; and then began meekly to unpin her shawl, although they
     had turned away without asking for it.
"No, no!" said the older man, who lingered on the step before springing into the boat, and to
     whom she mutely offered the shawl.
"Keep it! we donnot want it. It were only for to try you,—some folks say they've no more
     blunt, when all the while they've getten a mint."
"Thank you," said she, in a dull, low tone.
"Where are you bound to? I axed that question afore," said the gruff old fellow.
"I don't know. I'm a stranger," replied she, quietly, with a strange absence of anxiety under
     the circumstances.
"But you mun find out then," said he, sharply, "pier-head's no place for a young woman to be
     standing on, gape-saying."
"I've a card somewhere as will tell me," she answered, and the man, partly relieved, jumped
     into the boat, which was now pushing off to make way for the arrivals from some steamer.
Mary felt in her pocket for the card, on which was written the name of the street where she
     was to have met Mr. Bridgenorth at two o'clock; where Job and Mrs. Wilson were to have been,
     and where she was to have learnt from the former the particulars of some respectable lodging.
     It was not to be found.
She tried to brighten her perceptions, and felt again, and took out the little articles her
     pocket contained, her empty purse, her pocket-handkerchief, and such little things, but it was
     not there.
In fact she had dropped it when, so eager to embark, she had pulled out her purse to reckon
     up her money.
She did not know this, of course. She only knew it was gone.
It added but little to the despair that was creeping over her. But she tried a little more to
     help herself, though every minute her mind became more cloudy. She strove to remember where
     Will had lodged, but she could not; name, street, every thing had passed away, and it did not
     signify; better she were lost than found.
She sat down quietly on the top step of the landing, and gazed down into the dark, dank water
     below. Once or twice a spectral thought loomed among the shadows of her brain; a wonder whether
     beneath that cold dismal surface there would not be rest from the troubles of earth. But she
     could not hold an idea before her for two consecutive moments; and she forgot what she thought
     about before she could act upon it.
So she continued sitting motionless, without looking up, or regarding in any way the insults
     to which she was subjected.
Through the darkening light the old boatman had watched her: interested in her in spite of
     himself, and his scoldings of himself.
When the landing-place was once more comparatively clear, he made his way towards it, across
     boats, and along planks, swearing at himself while he did so, for an old fool.
He shook Mary's shoulder violently.
"D—— you, I ask you again where you're bound to? Don't sit there, stupid. Where are you going
     to?"
"I don't know," sighed Mary.
"Come, come; avast with that story. You said a bit ago you'd a card, which was to tell you
     where to go."
"I had, but I've lost it. Never mind."
She looked again down upon the black mirror below.
He stood by her, striving to put down his better self; but he could not. He shook her again.
     She looked up, as if she had forgotten him.
"What do you want?" asked she, wearily.
"Come with me, and be d——d to you!" replied he, clutching her arm to pull her up.
She arose and followed him, with the unquestioning docility of a little child.
 
 
</div></body></text></TEI>