<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Dombey and Son</title><author>Dickens, Charles (1812-1870)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1848</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
CHAPTER XXXII
The Wooden Midshipman goes to Pieces
HONEST Captain Cuttle, as the weeks flew over him in his fortified retreat, by no means
     abated any of his prudent provisions against surprise, because of the non-appearance of the
     enemy. The Captain argued that his present security was too profound and wonderful to endure
     much longer; he knew that when the wind stood in a fair quarter, the weathercock was seldom
     nailed there; and he was too well acquainted with the determined and dauntless character of
     Mrs. MacStinger, to doubt that that heroic woman had devoted herself to the task of his
     discovery and capture. Trembling beneath the weight of these reasons, Captain Cuttle lived a
     very close and retired life; seldom stirring abroad until after dark; venturing even then only
     into the obscurest streets; never going forth at all on Sundays; and both within and without
     the walls of his retreat, avoiding bonnets, as if they were worn by raging lions. 
The Captain never dreamed that in the event of his being pounced upon by Mrs. MacStinger, in
     his walks, it would be possible to offer resistance. He felt that it could not be done. He saw
     himself, in his mind's eye, put meekly in a hackney-coach, and carried off to his old lodgings.
     He foresaw that, once immured there, he was a lost man: his hat gone; Mrs. MacStinger watchful
     of him day and night; reproaches heaped upon his head, before the infant family; himself the
     guilty object of suspicion and distrust; an ogre in the children's eyes, and in their mother's
     a detected traitor. 
A violent perspiration, and a lowness of spirits always came over the Captain as this gloomy
     picture presented itself to his imagination. It generally did so previous to his stealing out
     of doors at night for air and exercise. Sensible of the risk he ran, the Captain took leave of
     Rob, at those times, with the solemnity which became a man who might never return: exhorting
     him, in the event of his (the Captain's) being lost sight of, for a time, to tread in the paths
     of virtue, and keep the brazen instruments well polished. 
But not to throw away a chance; and to secure to himself a means, in case of the worst, of
     holding communication with the external world; Captain Cuttle soon conceived the happy idea of
     teaching Rob the Grinder some secret signal, by which that adherent might make his presence and
     fidelity known to his commander, in the hour of adversity. After much cogitation, the Captain
     decided in favour of instructing him to whistle the marine melody, `Oh cheerily, cheerily!´ and
     Rob the Grinder attaining a point as near perfection in that accomplishment as a landsman could
     hope to reach, the Captain impressed these mysterious instructions on his mind: 
`Now, my lad, stand by! If ever I'm took—´ 
`Took, Captain!´ interposed Rob, with his round eyes wide open. 
`Ah!´ said Captain Cuttle darkly, `if ever I goes away, meaning to come back to supper, and
     don't come within hail again twenty-four hours arter my loss, go you to Brig Place and whistle
     that 'ere tune near my old moorings—not as if you was a meaning of it, you understand, but as
     if you'd drifted there, promiscuous. If I answer in that tune, you sheer off, my lad, and come
     back four-and-twenty hours arterwards; if I answer in another tune, do you stand off and on,
     and wait till I throw out further signals. Do you understand them orders, now?´ 
`What am I to stand off and on of, Captain?´ inquired Rob. `The horse-road?´ 
`Here's a smart lad for you!´ cried the Captain, eyeing him sternly, `as don't know his own
     native alphabet! Go away a bit and come back again alternate—d'ye understand that?´ 
`Yes, Captain,´ said Rob. 
`Very good my lad, then,´ said the Captain, relenting. `Do it!´ 
That he might do it the better, Captain Cuttle sometimes condescended, of an evening after
     the shop was shut, to rehearse this scene: retiring into the parlour for the purpose, as into
     the lodgings of a supposititious MacStinger, and carefully observing the behaviour of his ally,
     from the hole of espial he had cut in the wall. Rob the Grinder discharged himself of his duty
     with so much exactness and judgment, when thus put to the proof, that the Captain presented
     him, at divers times, with seven sixpences, in token of satisfaction; and gradually felt
     stealing over his spirit the resignation of a man who had made provision for the worst, and
     taken every reasonable precaution against an unrelenting fate. 
Nevertheless, the Captain did not tempt ill-fortune, by being a whit more venturesome than
     before. Though he considered it a point of good breeding in himself, as a general friend of the
     family, to attend Mr. Dombey's wedding (of which he had heard from Mr. Perch), and to show that
     gentleman a pleasant and approving countenance from the gallery, he had repaired to the church
     in a hackney cabriolet with both windows up; and might have scrupled even to make that venture,
     in his dread of Mrs. MacStinger, but that the lady's attendance on the ministry of the Reverend
     Melchisedech rendered it peculiarly unlikely that she would be found in communion with the
     Establishment. 
The Captain got safe home again, and fell into the ordinary routine of his new life, without
     encountering any more direct alarm from the enemy, than was suggested to him by the daily
     bonnets in the street. But other subjects began to lay heavy on the Captain's mind. Walter's
     ship was still unheard of. No news came of old Sol Gills. Florence did not even know of the old
     man's disappearance, and Captain Cuttle had not the heart to tell her. Indeed the Captain, as
     his own hopes of the generous, handsome, gallant-hearted youth, whom he had loved, according to
     his rough manner, from a child, began to fade, and faded more and more from day to day, shrink
     with instinctive pain from the thought of exchanging a word with Florence. If he had had good
     news to carry to her, the honest Captain would have braved the newly decorated house and
     splendid furniture—though these, connected with the lady he had seen at church, were awful to
     him—and made his away into her presence. With a dark horizon gathering around their common
     hopes, however, that darkened every hour, the Captain almost felt as if he were a new
     misfortune and affliction to her; and was scarcely less afraid of a visit from Florence, than
     from Mrs. MacStinger herself. 
It was a chill dark autumn evening, and Captain Cuttle had ordered a fire to be kindled in
     the little back parlour, now more than ever like the cabin of a ship. The rain fell fast, and
     the wind blew hard; and straying out on the house-top by that stormy bedroom of his old friend,
     to take an observation of the weather, the Captain's heart died within him, when he saw how
     wild and desolate it was. Not that he associated the weather of that time with poor Walter's
     destiny, or doubted that if Providence had doomed him to be lost and shipwrecked, it was over,
     long ago; but that beneath an outward influence, quite distinct from the subject-matter of his
     thoughts, the Captain's spirits sank, and his hopes turned pale, as those of wiser men had
     often done before him, and will often do again. 
Captain Cuttle, addressing his face to the sharp wind and slanting rain, looked up at the
     heavy scud that was flying fast over the wilderness of house-tops, and looked for something
     cheery there in vain. The prospect near at hand was no better. In sundry tea-chests and other
     rough boxes at his feet, the pigeons of Rob the Grinder were cooing like so many dismal breezes
     getting up. A crazy weathercock of a midshipman, with a telescope at his eye, once visible from
     the street, but long bricked out, creaked and complained upon his rusty pivot as the shrill
     blast spun him round and round, and sported with him cruelly. Upon the Captain's coarse blue
     vest the cold raindrops started like steel beads; and he could hardly maintain himself aslant
     against the stiff Nor'-Wester that came pressing against him, importunate to topple him over
     the parapet, and throw him on the pavement below. If there were any Hope alive that evening,
     the Captain thought, as he held his hat on, it certainly kept house, and wasn't out of doors;
     so the Captain, shaking his head in a despondent manner, went in to look for it. 
Captain Cuttle descended slowly to the little back parlour, and, seated in his accustomed
     chair, looked for it in the fire; but it was not there, though the fire was bright. He took out
     his tobacco-box and pipe, and composing himself to smoke, looked for it in the red glow from
     the bowl, and in the wreaths of vapour that curled upward from his lips; but there was not so
     much as an atom of the rust of Hope's anchor in either. He tried a glass of grog; but
     melancholy truth was at the bottom of that well, and he couldn't finish it. He made a turn or
     two in the shop, and looked for Hope among the instruments; but they obstinately worked out
     reckonings for the missing ship, in spite of any opposition he could offer, that ended at the
     bottom of the lone sea. 
The wind still rushing, and the rain still pattering, against the closed shutters, the
     Captain brought to before the Wooden Midshipman upon the counter, and thought, as he dried the
     little officer's uniform with his sleeve, how many years the Midshipman had seen, during which
     few changes—hardly any—had transpired among his ship's company; how the changes had come all
     together, one day, as it might be; and of what a sweeping kind they were. Here was the little
     society of the back parlour broken up, and scattered far and wide. Here was no audience for
     Lovely Peg, even if there had been anybody to sing it, which there was not, for the Captain was
     as morally certain that nobody but he could execute that ballad, as he was that he had not the
     spirit, under existing circumstances, to attempt it. There was no bright face of `Wal'r´ in the
     house;—here the Captain transferred his sleeve for a moment from the Midshipman's uniform to
     his own cheek;—the familiar wig and buttons of Sol Gills were a vision of the past; Richard
     Whittington was knocked on the head; and every plan and project, in connexion with the
     Midshipman, lay drifting, without mast or rudder, on the waste of waters. 
As the Captain, with a dejected face, stood revolving these thoughts, and polishing the
     Midshipman, partly in the tenderness of old acquaintance, and partly in the absence of his
     mind, a knocking at the shop-door communicated a frightful start to the frame of Rob the
     Grinder, seated on the counter, whose large eyes had been intently fixed on the Captain's face,
     and who had been debating within himself, for the five hundredth time, whether the Captain
     could have done a murder, that he had such an evil conscience, and was always running away. 
`What's that?´ said Captain Cuttle, softly. 
`Somebody's knuckles, Captain,´ answered Rob the Grinder. 
The Captain, with an abashed and guilty air, immediately sneaked on tiptoe to the little
     parlour and locked himself in. Rob, opening the door, would have parleyed with the visitor on
     the threshold if the visitor had come in female guise; but the figure being of the male sex,
     and Rob's orders only applying to women, Rob held the door open and allowed it to enter: which
     it did very quickly, glad to get out of the driving rain. 
`A job for Burgess and Co. at any rate,´ said the visitor, looking over his shoulder
     compassionately at his own legs, which were very wet and covered with splashes. `Oh, how-de-do,
     Mr. Gills?´ 
The salutation was addressed to the Captain, now emerging from the back parlour with a most
     transparent and utterly futile affectation of coming out by accident. 
`Thankee,´ the gentleman went on to say in the same breath; `I'm very well indeed, myself,
     I'm much obliged to you. My name is Toots,—Mister Toots.´ 
The Captain remembered to have seen this young gentleman at the wedding, and made him a bow.
     Mr. Toots replied with a chuckle; and being embarrassed, as he generally was, breathed hard,
     shook hands with the Captain for a long time, and then falling on Rob the Grinder, in the
     absence of any other resource, shook hands with him in a most affectionate and cordial manner. 
`I say; I should like to speak a word to you, Mr. Gills, if you please,´ said Toots at
     length, with surprising presence of mind. `I say! Miss D. O. M. you know!´ 
The Captain, with responsive gravity and mystery, immediately waved his hook towards the
     little parlour, whither Mr. Toots followed him. 
`Oh! I beg your pardon though,´ said Mr. Toots, looking up in the Captain's face as he sat
     down in a chair by the fire, which the Captain placed for him; `you don't happen to know the
     Chicken at all; do you, Mr. Gills?´ 
`The Chicken?´ said the Captain. 
`The Game Chicken,´ said Mr. Toots. 
The Captain shaking his head, Mr. Toots explained that the man alluded to was the celebrated
     public character who had covered himself and his country with glory in his contest with the
     Nobby Shropshire One; but this piece of information did not appear to enlighten the Captain
     very much. 
`Because he's outside: that's all,´ said Mr. Toots. `But it's of no consequence; he won't get
     very wet, perhaps.´ 
`I can pass the word for him in a moment,´ said the Captain. 
`Well, if you would have the goodness to let him sit in the shop with your young
     man,´ chuckled Mr. Toots, `I should be glad; because, you know, he's easily offended, and the
     damp's rather bad for his stamina. I'll call him in, Mr. Gills.´ 
With that, Mr. Toots repairing to the shop-door, sent a peculiar whistle into the night,
     which produced a stoical gentleman in a shaggy white great-coat and a flat-brimmed hat, with
     very short hair, a broken nose, and a considerable tract of bare and sterile country behind
     each ear. 
`Sit down, Chicken,´ said Mr. Toots. 
The compliant Chicken spat out some small pieces of straw on which he was regaling himself,
     and took in a fresh supply from a reserve he carried in his hand. 
`There an't no drain of nothing short handy, is there?´ said the Chicken, generally. `This
     here sluicing night is hard lines to a man as lives on his condition.´ 
Captain Cuttle proffered a glass of rum, which the Chicken, throwing back his head, emptied
     into himself, as into a cask, after proposing the brief sentiment, `Towards us!´ Mr. Toots and
     the Captain returning then to the parlour, and taking their seats before the fire, Mr. Toots
     began: 
`Mr. Gills—´ 
`Awast!´ said the Captain. `My name's Cuttle.´ 
Mr. Toots looked greatly disconcerted, while the Captain proceeded gravely. 
`Cap'en Cuttle is my name, and England is my nation, this here is my dwelling-place, and
     blessed be creation—Job,´ said the Captain, as an index to his authority. 
`Oh! I couldn't see Mr. Gills, could I?´ said Mr. Toots; `because—´ 
`If you could see Sol Gills, young gen'l'm'n,´ said the Captain, impressively, and laying his
     heavy hand on Mr. Toots's knee, `old Sol, mind you—with your own eyes—as you sit there—-you'd
     be welcome to me, than a wind astarn, to a ship becalmed. But you can't see Sol Gills. And why
     can't you see Sol Gills?´ said the Captain, apprised by the face of Mr. Toots that he was
     making a profound impression on that gentleman's mind. `Because he's inwisible.´ 
Mr. Toots in his agitation was going to reply that it was of no consequence at all. But he
     corrected himself, and said, `Lor bless me!´ 
`That there man,´ said the Captain, `has left me in charge here by a piece of writing, but
     though he was a'most as good as my sworn brother, I know no more where he's gone, or why he's
     gone; if so be to seek his nevy, or if so be along of being not quite settled in his mind; than
     you do. One morning at daybreak, he went over the side,´ said the Captain, `without a splash,
     without a ripple. I have looked for that man high and low, and never set eyes, nor ears, nor
     nothing else, upon him, from that hour.´ 
`But, good Gracious, Miss Dombey don't know—´ Mr. Toots began. 
`Why, I ask you, as a feeling heart,´ said the Captain, dropping his voice, `why should she
     know? why should she be made to know, until such time as there warn't any help for it? She took
     to old Sol Gills, did that sweet creetur, with a kindness, with a affability, with a—what's the
     good of saying so? you know her.´ 
`I should hope so,´ chuckled Mr. Toots, with a conscious blush that suffused his whole
     countenance. 
`And you come here from her?´ said the Captain. 
`I should think so,´ chuckled Mr. Toots. 
`Then all I need observe, is,´ said the Captain, `that you know a angel, and are chartered
      bya angel.´ 
Mr. Toots instantly seized the Captain's hand, and requested the favour of his friendship. 
`Upon my word and honour,´ said Mr. Toots, earnestly, `I should be very much obliged to you
     if you'd improve my acquaintance. I should like to know you, Captain, very much. I really am in
     want of a friend, I am. Little Dombey was my friend at old Blimber's, and would have been now,
     if he'd have lived. The Chicken,´ said Mr. Toots, in a forlorn whisper, `is very well—admirable
     in his way—the sharpest man perhaps in the world; there's not a move he isn't up to, everybody
     says so—but I don't know—he's not everything. So she isan angel, Captain. If there is
     an angel anywhere, it's Miss Dombey. That's what I've always said. Really though, you know,´
     said Mr. Toots, `I should be very much obliged to you if you'd cultivate my acquaintance.´ 
Captain Cuttle received this proposal in a polite manner, but still without committing
     himself to its acceptance; merely observing, `Aye, aye, my lad. We shall see, we shall see;´
     and reminding Mr. Toots of his immediate mission, by inquiring to what he was indebted for the
     honour of that visit. 
`Why the fact is,´ replied Mr. Toots, `that it's the young woman I come from. Not Miss
     Dombey—Susan, you know.´ 
The Captain nodded his head once, with a grave expression of face, indicative of his
     regarding that young woman with serious respect. 
`And I'll tell you how it happens,´ said Mr. Toots. `You know, I go and call sometimes, on
     Miss Dombey. I don't go there on purpose, you know, but I happen to be in the neighbourhood
     very often; and when I find myself there, why—why I call.´ 
`Nat'rally,´ observed the Captain. 
`Yes,´ said Mr. Toots. `I called this afternoon. Upon my word and honour, I don't think it's
     possible to form an idea of the angel Miss Dombey was this afternoon.´ 
The Captain answered with a jerk of his head, implying that it might not be easy to some
     people, but was quite so to him. 
As I was coming out,´ said Mr. Toots, `the young woman, in the most unexpected manner, took
     me into the pantry.´ 
The Captain seemed, for the moment, to object to this proceeding: and leaning back in his
     chair, looked at Mr. Toots with a distrustful, if not threatening visage. 
`Where she brought out,´ said Mr. Toots, `this newspaper. She told me that she had kept it
     from Miss Dombey all day, on account of something that was in it, about somebody that she and
     Dombey used to know; and then she read the passage to me. Very well. Then she said—wait a
     minute; what was it she said, though!´ 
Mr. Toots, endeavouring to concentrate his mental powers on this question, unintentionally
     fixed the Captain's eye, and was so much discomposed by its stern expression, that his
     difficulty in resuming the thread of his subject was enhanced to a painful extent. 
`Oh!´ said Mr. Toots after long consideration. `Oh, ah!Yes! She said that she hoped there was
     a bare possibility that it mightn't be true; and that as she couldn't very well come out
     herself, without surprising Miss Dombey, would I go down to Mr. Solomon Gills the
     Instrument-maker's in this street, who was the party's uncle, and ask whether he believed it
     was true, or had heard anything else in the City. She said, if he couldn't speak to me, no
     doubt Captain Cuttle could. By the bye!´ said Mr. Toots, as the discovery flashed upon him,
     `you, you know!´ 
The Captain glanced at the newspaper in Mr. Toots's hand, and breathed short and hurriedly. 
`Well,´ pursued Mr. Toots, `the reason why I'm rather late is, because I went up as far as
     Finchley first, to get some uncommonly fine chickweed that grows there, for Miss Dombey's bird.
     But I came on here, directly afterwards. You've seen the paper, I suppose?´ 
The Captain, who had become cautious of reading the news, lest he should find himself
     advertised at full length by Mrs. MacStinger, shook his head. 
`Shall I read the passage to you?´ inquired Mr. Toots. 
The Captain making a sign in the affirmative, Mr. Toots read as follows, from the Shipping
     Intelligence: 
`”Southampton. The barque Defiance, Henry James, Commander, arrived in this port to-day, with
     a cargo of sugar, coffee, and rum, reports that being becalmed on the sixth day of her passage
     home from Jamaica, in”—in such and such a latitude, you know,´ said Mr. Toots, after making a
     feeble dash at the figures, and tumbling over them. 
`Aye!´ cried the Captain, striking his clenched hand on the table. `Heave ahead, my lad!´ 
`—latitude,´ repeated Mr. Toots, with a startled glance at the Captain, `and longitude
     so-and-so,—“the look-out observed, half an hour before sunset, some fragments of a wreck,
     drifting at about the distance of a mile. The weather being clear, and the barque making no
     way, a boat was hoisted out, with orders to inspect the same, when they were found to consist
     of sundry large spars, and a part of the main rigging of an English brig, of about five hundred
     tons burden, together with a portion of the stern on which the words and letters `Son and H—´
     were yet plainly legible. No vestige of any dead body was to be seen upon the floating
     fragments. Log of the Defiance states, that a breeze springing up in the night, the wreck was
     seen no more. There can be no doubt that all surmises as to the fate of the missing vessel, the
     Son and Heir, port of London, bound for Barbadoes, are now set at rest for ever; that she broke
     up in the last hurricane; and that every soul on board perished.”´ 
Captain Cuttle, like all mankind, little knew how much hope had survived within him under
     discouragement, until he felt its death-shock. During the reading of the paragraph, and for a
     minute or two afterwards, he sat with his gaze fixed on the modest Mr. Toots, like a man
     entranced; then, suddenly rising, and putting on his glazed hat, which, in his visitor's
     honour, he had laid upon the table, the Captain turned his back, and bent his head down on the
     little chimneypiece. 
`Oh, upon my word and honour,´ cried Mr. Toots, whose tender heart was moved by the Captain's
     unexpected distress, `this is a most wretched sort of affair this world is! Somebody's always
     dying, or going and doing something uncomfortable in it. I'm sure I never should have looked
     forward so much, to coming into my property, if I had known this. I never saw such a world.
     It's a great deal worse than Blimber's.´ 
Captain Cuttle, without altering his position, signed to Mr. Toots not to mind him; and
     presently turned round, with his glazed hat thrust back upon his ears, and his hand composing
     and smoothing his brown face. 
`Wal'r, my dear lad,´ said the Captain, `farewell! Wal'r my child, my boy, and man, I loved
     you! He warn't my flesh and blood,´ said the Captain, looking at the fire—`I an't got none—but
     something of what a father feels when he loses a son, I feel in losing Wal'r. For why?´ said
     the Captain. `Because it an't one loss, but a round dozen. Where's that there young school-boy
     with the rosy face and curly hair, that used to be as merry in this here parlour, come round
     every week, as a piece of music? Gone down with Wal'r. Where's that there fresh lad, that
     nothing couldn't tire nor put out, and that sparkled up and blushed so, when we joked him about
     Heart's Delight, that he was beautiful to look at? Gone down with Wal'r. Where's that there
     man's spirit, all afire, that wouldn't see the old man hove down for a minute, and cared
     nothing for itself? Gone down with Wal'r. It an't one Wal'r. There was a dozen Wal'rs that I
     know'd and loved, all holding round his neck when he went down, and they're a-holding round
     mine now!´ 
Mr. Toots sat silent: folding and refolding the newspaper as small as possible upon his knee. 
`And Sol Gills,´ said the Captain, gazing at the fire, `poor nevyless old Sol, where are
      you got to! you was left in charge of me; his last words was, “Take care of my
     uncle!” What came over you,Sol, when you went and gave the go-bye to Ned Cuttle; and
     what am I to put in my accounts that he's a looking down upon, respecting you! Sol Gills, Sol
     Gills!´ said the Captain, shaking his head slowly, `catch sight of that there newspaper, away
     from home, with no one as know'd Wal'r by, to say a word; and broadside to you broach, and down
     you pitch, head foremost!´ 
Drawing a heavy sigh, the Captain turned to Mr. Toots, and roused himself to a sustained
     consciousness of that gentleman's presence. 
`My lad,´ said the Captain, `you must tell the young woman honestly that this here fatal news
     is too correct. They don't romance, you see, on such pints. It's entered on the ship's log, and
     that's the truest book as a man can write. To-morrow morning,´ said the Captain, `I'll step out
     and make inquiries; but they'll lead to no good. They can't do it. If you'll give me a look-in
     in the forenoon, you shall know what I have heerd; but tell the young woman from Cap'en Cuttle,
     that it's over. Over!´ And the Captain, hooking off his glazed hat, pulled his handkerchief out
     of the crown, wiped his grizzled head despairingly, and tossed the handkerchief in again, with
     the indifference of deep dejection. 
`Oh! I assure you,´ said Mr. Toots, `really I am dreadfully sorry. Upon my word I am, though
     I wasn't acquainted with the party. Do you think Miss Dombey will be very much affected,
     Captain Gills—I mean Mr. Cuttle?´ 
`Why, Lord love you,´ returned the Captain, with something of compassion for Mr. Toots's
     innocence. `When she warn't no higher than that, they were as fond of one another as two young
     doves.´ 
`Were they though!´ said Mr. Toots, with a considerably lengthened face. 
`They were made for one another,´ said the Captain, mournfully; `but what signifies that
     now!´ 
`Upon my word and honour,´ cried Mr. Toots, blurting out his words through a singular
     combination of awkward chuckles and emotion, `I'm even more sorry than I was before. You know,
     Captain Gills, I—I positively adore Miss Dombey;—I—I am perfectly sore with loving her;´ the
     burst with which this confession forced itself out of the unhappy Mr. Toots, bespoke the
     vehemence of his feelings; `but what would be the good of my regarding her in this manner, if I
     wasn't truly sorry for her feeling pain, whatever was the cause of it. Mine an't a selfish
     affection, you know,´ said Mr. Toots, in the confidence engendered by his having been a witness
     of the Captain's tenderness. `It's the sort of thing with me, Captain Gills, that if I could be
     run over—or—or trampled upon—or—or thrown off a very high place—or anything of that sort—for
     Miss Dombey's sake, it would be the most delightful thing that could happen to me.´ 
All this, Mr. Toots said in a suppressed voice, to prevent its reaching the jealous ears of
     the Chicken, who objected to the softer emotions; which effort of restraint, coupled with the
     intensity of his feelings, made him red to the tips of his ears, and caused him to present such
     an affecting spectacle of disinterested love to the eyes of Captain Cuttle, that the good
     Captain patted him consolingly on the back, and bade him cheer up. 
`Thankee, Captain Gills,´ said Mr. Toots, `it's kind of you, in the midst of your own
     troubles, to say so. I'm very much obliged to you. As I said before, I really want a friend,
     and should be glad to have your acquaintance. Although I am very well off,´ said Mr. Toots,
     with energy, `you can't think what a miserable Beast I am. The hollow crowd, you know, when
     they see me with the Chicken, and characters of distinction like that, suppose me to be happy;
     but I'm wretched. I suffer for Miss Dombey, Captain Gills. I can't get through my meals; I have
     no pleasure in my tailor; I often cry when I'm alone. I assure you it'll be a satisfaction to
     me to come back to-morrow, or to come back fifty times.´ 
Mr. Toots, with these words, shook the Captain's hand; and disguising such traces of his
     agitation as could be disguised on so short a notice, before the Chicken's penetrating glance,
     rejoined that eminent gentleman in the shop. The Chicken, who was apt to be jealous of his
     ascendancy, eyed Captain Cuttle with anything but favour as he took leave of Mr. Toots; but
     followed his patron without being otherwise demonstrative of his ill-will: leaving the Captain
     oppressed with sorrow; and Rob the Grinder elevated with joy, on account of having had the
     honour of staring for nearly half an hour at the conqueror of the Nobby Shropshire One. 
Long after Rob was fast asleep in his bed under the counter, the Captain sat looking at the
     fire; and long after there was no fire to look at the Captain sat gazing on the rusty bars,
     with unavailing thoughts of Walter and old Sol crowding through his mind. Retirement to the
     stormy chamber at the top of the house brought no rest with it; and the Captain rose up in the
     morning, sorrowful and unrefreshed. 
As soon as the City offices were open, the Captain issued forth to the counting-house of
     Dombey and Son. But there was no opening of the Midshipman's windows that morning. Rob the
     Grinder, by the Captain's orders, left the shutters closed, and the house was as a house of
     death. 
It chanced that Mr. Carker was entering the office, as Captain Cuttle arrived at the door.
     Receiving the Manager's benison gravely and silently, Captain Cuttle made bold to accompany him
     into his own room. 
`Well, Captain Cuttle,´ said Mr. Carker, taking up his usual position before the fireplace,
     and keeping on his sat, `this is a bad business.´ 
`You have received the news as was in print yesterday, Sir?´ said the Captain. 
`Yes,´ said Mr. Carker, `we have received it! It was accurately stated. The underwriters
     suffer a considerable loss. We are very sorry. No help! Such is life!´ 
Mr. Carker pared his nails delicately with a penknife, and smiled at the Captain, who was
     standing by the door looking at him. 
`I excessively regret poor Gay,´ said Carker, `and the crew. I understand there were some of
     our very best men among 'em. It always happens so. Many men with families too. A comfort to
     reflect that poor Gay had no family, Captain Cuttle!´ 
The Captain stood rubbing his chin, and looking at the Manager. The Manager glanced at the
     unopened letters lying on his desk, and took up the newspaper. 
`Is there anything I can do for you, Captain Cuttle?´ he asked, looking off it, with a
     smiling and expressive glance at the door. 
`I wish you could set my mind at rest, Sir, on something it's uneasy about,' returned the
     Captain. 
`Aye!´ exclaimed the Manager, `what's that? Come, Captain Cuttle, I must trouble you to be
     quick, if you please. I am much engaged.´ 
`Lookee here, Sir´ said the Captain, advancing a step. `Afore my friend Wal'r went on this
     here disastrous voyage——´ 
`Come, come, Captain Cuttle,´ interposed the smiling Manager, `don't talk about disastrous
     voyages in that way. We have nothing to do with disastrous voyages here, my good fellow. You
     must have begun very early on your day's allowance, Captain, if you don't remember that there
     are hazards in all voyages whether by sea or land. You are not made uneasy by the supposition
     that young what's-his-name was lost in bad weather that was got up against him in these
     offices—are you? Fie, Captain! Sleep, and soda-water, are the best cures for such uneasiness as
     that.´ 
`My lad,´ returned the Captain, slowly—`you are a'most a lad to me, and so I don't ask your
     pardon for that slip of a word,—if you find any pleasure in this here sport, you an't the
     gentleman I took you for, and if you an't the gentleman I took you for, may be my mind has call
     to be uneasy. Now this is what it is, Mr. Carker.—Afore that poor lad went away, according to
     orders, he told me that he warn't a going away for his own good, or for promotion, he know'd.
     It was my belief that he was wrong, and I told him so, and I come here, your head governor
     being absent, to ask a question or two of you in a civil way, for my own satisfaction. Them
     questions you answered—free. Now it'll ease my mind to know, when all is over, as it is, and
     when what can't be cured must be endoored—for which, as a scholar, you'll overhaul the book
     it's in, and thereof make a note—to know once more, in a word, that I warn't mistaken; that I
     warn't back'ard in my duty when I didn't tell the old man what Wal'r told me; and that the wind
     was truly in his sail, when he highsted of it for Barbadoes Harbour. Mr. Carker,´ said the
     Captain, in the goodness of his nature, `when I was here last, we was very pleasant together.
     If I ain't been altogether so pleasant myself this morning, on account of this poor lad, and if
     I have chafed again any observation of yours that I might have fended off, my name is Ed'ard
     Cuttle, and I ask your pardon.´ 
`Captain Cuttle,´ returned the Manager, with all possible politeness, `I must ask you to do
     me a favour.´ 
`And what is it, Sir?´ inquired the Captain. 
`To have the goodness to walk off, if you please,´ rejoined the Manager, stretching forth his
     arm, `and to carry your jargon somewhere else.´ 
Every knob in the Captain's face turned white with astonishment and indignation; even the red
     rim on his forehead faded, like a rainbow among the gathering clouds. 
`I tell you what, Captain Cuttle,´ said the Manager, shaking his forefinger at him, and
     showing him all his teeth, but still amiably smiling, `I was much too lenient with you when you
     came here before. You belong to an artful and audacious set of people. In my desire to save
     young what's-his-name from being kicked out this place, neck and crop, my good Captain, I
     tolerated you; but for once, and only once. Now, go, my friend!´ 
The Captain was absolutely rooted to the ground, and speechless. 
`Go,´ said the good-humoured Manager, gathering up his skirts, and standing astride upon the
     hearth-rug, `like a sensible fellow, and let us have no turning out, or any such violent
     measures. If Mr. Dombey were here, Captain, you might be obliged to leave in a more ignominious
     manner, possibly. I merely say, Go!´ 
The Captain, laying his ponderous hand upon his chest, to assist himself in fetching a deep
     breath, looked at Mr. Carker from head to foot, and looked round the little room, as if he did
     not clearly understand where he was, or in what company. 
`You are deep, Captain Cuttle,´ pursued Carker, with the easy and vivacious frankness of a
     man of the world who knew the world too well to be ruffled by any discovery of misdoing, when
     it did not immediately concern himself; `but you are not quite out of soundings, either—neither
     you nor your absent friend, Captain. What have you done with your absent friend, hey?´ 
Again the Captain laid his hand upon his chest. After drawing another deep breath, he
     conjured himself to `stand by!´ But in a whisper. 
`You hatch nice little plots, and hold nice little councils, and make nice little
     appointments, and receive nice little visitors, too, Captain, hey?´ said Carker, bending his
     brows upon him, without showing his teeth any the less: `but it's a bold measure to come here
     afterwards. Not like your discretion! You conspirators, and hiders, and runners-away, should
     know better than that. Will you oblige me by going?´ 
`My lad,´ gasped the Captain, in a choked and trembling voice, and with a curious action
     going on in the ponderous fist; `there's a many words I could wish to say to you, but I don't
     rightly know where they're stowed just at present. My young friend, Wal'r, was drownded only
     last night, according to my reckoning, and it puts me out, you see. But you and me will come
     alongside o´ one another again, my lad,´ said the Captain, holding up his hook, `if we live.´ 
`It will be anything but shrewd in you, my good fellow, if we do,´ returned the Manager, with
     the same frankness; `for you may rely, I give you fair warning, upon my detecting and exposing
     you. I don't pretend to be a more moral man than my neighbours, my good Captain; but the
     confidence of this house, or of any member of this house, is not to be abused and undermined
     while I have eyes and ears. Good day!´ said Mr. Carker, nodding his head. 
Captain Cuttle, looking at him steadily (Mr. Carker looked full as steadily at the Captain),
     went out of the office and left him standing astride before the fire, as calm and pleasant as
     if there were no more spots upon his soul than on his pure white linen, and his smooth sleek
     skin. 
The Captain glanced, in passing through the outer counting-house, at the desk where he knew
     poor Walter had been used to sit, now occupied by another young boy, with a face almost as
     fresh and hopeful as his on the day when they tapped the famous last bottle but one of the old
     Madeira, in the little back parlour. The association of ideas, thus awakened, did the Captain a
     great deal of good; it softened him in the very height of his anger, and brought the tears into
     his eyes. 
Arrived at the Wooden Midshipman's again, and sitting down in a corner of the dark shop, the
     Captain's indignation, strong as it was, could make no head against his grief. Passion seemed
     not only to do wrong and violence to the memory of the dead, but to be infected by death, and
     to droop and decline beside it. All the living knaves and liars in the world, were nothing to
     the honesty and truth of one dead friend. 
The only thing the honest Captain made out clearly, in this state of mind, besides the loss
     of Walter was, that with him almost the whole world of Captain Cuttle had been drowned. If he
     reproached himself sometimes, and keenly too, for having ever connived at Walter's innocent
     deceit, he thought at least as often of the Mr. Carker whom no sea could ever render up; and
     the Mr. Dombey, whom he now began to perceive was as far beyond human recall; and the `Heart's
     Delight,' with whom he must never forgather again; and the Lovely Peg, that teak-built and trim
     ballad, that had gone ashore upon a rock, and split into mere planks and beams of rhyme. The
     Captain sat in the dark shop, thinking of these things, to the entire exclusion of his own
     injury; and looking with as sad an eye upon the ground, as if in contemplation of their actual
     fragments as they floated past him. 
But the Captain was not unmindful, for all that, of such decent and respectful observances in
     memory of poor Walter, as he felt within his power. Rousing himself, and rousing Rob the
     Grinder (who in the unnatural twilight was fast asleep), the Captain sallied forth with his
     attendant at his heels, and the door-key in his pocket, and repairing to one of those
     convenient slop-selling establishments of which there is abundant choice at the eastern end of
     London, purchased on the spot two suits of mourning—one for Rob the Grinder, which was
     immensely too small, and one for himself, which was immensely too large. He also provided Rob
     with a species of hat, greatly to be admired for its symmetry and usefulness, as well as for a
     happy blending of the mariner with the coal-heaver; which is usually termed a sou'wester; and
     which was something of a novelty in connexion with the instrument business. In their several
     garments, which the vendor declared to be such a miracle in point of fit as nothing but a rare
     combination of fortuitous circumstances ever brought about, and the fashion of which was
     unparalleled within the memory of the oldest inhabitant, the Captain and Grinder immediately
     arrayed themselves: presenting a spectacle fraught with wonder to all who beheld it. 
In this altered form, the Captain received Mr. Toots. `I'm took aback, my lad, at present,´
     said the Captain, `and will only confirm that there ill news. Tell the young woman to break it
     gentle to the young lady, and for neither of 'em never to think of me no more—'special, mind
     you, that is—though I will think of them, when night comes on a hurricane and seas is mountains
     rowling, for which overhaul your Doctor Watts, brother, and when found make a note on.´ 
The Captain reserved, until some fitter time, the consideration of Mr. Toots's offer of
     friendship, and thus dismissed him. Captain Cuttle's spirits were so low, in truth, that he
     half determined, that day, to take no further precautions against surprise from Mrs.
     MacStinger, but to abandon himself recklessly to chance, and be indifferent to what might
     happen. As evening came on, he fell into a better frame of mind, however; and spoke much of
     Walter to Rob the Grinder, whose attention and fidelity he likewise incidentally commended. Rob
     did not blush to hear the Captain earnest in his praises, but sat staring at him, and affecting
     to snivel with sympathy, and making a feint of being virtuous, and treasuring up every word he
     said (like a young spy as he was) with very promising deceit. 
When Rob had turned in, and was fast asleep, the Captain trimmed the candle, put on his
     spectacles—he had felt it appropriate to take to spectacles on entering into the Instrument
     Trade, though his eyes were like a hawk's—and opened the prayer-book at the Burial Service. And
     reading softly to himself, in the little back parlour, and stopping now and then to wipe his
     eyes, the Captain, in a true and simple spirit, committed Walter's body to the deep. 
</div></body></text></TEI>