<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Dombey and Son</title><author>Dickens, Charles (1812-1870)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1848</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="56">
CHAPTER LVI
Several People delighted, and the Game Chicken disgusted
THE Midshipman was all alive. Mr. Toots and Susan had arrived at last. Susan has run up
     stairs like a young woman bereft of her senses, and Mr. Toots and the Chicken had gone into the
     parlour. 
`Oh my own pretty darling sweet Miss Floy!´ cried the Nipper, running into Florence's room,
     `to think that it should come to this and I should find you here my own dear dove with nobody
     to wait upon you and no home to call your own but never never will I go away again Miss Floy
     for though I may not gather moss I'm not a rolling stone nor is my heart a stone or else it
     wouldn't bust as it is busting now oh dear oh dear!´ 
Pouring out these words, without the faintest indication of a stop, of any sort, Miss Nipper,
     on her knees beside her mistress, hugged her close. 
`Oh love!´ cried Susan, `I know all that's past I know it all my tender pet and I'm a choking
     give me air!´ 
`Susan, dear good Susan!´ said Florence. 
`Oh bless her! I that was her little maid when she was a little child! and is she really,
     really truly going to be married?´ exclaimed Susan, in a burst of pain and pleasure, pride and
     grief, and Heaven knows how many other conflicting feelings. 
`Who told you so?´ said Florence. 
`Oh gracious me! that innocentest creetur Toots,´ returned Susan hysterically. `I knew he
     must be right my dear because he took on so. He's the devotedest and innocentest infant!And is
     my darling,´ pursued Susan, with another close embrace and burst of tears, `really really going
     to be married!´ 
The mixture of compassion, pleasure, tenderness, protection, and regret with which the Nipper
     constantly recurred to this subject, and at every such recurrence, raised her head to look in
     the young face and kiss it, and then laid her head again upon her mistress's shoulder,
     caressing her and sobbing, was as womanly and good a thing, in its way, as ever was seen in the
     world. 
`There, there!´ said the soothing voice of Florence presently. `Now you're quite yourself,
     dear Susan!´ 
Miss Nipper, sitting down upon the floor, at her mistress's feet, laughing and sobbing,
     holding her pocket-handkerchief to her eyes with one hand, and patting Diogenes with the other
     as he licked her face, confessed to being more composed, and laughed and cried a little more in
     proof of it. 
`I—I—I never did see such a creetur as that Toots,´ said Susan, `in all my born days never!´ 
`So kind,´ suggested Florence. 
`And so comic!´ Susan sobbed. `The way he's been going on inside with me with that
     disrespectable Chicken on the box!´ 
`About what, Susan?´ inquired Florence timidly. 
`Oh about Lieutenant Walters, and Captain Gills, and you my dear Miss Floy, and the silent
     tomb,´ said Susan. 
`The silent tomb!´ repeated Florence. 
`He says,´ here Susan burst into a violent hysterical laugh, `that he'll go down into it now
     immediately and quite comfortable, but bless your heart my dear Miss Floy he won't, he's a
     great deal too happy in seeing other people happy for that, he may not be a Solomon,´ pursued
     the Nipper, with her usual volubility, `nor do I say he is but this I do say a less selfish
     human creature human nature never knew!´ 
Miss Nipper being still hysterical, laughed immoderately after making this energetic
     declaration, and then informed Florence that he was waiting below to see her; which would be a
     rich repayment for the trouble he had had in his late expedition. 
Florence entreated Susan to beg of Mr. Toots as a favour that she might have the pleasure of
     thanking him for his kindness; and Susan, in a few moments, produced that young gentleman,
     still very much dishevelled in appearance, and stammering exceedingly. 
`Miss Dombey,´ said Mr. Toots. `To be again permitted to—to—gaze—at least, not to gaze, but—I
     don't exactly know what I was going to say, but it's of no consequence.´ 
`I have to thank you so often,´ returned Florence, giving him both her hands, with all her
     innocent gratitude beaming in her face, `that I have no words left, and don't know how to do
     it.´ 
`Miss Dombey,´ said Mr. Toots, in an awful voice, `if it was possible that you could,
     consistently with your angelic nature, Curse me, you would—if I may be allowed to say so—floor
     me infinitely less, than by these undeserved expressions of kindness. Their effect upon
     me—is—but,´ said Mr. Toots, abruptly, `this is a digression, and's of no consequence at all.´ 
As there seemed to be no means of replying to this, but by thanking him again, Florence
     thanked him again. 
`I could wish,´ said Mr. Toots, `to take this opportunity, Miss Dombey, if I might, of
     entering into a word of explanation. I should have had the pleasure of—of returning with Susan
     at an earlier period; but, in the first place, we didn't know the name of the relation to whose
     house she had gone, and, in the second, as she had left that relation's and gone to another at
     a distance, I think that scarcely anything short of the sagacity of the Chicken, would have
     found her out in the time.´ 
Florence was sure of it. 
`This, however,´ said Mr. Toots, `is not the point. The company of Susan has been, I assure
     you, Miss Dombey, a consolation and satisfaction to me, in my state of mind, more easily
     conceived than described. The journey has been its own reward. That, however, still, is not the
     point. Miss Dombey, I have before observed that I know I am not what is considered a quick
     person. I am perfectly aware of that. I don't think anybody could be better acquainted with his
     own—if it was not too strong an expression, I should say with the thickness of his own
     head—than myself. But, Miss Dombey, I do, notwithstanding, perceive the state of—of things—with
     Lieutenant Walters. Whatever agony that state of things may have caused me (which is of no
     consequence at all), I am bound to say, that Lieutenant Walters is a person who appears to be
     worthy of the blessing that has fallen on his—on his brow. May he wear it long, and appreciate
     it, as a very different, and very unworthy individual, that it is of no consequence to name,
     would have done! That, however, still, is not the point. Miss Dombey, Captain Gills is a friend
     of mine; and during the interval that is now elapsing, I believe it would afford Captain Gills
     pleasure to see me occasionally coming backwards and forwards here. It would afford me pleasure
     so to come. But I cannot forget that I once committed myself, fatally, at the corner of the
     Square at Brighton; and if my presence will be, in the least degree, unpleasant to you, I only
     ask you to name it to me now, and assure you that I shall perfectly understand you. I shall not
     consider it at all unkind, and shall only be too delighted and happy to be honoured with your
     confidence.´ 
`Mr. Toots,´ returned Florence, `if you, who are so old and true a friend of mine, were to
     stay away from this house now, you would make me very unhappy. It can never, never, give me any
     feeling but pleasure to see you.´ 
`Miss Dombey,´ said Mr. Toots, taking out his pocket-handkerchief, `if I shed a tear, it is a
     tear of joy. It is of no consequence, and I am very much obliged to you. I may be allowed to
     remark, after what you have so kindly said, that it is not my intention to neglect my person
     any longer.´ 
Florence received this intimation with the prettiest expression of perplexity possible. 
`I mean,´ said Mr. Toots, `that I shall consider it my duty as a fellow-creature generally,
     until I am claimed by the silent tomb, to make the best of myself, and to—to have my boots as
     brightly polished, as—as circumstances will admit of. This is the last time, Miss Dombey, of my
     intruding any observation of a private and personal nature. I thank you very much indeed. If I
     am not, in a general way, as sensible as my friends could wish me to be, or as I could wish
     myself, I really am, upon my word and honour, particularly sensible of what is considerate and
     kind. I feel,´ said Mr. Toots, in an impassioned tone, `as if I could express my feelings, at
     the present moment, in a most remarkable manner, if—if—I could only get a start.´ 
Appearing not to get it, after waiting a minute or two to see if it would come, Mr. Toots,
     took a hasty leave, and went below to seek the Captain, whom he found in the shop. 
`Captain Gills,´ said Mr. Toots, `what is now to take place between us, takes place under the
     sacred seal of confidence. It is the sequel, Captain Gills, of what has taken place between
     myself and Miss Dombey, up stairs.´ 
`Alow and aloft, eh, my lad?´ murmured the Captain. 
`Exactly so, Captain Gills,´ said Mr. Toots, whose fervour of acquiescence was greatly
     heightened by his entire ignorance of the Captain's meaning. `Miss Dombey, I believe, Captain
     Gills, is to be shortly united to Lieutenant Walters?´ 
`Why, aye, my lad. We're all shipments here,—Wal'r and sweetheart will be jined together in
     the house of bondage, as soon as the askings is over,´ whispered Captain Cuttle, in his ear. 
`The askings, Captain Gills!´ repeated Mr. Toots. 
`In the church, down yonder,´ said the Captain, pointing his thumb over his shoulder. 
`Oh! Yes!´ returned Mr. Toots. 
`And then,´ said the Captain, in his hoarse whisper, and tapping Mr. Toots on the chest with
     the back of his hand, and falling from him with a look of infinite admiration, `what follers?
     That there pretty creetur, as delicately brought up as a foreign bird, goes away upon the
     roaring main with Wal'r on a woyage to China!´ 
`Lord, Captain Gills!´ said Mr. Toots. 
`Aye!´ nodded the Captain. `The ship as took him up, when he was wrecked in the hurricane
     that had drove her clean out of her course, was a China trader, and Wal'r made the woyage, and
     got into favour, aboard and ashore—being as smart and good a lad as ever stepped—and so, the
     supercargo dying at Canton, he got made (having acted as clerk afore), and now he's supercargo
     aboard another ship, same owners. And so, you see,´ repeated the Captain, thoughtfully, `the
     pretty creetur goes away upon the roaring main with Wal'r, on a woyage to China.´ 
Mr. Toots and Captain Cuttle heaved a sigh in concert. 
`What then?´ said the Captain. `She loves him true. He loves her true. Them as should have
     loved and tended of her, treated of her like the beasts as perish. When she, cast out of home,
     come here to me, and dropped upon them planks, her wownded heart was broke. I know it. I,
     Ed'ard Cuttle, see it. There's nowt but true, kind, steady love, as can ever piece it up again.
     If so be I didn't know that, and didn't know as Wal'r was her true love, brother, and she his,
     I'd have these here blue arms and legs chopped off, afore I'd let her go. But I do
     know it, and what then? Why, then, I say, Heaven go with 'em both, and so it will! Amen!´ 
`Captain Gills,´ said Mr. Toots, `let me have the pleasure of shaking hands. You've a way of
     saying things, that gives me an agreeable warmth, all up my back. I say Amen. You are
     aware, Captain Gills, that I, too, have adored Miss Dombey.´ 
`Cheer up!´ said the Captain, laying his hand on Mr. Toots's shoulder. `Stand by, boy!´ 
`It is my intention, Captain Gills,´ returned the spirited Mr. Toots, `to cheer up.
     Also to stand by, as much as possible. When the silent tomb shall yawn, Captain Gills, I shall
     be ready for burial; not before. But not being certain, just at present, of my power over
     myself, what I wish to say to you, and what I shall take it as a particular favour if you will
     mention to Lieutenant Walters, is as follows.´ 
`Is as follers,´ echoed the Captain. `Steady!´ 
`Miss Dombey being so inexpressibly kind,´ continued Mr. Toots with watery eyes, `as to say
     that my presence is the reverse of disagreeable to her, and you and everybody here being no
     less forbearing and tolerant towards one who—who certainly,´ said Mr. Toots, with momentary
     dejection, `would appear to have been born by mistake, I shall come backwards and
     forwards of an evening, during the short time we can all be together. But what I ask is this.
     If, at any moment, I find that I cannot endure the contemplation of Lieutenant Walters's bliss,
     and should rush out, I hope, Captain Gills, that you and he will both consider it as my
     misfortune and not my fault, or the want of inward conflict. That you'll feel convinced I bear
     no malice to any living creature—least of all to Lieutenant Walters himself—and that you'll
     casually remark that I have gone out for a walk, or probably to see what o'clock it is by the
     Royal Exchange. Captain Gills, if your could enter into this arrangement, and could answer for
     Lieutenant Walters, it would be a relief to my feelings that I should think cheap at the
     sacrifice of a considerable portion of my property.´ 
`My lad,´ returned the Captain, `say no more. There ain't a colour you can run up, as won't
     be made out, and answered to, by Wal'r and self.´ 
`Captain Gills,´ said Mr. Toots, `my mind is greatly relieved. I wish to preserve the good
     opinion of all here. I—I—mean well, upon my honour, however badly I may show it. You know,´
     said Mr. Toots, `it's exactly as if Burgess and Co. wished to oblige a customer with a most
     extraordinary pair of trousers, and could not cut out what they had in their minds.´ 
With this apposite illustration, of which he seemed a little proud, Mr. Toots gave captain
     Cuttle his blessing and departed. 
The honest Captain, with his Heart's Delight in the house, and Susan tending her, was a
     beaming and a happy man. As the days flew by, he grew more beaming and more happy, every day.
     After some conferences with Susan (for whose wisdom the Captain had a profound respect, and
     whose valiant precipitation of herself on Mrs. MacStinger he could never forget), he proposed
     to Florence that the daughter of the elderly lady who usually sat under the blue umbrella in
     Leadenhall Market, should, for prudential reasons and considerations of privacy, be superseded
     in the temporary discharge of the household duties, by some one who was not unknown to them,
     and in whom they could safely confide. Susan, being present, then named, in furtherance of a
     suggestion she had previously offered to the Captain, Mrs. Richards. Florence brightened at the
     name. And Susan, setting off that very afternoon to the Toodle domicile, to sound Mrs.
     Richards, returned in triumph the same evening, accompanied by the identical rosy-cheeked
     apple-faced Polly, whose demonstrations, when brought into Florence's presence, were hardly
     less affectionate than those of Susan Nipper herself. 
This piece of generalship accomplished; from which the Captain derived uncommon satisfaction,
     as he did, indeed, from everything else that was done, whatever it happened to be; Florence had
     next to prepare Susan for their approaching separation. This was a much more difficult task, as
     Miss Nipper was of a resolute disposition, and had fully made up her mind that she had come
     back never to be parted from her old mistress any more. 
`As to wages dear Miss Floy,´ she said, `you wouldn't hint and wrong me so as think of naming
     them, for I've put money by and wouldn't sell my love and duty at a time like this even if the
     Savings´ Banks and me were total strangers or the Banks were broke to pieces, but you've never
     been without me darling from the time your poor dear ma was took away, and though I'm nothing
     to be boasted of you're used to me and oh my own dear mistress through so many years don't
     think of going anywhere without me, for it mustn't and can't be!´ 
`Dear Susan, I am going on a long, long voyage.´ 
`Well Miss Floy, and what of that? the more you'll want me. Lengths of voyages ain't an
     object in my eyes, thank God!´ said the impetuous Susan Nipper. 
`But, Susan, I am going with Walter, and I would go with Walter anywhere—everywhere! Walter
     is poor, and I am very poor, and I must learn, now, both to help myself, and help him.´ 
`Dear Miss Floy!´ cried Susan, bursting out afresh, and shaking her head violently, `it's
     nothing new to you to help yourself and others too and be the patientest and truest of noble
     hearts, but let me talk to Mr. Walter Gay and settle it with him, for suffer you to go away
     across the world alone I cannot, and I won't.´ 
`Alone, Susan?´ returned Florence. `Alone? and Walter taking me with him!´ Ah, what a bright,
     amazed, enraptured smile was on her face!—He should have seen it. `I am sure you will not speak
     to Walter if I ask you not,´ she added tenderly; `and pray don't, dear.´ 
Susan sobbed `Why not, Miss Floy?´ 
`Because,´ said Florence, `I am going to be his wife, to give him up my whole heart, and to
     live with him and die with him. He might think, if you said to him what you have said to me,
     that I am afraid of what is before me, or that you have some cause to be afraid for me. Why,
     Susan, dear, I love him!´ 
Miss Nipper was so much affected by the quiet fervour of these words, and simple, heartfelt,
     all-pervading earnestness expressed in them, and making the speaker's face more beautiful and
     pure than ever, that she could only cling to her again, crying Was her little mistress really,
     really going to be married, and pitying, caressing, and protecting her, as she had done before. 
But the Nipper, though susceptible of womanly weaknesses, was almost as capable of putting
     constraint upon herself as of attacking the redoubtable MacStinger. From that time, she never
     returned to the subject, but was always cheerful, active, bustling, and hopeful. She did,
     indeed, inform Mr. Toots privately, that she was only `keeping up´ for the time, and that when
     it was all over, and Miss Dombey was gone, she might be expected to become a spectacle
     distressful; and Mr. Toots did also express that it was his case too, and that they would
     mingle their tears together; but she never otherwise indulged her private feelings in the
     presence of Florence or within the precincts of the Midshipman. 
Limited and plain as Florence's wardrobe was—what a contrast to that prepared for the last
     marriage in which she had taken part!—there was a good deal to do in getting it ready, and
     Susan Nipper worked away at her side, all day, with the concentrated zeal of fifty
     sempstresses. The wonderful contributions Captain Cuttle would have made to this branch of the
     outfit, if he had been permitted—as pink parasols, tinted silk stockings, blue shoes, and other
     articles no less necessary on shipboard—would occupy some space in the recital. He was induced,
     however, by various fraudulent representations, to limit his contributions to a workbox and
     dressing-case, of each of which he purchased the very largest specimen that could be got for
     money. For ten days or a fortnight afterwards, he generally sat, during the greater part of the
     day, gazing at these boxes; divided between extreme admiration of them, and dejected misgivings
     that they were not gorgeous enough, and frequently diving out into the street to purchase some
     wild article that he deemed necessary to their completeness. But his master-stroke was, the
     bearing of them both off, suddenly, one morning, and getting the two words florence gay engraved upon a brass heart inlaid over the lid of each. After this, he
     smoked four pipes successively in the little parlour by himself, and was discovered chuckling,
     at the expiration of as many hours. 
Walter was busy and away all day, but came there every morning early to see Florence, and
     always passed the evening with her. Florence never left her high rooms but to steal downstairs
     to wait for him when it was his time to come, or, sheltered by his proud, encircling arm, to
     bear him company to the door again, and sometimes peep into the street. In the twilight they
     were always together. Oh blessed time! Oh wandering heart at rest! Oh deep, exhaustless, mighty
     well of love, in which so much was sunk! 
The cruel mark was on her bosom yet. It rose against her father with the breath she drew, it
     lay between her and her lover when he pressed her to his heart. But she forgot it. In the
     beating of that heart for her, and in the beating of her own for him, all harsher music was
     unheard, all stern unloving hearts forgotten. Fragile and delicate she was, but with a might of
     love within her that could, and did, create a world to fly to, and to rest in, out of his one
     image. 
How often did the great house, and the old days, come before her in the twilight time, when
     she was sheltered by the arm, so proud, so fond, and, creeping closer to him, shrunk within it
     at the recollection! How often, from remembering the night when she went down to that room and
     met the never-to-be-forgotten look, did she raise her eyes to those that watched her with such
     loving earnestness, and weep with happiness in such a refuge! The more she clung to it, the
     more the dear dead child was in her thoughts: but as if the last time she had seen her father,
     had been when he was sleeping and she kissed his face, she always left him so, and never, in
     her fancy, passed that hour. 
`Walter, dear,´ said Florence, one evening, when it was almost dark. `Do you Know what I have
     been thinking to-day?´ 
`Thinking how the time is flying on, and how soon we shall be upon the sea, sweet Florence?´ 
`I don't mean that, Walter, though I think of that too. I have been thinking what a charge I
     am to you.´ 
`A precious, sacred charge, dear heart! Why Ithink that sometimes.´ 
`You are laughing, Walter. I know that's much more in your thoughts than mine. But I mean a
     cost.´ 
`A cost, my own?´ 
`In money, dear. All these preparations that Susan and I are so busy with—I have been able to
     purchase very little for myself. You were poor before. But how much poorer I shall make you,
     Walter!´ 
`And how much richer, Florence!´ 
Florence laughed, and shook her head. 
`Besides,´ said Walter, `long ago—before I went to sea—I had a little purse presented to me,
     dearest, which had money in it.´ 
`Ah!´ returned Florence, laughing sorrowfully, `very little!Very little, Walter! But, you
     must not think,´ and here she laid her light hand on his shoulder, and looked into his face,
     `that I regret to be this burden on you. No, dear love, I am glad of it. I am happy in it. I
     wouldn't have it otherwise for all the world!´ 
`Nor I, indeed, dear Florence.´ 
`Aye! but, Walter, you can never feel it as I do. I am so proud of you! It makes my heart
     swell with such delight to know that those who speak of you must say you married a poor
     disowned girl, who had taken shelter here; who had no other home, no other friends; who had
     nothing—nothing! Oh, Walter, if I could have brought you millions, I never could have been so
     happy for your sake, as I am!´ 
`And you, dear Florence? are you nothing?´ he returned. 
`No, nothing, Walter. Nothing but your wife.´ The light hand stole about his neck, and the
     voice came nearer—nearer. `I am nothing any more, that is not you. I have no earthly hope any
     more, that is not you. I have nothing dear to me any more, that is not you.´ 
Oh! well might Mr. Toots leave the little company that evening, and twice go out to correct
     his watch by the Royal Exchange, and once to keep an appointment with a banker which he
     suddenly remembered, and once to take a little turn to Aldgate Pump and back! 
But before he went upon these expeditions, or indeed before he came, and before lights were
     brought, Walter said: 
`Florence, love, the lading of our ship is nearly finished, and probably on the very day of
     our marriage she will drop down the river. Shall we go away that morning, and stay in Kent
     until we go on board at Gravesend within a week?´ 
`If you please, Walter. I shall be happy anywhere. But—— 
`Yes, my life?´ 
`You know,´ said Florence, `that we shall have no marriage party, and that nobody will
     distinguish us by our dress from other people. As we leave the same day, will you—will you take
     me somewhere that morning, Walter—early—before we go to church?´ 
Walter seemed to understand her, as so true a lover so truly loved should, and confirmed his
     ready promise with a kiss—with more than one perhaps, or two or three, or five or six; and in
     the grave, peaceful evening, Florence was very happy. 
Then into the quiet room came Susan Nipper and the candles: shortly afterwards, the tea, the
     Captain, and the excursive Mr. Toots, who, as above mentioned, was frequently on the move
     afterwards, and passed but a restless evening. This, however, was not his habit: for he
     generally got on very well, by dint of playing at cribbage with the Captain under the advice
     and guidance of Miss Nipper, and distracting his mind with the calculations incidental to the
     game; which he found to be a very effectual means of utterly confounding himself. 
The Captain's visage on these occasions presented one of the finest examples of combination
     and succession of expression ever observed. His instinctive delicacy and his chivalrous feeling
     towards Florence, taught him that it was not a time for any boisterous jollity, or violent
     display of satisfaction. Certain floating reminiscences of Lovely Peg, on the other hand, were
     constantly struggling for a vent, and urging the Captain to commit himself by some irreparable
     demonstration. Anon, his admiration of Florence and Walter—well-matched, truly, and full of
     grace and interest in their youth, and love, and good looks, as they sat apart—would take such
     complete possession of him, that he would lay down his cards, and beam upon them, dabbing his
     head all over with his pocket-handkerchief; until warned, perhaps, by the sudden rushing forth
     of Mr. Toots, that he had unconsciously been very instrumental, indeed, in making that
     gentleman miserable. This reflection would make the Captain profoundly melancholy, until the
     return of Mr. Toots; when he would fall to his cards again, with many side winks and nods, and
     polite waves of his hook at Miss Nipper, importing that he wasn't going to do so any more. The
     state that ensued on this, was, perhaps, his best; for then, endeavouring to discharge all
     expression from his face, he would sit, staring round the room, with all these expressions
     conveyed into it at once, and each wrestling with the other. Delighted admiration of Florence
     and Walter always overthrew the rest, and remained victorious and undisguised, unless Mr. Toots
     made another rush into the air, and then the Captain would sit, like a remorseful culprit,
     until he came back again, occasionally calling upon himself, in a low reproachful voice, to
     `Stand by!´ or growling some remonstrance to `Ed'ard Cuttle, my lad,'on the want of caution
     observable in his behaviour. 
One of Mr. Toots's hardest trials, however, was of his own seeking. On the approach of the
     Sunday which was to witness the last of those askings in church of which the Captain had
     spoken, Mr. Toots thus stated his feelings to Susan Nipper. 
`Susan,´ said Mr. Toots, `I am drawn towards the building. The words which cut me off from
     Miss Dombey for ever, will strike upon my ears like a knell you know, but upon my word and
     honour, I feel that I must hear them. Therefore,´ said Mr. Toots, `will you accompany me
     to-morrow, to the sacred edifice?´ 
Miss Nipper expressed her readiness to do so, if that would be any satisfaction to Mr. Toots,
     but besought him to abandon his idea of going. 
`Susan,´ returned Mr. Toots, with much solemnity, `before my whiskers began to be observed by
     anybody but myself, I adored Miss Dombey. While yet a victim to the thraldom of Blimber, I
     adored Miss Dombey. When I could no longer be kept out of my property, in a legal point of
     view, and—and accordingly came into it—I adored Miss Dombey. The banns which consign her to
     Lieutenant Walters, and me to—to Gloom, you know,´ said Mr. Toots, after hesitating for a
     strong expression, `may be dreadful, will be dreadful; but I feel that I should wish
     to hear them spoken. I feel that I should wish to know that the ground was certainly cut from
     under me, and that I hadn't a hope to cherish, or a—or a leg, in short, to—to go upon.´ 
Susan Nipper could only commiserate Mr. Toots's unfortunate condition, and agree, under these
     circumstances, to accompany him; which she did next morning. 
The church Walter had chosen for the purpose, was a mouldy old church in a yard, hemmed in by
     a labyrinth of back streets and courts, with a little burying-ground round it, and itself
     buried in a kind of vault, formed by the neighbouring houses, and paved with echoing stones. It
     was a great dim, shabby pile, with high old oaken pews, among which about a score of people
     lost themselves every Sunday; while the clergyman's voice drowsily resounded through the
     emptiness, and the organ rumbled and rolled as if the church had got the colic, for want of a
     congregation to keep the wind and damp out. But so far was this city church from languishing
     for the company of other churches, that spires were clustered round it, as the masts of
     shipping cluster on the river. It would have been hard to count them from its steeple-top, they
     were so many. In almost every yard and blind-place near, there was a church. The confusion of
     bells when Susan and Mr. Toots betook themselves towards it on the Sunday morning, was
     deafening. There were twenty churches close together, clamouring for people to come in. 
The two stray sheep in question were penned by a beadle in a commodious pew, and, being
     early, sat for some time counting the congregation, listening to the disappointed bell high up
     in the tower, or looking at a shabby little old man in the porch behind the screen, who was
     ringing the same, like the Bull in Cock Robin, with his foot in a stirrup. Mr. Toots, after a
     lengthened survey of the large books on the reading-desk, whispered Miss Nipper that he
     wondered where the banns were kept, but that young lady merely shook her head and forward;
     repelling for the time all approaches of a temporal nature. 
Mr. Toots, however, appearing unable to keep his thoughts from the banns, was evidently
     looking out for them during the whole preliminary portion of the service. As the time for
     reading them approached, the poor young gentleman manifested great anxiety and trepidation,
     which was not diminished by the unexpected apparition of the Captain in the front row of the
     gallery. When the clerk handed up a list to the clergyman, Mr. Toots, being then seated, held
     on by the seat of the pew; but when the names of Walter Gay and Florence Dombey were read aloud
     as being in the third and last stage of that association, he was so entirely conquered by his
     feelings as to rush from the church without his hat, followed by the beadle and pew-opener, and
     two gentlemen of the medical profession, who happened to be present; of whom the first-named
     presently returned for that article, informing Miss Nipper in a whisper that she was not to
     make herself uneasy about the gentleman, as the gentleman said his indisposition was of no
     consequence. 
Miss Nipper, feeling that the eyes of that integral portion of Europe which lost itself
     weekly among the high-backed pews, were upon her, would have been sufficiently embarrassed by
     this incident, though it had terminated here; the more so, as the Captain in the front row of
     the gallery, was in a state of unmitigated consciousness which could hardly fail to express to
     the congregation that he had some mysterious connexion with it. But the extreme restlessness of
     Mr. Toots painfully increased and protracted the delicacy of her situation. That young
     gentleman, incapable, in his state of mind, of remaining alone in the churchyard, a prey to
     solitary meditation, and also desirous, no doubt, of testifying his respect for the offices he
     had in some measure interrupted, suddenly returned—not coming back to the pew, but stationing
     himself on a free seat in the aisle, between two elderly females who were in the habit of
     receiving their portion of a weekly dole of bread then set forth on a shelf in the porch. In
     this conjunction Mr. Toots remained, greatly disturbing the congregation, who felt it
     impossible to avoid looking at him, until his feelings overcame him again, when he departed
     silently and suddenly. Not venturing to trust himself in the church any more, and yet wishing
     to have some social participation in what was going on there, Mr. Toots was after this, seen
     from time to time, looking in, with a lorn aspect, at one or other of the windows; and as there
     were several windows accessible to him from without, and as his restlessness was very great, it
     not only became difficult to conceive at which window he would appear next, but likewise became
     necessary, as it were, for the whole congregation to speculate upon the chances of the
     different windows, during the comparative leisure afforded them by the sermon. Mr. Toots's
     movements in the churchyard were so eccentric, that he seemed generally to defeat all
     calculation, and to appear, like the conjuror's figure, where he was least expected; and the
     effect of these mysterious presentations was much increased by its being difficult to him to
     see in, and easy to everybody else to see out: which occasioned his remaining, every time,
     longer than might have been expected, with his face close to the glass, until he all at once
     became aware that all eyes were upon him, and vanished. 
These proceedings on the part of Mr. Toots, and the strong individual consciousness of them
     that was exhibited by the Captain, rendered Miss Nipper's position so responsible a one, that
     she was mightily relieved by the conclusion of the service; and was hardly so affable to Mr.
     Toots as usual, when he informed her and the Captain, on the way back, that now he was sure he
     had no hope, you know, he felt more comfortable—at least not exactly more comfortable, but more
     comfortably and completely miserable. 
Swiftly now, indeed, the time flew by until it was the evening before the day appointed for
     the marriage. They were all assembled in the upper room at the Midshipman's, and had no fear of
     interruption; for there were no lodgers in the house now, and the Midshipman had it all to
     himself. They were grave and quiet in the prospect of to-morrow, but moderately cheerful too.
     Florence, with Walter close beside her, was finishing a little piece of work intended as a
     parting gift to the Captain. The Captain was playing cribbage with Mr. Toots. Mr. Toots was
     taking counsel as to his hand, of Susan Nipper. Miss Nipper was giving it, with all due secrecy
     and circumspection. Diogenes was listening, and occasionally breaking out into a gruff
     half-smothered fragment of a bark, of which he afterwards seemed half-ashamed, as if he doubted
     having any reason for it. 
`Steady, steady!´ said the Captain to Diogenes, `what's amiss with you? You don't seem easy
     in your mind to-night, my boy!´ 
Diogenes wagged his tail, but pricked up his ears immediately afterwards, and gave utterance
     to another fragment of a bark; for which he apologised to the Captain, by again wagging his
     tail. 
`It's my opinion, Di,´ said the Captain, looking thoughtfully at his cards, and stroking his
     chin with his hook, `as you have your doubts of Mrs. Richards; but if you're the animal I take
     you to be, you'll think better o´ that; for her looks is her commission. Now, Brother:´ to Mr.
     Toots: `if so be as you're ready, heave ahead.´ 
The Captain spoke with all composure and attention to the game, but suddenly his cards
     dropped out of his hand, his mouth and eyes opened wide, his legs drew themselves up and stuck
     out in front of his chair, and he sat staring at the door with blank amazement. Looking round
     upon the company, and seeing that none of them observed him or the cause of his astonishment,
     the Captain recovered himself with a great gasp, struck the table a tremendous blow, cried in a
     stentorian roar, `Sol Gills ahoy!´ and tumbled into the arms of a weather-beaten pea-coat that
     had come with Polly into the room. 
In another moment, Walter was in the arms of the weather-beaten pea-coat. In another moment,
     Florence was in the arms of the weather-beaten pea-coat. In another moment, Captain Cuttle had
     embraced Mrs. Richards and Miss Nipper, and was violently shaking hands with Mr. Toots,
     exclaiming, as he waved his hook above his head, `Hooroar, my lad, hooroar!´ To which Mr.
     Toots, wholly at a loss to account for these proceedings, replied with great politeness,
     `Certainly, Captain Gills, whatever you think proper!´ 
The weather-beaten pea-coat, and a no less weather-beaten cap and comforter belonging to it,
     turned from the Captain and from Florence back to Walter, and sounds came from the
     weather-beaten pea-coat, cap, and comforter, as of an old man sobbing underneath them; while
     the shaggy sleeves clasped Walter tight. During this pause, there was an universal silence, and
     the Captain polished his nose with great diligence. But when the pea-coat, cap, and comforter
     lifted themselves up again, Florence gently moved towards them; and she and Walter taking them
     off, disclosed the old Instrument-maker, a little thinner and more careworn than of old, in his
     old Welsh wig and his old coffee-coloured coat and basket buttons, with his old infallible
     chronometer ticking away in his pocket. 
`Chock full o´ science,´ said the radiant Captain, `as ever he was! Sol Gills, Sol Gills,
     what have you been up to, for this many a long day, my ould boy?´ 
`I'm half blind, Ned,´ said the old man, `and almost deaf and dumb with joy.´ 
`His wery woice,´ said the Captain, looking round with an exultation to which even his face
     could hardly render justice—`his wery woice as chock full o' science as ever it was! Sol Gills,
     lay to, my lad, upon your own wines and fig-trees, like a taut ould patriark as you are, and
     overhaul them there adwentures o´ yourn, in your own formilior woice. 'Tis the woice,
     said the Captain, impressively, and announcing a quotation with his hook, `of the sluggard, I
     heerd him complain, you have woke me too soon, I must slumber again. Scatter his ene-mies, and
     make 'em fall!´ 
The Captain sat down with the air of a man who had happily expressed the feeling of everybody
     present, and immediately rose again to present Mr. Toots, who was much disconcerted by the
     arrival of anybody, appearing to prefer a claim to the name of Gills. 
`Although,´ stammered Mr. Toots, `I had not the pleasure of your acquaintance, Sir, before
     you were—you were—´ 
`Lost to sight, to memory dear,´ suggested the Captain, in a low voice. 
`Exactly so, Captain Gills!´ assented Mr. Toots. `Although I had not the pleasure of your
     acquaintance, Mr.—Mr. Sols,´ said Toots, hitting on that name in the inspiration of a bright
     idea, `before that happened, I have the greatest pleasure, I assure you, in—you know, in
     knowing you. I hope,´ said Mr. Toots, `that you're as well as can be expected.´ 
With these courteous words, Mr. Toots sat down blushing and chuckling. 
The old Instrument-maker, seated in a corner between Walter and Florence, and nodding at
     Polly, who was looking on, all smiles and delight, answered the Captain thus: 
`Ned Cuttle, my dear boy, although I have heard something of the changes of events here, from
     my pleasant friend there—what a pleasant face she has to be sure, to welcome a wanderer home!´
     said the old man, breaking off, and rubbing his hands in his old dreamy way. 
`Hear him!´ cried the Captain gravely. `'Tis woman as seduces all mankind. For which,´ aside
     to Mr. Toots, `you'll overhaul your Adam and Eve, brother.´ 
`I shall make a point of doing so, Captain Gills,´ said Mr. Toots. 
`Although I have heard something of the changes of events, from her,´ resumed the
     Instrument-maker, taking his old spectacles from his pocket, and putting them on his forehead
     in his old manner, `they are so great and unexpected, and I am so overpowered by the sight of
     my dear boy, and by the,'—glancing at the downcast eyes of Florence, and not attempting to
     finish the sentence—`that I—I can't say much to-night. But my dear Ned Cuttle, why didn't you
     write?´ 
The astonishment depicted in the Captain's features positively frightened Mr. Toots, whose
     eyes were quite fixed by it, so that he could not withdraw them from his face. 
`Write!´ echoed the Captain. `Write, Sol Gills?´ 
`Aye,´ said the old man, `either to Barbados, or Jamaica, or Demerara. That was what I
     asked.´ 
`What you asked, Sol Gills?´ repeated the Captain. 
`Aye,´ said the old man. `Don't you know, Ned? Sure you have not forgotten? Every time I
     wrote to you.´ 
The Captain took off his glazed hat, hung it on his hook, and smoothing his hair from behind
     with his hand, sat gazing at the group around him: a perfect image of wondering resignation. 
`You don't appear to understand me, Ned!´ observed old Sol. 
`Sol Gills,´ returned the Captain, after staring at him and the rest for a long time, without
     speaking, `I'm gone about and adrift. Pay out a word or two respecting them adwenturs, will
     you! Can't I bring up, nohows? Nohows?´ said the Captain, ruminating, and staring all round. 
`You know, Ned,´ said Sol Gills, `why I left here. Did you open my packet, Ned?´ 
`Why, aye, aye,´ said the Captain. `To be sure, I opened the packet.´ 
`And read it?´ said the old man. 
`And read it,´ answered the Captain, eyeing him attentively, and proceeding to quote it from
     memory. `“My dear Ned Cuttle, when I left home for the West Indies in forlorn search of
     intelligence of my dear—” There he sits! There's Wal'r!' said the Captain, as if he were
     relieved by getting hold of anything that was real and indisputable. 
`Well, Ned. Now attend a moment!´ said the old man. `When I wrote first—that was from
     Barbados—I said that though you would receive that letter long before the year was out, I
     should be glad if you would open the packet, as it explained the reason of my going away. Very
     good, Ned. When I wrote the second, third, and perhaps the fourth times—that was from Jamaica—I
     said I was in just the same state, couldn't rest, and couldn't come away from that part of the
     world, without knowing that my boy was lost or saved. When I wrote next—that, I think, was from
     Demerara, wasn't it?´ 
`That he thinks was from Demerara, warn't it!´ said the Captain, looking hopelessly round. 
`—I said,´ proceeded old Sol, `that still there was no certain information got yet. That I
     found many captains and others, in that part of the world, who had known me for years, and who
     assisted me with a passage here and there, and for whom I was able, now and then, to do a
     little in return, in my own craft. That every one was sorry for me, and seemed to take a sort
     of interest in my wanderings; and that I began to think it would be my fate to cruise about in
     search of tidings of my boy until I died.´ 
`Began to think as how he was a scientific flying Dutchman!´ said the Captain, as before, and
     with great seriousness. 
`But when the news come one day, Ned,—that was to Barbados, after I got back there,—that a
     China trader home'ard bound had been spoke, that had my boy aboard, then, Ned, I took passage
     in the next ship and came home; arrived at home to-night to find it true, thank God!´ said the
     old man, devoutly. 
The Captain, after bowing his head with great reverence, stared all round the circle,
     beginning with Mr. Toots, and ending with the Instrument-maker; then gravely said: 
`Sol Gills! The observation as I'm a-going to make is calc'lated to blow every stitch of sail
     as you can carry, clean out of the bolt-ropes, and bring you on your beam ends with a lurch.
     Not one of them letters was ever delivered to Ed'ard Cuttle. Not one o´ them letters,´ repeated
     the Captain, to make his declaration the more solemn and impressive, `was ever delivered unto
     Ed'ard Cuttle, Mariner, of England, as lives at home at ease, and doth improve each shining
     hour!´ 
`And posted by my own hand! And directed by my own hand, Number nine Brig Place!' exclaimed
     old Sol. 
The colour all went out of the Captain's face, and all came back again in a glow. 
`What do you mean, Sol Gills, my friend, by Number nine Brig Place?´ inquired the Captain. 
`Mean? Your lodgings, Ned,´ returned the old man. `Mrs. What's-her-name! I shall forget my
     own name next, but I am behind the present time—I always was, you recollect —and very much
     confused. Mrs.——´ 
`Sol Gills!´ said the Captain, as if he were putting the most improbable case in the world,
     `it ain't the name of MacStinger as you're a trying to remember?´ 
`Of course it is!´ exclaimed the Instrument-maker. `To be sure Ned. Mrs. MacStinger!´ 
Captain Cuttle, whose eyes were now as wide open as they could be, and the knobs upon whose
     face were perfectly luminous, gave a long shrill whistle of a most melancholy sound, and stood
     gazing at everybody in a state of speechlessness. 
`Overhaul that there again, Sol Gills, will you be so kind?´ he said at last. 
`All these letters,´ returned Uncle Sol, beating time with the forefinger of his right hand
     upon the palm of his left, with a steadiness and distinctness that might have done honour, even
     to the infallible chronometer in his pocket, `I posted with my own hand, and directed with my
     own hand, to Captain Cuttle, at Mrs. MacStinger's, Number nine Brig Place.´ 
The Captain took his glazed hat off his hook, looked into it, put it on, and sat down. 
`Why, friends all,´ said the Captain, staring round in the last state of discomfiture, `I cut
     and run from there!´ 
`And no one knew where you were gone, Captain Cuttle?´ cried Walter hastily. 
`Bless your heart, Wal'r,´ said the Captain, shaking his head, `she'd never have allowed o´
     my coming to take charge o´ this here property. Nothing could be done but cut and run. Lord
     love you, Wal'r!´ said the Captain, `you've only seen her in a calm! But see her when her angry
     passions rise—and make a note on!´ 
`I'd give it her!´ remarked the Nipper, softly. 
`Would you, do you think, my dear?´ returned the Captain with feeble admiration. `Well, my
     dear, it does you credit. But there ain't no wild animal I would sooner face myself. I only got
     my chest away by means of a friend as nobody's a match for. It was no good sending any letter
     there. She wouldn't take in any letter, bless you,´ said the Captain, `under them
     circumstances! Why, you could hardly make it worth a man's while to be the postman!´ 
`Then it's pretty clear, Captain Cuttle, that all of us, and you and Uncle Sol especially,´
     said Walter, `may thank Mrs. MacStinger for no small anxiety.´ 
The general obligation in this wise to the determined relict of the late Mr. MacStinger, was
     so apparent, that the Captain did not contest the point; but being in some measure ashamed of
     his position, though nobody dwelt upon the subject, and Walter especially avoided it,
     remembering the last conversation he and the Captain had held together respecting it, he
     remained under a cloud for nearly five minutes—an extra-ordinary period for him—when that sun,
     his face, broke out once more, shining on all beholders with extraordinary brilliancy; and he
     fell into a fit of shaking hands with everybody over and over again. 
At an early hour, but not before Uncle Sol and Walter had questioned each other at some
     length about their voyages and dangers, they all, except Walter, vacated Florence's room, and
     went down to the parlour. Here they were soon afterwards joined by Walter, who told them
     Florence was a little sorrowful and heavy-hearted, and had gone to bed. Though they could not
     have disturbed her with their voices down there, they all spoke in a whisper after this: and
     each, in his different way, felt very lovingly and gently towards Walter's fair young bride:
     and a long explanation there was of everything relating to her, for the satisfaction of Uncle
     Sol; and very sensible Mr. Toots was of the delicacy with which Walter made his name and
     services important, and his presence necessary to their little council. 
`Mr. Toots,´ said Walter, on parting with him at the house door, `we shall see each other
     to-morrow morning?´ 
`Lieutenant Walters,´ returned Mr. Toots, grasping his hand fervently, `I shall certainly be
     present.´ 
`This is the last night we shall meet for a long time—the last night we may ever meet,´ said
     Walter. `Such a noble heart as yours, must feel, I think, when another heart is bound to it. I
     hope you know that I am very grateful to you?´ 
`Walters,´ replied Mr. Toots, quite touched, `I should be glad to feel that you had reason to
     be so.´ ´ 
`Florence,´ said Walter, `on this last night of her bearing her own name, has made me
     promise—it was only just now, when you left us together—that I would tell you—with her dear
     love—´ 
Mr. Toots laid his hand upon the doorpost, and his eyes upon his hand. 
`—with her dear love,´ said Walter, `that she can never have a friend whom she will value
     above you. That the recollection of your true consideration for her always, can never be
     forgotten by her. That she remembers you in her prayers to-night, and hopes that you will think
     of her when she is far away. Shall I say anything for you?´ 
`Say, Walter,´ replied Mr. Toots indistinctly, `that I shall think of her every day, but
     never without feeling happy to know that she is married to the man she loves, and who loves
     her. Say, if you please, that I am sure her husband deserves her—even her!—and that I am glad
     of her choice.´ 
Mr. Toots got more distinct as he came to these last words, and raising his eyes from the
     doorpost, said them stoutly. He then shook Walter's hand again with a fervour that Walter was
     not slow to return, and started homeward. 
Mr. Toots was accompanied by the Chicken, whom he had of late brought with him every evening,
     and left in the shop, with an idea that unforeseen circumstances might arise from without, in
     which the prowess of that distinguished character would be of service to the Midshipman. The
     Chicken did not appear to be in a particularly good humour on this occasion. Either the
     gas-lamps were treacherous, or he cocked his eye in a hideous manner, and likewise distorted
     his nose, when Mr. Toots, crossing the road, looked back over his shoulder at the room where
     Florence slept. On the road home, he was more demonstrative of aggressive intentions against
     the other foot-passengers, than comported with a professor of the peaceful art of self-defence.
     Arrived at home, instead of leaving Mr. Toots in his apartments when he had escorted him
     thither, he remained before him weighing his white hat in both hands by the brim, and twitching
     his head and nose (both of which had been many times broken, and but indifferently repaired),
     with an air of decided disrespect. 
His patron being much engaged with his own thoughts, did not observe this for some time, nor
     indeed until the Chicken, determined not to be overlooked, had made divers clicking sounds with
     his tongue and teeth, to attract attention. 
`Now, Master,´ said the Chicken, doggedly, when he, at length, caught Mr. Toot's eye, `I want
     to know whether this here gammon is to finish it, or whether you're a going in to win?´ 
`Chicken,´ returned Mr. Toots, `explain yourself.´ 
`Why then, here's all about it, Master,´ said the Chicken. `I ain't a cove to chuck a word
     away. Here's wot it is. Are any on 'em to be doubled up?´ 
When the Chicken put this question he dropped his hat, made a dodge and a feint with his left
     hand, hit a supposed enemy a violent blow with his right, shook his head smartly, and recovered
     himself. 
`Come, Master,´ said the Chicken. `Is it to be gammon or pluck? Which?´ 
`Chicken,´ returned Mr. Toots, `your expressions are coarse, and your meaning is obscure.´ 
`Why, then, I tell you what, Master,´ said the Chicken. `This is where it is. It's mean.´ 
`What is mean, Chicken?´ asked Mr. Toots. 
`It is,´ said the Chicken, with a frightful corrugation of his broken nose. `There!
     Now, Master! Wot! When you could go and blow on this here match to the stiff 'un;´ by which
     depreciatory appellation it has been since supposed that the Game One intended to signify Mr.
     Dombey; `and when you could knock the winner and all the kit of 'em dead out o´ wind and time,
     are you going to give in? To give in?´ said the Chicken, with contemptuous emphasis.
     `Wy, it's mean!´ 
`Chicken,´ said Mr. Toots, severely, `you're a perfect Vulture! Your sentiments are
     atrocious.´ 
`My sentiments is Game and Fancy, Master,´ returned the Chicken. `That's wot my sentiments
     is. I can't abear a meanness. I'm afore the public, I'm to be heerd on at the bar of the Little
     Helephant, and no Gov'ner o´ mine mustn't go and do what's mean. Wy, it's mean,´ said the
     Chicken, with increased expression. `That's where it is. It's mean.´ 
`Chicken,´ said Mr. Toots, `You disgust me.´ 
`Master,´ returned the Chicken, putting on his hat, `there's a pair on us, then. Come! Here's
     a offer! You've spoke to me more than once't or twice't about the public line. Never mind! Give
     me a fi'typunnote to-morrow, and let me go.´ 
`Chicken,´ returned Mr. Toots, `after the odious sentiments you have expressed, I shall be
     glad to part on such terms.´ 
`Done then,´ said the Chicken. `It's a bargain. This here conduct of yourn won't suit
      my book, Master. Wy, it's mean,´ said the Chicken; who seemed equally unable to get
     beyond that point, and to stop short of it. `That's where it is; it's mean!´ 
So Mr. Toots and the Chicken agreed to part on this incompatibility of moral perception; and
     Mr. Toots lying down to sleep, dreamed happily of Florence, who had thought of him as her
     friend upon the last night of her maiden life, and who had sent him her dear love. 
</div></body></text></TEI>