<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Inheritance of Evil, Or, the Consequence of
                        Marrying a Deceased Wife’s Sister : VWWP edition </title><author>Skene, Felicia (1821-1899)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1849</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I.
THROUGH the mist and gloom of a dull November morning, a pompous funeral
                    procession went its way along the busy streets of London.
It was a common sight—so common that it attracted no attention from the multitude
                    who crowded on its path, as with eager care‐worn faces they hurried on in their
                    several avocations; and yet it was a strange sight too for them if they would
                    but have thought upon it—the passing amongst them of that quiet traveller to the
                    realms unseen! For so surely as he was even now moving on to the portals of the
                    land which is very far off, they themselves, with their swift impatient feet, were speeding unconsciously on the same
                    journey.
We say unconsciously, for each one had set before himself some desirable object
                    of attainment for which he toiled that day—wealth, fame, ambition, love—some
                    bright vision, to realize which he gave up unreservedly the redeemless hours of
                    his existence, whilst, with every breath he drew in labouring for it, he
                    shortened the life for which it was to be attained. Yet even as he
                    had done, who was now carried past so helplessly, that his dust might duly be
                    returned to its kindred dust—that living mass of human beings would toil and
                    yearn for their fancied good, till, with strength and energy all spent and gone,
                    they saw the fair phantom of their hopes dissolve in air, disclosing to their
                    view the grave alone—that actual reality for which they had been working! It had
                    been so with him whose rigid corpse now went so still and silently through the
                    noise and turmoil of the world he had loved.
Mr. Maynard had been a wealthy city merchant; in early youth he had been thrown
                    on his own resources, penniless, and well nigh friendless. He was a man resolute
                    of will, and of good abilities; but his mind, having never been directed to the
                    Unseen Truths, had fixed itself entirely on the fleeting realities of this
                        life. He looked keenly into his own
                    position, and he perceived that, in this world, wealth is the one thing needful.
                    He therefore determined to attain it.
From that time his life was given up to this object only. He toiled, he slaved,
                    he speculated; he rose up early, and late took rest; he ate the bread of
                    carefulness; he wasted lavishly his health and strength and intellect; he
                    devoured widows’ houses, and made the orphan desolate: for as his desire
                    strengthened till he grew to be its very slave, he cared little for the injury
                    done to others in its accomplishment—and he succeeded. Man has a mighty power in
                    working out a resolute purpose, be it for good or evil, if his whole soul is
                    concentrated upon it. Mr. Maynard became rich, beyond what he had ever hoped for
                    when he set out on his pilgrimage to the shrine of his god, Mammon; but still he
                    laboured on, plunging into speculation, for to make money was the aim and end of
                    his existence, and he could not stop now. Some dim vision may have been before
                    him of a luxurious retirement hereafter, where he should dwell, surrounded by
                    all the splendour and comfort wealth could procure him; but his health failed
                    him meantime, sacrificed to his laborious and unremitting industry. Death came
                    and took him when his soul was so wrapped up in the  cares of life, that this tremendous reality was to
                    him but a far‐off haunting shadow, too distant and uncertain to be heeded. Death
                    came and took him, and then it was found that he had gained but one thing with
                    the toil and labour and sacrifice of his whole life; he had earned for himself
                    the gorgeous monument whose ponderous bulk was henceforth to weigh down upon his
                    mouldering remains. To the last hour of his existence he worked like a slave,
                    and this was the sole fruit he reaped from his labours—the costly tomb, wherein
                    his worn and wasted body would fall perhaps a little less quickly to decay than
                    in some green churchyard of holier and humbler aspect.
Mr. Maynard left two daughters. He had married somewhat late in life, for the
                    sole purpose of connecting himself with the father of his bride, the head of a
                    great mercantile house. It was his desire to succeed to this man’s position at
                    his death, and this wish was fulfilled.
A very few years had passed away, and his wife died. Neglected, though
                    uncomplaining, she perished for want of sympathy and affection, as flowers fade
                    when deprived of air and sunshine. Her little daughters were given up to the
                    care of nurses and governesses, and Mr. Maynard required, not unfrequently, to
                    be reminded of their existence.

If he remembered them at all in his dying hour, so appalling in its suddenness,
                    it must have been with a pang of remorse, for he had made no provision for
                    them—not from wilful neglect, but simply because he never thought of death at
                    all; it was a contingency which did not enter into his speculations.
He left no will, and the management of his affairs naturally devolved on his
                    partner, Mr. Hardman. By some process of calculation peculiar to himself, this
                    gentleman discovered that all which remained of Mr. Maynard’s capital must now
                    become merged in that of the house. His speculations had in fact ruined him, and
                    the rich man’s orphan children did not inherit from him so much as the cost of
                    that same stately tombstone which Mr. Hardman deemed it his duty to erect over
                    his grave.
Some little property Elizabeth and Agnes Maynard had received at their mother’s
                    death, and this circumstance had induced Mr. Hardman voluntarily to constitute
                    himself their guardian. To do him justice, he was certainly in some degree
                    influenced in his decision by the glimmerings of better feeling, which shone
                    through this worldly man’s profound and inherent selfishness when he thought of
                    the desolate condition of his partner’s daughters.
They sat together now in the darkened room  from
                    which their father’s coffin had been carried an hour before, and both were in
                    bitter sorrow. It is a blessed thing, that atmosphere of love which pervades
                    this whole wide restless world, emanating, no doubt, from the unseen presence of
                    Him who is Love, and penetrating, in some one shape or other, into
                    the life of the most forlorn amongst us. Not a flower perishes from the green
                    earth, but the dews of heaven weep over it; not a human being is laid down in
                    the unresisting helplessness of death, but tears are found from human eyes to
                    fall upon him.
Mr. Maynard had certainly done as little to awaken affection or inspire regret as
                    most men, and yet the sobs of his orphan children came thick and fast, as they
                    heard the tramp of the horses which bare him away.
But there are two kinds of sorrow with which the dead are mourned, and Mr.
                    Maynard could lay claim to one of them only; there is the natural instinct, the
                    mysterious claim of the ties of blood, which sends a bitter pang through the
                    heart when they are rent asunder, added to that strange pity which we never fail
                    to experience for the powerless corpse stretched out so pale and cold before us,
                    although we know well that ourselves shall soon be laid as cold and pale, and
                    haply the thought is sweet  to us, as that of
                    the evening rest to the wearied labourer toiling in the heat of noon. But there
                    is another far deeper misery which rises up from the grave of the departed to
                    overwhelm us, when it is, so to speak, the soul of him who is gone forth that we
                    have loved; the soul whose superior holiness has been perhaps like the
                    brightness of an angel to our less elevated gaze, whose goodness has won our
                    reverence, whose gentleness has gained our deepest love.
No such lofty and holy affection as this had bound the soul of the stern
                    worldly‐minded man to his young daughters; and perhaps we might rightly enough
                    estimate the nature of the welcome which the departed shall receive from the
                    brotherhood of saints above, by the character of the sorrow with which they are
                    lamented here.
Had Elizabeth and Agnes Maynard analyzed their feelings in this the saddest hour
                    of their lives, they would have found that they mourned far less for their
                    father, to whom they were almost strangers, than for that bitter sense of
                    desolation against which the warm, loving heart of youth rebels so strongly.
They nestled close together; Agnes, who was scarce sixteen, and five years
                    younger than her sister, clung to her with a sort of  innocent helplessness, which resulted more from her
                    peculiar disposition than from her early youth.
She was singularly sweet‐tempered and guileless, but altogether deficient in
                    moral courage and strength of mind; as she advanced out of childhood, she seemed
                    only to lean the more hopelessly on the guidance of others, instead of exerting
                    the powers of her own mind; and the prevailing feature of her character was a
                    clinging and passionate tenderness of disposition, over which she neither had,
                    nor attempted to have, any control whatever. Elizabeth had far more depth of
                    character, with an intensity and sensitiveness of feeling which would scarce
                    have been looked for under her outward reserve of manner. Her affection for
                    those she loved was of a nature so profound and exacting, that it had engendered
                    that jealousy of disposition which makes such havoc of the soul that harbours
                    it. As yet this fatal propensity had been little called forth, for her whole
                    thoughts were centred on Agnes, and the sisters had now no other home but in
                    their mutual love.
There was one circumstance in the life of Elizabeth Maynard which was destined to
                    influence her whole existence, and the recollection of it was busy at her heart
                    even now, as she sat with her fair young sister sobbing in her  arms. She remembered when she was but nine years old
                    how she had been one night aroused out of the sweet slumber of childhood, to go
                    and witness the closing of her mother’s eyes in a sleep yet deeper.
There is something very awful in the death‐bed of one who dies of a broken heart.
                    Death by the judgment of Heaven is a holy, though terrible thing; but the heart
                    revolts from the sight, when His inscrutable decree permits a human hand to sap
                    the springs of a fellow‐creature’s life by wanton or careless cruelty.
Elizabeth still shuddered when she thought of that white drawn face, so young,
                    but rowed with unavailing tears, and the pale lips from which no murmur ever
                    passed, now wreathing themselves into a strange smile of joy at her release.
                    Close to her breast, whence the breath came faint and gasping, the mother had
                    drawn her youngest born, as though she thought the warmth of that little healthy
                    frame could have driven back the chill that was curdling round her heart.
Mr. Maynard was not there, for the dying woman, true and tender even yet to the
                    husband she had loved so vainly, would not let his slumbers be disturbed, though
                    her heart yearned to tell him how she forgave him all, and loved him to the
                    last.

When she saw Elizabeth by her side, she raised herself up and looked at her with
                    eyes gleaming, even through the shades of death, with an expression of intense
                    entreaty. One care—one thought of earth still chained back that fluttering
                    spirit yearning to depart—it was for the little child who lay in her bosom. With
                    the quick instinct of a mother, she had perceived that the little Agnes would
                    possess to the uttermost that warm and loving disposition which had made of
                    herself so wretched a wife. Another might have cared little for the cold neglect
                    which had destroyed her; and when she thought of all the storms and dangers on
                    that wide sea of life where she had made so sad a shipwreck, she trembled with
                    an agonizing fear for the rosy happy child who slept upon her bed of death.
She had no hope but in her eldest daughter; for she knew that she left her
                    children friendless—not even their father could be called their friend! For
                    Elizabeth herself she feared nothing; the child was strangely reserved even
                    then, and her mother never dreamt of the strong tide of feeling which lurked
                    under that calm exterior, though she could duly appreciate the superiority of
                    intellect and force of character, which were already so manifest.
Addressing herself far less to the child then 
                    present with her, than to the woman she was hereafter to be, the dying mother
                    solemnly implored of Elizabeth to look upon her infant sister henceforward as a
                    sacred charge—so long as they both should live she besought her to watch over
                    her, even as she would herself have done, but for the implacable death, which
                    alone could have torn that child from her arms. She required from her especially
                    a positive pledge that no other tie or affection hereafter springing up in her
                    life should interfere with this her earliest and most binding duty.
Elizabeth had, as we have said, a mind beyond her years; and she knew well that
                    it was no light promise which she gave in that hour, and sealed in the farewell
                    kiss, with which she drained her mother’s last breath upon her lips. She thought
                    of it now in the time of their common desolation, as she looked on poor Agnes in
                    her helpless sorrow, and lifted up the veil of sunny hair that she might gaze
                    into her sweet innocent face. Deeply she resolved that, whatever might be their
                    fate, her work and office must ever be to guard that little one close by her
                    side, and shield her from all sorrow and danger.
To both these sisters, earth and the things of it were as yet all in all. Their
                    governess had given them what she termed a “religious education,”—that is, she had carefully instilled into
                    them her own peculiar and most bounded views, on various points of completely
                    minor importance, dwelling chiefly on the great danger of trusting to
                    forms—whilst she furnished them with nothing else, either more or less tangible,
                    wherein to trust;—thus, while the outward semblance of piety might now be fairly
                    ranked amongst the accomplishments she had taught them, they knew far less of
                    the faith, hope, and love, with which if a soul be girt it can battle with life
                    and face eternity, than the infant who smiles in his slumbers to the unseen
                    angelic guardians round him.
The sisters were still seated together in silence, when the door opened, and Mr.
                    Hardman entered with the slow solemn step suitable to this mournful
                    occasion.
He had come to acquaint his wards with his intentions respecting them,
                    immediately on returning from the funeral of their father, this being the proper
                    and legitimate moment for such a communication.
Mr. Hardman was systematic in everything: systematic in selfishness, in
                    covetousness, and in the virtues which he deemed necessary to his
                    respectability. He had as keen a relish for money‐making as his partner, Mr.
                    Maynard,  but his toil and labour were to a
                    certain end. He was a man who could judge of cause and effect, and the desire of
                    wealth was not with him a passion absorbing in itself; he sought to make a
                    fortune because it was his will and pleasure to enjoy the good things of life;
                    he knew that there are none of this world’s gifts which riches cannot
                    purchase—not even the most shadowy and unsubstantial, such as the outward
                    respect and consideration of his fellow‐men.
Slowly and surely he advanced in a solid prosperity; gradually he surrounded
                    himself with all that his soul coveted—luxury, comfort, ostentatious splendour
                    for himself, his wife, and his family; and then he set himself systematically to
                    enjoy them according to his previous calculations.
He was now a man of weight and influence in the city, but he continued to pursue,
                    with rigid firmness, the system to which he owed so much of his advancement,
                    namely, the inflexible determination with which, even in the most unimportant
                    matters, he carried out his own plans and ideas in spite of all
                        obstacles or opposition.
Mr. Hardman proceeded to inform his wards of the arrangement which he and his
                    wife had adopted for them after mature consideration.

Elizabeth was to take up her residence in his house, and become, for some time at
                    least, a member of his family. Agnes was to accompany one of his own daughters
                    to a fashionable school in Paris, there to complete her education. With a cry
                    almost of despair, both sisters vehemently deprecated the idea of their
                    separation; there were but two of them all alone in the wide world, surely he
                    would not part them?
Mr. Hardman was immovable, and they were too helpless to resist. He had already
                    two daughters older than Elizabeth, and his wife was resolutely determined not
                    to have the charge of more than three.
Mr. Hardman continued to acquaint them with the details of his plan as firmly and
                    composedly as though they had gladly acquiesced in it. His carriage was to come
                    for them that evening, to conduct them both to his house—the following week
                    Agnes was to go to Paris. He mentioned the sums he would deduct yearly from
                    their little fortunes as payment to himself for their expenses; recommended them
                    to prepare for the removal of their effects from the house they were to enter no
                    more, and so took his leave.
The door had no sooner closed upon him than Agnes gave way to a burst of the most
                    passionate sorrow, whilst Elizabeth, whose feelings  were at all times painfully intense and strong, dwelt
                    without scruple on the profound dislike to her guardian, which struck deep root
                    in her heart from that hour.
After a little time, however, she tenderly raised her sister’s drooping head, and
                    said, with an effort at calmness—
“It is of no use to struggle, dear Agnes; we must submit—we have no home!”
“No home?” echoed Agnes. “Oh, shall we never have a home again? shall we never
                    find a spot where we may dwell together again, and no one shall have power to
                    divide us?”
“We know not what may be in reserve for us,” said Elizabeth, sadly; “but most
                    certainly they shall not separate us long: the time must come when we shall be
                    free from Mr. Hardman’s tutelage, and then I will defy the whole world to rob me
                    of the charge which I received from our mother on her death‐bed.”
“Ah! but that will not be for a long time,” said Agnes, sighing heavily. Then
                    suddenly, with all the buoyancy of youth, her expression changed from one of
                    deep despondency to a hopeful joy. “I will tell you how it must be,” she
                    exclaimed; “you must marry very soon, and then we shall have a home together
                    once again: you would take me to live with you
                    always in your own house, would you not, dear sister?”
“I would, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, with a faint smile at the rapidity with
                    which Agnes’s ideas rose. “If ever I have a home, it shall in truth be yours
                    also; and you may rest assured that I will never accept of any unless you are to
                    share it with me.”
</div></body></text></TEI>