<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Auriol or the elixir of life</title><author>Ainsworth, William Harrison (1805-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1850</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
Chapter 8
The Barber of London
Who has not heard of the Barber of London? His dwelling is in the neighbourhood of Lincoln’s
     Inn. It is needless to particularise the street, for everybody knows the shop; that is to say,
     every member of the legal profession, high or low. All, to the very judges themselves, have
     their hair cut, or their wigs dressed, by him. A pleasant fellow is Mr. Tuffnell Trigge—Figaro
     himself not pleasanter—and if you do not shave yourself—if you want a becoming flow imparted to
     your stubborn locks, or if you require a wig, I recommend you to the care of Mr. Tuffnell
     Trigge. Not only will he treat you well, but he will regale you with all the gossip of the
     court; he will give you the last funny thing of Mr. Serjeant Larkins; he will tell you how many
     briefs the great Mr. Skinner Fyne receives—what the Vice-Chancellor is doing; and you will own,
     on rising, that you have never spent a five minutes more agreeably. Besides, you are likely to
     see some noticeable characters, for Mr. Trigge’s shop is quite a lounge. Perhaps you may find a
     young barrister who has just been “called,” ordering his “first wig,” and you may hear the
     prognostications of Mr. Trigge as to his future distinction. “Ah, sir,” he will say, glancing
     at the stolid features of the young man, “you have quite the face of the Chief Justice—quite
     the face of the chief—I don’t recollect him ordering his first wig—that was a little before my
     time; but I hope to live to see you chief, sir. Quite within your reach, if you choose to
     apply. Sure of it, sir—quite sure.” Or you may see him attending to some grave master in
     Chancery, and listening with profound attention to his remarks; or screaming with laughter at
     the jokes of some smart special pleader; or talking of the theatres, the actors and actresses,
     to some young attorneys, or pupils in conveyancers’ chambers; for those are the sort of
     customers in whom Mr. Trigge chiefly delights; with them, indeed, he is great, for it
     is by them he has been dubbed the Barber of London. His shop is also frequented by managing
     clerks, barristers’ clerks, engrossing clerks, and others; but these are, for the most part,
     his private friends.
Mr. Trigge’s shop is none of your spruce West End hair-cutting establishments, with
     magnificent mirrors on every side, in which you may see the back of your head, the front, and
     the side, all at once, with walls bedizened with glazed French paper, and with an ante-room
     full of bears’-grease, oils, creams, tooth-powders, and cut glass. No, it is a real barber’s
     and hairdresser’s shop, of the good old stamp, where you may get cut and curled for a shilling,
     and shaved for half the price.
True, the floor is not covered with a carpet. But what of that? It bears the imprint of
     innumerable customers, and is scattered over with their hair. In the window, there is an
     assortment of busts moulded in wax, exhibiting the triumphs of Mr. Trigge’s art; and above
     these are several specimens of legal wigs. On the little counter behind the window, amid large
     pots of pomade and bears’-grease, and the irons and brushes in constant use by the barber, are
     other bustos, done to the life, and for ever glancing amiably into the room. On the block is a
     judge’s wig, which Mr. Trigge has just been dressing, and a little farther, on a higher block,
     is that of a counsel. On either side of the fireplace are portraits of Lord Eldon and Lord
     Lyndhurst. Some other portraits of pretty actresses are likewise to be seen. Against the
     counter rests a board, displaying the playbill of the evening; and near it is a large piece of
     emblematical crockery, indicating that bears’-grease may be had on the premises. Amongst Mr.
     Trigge’s live-stock may be enumerated his favourite magpie, placed in a wicker cage in the
     window, which chatters incessantly, and knows everything, its master avouches, “as well as a
     Christian.”
And now as to Mr. Tuffnell Trigge himself. He is very tall and very thin, and holds himself
     so upright that he loses not an inch of his stature. His head is large and his face long, with
     marked, if not very striking features, charged, it must be admitted, with a very self-satisfied
     expression. One cannot earn the appellation of the Barber of London without talent; and it is
     the consciousness of this talent that lends to Mr. Trigge’s features their apparently conceited
     expression. A fringe of black whisker adorns his cheek and chin, and his black bristly hair is
     brushed back, so as to exhibit the prodigious expanse of his forehead. His eyebrows are
     elevated, as if in constant scorn.
The attire in which Mr. Trigge is ordinarily seen, consists of a black velvet waistcoat, and
     tight black continuations. These are protected by a white apron tied round his waist, with
     pockets to hold his scissors and combs; over all, he wears a short nankeen jacket, into the
     pockets of which his hands are constantly thrust when not otherwise employed. A black satin
     stock with a large bow encircles his throat, and his shirt is fastened by black enamel studs.
     Such is Mr. Tuffnell Trigge, yclept the Barber of London.
At the time of his introduction to the reader, Mr. Trigge had just advertised for an
     assistant, his present young man, Rutherford Watts, being about to leave him, and set up for
     himself in Canterbury. It was about two o’clock, and Mr. Trigge had just withdrawn into an
     inner room to take some refection, when, on returning, he found Watts occupied in cutting the
     hair of a middle-aged, sour-looking gentleman, who was seated before the fire. Mr. Trigge bowed
     to the sour-looking gentleman, and appeared ready to enter into conversation with him, but no
     notice being taken of his advances, he went and talked to his magpie.
While he was chattering to it, the sagacious bird screamed forth: “Pretty dear!—pretty
     dear!”
“Ah! what’s that? Who is it?” cried Trigge.
“Pretty dear!—pretty dear!” reiterated the magpie.
Upon this, Trigge looked around, and saw a very singular little man enter the shop. He had
     somewhat the appearance of a groom, being clothed in a long grey coat, drab knees, and small
     top-boots. He had a large and remarkably projecting mouth, like that of a baboon, and a great
     shock head of black hair.
“Pretty dear!—pretty dear!” screamed the magpie.
“I see nothing pretty about him,” thought Mr. Trigge. “What a strange little fellow! It would
     puzzle the Lord Chancellor himself to say what his age might be.”
The little man took off his hat, and making a profound bow to the barber, unfolded the
      Times newspaper, which he carried under his arm, and held it up to Trigge.
“What do you want, my little friend, eh?” said the barber.
“High wages!—high wages!” screamed the magpie.
“Is this yours, sir?” replied the little man, pointing to an advertisement in the
     newspaper.
“Yes, yes, that’s my advertisement, friend,” replied Mr. Trigge. “But what of it?”
Before the little man could answer, a slight interruption occurred. While eyeing the
     new-comer, Watts neglected to draw forth the hot curling-irons, in consequence of which he
     burnt the sour-looking gentleman’s forehead, and singed his hair.
“Take care, sir!” cried the gentleman furiously. “What the devil are you about?”
“Yes! take care, sir, as Judge Learmouth observes to a saucy witness,” cried Trigge—”‘take
     care, or I’ll commit you!’”
“D—n Judge Learmouth!” cried the gentleman angrily. “If I were a judge, I’d hang such a
     careless fellow.”
“Sarve him right!” screamed Mag—“sarve him right!”

“Beg pardon, sir,” cried Watts. “I’ll rectify you in a minute.”
“Well, my little friend,” observed Trigge, “and what may be your object in coming to me? as
     the great conveyancer, Mr. Plodwell, observes to his clients—what may be your object?”
“You want an assistant, don’t you, sir?” rejoined the little man humbly.
“Do you apply on your own account, or on behalf of a friend?” asked Trigge.
“On my own,” replied the little man.
“What are your qualifications?” demanded Trigge—“what are your qualifications?”
“I fancy I understand something of the business,” replied the little man. “I was a perruquier
     myself, when wigs were more in fashion than they are now.”
“Ha! indeed!” said Trigge, laughing. “That must have been in the last century—in Queen Anne’s
     time—eh?”
“You have hit it exactly, sir,” replied the little man. “It was in Queen Anne’s
     time.”
“Perhaps you recollect when wigs were first worn, my little Nestor?” cried Mr. Trigge.
“Perfectly,” replied the little man. “French periwigs were first worn in Charles the Second’s
     time.”
“You saw ’em, of course?” cried the barber, with a sneer.
“I did,” replied the little man quietly.
“Oh, he must be out of his mind,” cried Trigge. “We shall have a commission de
      lunatico to issue here, as the Master of the Rolls would observe.”
“I hope I may suit you, sir,” said the little man.
“I don’t think you will, my friend,” replied Mr. Trigge; “I don’t think you will. You don’t
     seem to have a hand for hairdressing. Are you aware of the talent the art requires? Are you
     aware what it has cost me to earn the enviable title of the Barber of London? I’m as proud of
     that title as if I were——”
“Lord Chancellor!—Lord Chancellor!” screamed Mag.
“Precisely, Mag,” said Mr. Trigge; “as if I were Lord Chancellor.”
“Well, I’m sorry for it,” said the little man disconsolately.
“Pretty dear!” screamed Mag; “pretty dear!”
“What a wonderful bird you have got!” said the sour-looking gentleman, rising and paying Mr.
     Trigge. “I declare its answers are quite appropriate.”
“Ah! Mag is a clever creature, sir—that she is,” replied the barber. “I gave a good deal for
     her.”
“Little or nothing!” screamed Mag—“little or nothing!”
“What is your name, friend?” said the gentleman, addressing the little man, who still
     lingered in the shop.
“Why, sir, I’ve had many names in my time,” he replied. “At one time I was called
     Flapdragon—at another, Old Parr—but my real name, I believe, is Morse—Gregory Morse.”
“An Old Bailey answer,” cried Mr. Trigge, shaking his head. “Flapdragon, alias Old Parr—alias
     Gregory Morse—alias——”
“Pretty dear!” screamed Mag.
“And you want a place?” demanded the sour-looking gentleman, eyeing him narrowly.
“Sadly,” replied Morse.
“Well, then, follow me,” said the gentleman, “and I’ll see what can be done for you.”
And they left the shop together.
</div></body></text></TEI>