<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Auriol or the elixir of life</title><author>Ainsworth, William Harrison (1805-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1850</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
Chapter 10
The Statue at Charing Cross
One morning, two persons took their way along Parliament Street and Whitehall, and, chatting
     as they walked, turned into the entrance of Spring Gardens, for the purpose of looking at the
     statue at Charing Cross. One of them was remarkable for his dwarfish stature and strange
     withered features. The other was a man of middle size, thin, rather elderly, and with a sharp
     countenance, the sourness of which was redeemed by a strong expression of benevolence. He was
     clad in a black coat, rather rusty, but well brushed, buttoned up to the chin, black tights,
     short drab gaiters, and wore a white neckcloth and spectacles.
Mr. Loftus (for so he was called) was a retired merchant, of moderate fortune, and lived in
     Abingdon Street. He was a bachelor, and therefore pleased himself; and being a bit of an
     antiquary, rambled about all day long in search of some object of interest. His walk, on the
     present occasion, was taken with that view.
“By Jove! what a noble statue that is, Morse!” cried Loftus, gazing at it. “The horse is
     magnificent—positively magnificent.”
“I recollect when the spot was occupied by a gibbet, and when, in lieu of a statue, an effigy
     of the martyred monarch was placed there,” replied Morse. “That was in the time of the
     Protectorate.”
“You cannot get those dreams out of your head, Morse,” said Loftus, smiling. “I wish I could
     persuade myself I had lived for two centuries and a half.”
“Would you could have seen the ancient cross, which once stood there, erected by Edward the
     First to his beloved wife, ‘Eleanor of Castile’!” said Morse, heedless of the other’s remark.
     “It was much mutilated when I remember it; some of the pinnacles were broken, and the foliage
     defaced, but the statues of the queen were still standing in the recesses; and altogether the
     effect was beautiful.”
“It must have been charming,” observed Loftus, rubbing his hands; “and, though I like the
     statue, I would much rather have had the old Gothic cross. But how fortunate the former escaped
     destruction in Oliver Cromwell’s time!”
“I can tell you how that came to pass, sir,” replied Morse, “for I was assistant to John
     Rivers, the brazier, to whom the statue was sold.”
“Ah! indeed!” exclaimed Loftus. “I have heard something of the story, but should like to have
     full particulars.”
“You shall hear them, then,” replied Morse. “Yon statue, which, as you know, was cast by
     Hubert le Sueur, in 1633, was ordered by Parliament to be sold and broken to pieces. Well, my
     master, John Rivers, being a stanch Royalist, though he did not dare to avow his principles,
     determined to preserve it from destruction. Accordingly, he offered a good round sum for it,
     and was declared the purchaser. But how to dispose of it was the difficulty? He could trust
     none of his men but me, whom he knew to be as hearty a hater of the Roundheads, and as loyal to
     the memory of our slaughtered sovereign, as himself. Well, we digged a great pit, secretly, in
     the cellar, whither the statue had been conveyed, and buried it. The job occupied us nearly a
     month; and during that time, my master collected together all the pieces of old brass he could
     procure. These he afterwards produced, and declared they were the fragments of the statue. But
     the cream of the jest was to come. He began to cast handles of knives and forks in brass,
     giving it out that they were made from the metal of the statue. And plenty of ’em he sold too,
     for the Cavaliers bought ’em as memorials of their martyred monarch, and the Roundheads as
     evidences of his fall. In this way he soon got back his outlay.”
“Ha! ha! ha!” laughed Loftus.
“Well, in due season came the Restoration,” pursued Morse; “and my master made known to King
     Charles the Second the treasure he had kept concealed for him. It was digged forth, placed in
     its old position—but I forget whether the brazier was rewarded. I rather think not.”
“No matter,” cried Loftus; “he was sufficiently rewarded by the consciousness of having done
     a noble action. But let us go and examine the sculpture on the pedestal more closely.”
With this he crossed over the road; and, taking off his hat, thrust his head through the iron
     railing surrounding the pedestal, while Morse, in order to point out the beauties of the
     sculpture with greater convenience, mounted upon a stump beside him.
“You are aware that this is the work of Grinling Gibbons, sir?” cried the dwarf.
“To be sure I am,” replied Loftus—“to be sure. What fancy and gusto is displayed in the
     treatment of these trophies!”
“The execution of the royal arms is equally admirable,” cried Morse.
“Never saw anything finer,” rejoined Loftus—“never, upon my life.”
Every one knows how easily a crowd is collected in London, and it cannot be supposed that our
     two antiquaries would be allowed to pursue their investigations unmolested. Several ragged
     urchins got round them, and tried to discover what they were looking at, at the same time
     cutting their jokes upon them. These were speedily joined by a street-sweeper, rather young in
     the profession, a ticket-porter, a butcher’s apprentice, an old Israelitish clothes-man, a
     coalheaver, and a couple of charity-boys.
“My eyes!” cried the street-sweeper, “only twig these coves. If they ain’t green ‘uns, I’m
     done.”
“Old Spectacles thinks he has found it all out,” remarked the porter; “ve shall hear wot it
     all means by-and-by.”
“Plesh ma ‘art,” cried the Jew, “vat two funny old genelmen. I vonder vat they thinks they
     sees?”
“I’ll tell ‘ee, master,” rejoined the butcher’s apprentice; “they’re a tryin’ vich on ’em can
     see farthest into a millstone.”

“Only think of living all my life in London, and never examining this admirable work of art
     before!” cried Loftus, quite unconscious that he had become the object of general
     curiosity.
“Look closer at it, old gem’man,” cried the porter. “The nearer you get, the more you’ll
     admire it.”
“Quite true,” replied Loftus, fancying Morse had spoken; “it’ll bear the closest
     inspection.”
“I say, Ned,” observed one of the charity-boys to the other, “do you get over the railin’;
     they must ha’ dropped summat inside. See what it is.”
“I’m afraid o’ spikin’ myself, Joe,” replied the other; “but just give us a lift, and I’ll
     try.”
“Wot are you arter there, you young rascals?” cried the coalheaver; “come down, or I’ll send
     the perlice to you.”
“Wot two precious guys these is!” cried a ragamuffin lad, accompanied by a bulldog. “I’ve a
     good mind to chuck the little ’un off the post, and set Tartar at him. Here, boy, here!”
“That ‘ud be famous fun, indeed, Spicer!” cried another rapscallion behind him.
“Arrah! let ’em alone, will you there, you young divils!” cried an Irish bricklayer; “don’t
     you see they’re only two paiceable antiquaries.”
“Oh, they’re antiquaries, are they?” screamed the little street-sweeper. “Vell, I never see
     the likes on ’em afore; did you, Sam?”
“Never,” replied the porter.
“Och, murther in Irish! ye’re upsettin’ me, an’ all the fruits of my industry,” cried an
     applewoman, against whom the bricklayer had run his barrow. “Divil seize you for a careless
     wagabone! Why don’t you look where ye’re goin’, and not dhrive into people in that way?”
“Axes pardon, Molly,” said the bricklayer; “but I was so interested in them
     antiquaries, that I didn’t obsarve ye.”
“Antiquaries be hanged! what’s such warmint to me?” cried the applewoman furiously. “You’ve
     destroyed my day’s market, and bad luck to ye!”
“Well, never heed, Molly,” cried the good-natured bricklayer; “I’ll make it up t’ye. Pick up
     your apples, and you shall have a dhrop of the craiter if you’ll come along wid me.”
While this was passing, a stout gentleman came from the farther side of the statue, and
     perceiving Loftus, cried—“Why, brother-in-law, is that you?”
But Loftus was too much engrossed to notice him, and continued to expiate upon the beauty of
     the trophies.
“What are you talking about, brother?” cried the stout gentleman.
“Grinling Gibbons,” replied Loftus, without turning round. “Horace Walpole said that no one
     before him could give to wood the airy lightness of a flower, and here he has given it to a
     stone.”
“This may be all very fine, my good fellow,” said the stout gentleman, seizing him by the
     shoulder; “but don’t you see the crowd you’re collecting round you? You’ll be mobbed
     presently.”
“Why, how the devil did you come here, brother Thorneycroft?” cried Loftus, at last
     recognising him.
“Come along, and I’ll tell you,” replied the iron-merchant, dragging him away, while Morse
     followed closely behind them. “I’m so glad to have met you,” pursued Thorneycroft, as soon as
     they were clear of the mob; “you’ll be shocked to hear what has happened to your niece,
     Ebba.”
“Why, what has happened to her?” demanded Loftus. “You alarm me. Out with it at
     once. I hate to be kept in suspense.”
“She has left me,” replied Thorneycroft—“left her old indulgent father—run away.”
“Run away!” exclaimed Loftus. “Impossible! I’ll not believe it—even from your lips.”
“Would it were not so!—but it is, alas! too true,” replied Thorneycroft mournfully. “And the
     thing was so unnecessary, for I would gladly have given her to the young man. My sole hope is
     that she has not utterly disgraced herself.”
“No, she is too high principled for that,” cried Loftus. “Rest easy on that score. But with
     whom has she run away?”
“With a young man named Auriol Darcy,” replied Thorneycroft. “He was brought to my house
     under peculiar circumstances.”
“I never heard of him,” said Loftus.
“But I have,” interposed Morse. “I’ve known him these two hundred years.”
“Eh day! who’s this?” cried Thorneycroft.
“A crack-brained little fellow, whom I’ve engaged as valet,” replied Loftus. “He fancies he
     was born in Queen Elizabeth’s time.”
“It’s no fancy,” cried Morse. “I am perfectly acquainted with Auriol Darcy’s history. He
     drank of the same elixir as myself.”
“If you know him, can you give us a clue to find him?” asked Thorneycroft.
“I am sorry I cannot,” replied Morse. “I only saw him for a few minutes the other night,
     after I had been thrown into the Serpentine by the tall man in the black cloak.”
“What’s that you say?” cried Thorneycroft quickly. “I have heard Ebba speak of a tall man in
     a black cloak having some mysterious connection with Auriol. I hope that person has nothing to
     do with her disappearance.”
“I shouldn’t wonder if he had,” replied Morse. “I believe that black gentleman to be——”
“What!—who?” demanded Thorneycroft.
“Neither more nor less than the devil,” replied Morse mysteriously.
“Pshaw! poh!” cried Loftus. “I told you the poor fellow was half cracked.”
At this moment, a roguish-looking fellow, with red whiskers and hair, and clad in a velveteen
     jacket with ivory buttons, who had been watching the iron-merchant at some distance, came up,
     and touching his hat, said, “Mr. Thorneycroft, I believe?”
“My name is Thorneycroft, fellow!” cried the iron-merchant, eyeing him askance. “And your
     name, I fancy, is Ginger?”
“Exactly, sir,” replied the dog-fancier, again touching his hat, “ex-actly. I didn’t think
     you would rekilect me, sir. I bring you some news of your darter.”
“Of Ebba!” exclaimed Thorneycroft, in a tone of deep emotion. “I hope your news is good.”
“I wish it wos better, for her sake as well as yours, sir,” replied the dog-fancier gravely;
     “but I’m afeerd she’s in werry bad hands.”
“That she is, if she’s in the hands o’ the black gentleman,” observed Morse.
“Vy, Old Parr, that ain’t you?” cried Ginger, gazing at him in astonishment. “Vy, ‘ow you are
     transmogrified, to be sure!”
“But what of my daughter?” cried Thorneycroft; “where is she? Take me to her, and you shall
     be well rewarded.”
“I’ll do my best to take you to her, and without any reward, sir,” replied Ginger, “for my
     heart bleeds for the poor young creater. As I said afore, she’s in dreadful bad hands.”
“Do you allude to Mr. Auriol Darcy?” cried Thorneycroft.
“No, he’s as much a wictim of this infernal plot as your darter,” replied Ginger; “I thought
     him quite different at first—but I’ve altered my mind entirely since some matters has come to
     my knowledge.”
“You alarm me greatly by these dark hints,” cried Thorneycroft. “What is to be done?”
“I shall know in a few hours,” replied Ginger. “I ain’t got the exact clue yet. But come to
     me at eleven o’clock to-night, at the Turk’s Head, at the back o’ Shoreditch Church, and I’ll
     put you on the right scent. You must come alone.”
“I should wish this gentleman, my brother-in-law, to accompany me,” said Thorneycroft.
“He couldn’t help you,” replied Ginger. “I’ll take care to have plenty of assistance. It’s a
     dangerous bus’ness, and can only be managed in a sartin way, and by a sartin person, and he’d
     object to any von but you. To-night, at eleven! Good-bye, Old Parr. Ve shall meet again ere
     long.”
And without a word more, he hurried away.
</div></body></text></TEI>