<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook, Yeast: A
      Problem</title><author>Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1851</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I: THE PHILOSOPHY OF FOX-HUNTING
As this my story will probably run counter to more than one fashion of the day, literary and
     other, it is prudent to bow to those fashions wherever I honestly can; and therefore to begin
     with a scrap of description.
The edge of a great fox-cover; a flat wilderness of low leafless oaks fortified by a long,
     dreary, thorn capped clay ditch, with sour red water oozing out at every yard; a broken gate
     leading into a straight wood ride, ragged with dead grasses and black with fallen leaves, the
     centre mashed into a quagmire by innumerable horsehoofs; some forty red coats and some four
     black; a sprinkling of young-farmers, resplendent in gold buttons and green; a pair of sleek
     drab stable-keepers, showing off horses for sale; the surgeon of the union, in Mackintosh and
     antigropelos; two holiday schoolboys with trousers strapped down to bursting point, like a
     penny steamer’s safety-valve; a midshipman, the only merry one in the field, bumping about on a
     fretting, sweating hack, with its nose a foot above its ears; and Lancelot Smith, who then kept
     two good horses, and ‘rode forward’ as a fine young fellow of three-and-twenty who can afford
     it, and ‘has nothing else to do,’ has a very good right to ride.
But what is a description, without a sketch of the weather?—In these Pantheist days
     especially, when a hero or heroine’s moral state must entirely depend on the barometer, and
     authors talk as if Christians were cabbages, and a man’s soul as well as his lungs might be
     saved by sea-breezes and sunshine; or his character developed by wearing guano in his shoes,
     and training himself against a south wall—we must have a weather description, though, as I
     shall presently show, one in flat contradiction of the popular theory.  Luckily for our
     information, Lancelot was very much given to watch both the weather and himself, and had
     indeed, while in his teens, combined the two in a sort of a soul-almanack on the principles
     just mentioned—somewhat in this style:—
‘Monday, 21st.—Wind S.W., bright sun, mercury at 30½ inches.  Felt my heart
     expanded towards the universe.  Organs of veneration and benevolence pleasingly excited; and
     gave a shilling to a tramp.  An inexpressible joy bounded through every vein, and the soft air
     breathed purity and self-sacrifice through my soul.  As I watched the beetles, those children
     of the sun, who, as divine Shelley says, “laden with light and odour, pass over the gleam of
     the living grass,” I gained an Eden-glimpse of the pleasures of virtue.
‘N.B.  Found the tramp drunk in a ditch.  I could not have degraded myself on such a
     day—ah! how could he?
‘Tuesday, 22d.—Barometer rapidly falling.  Heavy clouds in the south-east.  My heart sank
     into gloomy forebodings.  Read Manfred, and doubted whether I should live long.  The
     laden weight of destiny seemed to crush down my aching forehead, till the thunderstorm burst,
     and peace was restored to my troubled soul.’
This was very bad; but to do justice to Lancelot, he had grown out of it at the time when my
     story begins.  He was now in the fifth act of his ‘Werterean’ stage; that sentimental measles,
     which all clever men must catch once in their lives, and which, generally, like the physical
     measles, if taken early, settles their constitution for good or evil; if taken late, goes far
     towards killing them.  Lancelot had found Byron and Shelley pall on his taste and commenced
     devouring Bulwer and worshipping Ernest Maltravers.  He had left Bulwer for old
     ballads and romances, and Mr. Carlyle’s reviews; was next alternately chivalry-mad; and
     Germany-mad; was now reading hard at physical science; and on the whole, trying to become a
     great man, without any very clear notion of what a great man ought to be.  Real education he
     never had had.  Bred up at home under his father, a rich merchant, he had gone to college with
     a large stock of general information, and a particular mania for dried plants, fossils,
     butterflies, and sketching, and some such creed as this:—
That he was very clever.
That he ought to make his fortune.
That a great many things were very pleasant—beautiful things among the rest.
That it was a fine thing to be ‘superior,’ gentleman-like, generous, and courageous.
That a man ought to be religious.
And left college with a good smattering of classics and mathematics, picked up in the
     intervals of boat-racing and hunting, and much the same creed as he brought with him, except in
     regard to the last article.  The scenery-and-natural-history mania was now somewhat at a
     discount.  He had discovered a new natural object, including in itself all—more than all—yet
     found beauties and wonders—woman!
Draw, draw the veil and weep, guardian angel! if such there be.  What was to be expected? 
     Pleasant things were pleasant—there was no doubt of that, whatever else might be doubtful.  He
     had read Byron by stealth; he had been flogged into reading Ovid and Tibullus; and commanded by
     his private tutor to read Martial and Juvenal ‘for the improvement of his style.’  All
     conversation on the subject of love had been prudishly avoided, as usual, by his parents and
     teacher.  The parts of the Bible which spoke of it had been always kept out of his sight.  Love
     had been to him, practically, ground tabooed and ‘carnal.’  What was to be expected?  Just what
     happened—if woman’s beauty had nothing holy in it, why should his fondness for it?  Just what
     happens every day—that he had to sow his wild oats for himself, and eat the fruit thereof, and
     the dirt thereof also.
O fathers! fathers! and you, clergymen, who monopolise education! either tell boys the truth
     about love, or do not put into their hands, without note or comment, the foul devil’s lies
     about it, which make up the mass of the Latin poets—and then go, fresh from teaching Juvenal
     and Ovid, to declaim at Exeter Hall against poor Peter Dens’s well-meaning prurience!  Had we
     not better take the beam out of our own eye before we meddle with the mote in the Jesuit’s?
But where is my description of the weather all this time?
I cannot, I am sorry to say, give any very cheerful account of the weather that day.  But
     what matter?  Are Englishmen hedge-gnats, who only take their sport when the sun shines?  Is it
     not, on the contrary, symbolical of our national character, that almost all our field
     amusements are wintry ones?  Our fowling, our hunting, our punt-shooting (pastime for Hymir
     himself and the frost giants)—our golf and skating,—our very cricket, and boat-racing, and jack
     and grayling fishing, carried on till we are fairly frozen out.  We are a stern people, and
     winter suits us.  Nature then retires modestly into the background, and spares us the obtrusive
     glitter of summer, leaving us to think and work; and therefore it happens that in England, it
     may be taken as a general rule, that whenever all the rest of the world is in-doors, we are out
     and busy, and on the whole, the worse the day, the better the deed.
The weather that day, the first day Lancelot ever saw his beloved, was truly national.  A
     silent, dim, distanceless, steaming, rotting day in March.  The last brown oak-leaf which had
     stood out the winter’s frost, spun and quivered plump down, and then lay; as if ashamed to have
     broken for a moment the ghastly stillness, like an awkward guest at a great dumb dinner-party. 
     A cold suck of wind just proved its existence, by toothaches on the north side of all faces. 
     The spiders having been weather-bewitched the night before, had unanimously agreed to cover
     every brake and brier with gossamer-cradles, and never a fly to be caught in them; like
     Manchester cotton-spinners madly glutting the markets in the teeth of ‘no demand.’  The steam
     crawled out of the dank turf, and reeked off the flanks and nostrils of the shivering horses,
     and clung with clammy paws to frosted hats and dripping boughs.  A soulless, skyless, catarrhal
     day, as if that bustling dowager, old mother Earth—what with match-making in spring, and
      fêtes champêtres in summer, and dinner-giving in autumn—was fairly worn out, and put
     to bed with the influenza, under wet blankets and the cold-water cure.
There sat Lancelot by the cover-side, his knees aching with cold and wet, thanking his stars
     that he was not one of the whippers-in who were lashing about in the dripping cover, laying up
     for themselves, in catering for the amusement of their betters, a probable old age of
     bed-ridden torture, in the form of rheumatic gout.  Not that he was at all happy—indeed, he had
     no reason to be so; for, first, the hounds would not find; next, he had left half-finished at
     home a review article on the Silurian System, which he had solemnly promised an abject and
     beseeching editor to send to post that night; next, he was on the windward side of the cover,
     and dare not light a cigar; and lastly, his mucous membrane in general was not in the happiest
     condition, seeing that he had been dining the evening before with Mr. Vaurien of Rottenpalings,
     a young gentleman of a convivial and melodious turn of mind, who sang—and played also—as
     singing men are wont—in more senses than one, and had ‘ladies and gentlemen’ down from town to
     stay with him; and they sang and played too; and so somehow between vingt-un and
     champagne-punch, Lancelot had not arrived at home till seven o’clock that morning, and was in a
     fit state to appreciate the feelings of our grandfathers, when, after the third bottle of port,
     they used to put the black silk tights into their pockets, slip on the leathers and boots, and
     ride the crop-tailed hack thirty miles on a winter’s night, to meet the hounds in the next
     county by ten in the morning.  They are ‘gone down to Hades, even many stalwart souls of
     heroes,’ with John Warde of Squerries at their head—the fathers of the men who conquered at
     Waterloo; and we their degenerate grandsons are left instead, with puny arms, and polished
     leather boots, and a considerable taint of hereditary disease, to sit in club-houses, and
     celebrate the progress of the species.
Whether Lancelot or his horse, under these depressing circumstances, fell asleep; or whether
     thoughts pertaining to such a life, and its fitness for a clever and ardent young fellow in the
     nineteenth century, became gradually too painful, and had to be peremptorily shaken off, this
     deponent sayeth not; but certainly, after five-and-thirty minutes of idleness and shivering,
     Lancelot opened his eyes with a sudden start, and struck spurs into his hunter without due
     cause shown; whereat Shiver-the-timbers, who was no Griselda in temper—(Lancelot had bought him
     out of the Pytchley for half his value, as unrideably vicious, when he had killed a groom, and
     fallen backwards on a rough-rider, the first season after he came up from Horncastle)—responded
     by a furious kick or two, threw his head up, put his foot into a drain, and sprawled down all
     but on his nose, pitching Lancelot unawares shamefully on the pommel of his saddle.  A certain
     fatality, by the bye, had lately attended all Lancelot’s efforts to shine; he never bought a
     new coat without tearing it mysteriously next day, or tried to make a joke without bursting out
     coughing in the middle ... and now the whole field were looking on at his mishap; between
     disgust and the start he turned almost sick, and felt the blood rush into his cheeks and
     forehead as he heard a shout of coarse jovial laughter burst out close to him, and the old
     master of the hounds, Squire Lavington, roared aloud—
‘A pretty sportsman you are, Mr. Smith, to fall asleep by the cover-side and let your horse
     down—and your pockets, too!  What’s that book on the ground?  Sapping and studying still?  I
     let nobody come out with my hounds with their pocket full of learning.  Hand it up here, Tom;
     we’ll see what it is.  French, as I am no scholar!  Translate for us, Colonel Bracebridge!’
And, amid shouts of laughter, the gay Guardsman read out,—
‘St. Francis de Sales: Introduction to a Devout Life.’
Poor Lancelot!  Wishing himself fathoms under-ground, ashamed of his book, still more ashamed
     of himself for his shame, he had to sit there ten physical seconds, or spiritual years, while
     the colonel solemnly returned him the book, complimenting him on the proofs of its purifying
     influence which he had given the night before, in helping to throw the turnpike-gate into the
     river.
But ‘all things do end,’ and so did this; and the silence of the hounds also; and a faint but
     knowing whimper drove St. Francis out of all heads, and Lancelot began to stalk slowly with a
     dozen horsemen up the wood-ride, to a fitful accompaniment of wandering hound-music, where the
     choristers were as invisible as nightingales among the thick cover.  And hark! just as the book
     was returned to his pocket, the sweet hubbub suddenly crashed out into one jubilant shriek, and
     then swept away fainter and fainter among the trees.  The walk became a trot—the trot a
     canter.  Then a faint melancholy shout at a distance, answered by a ‘Stole away!’ from the
     fields; a doleful ‘toot!’ of the horn; the dull thunder of many horsehoofs rolling along the
     farther woodside.  Then red coats, flashing like sparks of fire across the gray gap of mist at
     the ride’s-mouth, then a whipper-in, bringing up a belated hound, burst into the pathway,
     smashing and plunging, with shut eyes, through ash-saplings and hassock-grass; then a fat
     farmer, sedulously pounding through the mud, was overtaken and bespattered in spite of all his
     struggles;—until the line streamed out into the wide rushy pasture, startling up pewits and
     curlews, as horsemen poured in from every side, and cunning old farmers rode off at
     inexplicable angles to some well-known haunts of pug: and right ahead, chiming and jangling
     sweet madness, the dappled pack glanced and wavered through the veil of soft grey mist. 
     ‘What’s the use of this hurry?’ growled Lancelot.  ‘They will all be back again.  I never have
     the luck to see a run.’
But no; on and on—down the wind and down the vale; and the canter became a gallop, and the
     gallop a long straining stride; and a hundred horsehoofs crackled like flame among the
     stubbles, and thundered fetlock-deep along the heavy meadows; and every fence thinned the
     cavalcade, till the madness began to stir all bloods, and with grim earnest silent faces, the
     initiated few settled themselves to their work, and with the colonel and Lancelot at their
     head, ‘took their pleasure sadly, after the manner of their nation,’ as old Froissart has
     it.
‘Thorough bush, through brier, Thorough park, through pale;’
till the rolling grass-lands spread out into flat black open fallows, crossed with grassy
     baulks, and here and there a long melancholy line of tall elms, while before them the high
     chalk ranges gleamed above the mist like a vast wall of emerald enamelled with snow, and the
     winding river glittering at their feet.
‘A polite fox!’ observed the colonel.  ‘He’s leading the squire straight home to Whitford,
     just in time for dinner.’
* * * * *
They were in the last meadow, with the stream before them.  A line of struggling heads in the
     swollen and milky current showed the hounds’ opinion of Reynard’s course.  The sportsmen
     galloped off towards the nearest bridge.  Bracebridge looked back at Lancelot, who had been
     keeping by his side in sulky rivalry, following him successfully through all manner of
     desperate places, and more and more angry with himself and the guiltless colonel, because he
     only followed, while the colonel’s quicker and unembarrassed wit, which lived wholly in the
     present moment, saw long before Lancelot, ‘how to cut out his work,’ in every field.
‘I shan’t go round,’ quietly observed the colonel.
‘Do you fancy I shall?’ growled Lancelot, who took for granted—poor thin-skinned soul! that
     the words were meant as a hit at himself.
‘You’re a brace of geese,’ politely observed the old squire; ‘and you’ll find it out in
     rheumatic fever.  There—“one fool makes many!”  You’ll kill Smith before you’re done, colonel!’
     and the old man wheeled away up the meadow, as Bracebridge shouted after him,—
‘Oh, he’ll make a fine rider—in time!’
‘In time!’  Lancelot could have knocked the unsuspecting colonel down for the word.  It just
     expressed the contrast, which had fretted him ever since he began to hunt with the Whitford
     Priors hounds.  The colonel’s long practice and consummate skill in all he took in hand,—his
     experience of all society, from the prairie Indian to Crockford’s, from the prize-ring to the
     continental courts,—his varied and ready store of information and anecdote,—the harmony and
     completeness of the man,—his consistency with his own small ideal, and his consequent apparent
     superiority everywhere and in everything to the huge awkward Titan-cub, who, though
     immeasurably beyond Bracebridge in intellect and heart, was still in a state of convulsive
     dyspepsia, ‘swallowing formulæ,’ and daily well-nigh choked; diseased throughout with that
     morbid self-consciousness and lust of praise, for which God prepares, with His elect, a bitter
     cure.  Alas! poor Lancelot! an unlicked bear, ‘with all his sorrows before him!’—
‘Come along,’ quoth Bracebridge, between snatches of a tune, his coolness maddening
     Lancelot.  ‘Old Lavington will find us dry clothes, a bottle of port, and a brace of charming
     daughters, at the Priory.  In with you, little Mustang of the prairie!  Neck or nothing!’—
And in an instant the small wiry American, and the huge Horncastle-bred hunter, were
     wallowing and staggering in the yeasty stream, till they floated into a deep reach, and swam
     steadily down to a low place in the bank.  They crossed the stream, passed the Priory
     Shrubberies, leapt the gate into the park, and then on and upward, called by the unseen Ariel’s
     music before them.—Up, into the hills; past white crumbling chalk-pits, fringed with feathered
     juniper and tottering ashes, their floors strewed with knolls of fallen soil and vegetation,
     like wooded islets in a sea of milk.—Up, between steep ridges of tuft crested with black
     fir-woods and silver beech, and here and there a huge yew standing out alone, the advanced
     sentry of the forest, with its luscious fretwork of green velvet, like a mountain of Gothic
     spires and pinnacles, all glittering and steaming as the sun drank up the dew-drops.  The lark
     sprang upward into song, and called merrily to the new-opened sunbeams, while the wreaths and
     flakes of mist lingered reluctantly about the hollows, and clung with dewy fingers to every
     knoll and belt of pine.—Up into the labyrinthine bosom of the hills,—but who can describe
     them?  Is not all nature indescribable? every leaf infinite and transcendental?  How much more
     those mighty downs, with their enormous sheets of spotless turf, where the dizzy eye loses all
     standard of size and distance before the awful simplicity, the delicate vastness, of those
     grand curves and swells, soft as the outlines of a Greek Venus, as if the great goddess-mother
     Hertha had laid herself down among the hills to sleep, her Titan limbs wrapt in a thin veil of
     silvery green.
Up, into a vast amphitheatre of sward, whose walls banked out the narrow sky above.  And
     here, in the focus of the huge ring, an object appeared which stirred strange melancholy in
     Lancelot,—a little chapel, ivy-grown, girded with a few yews, and elders, and grassy graves.  A
     climbing rose over the porch, and iron railings round the churchyard, told of human care; and
     from the graveyard itself burst up one of those noble springs known as winter-bournes in the
     chalk ranges, which, awakened in autumn from the abysses to which it had shrunk during the
     summer’s drought, was hurrying down upon its six months’ course, a broad sheet of oily silver
     over a temporary channel of smooth greensward.
The hounds had checked in the woods behind; now they poured down the hillside, so close
     together ‘that you might have covered them with a sheet,’ straight for the little chapel.
A saddened tone of feeling spread itself through Lancelot’s heart.  There were the
     everlasting hills around, even as they had grown and grown for countless ages, beneath the
     still depths of the primeval chalk ocean, in the milky youth of this great English land.  And
     here was he, the insect of a day, fox-hunting upon them!  He felt ashamed, and more
     ashamed when the inner voice whispered—‘Fox-hunting is not the shame—thou art the shame.  If
     thou art the insect of a day, it is thy sin that thou art one.’
And his sadness, foolish as it may seem, grew as he watched a brown speck fleet rapidly up
     the opposite hill, and heard a gay view-halloo burst from the colonel at his side.  The chase
     lost its charm for him the moment the game was seen.  Then vanished that mysterious delight of
     pursuing an invisible object, which gives to hunting and fishing their unutterable and almost
     spiritual charm; which made Shakespeare a nightly poacher; Davy and Chantrey the patriarchs of
     fly-fishing; by which the twelve-foot rod is transfigured into an enchanter’s wand, potent over
     the unseen wonders of the water-world, to ‘call up spirits from the vasty deep,’ which will
     really ‘come if you do call for them’—at least if the conjuration be orthodox—and they there. 
     That spell was broken by the sight of poor wearied pug, his once gracefully-floating brush all
     draggled and drooping, as he toiled up the sheep-paths towards the open down above.
But Lancelot’s sadness reached its crisis, as he met the hounds just outside the churchyard. 
     Another moment—they had leaped the rails; and there they swept round under the gray wall,
     leaping and yelling, like Berserk fiends among the frowning tombstones, over the cradles of the
     quiet dead.
Lancelot shuddered—the thing was not wrong—‘it was no one’s fault,’—but there was a ghastly
     discord in it.  Peace and strife, time and eternity—the mad noisy flesh, and the silent
     immortal spirit,—the frivolous game of life’s outside show, and the terrible earnest of its
     inward abysses, jarred together without and within him.  He pulled his horse up violently, and
     stood as if rooted to the place, gazing at he knew not what.
The hounds caught sight of the fox, burst into one frantic shriek of joy—and then a sudden
     and ghastly stillness, as, mute and breathless, they toiled up the hillside, gaining on their
     victim at every stride.  The patter of the horsehoofs and the rattle of rolling flints died
     away above.  Lancelot looked up, startled at the silence; laughed aloud, he knew not why, and
     sat, regardless of his pawing and straining horse, still staring at the chapel and the
     graves.
On a sudden the chapel-door opened, and a figure, timidly yet loftily stepped out without
     observing him, and suddenly turning round, met him full, face to face, and stood fixed with
     surprise as completely as Lancelot himself.
That face and figure, and the spirit which spoke through them, entered his heart at once,
     never again to leave it.  Her features were aquiline and grand, without a shade of harshness;
     her eyes shone out like twain lakes of still azure, beneath a broad marble cliff of polished
     forehead; her rich chestnut hair rippled downward round the towering neck.  With her perfect
     masque and queenly figure, and earnest, upward gaze, she might have been the very model from
     which Raphael conceived his glorious St. Catherine—the ideal of the highest womanly genius,
     softened into self-forgetfulness by girlish devotion.  She was simply, almost coarsely dressed;
     but a glance told him that she was a lady, by the courtesy of man as well as by the will of
     God.
They gazed one moment more at each other—but what is time to spirits?  With them, as with
     their Father, ‘one day is as a thousand years.’  But that eye-wedlock was cut short the next
     instant by the decided interference of the horse, who, thoroughly disgusted at his master’s
     whole conduct, gave a significant shake of his head, and shamming frightened (as both women and
     horses will do when only cross), commenced a war-dance, which drove Argemone Lavington into the
     porch, and gave the bewildered Lancelot an excuse for dashing madly up the hill after his
     companions.
‘What a horrible ugly face!’ said Argemone to herself, ‘but so clever, and so unhappy!’
Blest pity! true mother of that graceless scamp, young Love, who is ashamed of his real
     pedigree, and swears to this day that he is the child of Venus!—the coxcomb!
* * * * *
[Here, for the sake of the reader, we omit, or rather postpone a long dissertation on the
     famous Erototheogonic chorus of Aristophanes’s Birds, with illustrations taken from all earth
     and heaven, from the Vedas and Proclus to Jacob Boëhmen and Saint Theresa.]
‘The dichotomy of Lancelot’s personality,’ as the Germans would call it, returned as he
     dashed on.  His understanding was trying to ride, while his spirit was left behind with
     Argemone.  Hence loose reins and a looser seat.  He rolled about like a tipsy man, holding on,
     in fact, far more by his spurs than by his knees, to the utter infuriation of
     Shiver-the-timbers, who kicked and snorted over the down like one of Mephistopheles’s
     Demon-steeds.  They had mounted the hill—the deer fled before them in terror—they neared the
     park palings.  In the road beyond them the hounds were just killing their fox, struggling and
     growling in fierce groups for the red gobbets of fur, a panting, steaming ring of horses round
     them.  Half a dozen voices hailed him as he came up.
‘Where have you been?’  ‘He’ll tumble off!’  ‘He’s had a fall!’  ‘No he hasn’t!’  ‘’Ware
     hounds, man alive!’  ‘He’ll break his neck!’
‘He has broken it, at last!’ shouted the colonel, as Shiver-the-timbers rushed at the high
     pales, out of breath, and blind with rage.  Lancelot saw and heard nothing till he was awakened
     from his dream by the long heave of the huge brute’s shoulder, and the maddening sensation of
     sweeping through the air over the fence.  He started, checked the curb, the horse threw up his
     head, fulfilling his name by driving his knees like a battering-ram against the pales—the
     top-bar bent like a withe, flew out into a hundred splinters, and man and horse rolled over
     headlong into the hard flint-road.
For one long sickening second Lancelot watched the blue sky between his own knees.  Then a
     crash as if a shell had burst in his face—a horrible grind—a sheet of flame—and the blackness
     of night.  Did you ever feel it, reader?
When he awoke, he found himself lying in bed, with Squire Lavington sitting by him.  There
     was real sorrow in the old man’s face, ‘Come to himself!’ and a great joyful oath rolled out. 
     ‘The boldest rider of them all!  I wouldn’t have lost him for a dozen ready-made spick and span
     Colonel Bracebridges!’
‘Quite right, squire!’ answered a laughing voice from behind the curtain.  ‘Smith has a clear
     two thousand a year, and I live by my wits!’
</div></body></text></TEI>