<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook, Yeast: A
      Problem</title><author>Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1851</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER XVI: ONCE IN A WAY
A few mornings afterwards, Lancelot, as he glanced his eye over the columns of The
      Times, stopped short at the beloved name of Whitford.  To his disgust and disappointment,
     it only occurred in one of those miserable cases, now of weekly occurrence, of concealing the
     birth of a child.  He was turning from it, when he saw Bracebridge’s name.  Another look
     sufficed to show him that he ought to go at once to the colonel, who had returned the day
     before from Norway.
A few minutes brought him to his friend’s lodging, but The Times had arrived there
     before him.  Bracebridge was sitting over his untasted breakfast, his face buried in his
     hands.
‘Do not speak to me,’ he said, without looking up.  ‘It was right of you to come—kind of you;
     but it is too late.’
He started, and looked wildly round him, as if listening for some sound which he expected,
     and then laid his head down on the table.  Lancelot turned to go.
‘No—do not leave me!  Not alone, for God’s sake, not alone!’
Lancelot sat down.  There was a fearful alteration in Bracebridge.  His old keen
     self-confident look had vanished.  He was haggard, life-weary, shame-stricken, almost abject. 
     His limbs looked quite shrunk and powerless, as he rested his head on the table before him, and
     murmured incoherently from time to time,—
‘My own child!  And I never shall have another!  No second chance for those who—Oh Mary! 
     Mary! you might have waited—you might have trusted me!  And why should you?—ay, why, indeed? 
     And such a pretty baby, too!—just like his father!’
Lancelot laid his hand kindly on his shoulder.
‘My dearest Bracebridge, the evidence proves that the child was born dead.’
‘They lie!’ he said, fiercely, starting up.  ‘It cried twice after it was born!’
Lancelot stood horror-struck.
‘I heard it last night, and the night before that, and the night before that again, under my
     pillow, shrieking—stifling—two little squeaks, like a caught hare; and I tore the pillows off
     it—I did; and once I saw it, and it had beautiful black eyes—just like its father—just like a
     little miniature that used to lie on my mother’s table, when I knelt at her knee, before they
     sent me out “to see life,” and Eton, and the army, and Crockford’s, and Newmarket, and fine
     gentlemen, and fine ladies, and luxury, and flattery, brought me to this!  Oh, father! father!
     was that the only way to make a gentleman of your son?—There it is again!  Don’t you hear
     it?—under the sofa cushions!  Tear them off!  Curse you!  Save it!’
And, with a fearful oath, the wretched man sent Lancelot staggering across the room, and
     madly tore up the cushions.
A long postman’s knock at the door.—He suddenly rose up quite collected.
‘The letter!  I knew it would come.  She need not have written it: I know what is in it.’
The servant’s step came up the stairs.  Poor Bracebridge turned to Lancelot with something of
     his own stately determination.
‘I must be alone when I receive this letter.  Stay here.’  And with compressed lips and fixed
     eyes he stalked out at the door, and shut it.
Lancelot heard him stop; then the servant’s footsteps down the stairs; then the colonel’s
     treading, slowly and heavily, went step by step up to the room above.  He shut that door too. 
     A dead silence followed.  Lancelot stood in fearful suspense, and held his breath to listen. 
     Perhaps he had fainted?  No, for then he would have heard a fall.  Perhaps he had fallen on the
     bed?  He would go and see.  No, he would wait a little longer.  Perhaps he was praying?  He had
     told Lancelot to pray once—he dared not interrupt him now.  A slight stir—a noise as of an
     opening box.  Thank God, he was, at least, alive!  Nonsense!  Why should he not be alive?  What
     could happen to him? And yet he knew that something was going to happen.  The silence was
     ominous—unbearable; the air of the room felt heavy and stifling, as if a thunderstorm were
     about to burst.  He longed to hear the man raging and stamping.  And yet he could not connect
     the thought of one so gay and full of gallant life, with the terrible dread that was creeping
     over him—with the terrible scene which he had just witnessed.  It must be all a temporary
     excitement—a mistake—a hideous dream, which the next post would sweep away.  He would go and
     tell him so.  No, he could not stir.  His limbs seemed leaden, his feet felt rooted to the
     ground, as in long nightmare.  And still the intolerable silence brooded overhead.
What broke it?  A dull, stifled report, as of a pistol fired against the ground; a heavy
     fall; and again the silence of death.
He rushed upstairs.  A corpse lay on its face upon the floor, and from among its hair, a
     crimson thread crept slowly across the carpet.  It was all over.  He bent over the head, but
     one look was sufficient.  He did not try to lift it up.
On the table lay the fatal letter.  Lancelot knew that he had a right to read it.  It was
     scrawled, mis-spelt—but there were no tear-blots on the paper:—
‘Sir—I am in prison—and where are you?  Cruel man!  Where were you all those miserable weeks,
     while I was coming nearer and nearer to my shame?  Murdering dumb beasts in foreign lands.  You
     have murdered more than them.  How I loved you once!  How I hate you now!  But I have my
     revenge.  Your baby cried twice after it was born!’
Lancelot tore the letter into a hundred pieces, and swallowed them, for every foot in the
     house was on the stairs.
So there was terror, and confusion, and running in and out: but there were no wet eyes there
     except those of Bracebridge’s groom, who threw himself on the body, and would not stir.  And
     then there was a coroner’s inquest; and it came out in the evidence how ‘the deceased had been
     for several days very much depressed, and had talked of voices and apparitions;’ whereat the
     jury—as twelve honest, good-natured Christians were bound to do—returned a verdict of temporary
     insanity; and in a week more the penny-a-liners grew tired; and the world, too, who never
     expects anything, not even French revolutions, grew tired also of repeating,—‘Dear me! who
     would have expected it?’ and having filled up the colonel’s place, swaggered on as usual,
     arm-in-arm with the flesh and the devil.
Bracebridge’s death had, of course, a great effect on Lancelot’s spirit.  Not in the way of
     warning, though—such events seldom act in that way, on the highest as well as on the lowest
     minds.  After all, your ‘Rakes’ Progresses,’ and ‘Atheists’ Deathbeds,’ do no more good than
     noble George Cruikshank’s ‘Bottle’ will, because every one knows that they are the exception,
     and not the rule; that the Atheist generally dies with a conscience as comfortably callous as a
     rhinocerous-hide; and the rake, when old age stops his power of sinning, becomes generally
     rather more respectable than his neighbours.  The New Testament deals very little in appeals
      ad terrorem; and it would be well if some, who fancy that they follow it, would do
     the same, and by abstaining from making ‘hell-fire’ the chief incentive to virtue, cease from
     tempting many a poor fellow to enlist on the devil’s side the only manly feeling he has
     left—personal courage.
But yet Lancelot was affected.  And when, on the night of the colonel’s funeral, he opened,
     at hazard, Argemone’s Bible, and his eyes fell on the passage which tells how ‘one shall be
     taken and another left,’ great honest tears of gratitude dropped upon the page; and he fell on
     his knees, and in bitter self-reproach thanked the new found Upper Powers, who, as he began to
     hope, were leading him not in vain,—that he had yet a life before him wherein to play the
     man.
And now he felt that the last link was broken between him and all his late frivolous
     companions.  All had deserted him in his ruin but this one—and he was silent in the grave.  And
     now, from the world and all its toys and revelry, he was parted once and for ever; and he stood
     alone in the desert, like the last Arab of a plague-stricken tribe, looking over the wreck of
     ancient cities, across barren sands, where far rivers gleamed in the distance, that seemed to
     beckon him away into other climes, other hopes, other duties.  Old things had passed away—when
     would all things become new?
Not yet, Lancelot.  Thou hast still one selfish hope, one dream of bliss, however impossible,
     yet still cherished.  Thou art a changed man—but for whose sake?  For Argemone’s.  Is she to be
     thy god, then?  Art thou to live for her, or for the sake of One greater than she?  All thine
     idols are broken—swiftly the desert sands are drifting over them, and covering them in.—All but
     one—must that, too, be taken from thee?
One morning a letter was put into Lancelot’s hands, bearing the Whitford postmark. 
     Tremblingly he tore it open.  It contained a few passionate words from Honoria.  Argemone was
     dying of typhus fever, and entreating to see him once again; and Honoria had, with some
     difficulty, as she hinted, obtained leave from her parents to send for him.  His last bank note
     carried him down to Whitford; and, calm and determined, as one who feels that he has nothing
     more to lose on earth, and whose torment must henceforth become his element, he entered the
     Priory that evening.
He hardly spoke or looked at a soul; he felt that he was there on an errand which none
     understood; that he was moving towards Argemone through a spiritual world, in which he and she
     were alone; that, in his utter poverty and hopelessness, he stood above all the luxury, even
     above all the sorrow, around him; that she belonged to him, and to him alone; and the
     broken-hearted beggar followed the weeping Honoria towards his lady’s chamber, with the step
     and bearing of a lord.  He was wrong; there were pride and fierceness enough in his heart,
     mingled with that sense of nothingness of rank, money, chance and change, yea, death itself, of
     all but Love;—mingled even with that intense belief that his sorrows were but his just deserts,
     which now possessed all his soul.  And in after years he knew that he was wrong; but so he felt
     at the time; and even then the strength was not all of earth which bore him manlike through
     that hour.
He entered the room; the darkness, the silence, the cool scent of vinegar, struck a shudder
     through him.  The squire was sitting half idiotic and helpless, in his arm-chair.  His face
     lighted up as Lancelot entered, and he tried to hold out his palsied hand.  Lancelot did not
     see him.  Mrs. Lavington moved proudly and primly back from the bed, with a face that seemed to
     say through its tears, ‘I at least am responsible for nothing that occurs from this
     interview.’  Lancelot did not see her either: he walked straight up towards the bed as if he
     were treading on his own ground.  His heart was between his lips, and yet his whole soul felt
     as dry and hard as some burnt-out volcano-crater.
A faint voice—oh, how faint, how changed!—called him from within the closed curtains.
‘He is there!  I know it is he!  Lancelot! my Lancelot!’
Silently still he drew aside the curtain; the light fell full upon her face.  What a sight! 
     Her beautiful hair cut close, a ghastly white handkerchief round her head, those bright eyes
     sunk and lustreless, those ripe lips baked, and black and drawn; her thin hand fingering
     uneasily the coverlid.—It was too much for him.  He shuddered and turned his face away. 
     Quick-sighted that love is, even to the last! slight as the gesture was, she saw it in an
     instant.
‘You are not afraid of infection?’ she said, faintly.  ‘I was not.’
Lancelot laughed aloud, as men will at strangest moments, sprung towards her with open arms,
     and threw himself on his knees beside the bed.  With sudden strength she rose upright, and
     clasped him in her arms.
‘Once more!’ she sighed, in a whisper to herself, ‘Once more on earth!’  And the room, and
     the spectators, and disease itself faded from around them like vain dreams, as she nestled
     closer and closer to him, and gazed into his eyes, and passed her shrunken hand over his
     cheeks, and toyed with his hair, and seemed to drink in magnetic life from his embrace.
No one spoke or stirred.  They felt that an awful and blessed spirit overshadowed the lovers,
     and were hushed, as if in the sanctuary of God.
Suddenly again she raised her head from his bosom, and in a tone, in which her old
     queenliness mingled strangely with the saddest tenderness,—
‘All of you go away now; I must talk to my husband alone.’
They went, leading out the squire, who cast puzzled glances toward the pair, and murmured to
     himself that ‘she was sure to get well now Smith was come: everything went right when he was in
     the way.’
So they were left alone.
‘I do not look so very ugly, my darling, do I?  Not so very ugly? though they have cut off
     all my poor hair, and I told them so often not!  But I kept a lock for you;’ and feebly she
     drew from under the pillow a long auburn tress, and tried to wreathe it round his neck, but
     could not, and sunk back.
Poor fellow! he could bear no more.  He hid his face in his hands, and burst into a long low
     weeping.
‘I am very thirsty, darling; reach me—No, I will drink no more, except from your dear
     lips.’
He lifted up his head, and breathed his whole soul upon her lips; his tears fell on her
     closed eyelids.
‘Weeping?  No.—You must not cry.  See how comfortable I am.  They are all so kind—soft bed,
     cool room, fresh air, sweet drinks, sweet scents.  Oh, so different from that
     room!’
‘What room?—my own!’
‘Listen, and I will tell you.  Sit down—put your arm under my head—so.  When I am on your
     bosom I feel so strong.  God! let me last to tell him all.  It was for that I sent for
     him.’
And then, in broken words, she told him how she had gone up to the fever patient at Ashy, on
     the fatal night on which Lancelot had last seen her.  Shuddering, she hinted at the horrible
     filth and misery she had seen, at the foul scents which had sickened her.  A madness of
     remorse, she said, had seized her.  She had gone, in spite of her disgust, to several houses
     which she found open.  There were worse cottages there than even her father’s; some tradesmen
     in a neighbouring town had been allowed to run up a set of rack rent hovels.—Another shudder
     seized her when she spoke of them; and from that point in her story all was fitful, broken,
     like the images of a hideous dream.  ‘Every instant those foul memories were defiling her
     nostrils.  A horrible loathing had taken possession of her, recurring from time to time, till
     it ended in delirium and fever.  A scent-fiend was haunting her night and day,’ she said.  ‘And
     now the curse of the Lavingtons had truly come upon her.  To perish by the people whom they
     made.  Their neglect, cupidity, oppression, are avenged on me!  Why not?  Have I not wantoned
     in down and perfumes, while they, by whose labour my luxuries were bought, were pining among
     scents and sounds,—one day of which would have driven me mad!  And then they wonder why men
     turn Chartists!  There are those horrible scents again!  Save me from them!  Lancelot—darling! 
     Take me to the fresh air!  I choke!  I am festering away!  The Nun-pool!  Take all the water,
     every drop, and wash Ashy clean again!  Make a great fountain in it—beautiful marble—to bubble
     and gurgle, and trickle and foam, for ever and ever, and wash away the sins of the Lavingtons,
     that the little rosy children may play round it, and the poor toil-bent woman may wash—and
     wash—and drink—Water! water!  I am dying of thirst!’
He gave her water, and then she lay back and babbled about the Nun-pool sweeping ‘all the
     houses of Ashy into one beautiful palace, among great flower-gardens, where the school children
     will sit and sing such merry hymns, and never struggle with great pails of water up the hill of
     Ashy any more.’
‘You will do it! darling!  Strong, wise, noble-hearted that you are!  Why do you look at me? 
     You will be rich some day.  You will own land, for you are worthy to own it.  Oh that I could
     give you Whitford!  No!  It was mine too long—therefore I die! because I—Lord Jesus! have I not
     repented of my sin?’
Then she grew calm once more.  A soft smile crept over her face, as it grew sharper and paler
     every moment.  Faintly she sank back on the pillows, and faintly whispered to him to kneel and
     pray.  He obeyed her mechanically....   ‘No—not for me, for them—for them, and for
     yourself—that you may save them whom I never dreamt that I was bound to save!’
And he knelt and prayed ... what, he alone and those who heard his prayer, can tell...
* * * * *
When he lifted up his head at last, he saw that Argemone lay motionless.  For a moment he
     thought she was dead, and frantically sprang to the bell.  The family rushed in with the
     physician.  She gave some faint token of life, but none of consciousness.  The doctor sighed,
     and said that her end was near.  Lancelot had known that all along.
‘I think, sir, you had better leave the room,’ said Mrs. Lavington; and followed him into the
     passage.
What she was about to say remained unspoken; for Lancelot seized her hand in spite of her,
     with frantic thanks for having allowed him this one interview, and entreaties that he might see
     her again, if but for one moment.
Mrs. Lavington, somewhat more softly than usual, said,—‘That the result of this visit had not
     been such as to make a second desirable—that she had no wish to disturb her daughter’s mind at
     such a moment with earthly regrets.’
‘Earthly regrets!’  How little she knew what had passed there!  But if she had known, would
     she have been one whit softened?  For, indeed, Argemone’s spirituality was not in her mother’s
     language.  And yet the good woman had prayed, and prayed, and wept bitter tears, by her
     daughter’s bedside, day after day; but she had never heard her pronounce the talismanic formula
     of words, necessary in her eyes to ensure salvation; and so she was almost without hope for
     her.  Oh, Bigotry!  Devil, who turnest God’s love into man’s curse! are not human hearts hard
     and blind enough of themselves, without thy cursed help?
For one moment a storm of unutterable pride and rage convulsed Lancelot—the next instant love
     conquered; and the strong proud man threw himself on his knees at the feet of the woman he
     despised, and with wild sobs entreated for one moment more—one only!
At that instant a shriek from Honoria resounded from the sick chamber.  Lancelot knew what it
     meant, and sprang up, as men do when shot through the heart.—In a moment he was himself again. 
     A new life had begun for him—alone.
‘You will not need to grant my prayer, madam,’ he said, calmly: ‘Argemone is dead.’
</div></body></text></TEI>