<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Heir of Redclyffe</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1853</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="29">
CHAPTER VII.

   Hark, how the birds do sing,
      And woods do ring!
All creatures have their joy, and man hath his;
   Yet if we rightly measure,
      Man's joy and pleasure
Rather hereafter than in present is;

   Not that he may not here
      Taste of the cheer,
But as birds drink and straight lift up the head,
   So must he sip and think
      Of better drink
He may attain to after he is dead.
Herbert. 
Guy returned to Hollywell on the Friday, there to spend a quiet week with them all, for it
      was a special delight to Amy that Hollywell and her family were as precious to him, for their
      own sakes as for hers. It was said that it was to be a quiet week— but with all the best
      efforts of Mrs. Edmonstone and Laura to preserve quiet, there was an amount of confusion that
      would have been very disturbing, but for Amy's propensity never to be ruffled or
      fluttered.
What was to be done in the honeymoon was the question for consideration. Guy and Amy would
      have liked to make a tour among the English cathedrals, pay a visit at Hollywell, and then go
      home and live in a corner of the house till the rest was ready; for Amy could not see why she
      should take up so much more room than old Sir Guy, and Guy declared he could not see that
      happiness was a reason for going pleasure-hunting; but Charles pronounced this very stupid,
      and Mr. Edmonstone thought a journey on the Continent was the only proper thing for them to
      do.
       Mrs. Edmonstone wished Amy to see a little of the world. Amy was known to have
      always desired to see Switzerland; it occurred to Guy that it would be a capital opportunity
      of taking Arnaud to see the relations he had been talking for the last twenty years of
      visiting, and so they acquiesced; for as Guy said, when they talked it over together, it did
      not seem to him to come under the denomination of pleasure hunting, since they had not devised
      it for themselves: they had no house to go to; they should do Arnaud a service, and perhaps
      they should meet Philip.
'That will not be pleasure-hunting, certainly,' said Amy; then, remembering that he could
      not bear to hear Philip under-rated, she added, 'I mean, unless you could convince him, and
      then it would be more than pleasure.'
'It would be my first of unattained wishes,' said Guy. 'Then we will enjoy the journey.'
'No fear on that score.'
'And for fear we should get too much into the stream of enjoyment, as people abroad forget
      home-duties, let us stick to some fixed time for coming back.'
'You said Redclyffe would be ready by Michaelmas.'
'I have told the builder it must be. So, Amy, as far as it depends on ourselves, we are
      determined to be at home by Michaelmas.'
All seemed surprised to find the time for the wedding so near at hand. Charles's spirits
      began to flag, Amy was a greater loss to him than to anybody else; she could never again be to
      him what she had been, and unable as he was to take part in the general bustle and occupation,
      he had more time for feeling this, much more than his mother and Laura, who were employed all
      day. He and Guy were exemplary in their civilities to each other in not engrossing Amy, and
      one who had only known him three years ago, when he was all exaction and selfishness, could
      have hardly believed him to be the same person who was now only striving
       to avoid giving pain, by showing how much it cost him to yield up his sister. He
      could contrive to be merry, but the difficulty was to be cheerful; he could make them all
      laugh in spite of themselves, but when alone with Amy, or when hearing her devolve on her
      sisters the services she had been wont to perform for him, it was almost more than he could
      endure; but then he dreaded setting Amy off into one of her silent crying-fits, for which the
      only remedy was the planning a grand visit to Redclyffe, and talking over all the facilities
      of railroads and carriages.
The last day had come, and a long, strange one it was; not exactly joyful to any, and very
      sad to some, though Amy, with her sweet pensive face, seemed to have a serenity of her own
      that soothed them whenever they looked at her. Charlotte, though inclined to be wild and
      flighty, was checked and subdued in her presence; Laura could not be entirely wretched about
      her; Charles lay and looked at her without speaking; her father never met her without kissing
      her on each side of her face, and calling her his little jewel; her mother— but who could
      describe Mrs. Edmonstone on that day, so full of the present pain, contending with the
      unselfish gladness.
Guy kept out of the way, thinking Amy ought to be left to them. He sat in his own room a
      good while, afterwards rode to Broadstone, in coming home made a long visit to Mr. Ross; and
      when he returned, he found Charles in his wheeled chair on the lawn, with Amy sitting on the
      grass by his side. He sat down by her, and there followed a long silence,—one of those pauses
      full of meaning.
'When shall we three meet again!' at length said Charles, in a would-be lively tone.
'And where?' said Amy.
'Here,' said Charles; 'you will come here to tell your adventures and take up Bustle.'
'I hope so,' said Guy. 'We could not help it. The telling you about it will be a treat to
      look forward to all the time.'

'Yes, your sight-seeing is a public benefit. You have seen many a thing for me.'
'That is the pleasure of seeing and hearing, the thing that is not fleeting,' said Guy.
'The unselfish part, you mean,' said Charles; and mused again, till Guy, starting up,
      exclaimed—
'There are the people!' as a carriage came in view in the lane. 'Shall I wheel you home,
      Charlie?'
'Yes, do.'
Guy leant over the back, and pushed him along; and as he did so, murmured, in a low
      tremulous tone, 'Wherever or whenever we may be destined to meet, Charlie, or if never again,
      I must thank you for a great part of my happiness here—for a great deal of kindness and
      sympathy.'
Charles looked straight before him, and answered— 'The kindness was all on your part. I had
      nothing to give in return but ill-temper and exactions. But, Guy, you must not think I have
      not felt all you have done for me. You have made a new man of me, instead of a wretched stick,
      laughing at my misery, to persuade myself and others that I did not feel it. I hope you are
      proud of it.'
'As if I had anything to do with it!'
'Hadn't you, that's all! I know what you wont deny, at any rate,—what a capital man of
      all-work you have been to me, when I had no right to ask it, as now we have,' he added,
      smiling, because Amy was looking at him, but not making a very successful matter of the smile.
      'When you come back, you'll see me treat you as indeed 'a man and a brother.''
This talk retarded them a little, and they did not reach the house till the guests were
      arriving. The first sight that met the eyes of Aunt Charlotte and Lady Eveleen, as they
      entered, was, in the frame of the open window, Guy's light agile figure, assisting Charles up
      the step, his brilliant hazel eyes and glowing healthy complexion contrasting with Charles's
      pale, fair, delicate face, and features sharpened and refined by suffering.
       Amy, her deep blushes and downcast eyes almost hidden by her glossy curls, stood
      just behind, carrying her brother's crutch.
'There they are,' cried Miss Edmonstone, springing forward from her brother and his wife,
      and throwing her arms round Amy in a warm embrace. 'My dear, dear little niece, I congratulate
      you with all my heart, and that I do.'
'I'll spare your hot cheeks, Amy dearest!' whispered Eveleen, as Amy passed to her embrace;
      while Aunt Charlotte hastily kissed Charles, and proceeded—'I don't wait for an introduction;'
      and vehemently shook hands with Guy.
'Ay, did I say a word too much in his praise?' said Mr. Edmonstone. 'Isn't he all out as
      fine a fellow as I told you?'
Guy was glad to turn away to shake hands with Lord Kilcoran, and the next moment he drew Amy
      out of the group eagerly talking round Charles's sofa, and holding her hand, led her up to a
      sturdy, ruddybrown, elderly man who had come in at the same time, but after the first
      reception had no share in the family greetings. 'You know him already,' said Guy; and Amy held
      out her hand, saying—
'Yes, I am sure I do.'
Markham was taken by surprise; he gave a most satisfied grunt, and shook hands as heartily
      as if she had been his favourite niece.
'And the little girl?' said Amy.
'O yes,—I picked her up at St. Mildred's: one of the servants took charge of her in the
      hall.'
'I'll fetch her,' cried Charlotte, as Amy was turning to the door, and the next moment she
      led in little Marianne Dixon, clinging to her hand. Amy kissed her, and held her fast in her
      arms, and Marianne looked up, consoled in her bewilderment, by the greeting of her dear old
      friend, Sir Guy.
Mr. Edmonstone patted her head; and when the
       others had spoken kindly to her, Charlotte, under whose especial charge Guy and
      Amy had placed her, carried her off to the regions upstairs.
The rest of the evening was hurry and confusion. Mrs. Edmonstone was very busy, and glad to
      be so, as she must otherwise have given way; and there was Aunt Charlotte to be talked to,
      whom they had not seen since Charles's illness. She was a short, bustling, active person, with
      a joyous face, inexhaustible good humour, a considerable touch of Irish, and referring
      everything to her mother,—her one thought. Everything was to be told to her; and the only
      drawback to her complete pleasure was the anxiety lest she should be missed at home.
Mrs. Edmonstone was occupied with her, telling her the history of the engagement, and
      praising Guy; Amy went up, as soon as dinner was over, to take leave of old nurse, and to see
      little Marianne; and Eveleen sat between Laura and Charlotte, asking many eager questions,
      which were not all convenient to answer.
Why Sir Guy had not been at home at Christmas, was a query to which it seemed as if she
      should never gain a reply; for that Charles had been ill, and Guy at Redclyffe, was no real
      answer; and finding she should not be told, she wisely held her tongue. Again she made an
      awkward inquiry—
'Now tell me, is Captain Morville pleased about this or not?'
Laura would have been silent, trusting to Eveleen's propensity for talking, for bringing her
      to some speech that it might be easier to answer, but Charlotte exclaimed, 'What has he been
      saying about it?'
'Saying? O nothing. But why does not he come?'
'You have seen him more lately than we have,' said Laura.
'That is an evasion,' said Eveleen; 'as if you did not know more of his mind than I could
      ever get at, if I saw him every day of my life.'

'He is provoking, that is all,' answered Charlotte. 'I am sure we don't want him; but Laura
      and Guy will both of them take his part.'
A call came at that moment,—the box of white gloves was come, and Laura must come and count
      them. She would fain have taken Charlotte with her; but neither Charlotte nor Eveleen appeared
      disposed to move, and she was obliged to leave them. Eva had already guessed that there was
      more chance of hearing the facts from Charlotte, and presently she knew a good deal. Charlotte
      had some prudence, but she thought she might tell their own cousin what half the neighbourhood
      knew—that Philip had suspected Guy falsely, and had made papa very angry with him; that the
      engagement had been broken off, and Guy had been banished, while all the time he was behaving
      most gloriously. Now it was all explained; but in spite of the fullest certainty, Philip would
      not be convinced, and wanted them to have waited five years.
Eveleen agreed with Charlotte that this was a great deal too bad, admired Guy, and pitied
      Amy to her heart's content.
'So, he was banished, regularly banished!' said she. 'However, of course Amy never gave him
      up.'
'Oh, she never mistrusted him one minute.'
'And while he had her fast, it was little he would care for the rest.'
'Yes, if he had known it, but she could not tell him.'
Eveleen looked arch.
'But I am sure she did not,' said Charlotte, rather angrily.
'You know nothing about it, my dear.'
'Yes, but I do; for mamma said to Charlie how beautifully she did behave, and he too,—never
      attempting any intercourse.'
'Very good of you to believe it.'

'I am sure of it, certain sure,' said Charlotte. 'How could you venture to think they would
      either of them do anything wrong?'
'I did not say they would,'
'What, not to write to each other when papa had forbidden it, and do so in secret, too?'
'My dear, don't look so innocently irate. Goodness has nothing to do with it, it would be
      only a moderate constancy. You know nothing at all of lovers.'
'If I know nothing of lovers, I know a great deal of Amy and Guy, and I am quite sure
      nothing on earth would tempt them to do anything in secret that they were forbidden.'
'Wait till you are in love, and you'll change your mind.'
'I never mean to be in love,' said Charlotte, indignantly. Eveleen laughed the more,
      Charlotte grew more angry and uncomfortable at the tone of the conversation, and was heartily
      glad that it was broken off by the entrance of the gentlemen. Guy helped Charles to the sofa,
      and then turned away to continue his endless talk on Redclyffe business with Markham.
      Charlotte flew up to the sofa, seized an interval when no one was in hearing, and kneeling
      down to bring her face on a level with her brother's whispered—'Charlie, Eva wont believe but
      that Guy and Amy kept up some intercourse last winter.'
'I can't help it, Charlotte.'
'When I tell her they did not, she only laughs at me. Do tell her they did not.'
'I have too much self-respect to lay myself open to ridicule.'
'Charlie, you don't think it possible yourself,' exclaimed Charlotte, in consternation.
'Possible—no indeed.'
'She will say it is not wrong, and that I know nothing of lovers.'
'You should have told her that ours are not
       common-place lovers, but far beyond her small experience.'
'I wish I had! Tell her so, Charlie, she will believe you.'
'I shan't say one word about it.'
'Why not?'
'Because she is not worthy. If she can't appreciate them, I would let her alone. I once
      thought better of Eva, but it is very bad company she keeps when she is not here.'
Charles, however, was not sorry when Eveleen came to sit by him, for a bantering
      conversation with her was the occupation of which he was most capable. Amy, returning, came
      and sat in her old place beside him, with her hand in his, and her quiet eyes fixed on the
      ground.
The last evening for many weeks that she would thus sit with him,—the last that she would
      ever be a part of his home. She had already ceased to belong entirely to him; she who had
      always been the most precious to him, except his mother.
Only his mother could have been a greater loss,—he could not dwell on the anticipation; and
      still holding her hand, he roused himself to listen, and answer gaily to Eveleen's description
      of the tutor, Mr. Fielder, 'a thorough gentleman, very clever and agreeable, who had read all
      the books in the world; the ugliest, yes, without exaggeration, the most quaintly ugly man
      living,—little, and looking just as if he was made of gutta percha,' Eveleen said, 'always
      moving by jerks,— so Maurice advised the boys not to put him near the fire, lest he should
      melt.'
'Only when he gives them some formidable lesson, and they want to melt his heart,' said
      Charles, talking at random, in hopes of saying something laughable.
'Then his eyes—'tis not exactly a squint, but a cast there is, and one set of eyelashes are
      black and the other light, and that gives him just the air of a little
       frightful terrier of Maurice's, named Venus, with a black spot over one eye. The
      boys never call him anything but Venus.'
'And you encourage them in respect for their tutor?'
'Oh, he holds his own at lessons, I trow; but he pretends to have such a horror of us wild
      Irish, and to wonder not to find us eating potatoes with our fingers, and that I don't wear a
      petticoat over my head instead of a bonnet, in what he calls the classical
      Carthaginian-Celto-Hibernian fashion.'
'Dear me,' said Charlotte, 'no wonder Philip recommended him.'
'O, I assure you he has the gift, no one else but Captain Morville talks near as well.'
So talked on Eveleen, and Charles answered her as much in her own fashion as he could, and
      when at last the evening came to an end, every one felt relieved.
Laura lingered long in Amy's room, perceiving that hitherto she had only known half the
      value of her sister, her sweet sister. It would be worse than ever now, when left with the
      others, all so much less sympathizing, all saying sharp things of Philip, none to cling to her
      with those winsome ways that had been unnoted till the time when they were no more to console
      her, and she felt them to have been the only charm that had softened her late dreary
      desolation.
So full was her heart, that she must have told Amy all her grief but for the part that
      Philip had acted towards Guy, and her doubts of Guy would not allow her the consolation of
      dwelling on Amy's happiness, which cheered the rest. She could only hang about her in
      speechless grief, and caress her fondly, while Amy cried, and tried to comfort her, till her
      mother came to wish her good-night.
Mrs. Edmonstone did not stay long, because she wished Amy, if possible, to rest.

'Mamma,' said Amy, as she received her last kiss, 'I can't think why I am not more
      unhappy.'
'It is all as it should be, my dear,' said Mrs. Edmonstone.
Amabel slept, and awakened to the knowledge that it was her wedding-day. She was not to
      appear at the first breakfast, but she came to meet Charles in the dressing-room; and as they
      sat together on the sofa, where she had watched and amused so many of his hours of
      helplessness, he clasped round her arm his gift,—a bracelet of their mother's hair. His
      fingers trembled and his eyes were hazy, but he would not let her help him. Her thanks were
      obliged to be all kisses, no words would come but 'Charlie, Charlie! how could I ever have
      promised to leave you?'
'Nonsense! who ever dreamt that my sisters were to be three monkeys tied to a clog?'
It was impossible not to smile, though it was but for a moment,—Charles's mirth was
      melancholy.
'And, dear Charlie, you will not miss me so very much; do pray let Charlotte wait upon
      you.'
'After the first, perhaps, I may not hate her. Oh, Amy, I little knew what I was doing when
      I tried to get him back again for you. I was sawing off the bough I was sitting on. But there!
      I will not flatter you, you've had enough to turn that head of yours. Stand up, and let me
      take a survey. Very pretty, I declare,—you do my education credit. There, if it will be for
      your peace, I'll do my best to wear on without you. I've wanted a brother all my life, and you
      are giving me the very one I would have picked out of a thousand—the only one I could forgive
      for presuming to steal you, Amy. Here he is. Come in,' he added, as Guy knocked at his door,
      to offer to help him down stairs.
Guy hardly spoke, and Amy could not look in his face. It was late, and he took down Charles
      at once. After this she had very little quiet, every one was buzzing
       about her, and putting the last touches to her dress; at last, just as she was
      quite finished, Charlotte exclaimed, 'Oh, there is Guy's step; may I call him in to have one
      look?'
Mrs. Edmonstone did not say no; and Charlotte, opening the dressing-room door, called to
      him. He stood opposite to Amy for some moments, then said, with a smile, 'I was wrong about
      the grogram; I would not for anything see you look otherwise than you do.'
It seemed to Mrs. Edmonstone and Laura that these words made them lose sight of the details
      of lace and silk that had been occupying them, so that they only saw the radiance, purity, and
      innocence of Amy's bridal appearance. No more was said, for Mr. Edmonstone ran up to call Guy,
      who was to drive Charles in the pony carriage.
Amabel, of course, went with her parents. Poor child! her tears flowed freely on the way,
      and Mr. Edmonstone, now that it had really come to the point of parting with his little Amy,
      was very much overcome, while his wife, hardly refraining from tears, could only hold her
      daughter's hand very close.
The regular morning service was a great comfort, by restoring their tranquillity, and by the
      time it was ended, Amabel's countenance had settled into its own calm expression of trust and
      serenity. She scarcely even trembled when her father led her forward; her hand did not shake,
      and her voice, though very low, was firm and audible; while Guy's deep, sweet tones had a sort
      of thrill and quiver of intense feeling.
No one could help observing that Laura was the most agitated person present; she trembled so
      much that she was obliged to lean on Charlotte, and her tears gave the infection to the other
      bridesmaids—all but Mary Ross, who could never cry when other people did, and little Marianne,
      who did nothing but look and wonder.
Mary was feeling a great deal, both of compassion
       for the bereaved family and of affectionate admiring joy for the young pair who
      knelt before the altar. It was a showery day, with gleams of vivid sunshine, and one of these
      suddenly broke forth, casting a stream of colour from a martyr's figure in the south window,
      so as to shed a golden glory on the wave of brown hair over Guy's forehead, then passing on
      and tinting the bride's white veil with a deep glowing shade of crimson and purple.
Either that golden light, or the expression of the face on which it beamed, made Mary think
      of the lines— Where is the brow to wear in mortal's sight, The crown of pure angelic light? 
Charles stood with his head leaning against a pillar, as if he could not bear to look up;
      Mr. Edmonstone, was restless and almost sobbing; Mrs. Edmonstone alone collected, though much
      flushed and somewhat trembling, while the only person apparently free from excitement was the
      little bride, as there she knelt, her hand clasped in his, her head bent down, her modest,
      steadfast face looking as if she was only conscious of the vow she exchanged, the blessing she
      received; and was, as it were, lifted out of herself.
It was over now. The feast, in its fullest sense was held, and the richest of blessings had
      been called down on them.
The procession came out of the vestry in full order, and very pretty it was; the bride and
      bridegroom in the fresh bright graciousness of their extreme youth, and the six bridesmaids
      following; Laura and Lady Eveleen, two strikingly handsome and elegant girls; Charlotte, with
      the pretty little fair Marianne; Mary Ross, and Grace Harper. The village people who stood
      round might well say that such a sight as that was worth coming twenty miles to see.
The first care, after the bridal pair had driven off,
       was to put Charles into his pony-carriage. Charlotte, who had just pinned on his
      favour, begged to drive him, for she meant to make him her especial charge, and to succeed to
      all Amy's rights. Mrs. Edmonstone asked whether Laura would not prefer going with him, but she
      hastily answered, 'No, thank you, let Charlotte;' for with her troubled feelings, she could
      better answer talking girls than parry the remarks of her shrewd, observant brother.'
Some one said it would rain, but Charlotte still pleaded earnestly.
'Come, then, puss,' said Charles, rallying his spirits, 'only don't upset me, or it will
      spoil their tour.'
Charlotte drove off with elaborate care,—then came a deep sigh, and she exclaimed, 'Well! he
      is our brother, and all is safe.'
'Yes,' said Charles; 'no more fears for them.'
'Had you any? I am very glad if you had.'
'Why?'
'Because it was so like a book. I had a sort of feeling, all the time, that Philip would
      come in quite grand and terrible.'
'As if he must act Ogre. I am not sure that I had not something of the same notion,—that he
      might appear suddenly, and forbid the banns, entirely for Amy's sake, and as the greatest
      kindness to her.'
'Oh!'
'However, he can't separate them now, let him do his worst; and while Amy is Guy's wife, I
      don't think we shall easily be made to quarrel. I am glad the knot is tied, for I had a
      fatality notion that the feud was so strong, that it was nearly a case of the mountains
      bending and the streams ascending, ere she was to be our foeman's bride.'
'No,' said Charlotte, 'it ought to be like that story of Rosaura and her kindred, don't you
      remember? The fate would not be appeased by the marriage, till Count Julius had saved the life
      of one of the hostile race.

That would be it ,—perhaps they will meet abroad. and Guy will do it
      .'
'That wont do. Philip will never endanger his precious life, nor ever forgive Guy the
      obligation. Well, I suppose there never was a prettier wedding— how silly of me to say so, I
      shall be sick of hearing it before night.'
'I do wish all these people were gone; I did not know it would be so horrid. I should like
      to shut myself up and cry, and think what I could ever do to wait on you. Indeed, Charlie, I
      know I never can be like Amy, but if you—'
'Be anything but sentimental, I don't want to make a fool of myself,' said Charles, with a
      smile and tone as if he was keeping sorrow at bay. 'Depend upon it if we were left to
      ourselves this evening, we should be so desperately savage that we should quarrel furiously,
      and there would be no Amy to set us to-rights.'
'How Aunt Charlotte did cry! What a funny little woman she is.'
'Yes, I see now who you take after, puss. You'll be just like her, when you are her
      age.'
'So I mean to be,—I mean to stay and take care of you all my life, as she does of
      grandmamma.'
'You do, do you?'
'Yes. I never mean to marry, it is so disagreeable. O dear! But how lovely dear Amy did
      look.'
'Here's the rain!' exclaimed Charles, as some large drops began to fall, in good time to
      prevent them from being either savage or sentimental, though at the expense of Charlotte's
      pink and white; for they had no umbrella, and she would not accept a share of Charles's
      carriage-cloak. She laughed, and drove on fast through the short cut, and arrived at the
      house-door just as the pelting hail was over, having battered her thin sleeves, and made her
      white bonnet look very deplorable. The first thing they saw was Guy, with Bustle close to him,
      for Bustle had found out that something
       was going on that concerned his master, and followed him about more assiduously
      than ever, as if sensible of the decree, that he was to be left behind to Charlotte's
      care.
'Charlotte, how wet you are.'
'Never mind, Charlie is not.' She sprung out, holding his hand, and felt as if she could
      never forget that moment when her new brother first kissed her brow.
'Where's Amy?'
'Here!' and while Guy lifted Charles out, Charlotte was clasped in her sister's arms.'
'Are you wet, Charlie?'
'No, Charlotte would not be wise, and made me keep the cloak to myself.'
'You are wet through, poor child; come up at once, and change,' said Amy, flying nimbly up
      the stairs,— up even to Charlotte's own room, the old nursery, and there she was unfastening
      the drenched finery.
'O Amy, don't do all this. Let me ring.'
'No, the servants are either not come home or too busy, Charles won't want me, he has Guy.
      Can I find your white frock?'
'Oh, but Amy—let me see!' Charlotte made prisoner the left hand, and looked up with an arch
      smile at the face where she had called up a blush. 'Lady Morville must not begin by being
      lady's-maid.'
'Let me—let me, Charlotte, dear, I shan't be able to do anything for you this long time.'
      Amy's voice trembled, and Charlotte held her fast to kiss her again.
'We must make haste,' said Amy, recovering herself. 'There are the carriages.'
While the frock was being fastened, Charlotte looked into the Prayer-book Amy had laid down.
      There was the name, Amabel Frances Morville, and the date.
'Has he just written it?' said Charlotte.
'Yes; when we came home.'

'O Amy! dear, dear Amy; I don't know whether I am glad or sorry!'
'I believe I am both,' said Amy.
At that moment Mrs. Edmonstone and Laura hastened in. Then was the time for broken words,
      tears, and smiles, as Amy leant against her mother, who locked her in a close embrace, and
      gazed on her in a sort of trance, at once of maternal pride and of pain, at giving up her
      cherished nestling. Poor Laura! how bitter were her tears, and how forced her smiles,—far
      unlike the rest!
No one would care to hear the details of the breakfast, and the splendours of the cake; how
      Charlotte recovered her spirits while distributing the favours; and Lady Eveleen set up a
      flirtation with Markham, and forced him into wearing one, though he protested, with many a
      grunt, that she was making a queer fool of him; how often Charles was obliged to hear it had
      been a pretty wedding; and how well Lord Kilcoran made his speech, proposing the health of Sir
      Guy and Lady Morville. All the time, Laura was active and useful,—feeling as if she was acting
      a play, sustaining the character of Miss Edmonstone, the bridesmaid at her sister's happy
      marriage; while the true Laura, Philip's Laura, was lonely, dejected, wretched; half fearing
      for her sister, half jealous of her happiness, forced into pageantry with an aching
      heart,—with only one wish, that it was over, and that she might be again alone with her
      burthen.
She was glad when her mother rose, and the ladies moved into the drawing-room,—glad to
      escape from Eveleen's quick eye, and to avoid Mary's clear sense,— glad to talk to comparative
      strangers,—glad of the occupation of going to prepare Amabel for her journey. This lasted a
      long time,—there was so much to be said, and hearts were so full, and Amy over again explained
      to Charlotte how to perform all the little services to Charles which she relinquished; while
      her mother had so many affectionate last words, and every now and
       then stopped short to look at her little daughter, saying, she did not know if
      it was not a dream.
At length Amabel was dressed in her purple and white shot silk, her muslin mantle, and white
      bonnet. Mrs. Edmonstone left her and Laura to have a few words together, and went to the
      dressing-room. There she found Guy, leaning on the mantel-shelf, as he used to do when he
      brought his troubles to her. He started as she entered.
'Ought I not to be here?' he said. 'I could not help coming once more. This room has always
      been the kernel of my home, my happiness here.'
'Indeed, it has been a very great pleasure to have you here.'
'You have been very kind to me,' he proceeded, in a low, reflecting tone. 'You have helped
      me very much, very often; even when—Do you remember the day I begged you to keep me in order,
      as if I were Charles? I did not think then—'
He was silent; and Mrs. Edmonstone, little able to find words, smiling, tried to say,—'I
      little thought how truly and how gladly I should be able to call you my son;' and ended by
      giving him a mother's kiss.
'I wish I could tell you half,' said Guy,—'half what I feel for the kindness that made a
      home to one who had no right to any. Coming as a stranger, I found—'
'We found one to love with all our hearts,' said Mrs. Edmonstone. 'I have often looked back,
      and seen that you brought a brightness to us all—especially to poor Charles. Yes; it dates
      from your coming; and I can only wish and trust, Guy, that the same brightness will rest on
      your own home.'
'There must be brightness where she is,' said Guy.
'I need not tell you to take care of her,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, smiling. 'I think I can
      trust you; but I feel rather as I did when first I sent her and Laura to a party of pleasure
      by themselves.'
Laura at this moment came in. Alone with Amy,
       she could not speak, she could only cry; and, fearful of distressing her sister,
      she came away; but here, with Guy, it was worse, for it was unkind not to speak one warm word
      to him. Yet what could she say? He spoke first—
'Laura, you must get up your looks again, now this turmoil is over. Don't do too much
      mathematics, and wear yourself down to a shadow.'
Laura gave her sad, forced smile.
'Will you do one thing for me, Laura? I should like to have one of your perspective views of
      the inside of the church. Would it be too troublesome to do?'
'Oh, no; I shall be very glad.'
'Don't set about it till you quite like it, and have plenty of time. Thank you. I shall
      think it is a proof that you can forgive me for all the pain I am causing you. I am very
      sorry, indeed—'
'You are so very kind,' said Laura, bursting into tears; and, as her mother was gone, she
      could not help adding, 'but don't try to comfort me, Guy; don't blame yourself,—'tisn't only
      that,—but I am so very, very unhappy.'
'Amy told me you were grieved for Philip. I wish I could help it, Laura. I want to try to
      meet him in Switzerland; and, if we can, perhaps it may be set right. At any rate, he will be
      glad to know you see the rights of it.'
Laura wept still more; but she could never again lose the sisterly feeling those kind words
      had awakened. If Philip had but known what he missed!
Charlotte ran in. 'Oh, I am glad to find you here, Guy; I wanted to put you in mind of your
      promise. You must write me the first letter you sign 'Your affectionate brother!''
'I won't forget, Charlotte.'
'Guy! Where's Guy?' called Mr. Edmonstone. 'The rain's going off. You must come down, both
      of you, or you'll be too late.'

Mrs. Edmonstone hastened to call Amabel. Those moments that she had been alone, Amabel had
      been kneeling in an earnest supplication that all might be forgiven that she had done amiss in
      the home of her childhood; that the blessings might be sealed on her and her husband; and that
      she might go forth from her father's house in strength sent from above. Her mother summoned
      her; she rose, came calmly forth, met Guy at the head of the stairs, put her arm in his, and
      they went down.
Charles was on the sofa in the ante-room, talking fast, and striving for high spirits. 'Amy,
      woman, you do us credit! Well, write soon, and don't break your heart for want of me.'
There was a confusion of good byes, and then all came out to the hall door; even Charles,
      with Charlotte's arm. One more of those fast locked embraces between the brother and sister,
      and Mr. Edmonstone put Amabel into the carriage.
'Good bye, good bye, my own dearest little one! Bless you, bless you! and may you be as
      happy as a Mayflower! Guy, good bye. I've given you the best I had to give,—and 'tis you that
      are welcome to her. Take care what you do with her, for she's a precious little jewel! Good
      bye, my boy!'
Guy's face and grasping hand were the reply. As he was about to spring into the carriage, he
      turned again. 'Charlotte, I have shut Bustle up in my room. Will you let him out in half an
      hour? I've explained it all to him, and he will be very good. Good bye.'
'I'll take care of him. I'll mention him in every letter.'
'And, Markham, mind, if our house is not ready by Michaelmas, we shall be obliged to come
      and stay with you.'
'Grunt!'
Lastly, as if he could not help it, Guy dashed up the
       step once more, pressed Charles's hand, and said, 'God bless you, Charlie!'
In an instant he was beside Amabel, and they drove off,—Amabel leaning forward, and gazing
      wistfully at her mother and Charles, till she was startled by a long cluster of laburnums,
      their yellow bloom bent down and heavy with wet, so that the ends dashed against her bonnet,
      and the crystal drops fell on her lap.
'Why, Amy, the Hollywell flowers are weeping for the loss of you!'
She gave a sweet, sunny smile through her tears. At that moment they came beyond the thick
      embowering shrubs, while full before them was the dark receding cloud, on which the sunbeams
      were painting a wide spanned rainbow. The semicircle was perfect, and full before them, like
      an arch of triumph under which they were to pass.
'How beautiful!' broke from them both.
'Guy,' said the bride, after a few minutes had faded the rainbow, and turned them from its
      sight, 'shall I tell you what I was thinking? I was thinking, that if there is a doom on us, I
      am not afraid, if it will only bring a rainbow.'
'The rainbow will come after, if not with it,' said Guy.

</div></body></text></TEI>