<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Heir of Redclyffe</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1853</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">
CHAPTER IX.

And turned the thistles of a curse
To types beneficent.
Wordsworth. 
It was about three weeks after the rendezvous at Bellagio, that Sir Guy and Lady Morville
      arrived at Vicenza, on their way from Venice. They were in the midst of breakfast when Arnaud
      entered, saying,—
'It was well, Sir Guy, that you changed your intention of visiting the Valtelline with
      Captain Morville.'
'What! Have you heard anything of him?'
'I fear that his temerity has caused him to suffer. I have just heard that an Englishman of
      your name is severely ill at Recoara.'
'Where?'
'At la badia di Recoara . It is what in English we call a watering-place, on the
      mountains to the north, where the Vicentini do go in summer for fraicheur , but they
      have all returned in the last two days, for fear of the infection.'
'I'll go and make inquiries,' said Guy, rising in haste. Returning in a quarter of hour, he
      said,—'It is true. It can be no other than poor Philip. I have seen his doctor, an Italian,
      who, when he saw our name written, said it was the same. He calls it una febbre molto
      grave .'
'Very heavy! Did he only know the name in writing?'

'Only from seeing it on his passport. He has been unable to give any directions.'
'How dreadfully ill he must be! And alone! What shall we do? You wont think of leaving me
      behind you, whatever you do?' exclaimed Amabel, imploringly.
'It is at no great distance, and—'
'O, don't say that. Only take me with you. I will try to bear it, if you don't think it
      right; but it will be very hard!'
Her eyes were full of tears, but she struggled to repress them, and was silent in suspense
      as she saw him considering.
'My poor Amy!' said he, presently; 'I believe the anxiety would be worse for you if I were
      to leave you here.'
'Oh, thank you!' exclaimed she.
'You will have nothing to do with the nursing. No, I don't think there is much risk; so we
      will go together.'
'Thank you! thank you! and perhaps I may be of some use. But is it very infectious?'
'I hope not: caught at Colico, and imported to a fresh place, I should think there was
      little fear of its spreading. However, we must soon be off: I am afraid he is very ill, and
      almost deserted. In the first place, I had better send an express to the Consul at Venice, to
      ask him to recommend us a doctor, for I have not much faith in this Italian.'
They were soon on the way to Recoara, a road bordered on one side by high rocks, on the
      other by a little river flowing down a valley, shut in by mountains. The valley gradually
      contracted in the ascent, till it became a ravine, and further on a mere crevice, marked by
      the thick growth of the chestnut trees; but before this greater narrowing, they saw the roofs
      of the houses in the little town. The sun shone clear, the air had grown fresh as they mounted
      higher; Amabel could hardly imagine sickness and sorrow in so
       fair a spot, and turned to her husband to say so; but he was deep in thought,
      and she would not disturb him.
The town was built on the bank of the stream, and very much shut in by the steep crags,
      which seemed almost to overhang the inn, to which they drove, auguring favourably of the place
      from its fresh, clean aspect.
Guy hastened to the patient, while Amabel was conducted to a room with a polished floor, and
      very little furniture, and there waited anxiously until he returned. There was a flush on his
      face, and almost before he spoke, he leant far out at the window to try to catch a breath of
      air.
'We must find another room for him directly,' said he. 'He cannot possibly exist where he
      is—a little den—such an atmosphere of fever—enough to knock one down! Will you have one got
      ready for him?'
'Directly,' said Amabel, ringing. 'How is he?'
'He is in a stupor: it is not sleep. He is frightfully ill. I never felt anything like the
      heat of his skin. But that stifling hole would account for much; very likely he may revive,
      when we get him into a better atmosphere. No one has attended to him properly. It is a
      terrible thing to be ill in a foreign country without a friend!'
Arnaud came, and Amabel sent for the hostess, while Guy returned to his charge. Little care
      had been taken for the solitary traveller on foot, too ill to exact attention, and whose
      presence drove away custom; but when his case was taken up by a Milord Inglese, the people of
      the inn were ready to do their utmost to cause their neglect to be forgotten, and everything
      was at the disposal of the Signora. The rooms were many, but very small, and the best she
      could contrive was to choose three rooms on the lower floor, rather larger than the rest, and
      opening into each other, as well as into the passage, so that it was possible to produce a
      thorough draught. Under her superintendence, Anne made the apartment look comfortable, and
      almost English, and,
       sending word that all was ready, she proceeded to establish herself in the
      corresponding rooms on the floor above.
Philip was perfectly unconscious when he was carried to his new room. His illness had
      continued about a week, and had been aggravated first by his incredulous and determined
      resistance of it, and then by the neglect with which he had been treated. It was fearful to
      see how his great strength had been cut down, as there he lay with scarcely a sign of life,
      except his gasping, labouring breath. Guy stood over him, let the air blow in from the open
      window, sprinkled his face with vinegar, and moistened his lips, longing for the physician,
      for whom, however, he knew he must wait many hours. Perplexed, ignorant of the proper
      treatment, fearing to do harm, and extremely anxious, he still was almost rejoiced: for there
      was no one to whom he was so glad to do a service, and a hope arose of full
      reconciliation.
The patient was somewhat revived by the fresh air; he breathed more freely, moved, and made
      a murmuring sound, as if striving painfully for a word.
'Da bere ,' at last he said; and if Guy had not known its meaning, it would have
      been plain from the gasping, parched manner in which it was uttered.
'Some water?' said Guy, holding it to his lips, and on hearing the English, Philip opened
      his eyes, and, as he drank, gazed with a heavy sort of wonder. 'Is that enough? Do you like
      some on your forehead?'
'Thank you.'
'Is that more comfortable? We only heard to-day you were ill.'
He turned away restlessly, as if hardly glad to see Guy, and not awake to the circumstances,
      in a dull, feverish oppression of the senses. Delirium soon came on, or, more properly,
      delusion. He was distressed by thinking himself deserted, and struggling to speak Italian, and
      when Guy replied in English, though the native tongue seemed to fall kindly on his ear, yet,
      to
       Guy's great grief, the old dislike appeared to prevent all comfort in his
      presence, though he could not repel his attentions. At night the wandering increased, till it
      became unintelligible raving, and strength was required to keep him in bed.
Amabel seldom saw her husband this evening. He once came up to see her, when she made him
      drink some coffee, but he soon went, telling her he should sit up, and begging her to go to
      rest quietly, as she looked pale and tired. The night was a terrible one, and morning only
      brought insensibility. The physician arrived, a sharp-looking Frenchman, who pronounced it to
      be a very severe and dangerous case, more violent than usual in malaria fever, and with more
      affection of the brain. Guy was glad to be set to do something, instead of standing by in
      inaction; but ice and blisters were applied without effect, and they were told it was likely
      to be long before the fever abated.
Day after day passed without improvement, and with few gleams of consciousness, and even
      these were not free from wandering: they were only intervals in the violent ravings, or the
      incoherent murmurs, and were never clear from some torturing fancy that he was alone and ill
      at Broadstone, and neither the Edmonstones nor his brother-officers would come to him, or else
      that he was detained from Stylehurst. 'Home' was the word oftenest on his lips. 'I would not
      go home,' the only expression that could sometimes be distinctly heard. He was obliged to
      depend on Guy as the only Englishman at hand; but whenever he recognised him, the traces of
      repugnance were evident, and in his clearer intervals, he always showed a preference for
      Arnaud's attendance. Still Guy persevered indefatigably, sitting up with him every night, and
      showing himself an invaluable nurse, with his tender hand, modulated voice, quick eye, and
      quiet activity. His whole soul was engrossed: he never appeared to think of himself or to be
      sensible of fatigue; but was only absorbed in the one thought of his patient's comfort.
       He seldom came to Amabel except at meals, and now and then for a short visit to
      her sitting-room to report on Philip's condition. If he could spare a little more time, when
      Philip was in a state of stupor, she used to try to persuade him to take some rest; and if it
      was late, or in the heat of noon, she could sometimes get him, as a favour to her, to lie down
      on the sofa, and let her read to him; but it did not often end in sleep, and he usually
      preferred taking her out into the fresh air, and wandering about among the chestnut-trees and
      green hillocks higher up in the ravine.
Very precious were these walks, with the quiet, grave talk that the scene and the
      circumstances inspired —when he would tell the thoughts that had occupied him in his
      night-watches, and they shared the subdued and deep reflections suited to this period of
      apprehension. These were her happiest times, but they were few and uncertain. She had in the
      mean time to wait, to watch, and hope alone, though she had plenty of employment: for besides
      writing constant bulletins, all preparations for the sick-room fell to her share. She had to
      send for, or devise substitutes for all the conveniences that were far from coming readily to
      hand in a remote Italian inn—to give orders, send commissions to Vicenza, or even to Venice,
      and to do a good deal, with Anne's assistance, by her own manual labour. Guy said she did more
      for Philip outside his room than he did inside, and often declared how entirely at a loss he
      should have been if she had not been there, with her ready resources, and, above all, with her
      sweet presence, making the short intervals he spent out of the sick chamber so much more than
      repose, such refreshment at the time, and in remembrance.
Thus it had continued for more than a fortnight, when one evening as the French physician
      was departing, he told Guy that he would not fail to come the next night, as he saw every
      reason to expect a crisis. Guy sat intently marking every alteration in the worn, flushed,
      suffering face that rested helplessly on the
       pillows, and every unconscious movement of the wasted, nerveless limbs stretched
      out in pam and helplessness, contrasting his present state with what he was when last they
      parted, in the full pride of health, vigour, and intellect. He dwelt on all that had passed
      between them from the first, the strange ancestral enmity that nothing had as yet overcome,
      the misunderstandings, the prejudices, the character whose faultlessness he had always
      revered, and the repeated failure of all attempts to be friends, as if his own impatience and
      passion had borne fruit in the merited distrust of the man whom of all others he respected,
      and whom he would fain love as a brother. He earnestly hoped that so valuable a life might be
      spared, but if that might not be, his fervent wish was that at least a few parting words of
      good will and reconciliation might be granted to be his comfort in remembrance.
So mused Guy during that night, as he watched the heavy doze between sleep and stupor, and
      tried to catch the low, indistinct mutterings that now and then seemed to ask for something.
      Towards morning Philip awoke more fully, and as Guy was feeling his pulse, he faintly
      asked,—
'How many?' while his eyes had more of their usual expression.
'I cannot count,' returned Guy; 'but it is less than in the evening. Some drink?'
Philip took some, then making an effort to look round, said, 'What day is it?'
'Saturday morning, the 23rd of August.'
'I have been ill a long time!'
'You have indeed, full three weeks; but you are better to-night.'
He was silent for some moments; then collecting himself, and looking fixedly at Guy, he
      said, in his own steady voice, though very feeble, 'I suppose, humanly speaking, it is an even
      chance between life and death?'
'Yes,' said Guy, firmly, the low sweet tones of his voice full of tenderness. 'You are very
      ill, but not
       without hope.' Then, after a pause, during which Philip looked thoughtful, but
      calm, he added—'I have tried to bring a clergyman here, but I could not succeed. Would you
      like me to read to you?'
'Thank you—presently—but I have something to say. Some more water;—thank you.' Then, after
      pausing, 'Guy, you have thought I judged you harshly; I meant to act for the best.'
'Don't think of that,' said Guy, with a rush of joy at hearing the words of reconciliation
      he had yearned for so long.
'And now you have been most kind. If I live, you shall see that I am sensible of it;' and he
      feebly moved his hand to his cousin, who pressed it, hardly less happy than on the day he
      stood before Mrs. Edmonstone in the dressing-room. Presently, Philip went on. 'My sister has
      my will. My love to her, and to—to—to poor Laura.' His voice suddenly failed; and while Guy
      was again moistening his lips, he gathered strength, and said, 'You and Amy will do what you
      can for her. Do not let the blow come suddenly. Ah! you do not know. We have been engaged this
      long time.'
Guy did not exclaim, but Philip saw his amazement.
'It was very wrong; it was not her fault,' he added. 'I can't tell you now; but if I live,
      all shall be told. If not, you will be kind to her?'
'Indeed we will.'
'Poor Laura!' again said Philip, in a much weaker voice, and after lying still a little
      longer, he faintly whispered. 'Read to me.'
Guy read till he fell into a doze, which lasted till Arnaud came in the morning, and Guy
      went up to his wife.
'Amy,' said he, entering with a quiet bright look, 'he has spoken to me according to my
      wish.'
'Then it is all right,' said Amabel, answering his look with one as calm and sweet. 'Is he
      better?'
'Not materially; his pulse is still very high; but
       there was a gleam of perfect consciousness, he spoke calmly and clearly, fully
      understanding his situation. Come what will, it is a thing to be infinitely thankful for! I am
      very glad! Now for our morning reading.'
As soon as it was over, and when Guy had satisfied himself that the patient was still quiet,
      they sat down to breakfast. Guy considered a little while, and said,
'I have been very much surprised. Had you any idea of an attachment between him and
      Laura?'
'I know she is very fond of him, and she has always been his favourite. What? Has he been in
      love with her all this time, poor fellow?'
'He says they are engaged.'
'Laura? Our sister! Oh Guy, impossible! He must have been wandering.'
'I could almost have thought so; but his whole manner forbade me to think there was any
      delusion. He was too weak to explain, but he said it was not her fault, and was overcome when
      speaking of her. He begged us to spare her from suddenly hearing of his death. He was as calm
      and reasonable as I am at this moment. No, Amy it was not delirium.'
'I don't know how to believe it!' said Amabel. 'It is so impossible for Laura, and for him
      too. Don't you know how, sometimes in fevers, people take a delusion, and are quite rational
      about everything else, and that, too; if only it was true; and don't you think it very likely,
      that if he really has been in love with her all this time, (how much he must have gone
      through!) he may fancy he has been secretly engaged, and reproach himself?'
'I cannot tell,' said Guy, 'there was a reality in his manner of speaking, that refuses to
      let me disbelieve him. Surely it cannot be one of the horrors of death that we should be left
      to reproach ourselves with the fancied sins we have been prone to, as well as with our real
      ones. Then'—and he rose, and walked about the room—'if so, more than ever, in the hour of
      death, good Lord, deliver us!'

Amabel was silent, and presently he sat down, saying. 'Well, time will show!'
'I cannot think it!' said Amy. 'Laura! How could she help telling mamma?' And as Guy smiled
      at the recollection of their own simultaneous coming to mamma, she added, 'not only because it
      was right, but for the comfort of it.'
'But, Amy, do you remember what I told you of poor Laura's tears, and what she said to me,
      on our wedding-day?'
'Poor Laura!' said Amy. 'Yet—' She paused, and Guy presently said,
'Well, I wont believe it, if I can possibly help it. I can't afford to lose my faith in my
      sister's perfection, or Philip's, especially now. But I must go; I have loitered too long, and
      Arnaud ought to go to his breakfast.'
Amabel sat long over the remains of her breakfast. She did not puzzle herself over Philip's
      confession, for she would not admit it without confirmation; and she could not think of his
      misdoings, even those of which she was certain, on the day when his life was hanging in the
      balance. All she could bear to recollect was his excellence; nay, in the tenderness of her
      heart, she nearly made out that she had always been very fond of him, overlooking that even
      before Guy came to Hollywell, she had always regarded him with more awe than liking, been
      disinclined to his good advice, shrunk from his condescension, and regularly enjoyed Charles's
      quizzing of him. All this, and all the subsequent injuries were forgotten, and she believed,
      as sincerely as her husband, that Philip had been free from any unkind intention. But she
      chiefly dwelt on her own Guy, especially that last speech, so unlike some of whom she had
      heard, who were rather glad to find a flaw in a faultless model, if only to obtain a
      fellow-feeling for it. 'Yes,' thought she, 'he might look far without finding anything better
      than himself, though he wont believe it. If ever he could make me angry, it will be
       by treating me as if I was better than he. Such nonsense! But I suppose his
      goodness would not be such if he was conscious of it, so I must be content with him as he is.
      I can't be so unwife-like after all; for I am sure nothing makes me feel so small and foolish
      as that humility of his! Come, I must see about some dinner for the French doctor.'
She set to work on her housewifely cares; but when these were despatched, it was hard to
      begin anything else on such a day of suspense, when she was living on reports from the
      sick-room. The delirium had returned, more violent than ever; and as she sat at her open
      window, she often heard the disconnected, words. She could do nothing but listen—she could
      neither read nor draw, and even letter-writing failed her to-day, for it seemed cruel to send
      a letter to his sister, and if Philip was not under a delusion, it was still worse to write to
      Hollywell; it made her shudder to think of the misery she might have inflicted in the former
      letters, where she had not spared the detail of her worst fears and conjectures, and by no
      means softened the account, as she had done to his sister.
Late in the afternoon the physician came, and she heard of his being quieter; indeed, there
      were no sounds below. It grew dark, Arnaud brought lights, and told her, Captain Morville had
      sunk into stupor. After another long space, the doctor came to take some coffee, and said the
      fever was lessening, but that strength was going with it, and if le malade was saved,
      it would be owing to the care and attention of le chevalier.
Of Guy she saw no more that evening. The last bulletin was pencilled by him on a strip of
      paper, and sent to her at eleven at night:
'Pulse almost nothing; deadly faintness; doctor does not give him up; it may be many hours;
      don't sit up; you shall hear when there is anything decisive.'
Amy submitted, and slowly put herself to bed, because she thought Guy would not like to find
      her up;
       but she had little sleep, and that was dreamy, full of the same anxieties as her
      waking moments, and perhaps making the night seem longer than if she had been awake the whole
      time.
At last she started from a somewhat sounder doze than usual, and saw it was becoming light;
      the white summits of the mountains were beginning to show themselves, and there was twilight
      in the room. Just then she heard a light, cautious tread in the passage; the lock of Guy's
      dressing-room was gently, slowly turned. It was over, then! Life or death? Her heart beat as
      she heard her husband's step in the next room, and her suspense would let her call out nothing
      but—'I am not asleep!'
Guy came forward, and stood still, while she looked up to the outline of his figure against
      the window. With a kind of effort he said, with forced clamness— 'He'll do now!' and
      came to the bed-side. His face was wet with tears, and her eyes were overflowing. After a few
      moments he murmured a few low words of deep thanksgivings, and again there was a silence.
'He is asleep quietly and comfortably,' said Guy, presently, 'and his pulse is steadier. The
      faintness and sinking have been dreadful; the doctor has been sitting with his hand on his
      pulse, telling me when to put the cordial into his mouth. Twice I thought him all but gone;
      and, till within the last hour, I did not think he could have revived; but now, the doctor
      says, we may almost consider the danger as over.'
'Oh, how glad I am! Was he sensible? Could he speak?'
'Sensible, at least when not fainting; but too weak to speak, or often to look up. When he
      did, though, it was very kindly, very pleasantly. And now! This is joy coming in the morning,
      Amy!'
'I wonder if you are happier now than after the shipwreck,' said Amy, after a silence.
'How can you ask? The shipwreck was a gleam, the first ray that came to cheer me in those
      penance
       hours, when I was cut off from all; and now, oh Amy! I cannot enter into it.
      Such richness and fulness of blessing showered on me, more than I ever dared to wish for or
      dream of, both in the present and future hopes. It seems more than can belong to man, at least
      to me, so unlike what I have deserved, that I can hardly believe it. It must be sent as a
      great trial.'
Amabel thought this so beautiful, that she could not answer; and he presently gave her some
      further particulars. He went back, in spite of her entreaties that he would afford himself a
      little rest, saying that the doctor was obliged to go away, and Philip still needed the most
      careful watching. Amy could not sleep any more; but lay musing over that ever brightening
      goodness which had lately at times almost startled her from its very unearthliness.

</div></body></text></TEI>