<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Heir of Redclyffe</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1853</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER XIX.

Most delicately, hour by hour,
He canvassed human mysteries,
And stood aloof from other minds.
Himself unto himself he sold,
Upon himself, himself did feed,
Quiet, dispassionate, and cold,
With chiselled features clear and sleek.
Tennyson. 
Guy had been about a week at Oxford, when one evening, as he was sitting alone in his rooms,
      he received an unexpected visit from Captain Morviller. He was glad, for he thought a personal
      interview would remove all misconstructions, and held out his hand cordially, saying:
'You here, Philip? When did you come?'
'Half an hour ago. I am on my way to spend a week with the Thorndales. I go on to-morrow to
      my sister's.'
While speaking, Philip was surveying the apartment, for he held that a man's room is
      generally an indication of his disposition, and assuredly there was a great deal of character
      in his own, with the scrupulous neatness and fastidious taste of its arrangements. Here, he
      thought, he could not fail to see traces of his cousin's habits, but he was obliged to confess
      to himself that there was very little to guide him. The furniture was strictly as its former
      occupant had left it, only rather the worse for wear, and far from being in
       order. The chairs were so heaped with books and papers,that Guy hat to make a
      clearance of one before his visitor could sit down; but there was nothing else to complain of,
      not even a trace of cigars; but knowing him to be a great reader and lover of accomplishments,
      Philip wondered that the only decorations were Lauras drawing of Sintram, and a little print
      of Redclyffe, and the books were chiefly such as were wanted for his studies; the few others
      having for the most part the air of old library books, as if he had sent for them form
      Redclyffe. Was this another proof that he had some way of frittering away his money with
      nothing to show for it? A Sophocles and a lexicon were open before him on the table, and a
      blotting book, which he closed, but not before Philip had caught sight of what looked like
      verses.
Neither did his countenance answer Philip's expectations. It had not his usual bright lively
      expression; there was a sadness which made his smile like a gleam on a showery day, instead of
      constant sunshine; but there was neither embarrassment nor defiance, and the gleamlike smile
      was there, as, with a frank, confiding tone, he said:
'This is very kind of you, to come and see what you can do for me.'
Philip was by no means prepared to be thus met halfway, but he thought Guy wanted to secure
      him as an intercessor, and hardened himself into righteous severity.
'No one can be more willing to help you than I, but you must, in the first place, help
      yourself.'
Instantly, the sedate measured tone made Guy's heart and head throb with impatience,
      awakening all the former memories so hardly battled down; but with the impulse of anger came
      the thought, 'Here it is again! If I don't keep it down now, I am undone! The enemy will seize
      me again!' He forced himself not to interrupt, while Philip went calmly on.
'While you are open, nothing can be done.'

'My only wish, my only desire, is to be open,' said Guy, speaking fast and low, and
      repressing the feeling, which, nevertheless, affected his voice; 'but the opportunity of
      explanation has never been given me.'
'You need complain of that no longer. I am here to convey to my uncle any explanation you
      may wish to address to him. I will do my best to induce him to attend to it favourably, but he
      is deeply offended and hurt by what has passed.'
'I know, I know,' said Guy, colouring deeply, and all irritation disappearing from voice and
      manner; 'I know there is no excuse for me. I can only repeat that I am heartily sorry for
      whatever I may have said, either of him or of you.'
'Of course,' returned Philip, 'I should never think of resenting what you may have said in a
      moment of irritation, especially as you express regret for it. Consider it as entirely
      overlooked on my part.'
Guy was nearly choked in uttering a 'Thank you,' which did not sound, after all, much like
      acceptance of forgiveness.
'Now to the real matter at issue,' said Philip; 'the application for the money, which so
      amazed Mr. Edmonstone.'
'I do not see that it is the point,' siad Guy; 'I wanted it for a scheme of my own; he did
      not think fit to let me have it, so there is an end of the matter.'
'Mr. Edmonstone does not think so. He wishes to be convinced that you have not spent it
      beforehand.'
'What would you have beyond my word and honour that I have not?' exclaimed Guy.
'Far be it from me to say that he doubts it,' said Philip; and as at those words the flash
      of the Morville eye darted lightning, he expected that the next moment, 'Do you?' would be
      thundered forth, and he could not, with truth, answer 'No;' but it was one of his maxims that
      a man need never be forced into an open quarrel, and he tranquilly continued: 'but it
       is better not to depend entirely on assertion. Why do you not bring him full
      proofs of your good intention, and thus restore yourself to his confidence?'
'I have said that I am bound not to mention the purpose.'
'Unfortunate!' said Philip; then, while Guy bit his lip till it bled, the pain really a
      relief, by giving some vent to his anger at the implied doubt, he went on: 'If it is
      impossible to clear this up, the next advice I would give is, that you should show what your
      expenditure has been; lay your accounts before him, and let them justify you.'
Most people would have resented this as an impertinent proposal, were it only that doing so
      would have served to conceal the awkward fact that the accounts had not been kept at all. Guy
      had never been taught to regard exactness in this respect as a duty, had no natural taste for
      precision, and did not feel responsible to any person; nor, if he had kept any, could he have
      shown them, without exposing his uncle. To refuse would, however, be a subterfuge, and after a
      moment, he made an effort, and confessed he had none to show; though he knew Philip would
      despise him for it as a fool, and probably take it as positive evidence against him.
It would have been more bearable if Philip would but have said 'How foolish,' instead of
      drily repeating, 'unfortunate!'
After a pause, during which Guy was not sufficiently master of himself to speak, Philip
      added— 'Then this matter of the thousand pounds is to be passed over? You have no explanation
      to offer?'
'No:' and again he paused. 'When my word is not accepted, I have no more to say. But this is
      not the point. What I would know is, what are the calumnies that accuse me of having gamed? If
      you really wish to do me a service, you will give me an opportunity of answering these
      precious proofs.'

'I will,' answered Philip; who could venture on doing so himself, though for his sister's
      sake it was unsafe to trust Mr. Edmonstone, with whom what was not an absolute secret was not
      a secret at all. 'My uncle knows that a thirty pound cheque of his, in your name, was paid by
      you to a notorious gamester.'
Guy did not shrink, as he simply answered—'It is true.'
'Yet you have neither played, nor betted, nor done anything that could come under the
      definition of gambling?'
'No.'
'Then why this payment?'
'I cannot explain that. I know appearances are against me,' replied Guy, steadily, and with
      less irritation than he had hitherto shown. 'I once thought my simple word would have
      sufficed; but since it seems that will not do, I will not again make what you call
      assertions.'
'In fact, while you profess a desire to be open and sincere, a mystery appears at every
      turn. What would you have us do?'
'As you think fit,' he answered, proudly.
Philip had been used to feel men's wills and characters bend and give way beneath his
      superior force of mind. They might, like Charles, chafe and rage, but his calmness always gave
      him the ascendant almost without exertion, and few people had ever come into contact with him
      without a certain submission of will or opinion. With Guy alone it was not so; he had been
      sensible of it once or twice before; he had no mastery, and could no more bend that spirit
      than a bar of steel. This he could not bear, for it obliged him to be continually making
      efforts to preserve his own sense of superiority.
'Since this is your ultimatum,' he said—'since you deny your confidence, and refuse any
      reply to these charges, you have no right to complain of suspicion. I shall do my best, both
      as your true friend, and as acting with your guardian's authority, to discover all
       that may lead to the elucidation of the mystery. In the first place, I am
      desired to make every inquiry here as to your conduct and expenditure. I hope they will prove
      satisfactory.'
'I am very much obliged to you,' answered Guy, his voice stern and dignified; and the smile
      that curled his lip was like Philip's own.
Philip was positively annoyed, and desirous to say something to put him down, but he had not
      committed himself by any vehemence, and Philip was too cool and wise to compromise his own
      dignity; so he rose to go, saying, 'Good night! I am sorry I cannot induce you to act in the
      only way that can right you.'
'Good night!' replied Guy, in the same dignified manner in which he had spoken ever since
      his passion had been surmounted.
They parted, each feeling that matters were just where they were before. Philip went back to
      his inn, moralizing on the pride and perverseness which made it impossible to make any
      impression on a Redclyffe Morville, whom not even the fear of detection could lead to
      submission.
Next morning, while Philip was hastily breakfasting, the door opened, and Guy entered, pale
      and disturbed, as if he had been awake all night.
'Philip!' said he, in his frank natural voice, 'I don't think we parted last night as your
      good intentions deserved.'
'O, ho!' thought Philip, 'the fear of an investigation has brought him to reason;' and he
      said, 'Well, I am very glad you see things in a truer light this morning;' then asked if he
      had breakfasted. He had; and his cousin added,
'Have you anything to say on the matter we discussed last night?'
'No. I can only repeat that I am not guilty, and wait for time to show my innocence. I only
      came to see you once more, that I might feel that we parted friends.'

'I shall always hope to be a true friend.'
'I did not come here for altercation,' said Guy (an answer rather to the spirit than the
      words), 'so I will say no more. If you wish to see me again, you will find me in my rooms.
      Good bye.'
Philip was puzzled. He wondered whether Guy had come wishing to propitiate him, but had
      found pride indomitable at the last moment; or whether he had been showing himself too
      severely just to admit entreaty. He would be able to judge better after he had made his
      inquiries, and he proceeded with them at once. He met with no such replies as he expected.
      Every one spoke of Sir Guy Morville in high terms, strict in his habits of application, and
      irreproachable in conduct. He was generally liked, and some regret was expressed that he lived
      in so secluded a manner, forming so few intimacies; but no one seemed to think it possible
      that anything wrong could be imputed to him. Philip could even perceive that there was some
      surprise that such inquiries should be made at all, especially by so young a man as himself.
      Mr. Wellwood, the person whom he most wished to see, was not at Oxford, but was at home
      preparing for his ordination.
Nor could Philip get nearer to the solution of the mystery when he went to the tradesmen,
      who were evidently as much surprised as the tutors, and said he always paid in ready money.
      Captain Morville felt like a lawyer whose case is breaking down, no discoveries made, nothing
      done; but he was not one whit convinced of his cousin's innocence, thinking the college
      authorities blind and careless, and the tradesmen combined to conceal their extortions, or
      else that the mischief had been done at St. Mildred's. He was particularly provoked when he
      remembered Guy's invitation to him to come to his rooms, knowing, as he must have done, what
      would be the result of the inquiry.
Philip was conscious that it would have been kind to have gone to say that, so far, he had
      found nothing
       amiss, but he did not like giving Guy this passing triumph. It made no
      difference in his real opinion; and why renew a useless discussion? He persuaded himself that
      he had left himself no time, and should miss the train, and hastened off to the station, where
      he had to wait a quarter of an hour, consoling himself with reflecting—
'After all, though I might have gone to him, it would have been useless. He is obstinate,
      and occasions of irritating his unfortunate temper are above all to be avoided.'
One short year after, what would not Philip have given for that quarter of an hour.
By six o'clock he was at St. Mildred's, greeted with delight by his sister, and with
      cordiality by Dr. Henley. They were both proud of him, and every tender feeling his sister
      had, was for Philip, her pet and her pupil in his childhood, and her most valued companion and
      counsellor through her early womanhood.
She had a picked dinner-party to meet him, for she knew the doctor's conversation was not
      exactly the thing to entertain him through a whole evening, and the guests might well think
      they had never seen a handsomer or more clever brother and sister than Mrs. Henley and Captain
      Morville. The old county families, if they did wonder at her marriage, were always glad to
      meet her brother, and it was a great pleasure to him to see old friends.
Only once did his sister, in the course of the evening, make him feel the difference of
      their sentiments, and that was about Miss Wellwood. Philip defended her warmly; and when he
      heard that there was a plan getting up for excluding her from the hospital, he expressed
      strong disapprobation at the time; and after the guests were gone, spoke upon the subject with
      his sister and her husband. The doctor entered into no party questions, and had only been
      stirred up to the opposition by his wife; he owned that the Miss Wellwoods had done a great
      deal of good, and made the nurses do their
       duty better than he had ever known, and was quite ready to withdraw his
      opposition. Mrs. Henley argued about opinions, but Philip was a match for her in her own line;
      and the end of it was, that though she would not allow herself to be convinced, and shook her
      head at her brother's way of thinking, he knew he had prevailed, and that Miss Wellwood would
      be unmolested.
There was not another person in the world to whom Margaret would have yielded; and it served
      to restore him to the sense of universal dominion which had been a little shaken by his
      conversation with Guy.
'Sir Guy was a great deal with the Wellwoods,' said Mrs. Henley.
'Was he, indeed?'
'O, you need not think of that . It would be too absurd. The youngest must be twice
      his age.'
'I was not thinking of any such thing,' said Philip, smiling as he thought of the very
      different course Guy's affections had taken.
'I did hear he was to marry Lady Eveleen de Courcy. Is there anything in that report?'
'No, certainly not.'
'I should pity the woman who married him, after the specimen I saw of his temper.'
'Poor boy!' said Philip.
'Lady Eveleen has been a great deal at Hollywell, has she not? I rather wondered my aunt
      should like to have her there, considering all things.'
'What things, sister?'
'Considering what a catch he would be for one of the Edmonstone girls.'
'I thought you had just been pitying the woman who should marry him. Perhaps my aunt had
      Lady Eveleen there to act as a screen for her own daughters.'
'That our good-natured aunt should have acted with such ultra-prudence!' said Margaret,
      laughing at his grave, ironical tone. 'Lady Eveleen is very pretty, is she not? A mere beauty,
      I believe?'

'Just so; she is much admired; but Guy is certainly not inclined to fall in love with
      her.'
'I should have thought him the very man to fall in love young, like his father. Do you think
      there is any chance for either of the Edmonstones? Laura's beauty he spoke of, but it was not
      in a very lover-like way. Do you admire Laura so much?'
'She is very pretty.'
'And little Amy?'
'She is a mere child, and will hardly ever be anything more; but she is a very good little
      amiable thing.'
'I wish poor Charles's temper was improved.'
'So do I; but it is very far from improvement at present, in consequence of his zeal for
      Guy. Guy has been very attentive and good-natured to him, and has quite won his heart; so that
      I should positively honour him for his championship if it was not in great degree out of
      opposition to his father and myself. To-morrow, Margaret, you must give me some guide to the
      most probable quarters for learning anything respecting this poor boy's follies.'
Mrs. Henley did her best in that way, and Philip followed up his inquiries with great
      ardour, but still unsuccessfully. Jack White, the hero of the draft, was not at St. Mildred's,
      nor likely to be heard of again till the next races; and whether Sir Guy had been on the
      race-ground at all was a doubtful point. Next, Philip walked to Stylehurst, to call on Colonel
      Harewood, and see if he could learn anything in conversation with him; but the Colonel did not
      seem to know anything, and his sons were not at home. Young Morville was, he thought, a
      spirited lad, very good-natured; he had been out shooting once or twice with Tom, and had a
      very fine spaniel. If he had been at the races, the Colonel did not know it; he had had some
      thoughts of asking him to join their party, but had been prevented.
This was no reason, thought Philip, why Guy might not have been with Tom Harewood without
      the Colonel's
       knowledge. Tom was just the man to lead him amongst those who were given to
      betting; he might have been drawn in, and, perhaps, he had given some pledge of payment when
      he was of age, or, possibly, obtained an immediate supply of money from the old steward at
      Redclyffe, who was devotedly attached to him. If so, Philip trusted to be able to detect it
      from the accounts; on the other supposition, there was no hope of discovery.
The conversation with Colonel Harewood kept him so late that he had no time for going, as
      usual, to his old haunts, at Stylehurst; nor did he feel inclined just then to revive the
      saddening reflections they excited. He spent the evening in talking over books with his
      sister, and the next day proceeded on his journey to Thorndale Park.
This was one of the places where he was always the most welcome, ever since he had been a
      school-boy, received in a way especially flattering, considering that the friendship was
      entirely owing to the uncompromising good sense and real kindness with which he had kept in
      order the follies of his former fag.
Charles might laugh, and call them the young man and young man's companion, and Guy more
      classically term them the pious Æneas and his fidus Achates, but it was a friendship that did
      honour to both; and the value that the Thorndales set upon Captain Morville was not misplaced,
      and scarcely over-rated. Not particularly clever themselves, they the more highly appreciated
      his endowments, and were proud that 'James' had been able to make such a friend; for they
      knew, as well as the rest of the world, that Captain Morville was far from seeking the
      acquaintance for the sake of their situation in life, but that it was from real liking and
      esteem. How far this esteem was gained by the deference the whole family paid to his opinion,
      was another question; at any rate, the courting was from them.
The Miss Thorndales deemed Captain Morville the
       supreme authority in drawing, literature, and ecclesiastical architecture; and
      whenever a person came in their way who was thought handsome, always pronounced that he was
      not by any means equal to James's friend. Lady Thorndale delighted to talk over James with
      him, and thank him for his kindness; and Lord Thorndale, rather a pompous man himself, liked
      his somewhat stately manners, and talked politics with him, sincerely wishing he was his
      neighbour at Redclyffe, and calculating how much good he would do there. Philip listened with
      interest to accounts of how the Thorndale and Morville influence had always divided the
      borough of Moorworth, and, if united, might dispose of it at will, and returned evasive
      answers to questions what the young heir of Redclyffe might be likely to do.
James Thorndale drove his friend to Redclyffe, as Philip had authority from Mr. Edmonstone
      to transact any business that might be required with Markham, the steward; and, as has been
      said before, he expected to discover in the accounts something that might explain why Guy had
      ceased to press for the thousand pounds. However, he could find nothing amiss in them,
      though—bearing in mind that it is less easy to detect the loss of a score of sheep than of
      one—he subjected them to a scrutiny which seemed by no means agreeable to the gruff old
      grumbling steward. He also walked about the park, saw to the marking of certain trees that
      were injuring each other; and finding that there was a misunderstanding between Markham and
      the new rector, Mr. Ashford, about certain parish matters, where the clergyman was certainly
      right, he bore down Markham's opposition with Mr. Edmonstone's weight, and felt he was doing
      good service.
He paused at the gate, and looked back at the wide domain and fine old house. He pitied
      them, and the simple-hearted, honest tenantry, for being the heritage of such a family, and
      the possession of one so likely to
       misuse them, instead of training them into the means of conferring benefits on
      them, on his country. What would not Philip himself do if those lands were his, —just what was
      needed to give his talents free scope? and what would it be to see his beautiful Laura their
      mistress?

</div></body></text></TEI>