<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAP. XVI. A LONG DAY IN LONDON.
The warden had to make use of all his very moderate
                                        powers of intrigue to give his son-in-law the slip, and get
                                        out of Barchester without being stopped on his road. No
                                        schoolboy ever ran away from school with more precaution and
                                        more dread of detection; no convict, slipping down from a
                                        prison wall, ever feared to see the gaoler more entirely
                                        than Mr. Harding did to see his son-in-law, as he drove up
                                        in the pony carriage to the railway station, on the morning
                                        of his escape to London.
The evening before he went, he wrote a note to the archdeacon,
                                        explaining that he should start on the morrow on his
                                        journey; that it was his intention to see the
                                        attorney-general if possible, and to decide on his future
                                        plans in accordance with what he heard from that gentleman;
                                        he excused himself for giving Dr. Grantly no earlier notice,
                                        by stating that his resolve was very sudden; and having
                                        entrusted this note to Eleanor, with the perfect, though not
                                                 expressed, understanding that it was
                                        to be sent over to Plumstead Episcopi without haste, he took
                                        his departure.
He also prepared and carried with him a note for Sir Abraham
                                        Haphazard, in which he stated his name, explaining that he
                                        was the defendant in the case of "The Queen on behalf of the
                                        Wool-carders of Barchester v. Trustees under the
                                        will of the late John Hiram," for so was the suit
                                        denominated, and begged the illustrious and learned
                                        gentleman to vouchsafe to him ten minutes' audience at any
                                        hour on the next day. Mr. Harding calculated that for that
                                        one day he was safe; his son-in-law, he had no doubt, would
                                        arrive in town by an early train, but not early enough to
                                        reach the truant till he should have escaped from his hotel
                                        after breakfast; and could he thus manage to see the lawyer
                                        on that very day, the deed might be done before the
                                        archdeacon could interfere.
On his arrival in town the warden drove, as was his wont, to the
                                        Chapter Hotel and Coffee House, near St. Paul's. His visits
                                        to London of late had not been frequent; but in those happy
                                        days when Harding's church music was going through the
                                        press, he had been often there; and as the publisher's house
                                        was in Paternoster Row, and the printer's press in  Fleet Street, the Chapter Hotel and Coffee
                                        House had been convenient. It was a quiet, sombre, clerical
                                        house, beseeming such a man as the warden, and thus he
                                        afterwards frequented it. Had he dared, he would on this
                                        occasion have gone elsewhere to throw the archdeacon further
                                        off the scent; but he did not know what violent steps his
                                        son-in-law might take for his recovery if he were not found
                                        at his usual haunt, and he deemed it not prudent to make
                                        himself the object of a hunt through London.
Arrived at his inn, he ordered dinner, and went forth to the
                                        attorney-general's chambers. There he learnt that Sir
                                        Abraham was in Court, and would not probably return that
                                        day. He would go direct from Court to the House; all
                                        appointments were, as a rule, made at the chambers; the
                                        clerk could by no means promise an interview for the next
                                        day; was able, on the other hand, to say that such interview
                                        was, he thought, impossible; but that Sir Abraham would
                                        certainly be at the House in the course of the night, when
                                        an answer from himself might possibly be elicited.
To the House Mr. Harding went, and left his note, not finding Sir
                                        Abraham there. He added a most piteous entreaty that he
                                        might be favoured with  an answer that evening,
                                        for which he would return. He then journeyed back sadly to
                                        the Chapter Coffee House, digesting his great thoughts, as
                                        best he might, in a clattering omnibus, wedged in between a
                                        wet old lady and a journeyman glazier, returning from his
                                        work with his tools in his lap. In melancholy solitude he
                                        discussed his mutton chop and pint of port. What is there in
                                        this world more melancholy than such a dinner? A dinner,
                                        though alone, in a country hotel may be worthy of some
                                        energy; the waiter, if you are known, will make much of you;
                                        the landlord will make you a bow, and perhaps put the fish
                                        on the table; if you ring you are attended to, and there is
                                        some life about it. A dinner at a London eatinghouse is also
                                        lively enough, if it have no other attraction. There is
                                        plenty of noise and stir about it, and the rapid whirl of
                                        voices and rattle of dishes disperses sadness. But a
                                        solitary dinner in an old, respectable, sombre, solid London
                                        inn, where nothing makes any noise but the old waiter's
                                        creaking shoes; where one plate slowly goes and another
                                        slowly comes without a sound; where the two or three guests
                                        would as soon think of knocking each other down as of
                                        speaking; where the servants whisper, and the whole
                                        household is disturbed if an order be given above the
                                        voice—what can be more melancholy  than a
                                        mutton chop and a pint of port in such a place?
Having gone through this, Mr. Harding got into another omnibus,
                                        and again returned to the House. yes, Sir Abraham was there,
                                        and was that moment on his legs, fighting eagerly for the
                                        hundred and seventh clause of the Convent Custody Bill. Mr.
                                        Harding's note had been delivered to him; and if Mr. Harding
                                        would wait some two or three hours, Sir Abraham could be
                                        asked whether there was any answer. The House was not full,
                                        and perhaps Mr. Harding might get admittance into the
                                        Strangers' Gallery, which admission, with the help of five
                                        shillings, Mr. Harding was able to effect.
This bill of Sir Abraham's had been read a second time and passed
                                        into committee. A hundred and six clauses had already been
                                        discussed, and had occupied only four mornings and five
                                        evening sittings; nine of the hundred and six clauses were
                                        passed, fifty-five were withdrawn by consent, fourteen had
                                        been altered so as to mean the reverse of the original
                                        proposition, eleven had been postponed for further
                                        consideration, and seventeen had been directly negatived.
                                        The hundred and seventh ordered the bodily searching of nuns
                                        for Jesuitical symbols by aged clergymen, and was considered
                                        to be the real mainstay of the whole  bill. No
                                        intention had ever existed to pass such a law as that
                                        proposed, but the government did not intend to abandon it
                                        till their object was fully attained by the discussion of
                                        this clause. It was known that it would be insisted on with
                                        terrible vehemence by Protestant Irish members, and as
                                        vehemently denounced by the Roman Catholic; and it was
                                        justly considered that no further union between the parties
                                        would be possible after such a battle. The innocent Irish
                                        fell into the trap as they always do, and whisky and poplins
                                        became a drug in the market.
A florid-faced gentleman with a nice head of hair, from the south
                                        of Ireland, had succeeded in catching the speaker's eye by
                                        the time that Mr. Harding had got into the gallery, and was
                                        denouncing the proposed sacrilege, his whole face glowing
                                        with a fine theatrical frenzy.
"And is this a Christian country?" said he. (Loud cheers; counter
                                        cheers from the ministerial benches. 'Some doubt as to
                                        that,' from a voice below the gangway.) "No, it can be no
                                        Christian country, in which the head of the bar, the lagal
                                        adviser (loud laughter and cheers)—yes, I say the lagal
                                        adviser of the crown (great cheers and laughter,—can stand
                                        up in his seat in this house (prolonged  cheers
                                        and laughter), and attempt to lagalise indacent assaults on
                                        the bodies of religious ladies." (Deafening cheers and
                                        laughter, which were prolonged till the honourable member
                                        resumed his seat.)
When Mr. Harding had listened to this and much more of the same
                                        kind of about three hours, he returned to the door of the
                                        house, and received back from the messenger his own note
                                        with the following words scrawled in pencil on the back of
                                        it:—"To-morrow, 10 P.M. —my chambers. A. H."
He was so far successful,—but 10 P.M. : what an hour Sir Abraham
                                        had named for a legal interview! Mr. Harding felt perfectly
                                        sure that long before that Dr. Grantly would be in London.
                                        Dr. Grantly could not, however, know that this interview had
                                        been arranged, nor could he learn it unless he managed to
                                        get hold of Sir Abraham before that hour; and as this was
                                        very improbable, Mr. Harding determined to start from his
                                        hotel early, merely leaving word that he should dine out,
                                        and unless luck were much against him, he might still escape
                                        the archdeacon till his return from the attorney-general's
                                        chambers.
He was at breakfast at nine, and for the twentieth time consulted
                                        his "Bradshaw," to see at what earliest hour Dr Grantly
                                        could arrive from Barchester. As  he examined
                                        the columns, he was nearly petrified by the reflection that
                                        perhaps the archdeacon might come up by the night
                                        mail-train! His heart sank within him at the horrid idea,
                                        and for a moment he felt himself dragged back to Barchester
                                        without accomplishing any portion of his object. Then he
                                        remembered that had Dr. Grantly done so, he would have been
                                        in the hotel, looking for him long since.
"Waiter," said he, timidly.
The waiter approached, creaking in his shoes, but voiceless.
"Did any gentleman—a clergyman, arrive here by the night
                                        mail-train?"
"No, sir, not one," whispered the waiter, putting his mouth
                                        nearly close to the warden's ear.
Mr. Harding was reassured.
"Waiter," said he again, and the waiter again creaked up; "If any
                                        one calls for me, I am going to dine out, and shall return
                                        about eleven o'clock."
The waiter nodded, but did not this time vouchsafe any reply; and
                                        Mr. Harding, taking up his hat, proceeded out to pass a long
                                        day in the best way he could, somewhere out of sight of the
                                        archdeacon.
"Bradshaw" had told him twenty times that Dr. Grantly could not
                                        be at Paddington station till 2 P.M. , and our poor friend
                                        might therefore have trusted to  the shelter of
                                        the hotel for some hours longer with perfect safety; but he
                                        was nervous. There was no knowing what steps the archdeacon
                                        might take for his apprehension: a message by electric
                                        telegraph might desire the landlord of the hotel to set a
                                        watch upon him; some letter might come which he might find
                                        himself unable to disobey; at any rate, he could not feel
                                        himself secure in any place at which the archdeacon could
                                        expect to find him; and at 10 A.M. he started forth to spend
                                        twelve hours in London.
Mr. Harding had friends in town, had he chosen to seek them; but
                                        he felt that he was in no humour for ordinary calls, and he
                                        did not now wish to consult with any one as to the great
                                        step which he had determined to take. As he had said to his
                                        daughter, no one knows where the shoe pinches but the
                                        wearer. There are some points on which no man can be
                                        contented to follow the advice of another— some subjects on
                                        which a man can consult his own conscience only. Our warden
                                        had made up his mind that it was good for him at any cost to
                                        get rid of this grievance; his daughter was the only person
                                        whose concurrence appeared necessary to him, and she did
                                        concur with him most heartily. Under such circumstances he
                                        would not, if he could help it, consult any one further,
                                        till advice would be useless.  Should the
                                        archdeacon catch him, indeed, there would be much advice,
                                        and much consultation of a kind not to be avoided; but he
                                        hoped better things; and as he felt that he could not now
                                        converse on indifferent subjects, he resolved to see no one
                                        till after his interview with the attorney-general.
He determined to take sanctuary in Westminster Abbey, so he again
                                        went thither in an omnibus, and finding that the doors were
                                        not open for morning service, he paid his twopence, and went
                                        in as a sight-seer. It occurred to him that he had no
                                        definite place of rest for the day, and that he should be
                                        absolutely worn out before his interview if he attempted to
                                        walk about from 10 A.M. to 10 P.M. , so he sat himself down
                                        on a stone step, and gazed up at the figure of William Pitt,
                                        who looks as though he had just entered the church for the
                                        first time in his life, and was anything but pleased at
                                        finding himself there.
He had been sitting unmolested about twenty minutes, when the
                                        verger asked him whether he would n't like to walk round.
                                        Mr. Harding did n't want to walk anywhere, and declined,
                                        merely observing that he was waiting for the morning
                                        service. The verger seeing that he was a clergyman, told him
                                        that the doors of the choir were now open, and 
                                        showed him into a seat. This was a great point gained; the
                                        archdeacon would certainly not come to morning service at
                                        Westminster Abbey, even though he were in London; and here
                                        the warden could rest quietly, and when the time came, duly
                                        say his prayers.
He longed to get up from his seat, and examine the music-books of
                                        the choristers, and the copy of the litany from which the
                                        service was chanted, to see how far the little details at
                                        Westminster corresponded with those at Barchester, and
                                        whether he thought his own voice would fill the church well
                                        from the Westminster precentor's seat. There would, however,
                                        be impropriety in such meddling, and he sat perfectly still,
                                        looking up at the noble roof, and guarding against the
                                        coming fatigues of the day.
By degrees two or three people entered: the very same damp old
                                        woman who had nearly obliterated him in the omnibus, or some
                                        other just like her; a couple of young ladies, with their
                                        veils down, and gilt crosses conspicuous on their
                                        prayer-books; an old man on crutches; a party who were
                                        seeing the abbey, and thought they might as well hear the
                                        service for their twopence, as opportunity served; and a
                                        young woman with her prayer-book done up  in
                                        her handkerchief, who rushed in late, and, in her hurried
                                        entry, tumbled over one of the forms, and made such a noise
                                        that every one, even the officiating minor canon, was
                                        startled, and she herself was so frightened by the echo of
                                        her own catastrophe, that she was nearly thrown into fits by
                                        the panic.
Mr. Harding was not much edified by the manner of the service.
                                        The minor canon in question hurried in, somewhat late, in a
                                        surplice not in the neatest order, and was followed by a
                                        dozen choristers, who were also not as trim as they might
                                        have been: they all jostled into their places with a quick
                                        hurried step, and the service was soon commenced. Soon
                                        commenced, and soon over, for there was no music, and time
                                        was not unnecessarily lost in the chanting. On the whole,
                                        Mr. Harding was of opinion that things were managed better
                                        at Barchester, though even there he knew that there was room
                                        for improvement.
It appears to us a question whether any clergyman can go through
                                        our church service with decorum, morning after morning, in
                                        an immense building, surrounded by not more than a dozen
                                        listeners. The best actors cannot act well before empty
                                        benches, and though there is, of course, a higher motive in
                                        one case than the other, still even the best 
                                        of clergymen cannot but be influenced by their audience; and
                                        to expect that a duty should be well done under such
                                        circumstances, would be to require from human nature more
                                        than human power.
When the two ladies with the gilt crosses, the old man with his
                                        crutch, and the still palpitating housemaid were going, Mr.
                                        Harding found himself obliged to go too. The verger stood in
                                        his way, and looked at him and looked at the door, and so he
                                        went. But he returned again in a few minutes, and re-entered
                                        with another twopence. There was no other sanctuary so good
                                        for him.
As he walked slowly down the nave, and then up one aisle, and
                                        then again down the nave and up the other aisle, he tried to
                                        think gravely of the step he was about to take. He was going
                                        to give up eight hundred a year voluntarily; and doom
                                        himself to live for the rest of his life on about a hundred
                                        and fifty. He knew that he had hitherto failed to realise
                                        this fact as he ought to do. Could he maintain his own
                                        independence and support his daughter on a hundred and fifty
                                        pounds a year without being a burden on any one? His
                                        son-in-law was rich, but nothing could induce him to lean on
                                        his son-in-law after acting, as he intended to do, in most
                                        direct opposition to his counsel. The bishop was rich, but
                                                 he was about to throw away the
                                        bishop's best gift, and that in a manner to injure
                                        materially the patronage of the giver: he could neither
                                        expect nor accept anything further from the bishop. There
                                        would be not only no merit, but positive disgrace, in giving
                                        up his wardenship, if he were not prepared to meet the world
                                        without it. Yes, he must from this time forward bound all
                                        his human wishes for himself and his daughter to the poor
                                        extent of so limited an income. He knew he had not thought
                                        sufficiently of this, that he had been carried away by
                                        enthusiasm, and had hitherto not brought home to himself the
                                        full reality of his position.
He thought most about his daughter, naturally. It was true that
                                        she was engaged, and he knew enough of his proposed
                                        son-in-law to be sure that his own altered circumstances
                                        would make no obstacle to such a marriage; nay, he was sure
                                        that the very fact of his poverty would induce Bold more
                                        anxiously to press the matter; but he disliked counting on
                                        Bold in this emergency, brought on, as it had been, by his
                                        doing. He did not like saying to himself, Bold has turned me
                                        out of my house and income, and, therefore, he must relieve
                                        me of my daughter; he preferred reckoning on Eleanor as the
                                        companion  of his poverty and exile,—as the
                                        sharer of his small income.
Some modest provision for his daughter had been long since made.
                                        His life was insured for three thousand pounds, and this sum
                                        was to go to Eleanor. The archdeacon, for some years past,
                                        had paid the premium, and had secured himself by the
                                        immediate possession of a small property which was to have
                                        gone to Mrs. Grantly after her father's death. This matter,
                                        therefore, had been out of the warden's hands long since,
                                        as, indeed, had all the business transactions of his family,
                                        and his anxiety was, therefore, confined to his own life
                                        income.
Yes. A hundred and fifty per annum was very small, but still it
                                        might suffice; but how was he to chant the litany at the
                                        cathedral on Sunday mornings, and get the service done at
                                        Crabtree Parva? True, Crabtree Church was not quite a mile
                                        and a half from the cathedral; but he could not be in two
                                        places at once! Crabtree was a small village, and afternoon
                                        service might suffice, but still this went against his
                                        conscience; it was not right that his parishioners should be
                                        robbed of any of their privileges on account of his poverty.
                                        He might, to be sure, make some arrangement for doing
                                        weekday service at the cathedral, but he had chanted the  litany at Barchester so long, and had a
                                        conscious feeling that he did it so well, that he was
                                        unwilling to give up the duty.
Thinking of such things, turning over in his own mind together
                                        small desires and grave duties, but never hesitating for a
                                        moment as to the necessity of leaving the hospital, Mr.
                                        Harding walked up and down the abbey, or sat still
                                        meditating on the same stone step, hour after hour. One
                                        verger went and another came, but they did not disturb him;
                                        every now and then they crept up and looked at him, but they
                                        did so with a reverential stare, and, on the whole, Mr.
                                        Harding found his retreat well chosen. About four o'clock
                                        his comfort was disturbed by an enemy in the shape of
                                        hunger; it was necessary that he should dine, and it was
                                        clear that he could not dine in the abbey; so he left his
                                        sanctuary not willingly, and betook himself to the
                                        neighbourhood of the Strand to look for food.
His eyes had become so accustomed to the gloom of the church,
                                        that they were dazed when he got out into the full light of
                                        day, and he felt confused and ashamed of himself, as though
                                        people were staring at him. He hurried along, still in dread
                                        of the archdeacon, till he came to Charing Cross, and then
                                        remembered that in one of his passages through the  Strand he had seen the words "Chops and
                                        Steaks" on a placard in a shop window. He remembered the
                                        shop distinctly; it was next door to a trunkseller's, and
                                        there was a cigar shop on the other side. He couldn't go to
                                        his hotel for dinner, which to him hitherto was the only
                                        known mode of dining in London at his own expense; and,
                                        therefore, he would get a steak at the shop in the Strand.
                                        Archdeacon Grantly would certainly not come to such a place
                                        for his dinner.
He found the house easily—just as he had observed it, between the
                                        trunks and the cigars. He was rather daunted by the huge
                                        quantity of fish which he saw in the window. There were
                                        barrels of oysters, hecatombs of lobsters, a few
                                        tremendous-looking crabs, and a tub full of pickled salmon;
                                        not, however, being aware of any connexion between
                                        shell-fish and iniquity, he entered, and modestly asked a
                                        slatternly woman, who was picking oysters out of a great
                                        watery reservoir, whether he could have a mutton chop and a
                                        potatoe.
The woman looked somewhat surprised, but answered in the
                                        affirmative, and a slipshod girl ushered him into a long
                                        back room, filled with boxes for the accommodation of
                                        parties, in one of which he took his seat. In a more
                                        miserably forlorn place he  could not have
                                        found himself: the room smelt of fish, and sawdust, and
                                        stale tobacco smoke, with a slight taint of escaped gas;
                                        everything was rough, and dirty, and disreputable; the cloth
                                        which they put before him was abominable; the knives and
                                        forks were bruised, and hacked, and filthy; and everything
                                        was impregnated with fish. He had one comfort, however: he
                                        was quite alone; there was no one there to look on his
                                        dismay; nor was it probable that any one would come to do
                                        so. It was a London supper-house. About one o' clock at
                                        night the place would be lively enough, but at the present
                                        time his seclusion was as deep as it had been in the
                                        abbey.
In about half an hour the untidy girl, not yet dressed for her
                                        evening labours, brought him his chop and potatoes, and Mr.
                                        Harding begged for a pint of sherry. He was impressed with
                                        an idea, which was generally prevalent a few years since,
                                        and is not yet wholly removed from the minds of men, that to
                                        order a dinner at any kind of inn, without also ordering a
                                        pint of wine for the benefit of the landlord, was a kind of
                                        fraud; not punishable, indeed, by law, but not the less
                                        abominable on that account. Mr. Harding remembered his
                                        coming poverty, and would willingly have saved his
                                        half-crown,  but he thought he had no
                                        alternative; and he was soon put in possession of some
                                        horrid mixture procured from the neighbouring
                                        public-house.
His chop and potatoes, however, were eatable, and having got over
                                        as best he might the disgust created by the knives and
                                        forks, he contrived to swallow his dinner. He was not much
                                        disturbed: one young man, with pale face and watery
                                        fish-like eyes, wearing his hat ominously on one side, did
                                        come in and stare at him, and ask the girl, audibly enough,
                                        'Who that old cock was;' but the annoyance went no further,
                                        and the warden was left seated on his wooden bench in peace,
                                        endeavouring to distinguish the different scents arising
                                        from lobsters, oysters, and salmon.
Unknowing as Mr. Harding was in the ways of London, he felt that
                                        he had somehow selected an ineligible dining-house, and that
                                        he had better leave it. It was hardly five o'clock—how was
                                        he to pass the time till ten? Five miserable hours! He was
                                        already tired, and it was impossible that he should continue
                                        walking so long. He thought of getting into an omnibus, and
                                        going out to Fulham for the sake of coming back in another:
                                        this, however, would be weary work, and as he paid his bill
                                        to the woman in the shop, he asked her if there were any
                                        place near  where he could get a cup of coffee.
                                        Though she did keep a shell-fish supper-house, she was very
                                        civil, and directed him to the cigar divan on the other side
                                        of the street.
Mr. Harding had not a much correcter notion of a cigar divan than
                                        he had of a London dinner-house, but he was desperately in
                                        want of rest, and went as he was directed. He thought he
                                        must have made some mistake when he found himself in a cigar
                                        shop, but the man behind the counter saw immediately that he
                                        was a stranger, and understood what he wanted. "One
                                        shilling, sir—thank ye, sir—cigar, sir?— ticket for coffee,
                                        sir—you'll only have to call the waiter. Up those stairs, if
                                        you please, sir. Better take the cigar, sir—you can always
                                        give it to a friend you know. Well, sir, thank ye, sir—as
                                        you are so good, I'll smoke it myself." And so Mr. Harding
                                        ascended to the divan, with his ticket for coffee, but minus
                                        the cigar.
The place seemed much more suitable to his requirements than the
                                        room in which he had dined: there was, to be sure, a strong
                                        smell of tobacco, to which he was not accustomed; but after
                                        the shellfish, the tobacco did not seem disagreeable. There
                                        were quantities of books, and long rows of sofas. What on
                                        earth could be more luxurious than a sofa,  a
                                        book, and a cup of coffee? An old waiter came up to him,
                                        with a couple of magazines and an evening paper. Was ever
                                        anything so civil? Would he have a cup of coffee, or would
                                        he prefer sherbet? Sherbet! Was he absolutely in an Eastern
                                        divan, with the slight addition of all the London
                                        periodicals? He had, however, an idea that sherbet should be
                                        drank sitting cross-legged, and as he was not quite up to
                                        this, he ordered the coffee.
The coffee came, and was unexceptionable. Why, this divan was a
                                        paradise! The civil old waiter suggested to him a game of
                                        chess: though a chess player he was not equal to this, so he
                                        declined, and, putting up his weary legs on the sofa,
                                        leisurely sipped his coffee, and turned over the pages of
                                        his Blackwood. He might have been so engaged for about an
                                        hour, for the old waiter enticed him to a second cup of
                                        coffee, when a musical clock began to play. Mr. Harding then
                                        closed his magazine, keeping his place with his finger, and
                                        lay, listening with closed eyes to the clock. Soon the clock
                                        seemed to turn into a violoncello, with piano
                                        accompaniments, and Mr. Harding began to fancy the old
                                        waiter was the Bishop of Barchester; he was inexpressibly
                                        shocked that the bishop should have brought him his  coffee with his own hands; then Dr.
                                        Grantly came in, with a basket full of lobsters, which he
                                        would not be induced to leave down stairs in the kitchen;
                                        and then the warden could n't quite understand why so many
                                        people would smoke in the bishop's drawing-room; and so he
                                        fell fast asleep, and his dreams wandered away to his
                                        accustomed stall in Barchester Cathedral, and the twelve old
                                        men he was so soon about to leave for ever.
He was fatigued, and slept soundly for some time. Some sudden
                                        stop in the musical clock woke him at length, and he jumped
                                        up with a start, surprised to find the room quite full; it
                                        had been nearly empty when his nap began. With nervous
                                        anxiety he pulled out his watch, and found that it was
                                        half-past nine. He seized his hat, and, hurrying down
                                        stairs, started at a rapid pace for Lincoln's Inn.
It still wanted twenty minutes to ten when the warden found
                                        himself at the bottom of Sir Abraham's stairs, so he walked
                                        leisurely up and down the quiet inn to cool himself. It was
                                        a beautiful evening at the end of August. He had recovered
                                        from his fatigue; his sleep and the coffee had refreshed
                                        him, and he was surprised to find that he was absolutely
                                        enjoying  himself, when the inn clock struck
                                        ten. The sound was hardly over before he knocked at Sir
                                        Abraham's door, and was informed by the clerk who received
                                        him that the great man would be with him immediately.

</div></body></text></TEI>