<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAP. II. THE BARCHESTER REFORMER.
Mr. Harding has been now precentor of Barchester for ten
                                        years; and, alas, the murmurs respecting the proceeds of
                                        Hiram's estate are again becoming audible. It is not that
                                        any one begrudges to Mr. Harding the income which he enjoys,
                                        and the comfortable place which so well becomes him; but
                                        such matters have begun to be talked of in various parts of
                                        England. Eager pushing politicians have asserted in the
                                        House of Commons, with very telling indignation, that the
                                        grasping priests of the Church of England are gorged with
                                        the wealth which the charity of former times has left for
                                        the solace of the aged, or the education of the young. The
                                        wellknown case of the Hospital of St. Cross, has even come
                                        before the law courts of the country, and the struggles of
                                        Mr. Whiston, at Rochester, have met with sympathy and
                                        support. Men are beginning to say that these things must be
                                        looked into.

Mr. Harding, whose conscience in the matter is clear, and who has
                                        never felt that he had received a pound from Hiram's will to
                                        which he was not entitled, has naturally taken the part of
                                        the church in talking over these matters with his friend,
                                        the bishop, and his son-in-law, the archdeacon. The
                                        archdeacon, indeed, Dr. Grantly, has been somewhat loud in
                                        the matter: he is a personal friend of the dignitaries of
                                        the Rochester Chapter, and has written letters in the public
                                        press on the subject of that turbulent Dr. Whiston, which,
                                        his admirers think, must well nigh set the question at rest.
                                        It is also known at Oxford, that he is the author of the
                                        pamphlet signed "Sacerdos" on the subject of the Earl of
                                        Guildford and St. Cross, in which it is so clearly argued
                                        that the manners of the present times do not admit of a
                                        literal adhesion to the very words of the founder's will,
                                        but that the interests of the church for which the founder
                                        was so deeply concerned, are best consulted in enabling its
                                        bishops to reward those shining lights, whose services have
                                        been most signally serviceable to Christianity. In answer to
                                        this, it is asserted that Henry de Blois, founder of St.
                                        Cross, was not greatly interested in the welfare of the
                                        reformed church, and that the masters of St. Cross, for many
                                        years past, cannot be  called shining lights in
                                        the service of Christianity; it is, however, stoutly
                                        maintained, and no doubt felt, by all the archdeacon's
                                        friends, that his logic is conclusive, and has not, in fact,
                                        been answered.
With such a tower of strength to back both his arguments and his
                                        conscience, it may be imagined that Mr. Harding has never
                                        felt any compunction as to receiving his quarterly sum of
                                        two hundred pounds. Indeed, the subject has never presented
                                        itself to his mind in that shape. He has talked not
                                        unfrequently, and heard very much about the wills of old
                                        founders and the incomes arising from their estates, during
                                        the last year or two; he did even, at one moment, feel a
                                        doubt (since expelled by his son-in-law's logic) as to
                                        whether Lord Guildford was clearly entitled to receive so
                                        enormous an income as he does from the revenues of St.
                                        Cross; but that he himself was overpaid with his modest
                                        eight hundred pounds;— he who, out of that, voluntarily gave
                                        up sixty-two pounds eleven shillings and fourpence a year to
                                        his twelve old neighbours;—he who, for the money, does his
                                        precentor's work as no precentor has done it before, since
                                        Barchester Cathedral was built;—such an idea has never
                                        sullied his quiet, or disturbed his conscience.
Nevertheless, Mr. Harding is becoming uneasy at the rumour which
                                        he knows to prevail in Barchester  on the
                                        subject. He is aware that, at any rate, two of his old men
                                        have been heard to say, that if every one had his own, they
                                        might each have their hundred pounds a year, and live like
                                        gentlemen, instead of a beggarly one shilling and sixpence a
                                        day; and that they had slender cause to be thankful for a
                                        miserable dole of twopence, when Mr. Harding and Mr.
                                        Chadwick, between them, ran away with thousands of pounds
                                        which good old John Hiram never intended for the like of
                                        them. It is the ingratitude of this which stings Mr.
                                        Harding. One of this discontented pair, Abel Handy, was put
                                        into the hospital by himself; he had been a stonemason in
                                        Barchester, and had broken his thigh by a fall from a
                                        scaffolding, while employed about the cathedral; and Mr.
                                        Harding had given him the first vacancy in the hospital
                                        after the occurrence, although Dr. Grantly had been very
                                        anxious to put into it an insufferable clerk of his at
                                        Plumstead Episcopi, who had lost all his teeth, and whom the
                                        archdeacon hardly knew how to get rid of by other means. Dr.
                                        Grantly has not forgotten to remind Mr. Harding how well
                                        satisfied with his one and sixpence a day old Joe Mutters
                                        would have been, and how injudicious it was on the part of
                                        Mr. Harding to allow a radical from the town to get into the
                                        concern. Probably  Dr. Grantly forgot, at the
                                        moment, that the charity was intended for broken-down
                                        journeymen of Barchester.
There is living at Barchester, a young man, a surgeon, named John
                                        Bold, and both Mr. Harding and Dr. Grantly are well aware
                                        that to him is owing the pestilent rebellious feeling which
                                        has shown itself in the hospital; yes, and the renewal, too,
                                        of that disagreeable talk about Hiram's estates which is now
                                        again prevalent in Barchester. Nevertheless, Mr. Harding and
                                        Mr. Bold are acquainted with each other; we may say, are
                                        friends, considering the great disparity in their years. Dr.
                                        Grantly, however, has a holy horror of the impious
                                        demagogue, as on one occasion he called Bold, when speaking
                                        of him to the precentor; and being a more prudent far-seeing
                                        man than Mr. Harding, and possessed of a stronger head, he
                                        already perceives that this John Bold will work great
                                        trouble in Barchester. He considers that he is to be
                                        regarded as an enemy, and thinks that he should not be
                                        admitted into the camp on anything like friendly terms. As
                                        John Bold will occupy much of our attention, we must
                                        endeavour to explain who he is, and why he takes the part of
                                        John Hiram's bedesmen.
John Bold is a young surgeon, who passed many of  his
                                        boyish years at Barchester. His father was a physician in
                                        the city of London, where he made a moderate fortune, which
                                        he invested in houses in that city. The Dragon-of-Wantly inn
                                        and posting-house, belonged to him, also four shops in the
                                        High Street, and a moiety of the new row of genteel villas
                                        (so called in the advertisements), built outside the town
                                        just beyond Hiram's Hospital. To one of these Dr. Bold
                                        retired to spend the evening of his life, and to die; and
                                        here his son John spent his holidays, and afterwards his
                                        Christmas vacation, when he went from school to study
                                        surgery in the London hospitals. Just as John Bold was
                                        entitled to write himself surgeon and apothecary, old Dr.
                                        Bold died, leaving his Barchester property to his son, and a
                                        certain sum in the three per cents to his daughter Mary, who
                                        is some four or five years older than her brother.
John Bold determined to settle himself at Barchester, and look
                                        after his own property, as well as the bones and bodies of
                                        such of his neighbours as would call upon him for assistance
                                        in their troubles. He therefore put up a large brass plate,
                                        with "John Bold, Surgeon," on it, to the great disgust of
                                        the nine practitioners who were already trying to get a
                                        living out of the bishop, dean, and canons; and 
                                        began house-keeping with the aid of his sister. At this time
                                        he was not more than twenty-four years old; and though he
                                        has now been three years in Barchester, we have not heard
                                        that he has done much harm to the nine worthy practitioners.
                                        Indeed, their dread of him has died away; for in three years
                                        he has not taken three fees.
Nevertheless, John Bold is a clever man, and would, with
                                        practice, be a clever surgeon; but he has got quite into
                                        another line of life. Having enough to live on, he has not
                                        been forced to work for bread; he has declined to subject
                                        himself to what he calls the drudgery of the profession, by
                                        which, I believe, he means the general work of a practising
                                        surgeon; and has found other employment. He frequently binds
                                        up the bruises and sets the limbs of such of the poorer
                                        classes as profess his way of thinking—but this he does for
                                        love. Now I will not say that the archdeacon is strictly
                                        correct in stigmatising John Bold as a demagogue; for I
                                        hardly know how extreme must be a man's opinions before he
                                        can be justly so called; but Bold is a strong reformer. His
                                        passion is the reform of all abuses; state abuses, church
                                        abuses, corporation abuses (he has got himself elected a
                                        town councillor of Barchester, and has so worried three
                                        consecutive  mayors, that it became somewhat
                                        difficult to find a fourth), abuses in medical practice, and
                                        general abuses in the world at large. Bold is thoroughly
                                        sincere in his patriotic endeavours to mend mankind, and
                                        there is something to be admired in the energy with which he
                                        devotes himself to remedying evil and stopping injustice;
                                        but I fear that he is too much imbued with the idea that he
                                        has a special mission for reforming. It would be well if one
                                        so young had a little more diffidence himself, and more
                                        trust in the honest purposes of others—if he could be
                                        brought to believe that old customs need not necessarily be
                                        evil, and that changes may possibly be dangerous; but no,
                                        Bold has all the ardour, and all the self-assurance of a
                                        Danton, and hurls his anathemas against time-honoured
                                        practices with the violence of a French Jacobin.
No wonder that Dr. Grantly should regard Bold as a firebrand,
                                        falling, as he has done, almost in the centre of the quiet
                                        ancient close of Barchester Cathedral. Dr. Grantly would
                                        have him avoided as the plague; but the old Doctor and Mr.
                                        Harding were fast friends. Young Johnny Bold used to play as
                                        a boy on Mr Harding's lawn; he has many a time won the
                                        precentor's heart by listening with wrapt attention to his
                                        sacred strains; and since those days,  to tell
                                        the truth at once, he has nearly won another heart within
                                        the same walls.
Eleanor Harding has not plighted her troth to John Bold, nor has
                                        she, perhaps, owned to herself how dear to her the young
                                        reformer is; but she cannot endure that any one should speak
                                        harshly of him. She does not dare to defend him when her
                                        brother-in-law is so loud against him; for she, like her
                                        father, is somewhat afraid of Dr. Grantly; but she is
                                        beginning greatly to dislike the archdeacon. She persuades
                                        her father that it would be both unjust and injudicious to
                                        banish his young friend because of his politics; she cares
                                        little to go to houses where she will not meet him, and, in
                                        fact, she is in love.
Nor is there any good reason why Eleanor Harding should not love
                                        John Bold. He has all those qualities which are likely to
                                        touch a girl's heart. He is brave, eager, and amusing;
                                        well-made and good-looking; young and enterprising; his
                                        character is in all respects good; he has sufficient income
                                        to support a wife; he is her father's friend; and, above
                                        all, he is in love with her: then why should not Eleanor
                                        Harding be attached to John Bold?
Dr. Grantly, who has as many eyes as Argus, and has long seen how
                                        the wind blows in that direction,  thinks there
                                        are various strong reasons why this should not be so. He has
                                        not thought it wise as yet to speak to his father-in-law on
                                        the subject, for he knows how foolishly indulgent is Mr.
                                        Harding in everything that concerns his daughter; but he has
                                        discussed the matter with his all-trusted helpmate, within
                                        that sacred recess formed by the clerical bedcurtains at
                                        Plumstead Episcopi.
How much sweet solace, how much valued counsel has our archdeacon
                                        received within that sainted enclosure! 'Tis there alone
                                        that he unbends, and comes down from his high church
                                        pedestal to the level of a mortal man. In the world Dr.
                                        Grantly never lays aside that demeanour which so well
                                        becomes him. He has all the dignity of an ancient saint with
                                        the sleekness of a modern bishop; he is always the same; he
                                        is always the archdeacon; unlike Homer, he never nods. Even
                                        with his father-in-law, even with the bishop and dean, he
                                        maintains that sonorous tone and lofty deportment which
                                        strikes awe into the young hearts of Barchester, and
                                        absolutely cows the whole parish of Plumstead Episcopi. 'Tis
                                        only when he has exchanged that ever-new shovel hat for a
                                        tasselled nightcap, and those shining black habiliments for
                                        his accustomed robe de nuit , that Dr. Grantly
                                        talks, and looks, and thinks like an ordinary man.

Many of us have often thought how severe a trial of faith must
                                        this be to the wives of our great church dignitaries. To us
                                        these men are personifications of St. Paul: their very gait
                                        is a speaking sermon; their clean and sombre apparel exacts
                                        from us faith and submission, and the cardinal virtues seem
                                        to hover round their sacred hats. A dean or archbishop, in
                                        the garb of his order, is sure of our reverence, and a well
                                        got-up bishop fills our very souls with awe. But how can
                                        this feeling be perpetuated in the bosoms of those who see
                                        the bishops without their aprons, and the archdeacons even
                                        in a lower state of dishabille ?
Do we not all know some reverend, all but sacred, personage,
                                        before whom our tongue ceases to be loud, and our step to be
                                        elastic? But were we once to see him stretch himself beneath
                                        the bed-clothes, yawn widely, and bury his face upon his
                                        pillow, we could chatter before him as glibly as before a
                                        doctor or a lawyer. From some such cause, doubtless, it
                                        arose that our archdeacon listened to the counsels of his
                                        wife, though he considered himself entitled to give counsel
                                        to every other being whom he met.
"My dear," he said, as he adjusted the copious folds of his
                                        nightcap, "there was that John Bold at  your
                                        father's again to-day. I must say your father is very
                                        imprudent."
"He is imprudent—he always was," replied Mrs. Grantly, speaking
                                        from under the comfortable bedclothes. "There's nothing new
                                        in that."
"No, my dear, there's nothing new—I know that; but, at the
                                        present juncture of affairs, such imprudence is—is—I'll tell
                                        you what, my dear, if he does not take care what he's about,
                                        John Bold will be off with Eleanor."
"I think he will, whether papa takes care or no; and why
                                        not?"
"Why not!" almost screamed the archdeacon, giving so rough a pull
                                        at his nightcap as almost to bring it over his nose; "why
                                        not!—that pestilent, interfering upstart, John Bold—the most
                                        vulgar young person I ever met! Do you know that he is
                                        meddling with your father's affairs in a most uncalled
                                        for—most—" And being at a loss for an epithet sufficiently
                                        injurious, he finished his expressions of horror by
                                        muttering, "Good heavens!" in a manner that had been found
                                        very efficacious in clerical meetings of the diocese. He
                                        must for the moment have forgotten where he was.
"As to his vulgarity, archdeacon," (Mrs. Grantly had never
                                        assumed a more familiar term than this in 
                                        addressing her husband), "I don't agree with you. Not that I
                                        like Mr. Bold—he is a great deal too conceited for me; but
                                        then Eleanor does, and it would be the best thing in the
                                        world for papa if they were to marry. Bold would never
                                        trouble himself about Hiram's Hospital if he were papa's
                                        son-in-law." And the lady turned herself round under the
                                        bed-clothes, in a manner to which the doctor was well
                                        accustomed, and which told him, as plainly as words, that as
                                        far as she was concerned the subject was over for that
                                        night.
"Good heavens!" murmured the doctor again—he was evidently much
                                        put beside himself.
Dr. Grantly is by no means a bad man; he is exactly the man which
                                        such an education as his was most likely to form; his
                                        intellect being sufficient for such a place in the world,
                                        but not sufficient to put him in advance of it. He performs
                                        with a rigid constancy such of the duties of a parish
                                        clergyman as are, to his thinking, above the sphere of his
                                        curate, but it is as an archdeacon that he shines.
We believe, as a general rule, that either a bishop or his
                                        archdeacons have sinecures: where a bishop works,
                                        archdeacons have but little to do, and vice versâ .
                                        In the diocese of Barchester the Archdeacon of Barchester
                                        does the work. In that capacity he  is diligent,
                                        authoritative, and, as his friends particularly boast,
                                        judicious. His great fault is an overbearing assurance of
                                        the virtues and claims of his order, and his great foible is
                                        an equally strong confidence in the dignity of his own
                                        manner and the eloquence of his own words. He is a moral
                                        man, believing the precepts which he teaches, and believing
                                        also that he acts up to them; though we cannot say that he
                                        would give his coat to the man who took his cloak, or that
                                        he is prepared to forgive his brother even seven times. He
                                        is severe enough in exacting his dues, considering that any
                                        laxity in this respect would endanger the security of the
                                        church; and, could he have his way, he would consign to
                                        darkness and perdition, not only every individual reformer,
                                        but every committee and every commission that would even
                                        dare to ask a question respecting the appropriation of
                                        church revenues.
"They are church revenues: the laity admit it. Surely the church
                                        is able to administer her own revenues." 'T was thus he was
                                        accustomed to argue, when the sacrilegious doings of Lord
                                        John Russell and others were discussed either at Barchester
                                        or at Oxford.
It was no wonder that Dr. Grantly did not like John Bold, and
                                        that his wife's suggestion, that he  should
                                        become closely connected with such a man dismayed him. To
                                        give him his due, the archdeacon never wanted courage; he
                                        was quite willing to meet his enemy on any field, and with
                                        any weapon. He had that belief in his own arguments that he
                                        felt sure of success, could he only be sure of a fair fight
                                        on the part of his adversary. He had no idea that John Bold
                                        could really prove that the income of the hospital was
                                        malappropriated; why, then, should peace be sought for on
                                        such base terms? What! bribe an unbelieving enemy of the
                                        church with the sister-in-law of one dignitary, and the
                                        daughter of another—with a young lady whose connections with
                                        the diocese and chapter of Barchester were so close as to
                                        give her an undeniable claim to a husband endowed with some
                                        of its sacred wealth! When Dr. Grantly talks of unbelieving
                                        enemies, he does not mean to imply want of belief in the
                                        doctrines of the church, but an equally dangerous scepticism
                                        as to its purity in money matters.
Mrs. Grantly is not usually deaf to the claims of the high order
                                        to which she belongs. She and her husband rarely disagree as
                                        to the tone with which the church should be defended; how
                                        singular, then, that in such a case as this she should be
                                        willing to succumb! The archdeacon again murmurs "Good  heavens!" as he lays himself beside her,
                                        but he does so in a voice audible only to himself, and he
                                        repeats it till sleep relieves him from deep thought.
Mr. Harding himself has seen no reason why his daughter should
                                        not love John Bold. He has not been unobservant of her
                                        feelings, and perhaps his deepest regret at the part which
                                        he fears Bold is about to take regarding the hospital,
                                        arises from a dread that he may be separated from his
                                        daughter, or that she may be separated from the man she
                                        loves. He has never spoken to Eleanor about her lover; he is
                                        the last man in the world to allude to such a subject
                                        unconsulted, even with his own daughter; and had he
                                        considered that he had ground to disapprove of Bold, he
                                        would have removed her, or forbidden him his house; but he
                                        saw no such ground. He would probably have preferred a
                                        second clerical son-in-law, for Mr. Harding, also, is
                                        attached to his order; and, failing in that, he would at any
                                        rate have wished that so near a connection should have
                                        thought alike with him on church matters. He would not,
                                        however, reject the man his daughter loved because he
                                        differed on such subjects with himself.
Hitherto Bold had taken no steps in the matter in any way
                                        annoying to Mr. Harding personally. Some months since, after
                                        a severe battle, which cost  him not a little,
                                        he gained a victory over a certain old turnpike woman in the
                                        neighbourhood, of whose charges another old woman had
                                        complained to him. He got the act of Parliament relating to
                                        the trust, found that his protégée had been wrongly
                                        taxed, rode through the gate himself, paying the toll, then
                                        brought an action against the gate-keeper, and proved that
                                        all people coming up a certain by-lane, and going down a
                                        certain other by-lane, were toll free. The fame of his
                                        success spread widely abroad, and he began to be looked on
                                        as the upholder of the rights of the poor of Barchester. Not
                                        long after this success, he heard from different quarters
                                        that Hiram's bedesmen were treated as paupers, whereas the
                                        property to which they were, in effect, heirs, was very
                                        large; and he was instigated by the lawyer whom he had
                                        employed in the case of the turnpike, to call upon Mr.
                                        Chadwick for a statement as to the funds of the estate.
Bold had often expressed his indignation at the malappropriation
                                        of church funds in general, in the hearing of his friend the
                                        precentor; but the conversation had never referred to
                                        anything at Barchester; and when Finney, the attorney,
                                        induced him to interfere with the affairs of the hospital,
                                        it was against Mr. Chadwick that his efforts were to be  directed. Bold soon found that if he
                                        interfered with Mr. Chadwick as steward, he must also
                                        interfere with Mr. Harding as warden; and though he
                                        regretted the situation in which this would place him, he
                                        was not the man to flinch from his undertaking from personal
                                        motives.
As soon as he had determined to take the matter in hand, he set
                                        about his work with his usual energy. He got a copy of John
                                        Hiram's will, of the wording of which he made himself
                                        perfectly master. He ascertained the extent of the property,
                                        and as nearly as he could the value of it; and made out a
                                        schedule of what he was informed was the present
                                        distribution of its income. Armed with these particulars, he
                                        called on Mr. Chadwick, having given that gentleman notice
                                        of his visit; and asked him for a statement of the income
                                        and expenditure of the hospital for the last twenty-five
                                        years.
This was of course refused, Mr. Chadwick alleging that he had no
                                        authority for making public the concerns of a property in
                                        managing which he was only a paid servant.
"And who is competent to give you that authority, Mr. Chadwick?"
                                        asked Bold.
"Only those who employ me, Mr. Bold," said the steward.

"And who are those, Mr. Chadwick?" demanded Bold.
Mr. Chadwick begged to say that if these inquiries were made
                                        merely out of curiosity, he must decline answering them: if
                                        Mr. Bold had any ulterior proceeding in view, perhaps it
                                        would be desirable that any necessary information should be
                                        sought for in a professional way by a professional man. Mr.
                                        Chadwick's attorneys were Messrs. Cox and Cummins, of
                                        Lincoln's Inn. Mr. Bold took down the address of Cox and
                                        Cummins, remarked that the weather was cold for the time of
                                        the year, and wished Mr. Chadwick good morning. Mr. Chadwick
                                        said it was cold for June, and bowed him out.
He at once went to his lawyer, Finney. Now, Bold was not very
                                        fond of his attorney, but, as he said, he merely wanted a
                                        man who knew the forms of law, and who would do what he was
                                        told for his money. He had no idea of putting himself in the
                                        hands of a lawyer. He wanted law from a lawyer as he did a
                                        coat from a tailor, because he could not make it so well
                                        himself; and he thought Finney the fittest man in Barchester
                                        for his purpose. In one respect, at any rate, he was right:
                                        Finney was humility itself.

Finney advised an instant letter to Cox and Cummins, mindful of
                                        his six-and-eightpence. "Slap at them at once, Mr. Bold;
                                        demand categorically and explicitly a full statement of the
                                        affairs of the hospital."
"Suppose I were to see Mr. Harding first," suggested Bold.
"Yes, yes, by all means," said the acquiescing Finney; "though,
                                        perhaps, as Mr. Harding is no man of business, it may
                                        lead—lead to some little difficulties; but perhaps you're
                                        right. Mr. Bold, I don't think seeing Mr. Harding can do any
                                        harm." Finney saw from the expression of his client's face
                                        that he intended to have his own way.

</div></body></text></TEI>