<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
CHAP. XIII. THE WARDEN'S DECISION.
The meeting between Eleanor and her father was not so
                                        stormy as that described in the last chapter, but it was
                                        hardly more successful. On her return from Bold's house, she
                                        found her father in a strange state. He was not sorrowful
                                        and silent as he had been on that memorable day when his
                                        son-in-law lectured him as to all that he owed to his order;
                                        nor was he in his usual quiet mood. When Eleanor reached the
                                        hospital, he was walking quickly to and fro upon the lawn,
                                        and she soon saw that he was much excited.
"I am going to London, my dear," he said as soon as he saw
                                        her.
"London, papa!"
"Yes my dear, to London; I will have this matter settled some
                                        way: there are some things, Eleanor, which I cannot
                                        bear."
"Oh, papa, what is it?" said she, leading him by the arm into the
                                        house—"I had such good news for you, and now you make me
                                        fear I am too late;" and  then, before he could
                                        let her know what had caused this sudden resolve, or could
                                        point to the fatal paper which lay on the table, she told
                                        him that the lawsuit was over, that Bold had commissioned
                                        her to assure her father in his name that it would be
                                        abandoned, that there was no further cause for misery, that
                                        the whole matter might be looked on as though it had never
                                        been discussed. She did not tell him with what determined
                                        vehemence she had obtained this concession in his favour,
                                        nor did she mention the price she was to pay for it.
The warden did not express himself peculiarly gratified at this
                                        intelligence, and Eleanor, though she had not worked for
                                        thanks, and was by no means disposed to magnify her own good
                                        offices, felt hurt at the manner in which her news was
                                        received.
"Mr. Bold can act as he thinks proper, my love," said he; "if Mr.
                                        Bold thinks that he has been wrong, of course he will
                                        discontinue what he is doing; but that cannot change my
                                        purpose."
"Oh, papa!" she exclaimed, all but crying with vexation—"I
                                        thought you would have been so happy—I thought all would
                                        have been right now."
"Mr. Bold," continued he, "has set great people to work; so great
                                        that I doubt they are now beyond his control. Read that, my
                                        dear:" and the  warden, doubling up a number of
                                        the Jupiter, pointed to the peculiar article which she was
                                        to read. It was to the last of the three leaders, which are
                                        generally furnished daily for the support of the nation,
                                        that Mr. Harding directed her attention. It dealt some heavy
                                        blows on various clerical delinquents; on families who had
                                        received their tens of thousands yearly for doing nothing;
                                        on men who, as the article stated, rolled in wealth which
                                        they had neither earned nor inherited, and which was in fact
                                        stolen from the poorer clergy. It named some sons of
                                        bishops, and grandsons of archbishops; men great in their
                                        way, who had redeemed their disgrace in the eyes of many by
                                        the enormity of their plunder; and then having disposed of
                                        these leviathans, it descended to Mr. Harding.
"We alluded some few weeks since to an instance of similar
                                        injustice, though in a more humble scale, in which the
                                        warden of an almshouse at Barchester has become possessed of
                                        the income of the greater part of the whole institution. Why
                                        an almshouse should have a warden we cannot pretend to
                                        explain, nor can we say what special need twelve old men can
                                        have for the services of a separate clergyman, seeing that
                                        they have twelve reserved seats for themselves in Barchester
                                        Cathedral. But be this as it may, let the gentleman call
                                        himself warden or precentor,  or what he will,
                                        let him be never so scrupulous in exacting religious duties
                                        from his twelve dependants, or never so negligent as regards
                                        the services of the cathedral, it appears palpably clear
                                        that he can be entitled to no portion of the revenue of the
                                        hospital, excepting that which the founder set apart for
                                        him; and it is equally clear that the founder did not intend
                                        that three fifths of his charity should be so consumed.
"The case is certainly a paltry one after the tens of thousands
                                        with which we have been dealing, for the warden's income is
                                        after all but a poor eight hundred a year: eight hundred a
                                        year is not magnificent preferment of itself, and the warden
                                        may, for anything we know, be worth much more to the church;
                                        but if so, let the church pay him out of funds justly at its
                                        own disposal.
"We allude to the question of the Barchester almshouse at the
                                        present moment, because we understand that a plea has been
                                        set up which will be peculiarly revolting to the minds of
                                        English churchmen. An action has been taken against Mr.
                                        warden Harding, on behalf of the almsmen, by a gentleman
                                        acting solely on public grounds, and it is to be argued that
                                        Mr. Harding takes nothing but what he receives as a servant
                                        of the hospital, and that he is not himself responsible for
                                        the amount of stipend  given to him for his
                                        work. Such a plea would doubtless be fair, if any one
                                        questioned the daily wages of a bricklayer employed on the
                                        building, or the fee of the charwoman who cleans it; but we
                                        cannot envy the feeling of a clergyman of the Church of
                                        England who could allow such an argument to be put into his
                                        mouth.
"If this plea be put forward, we trust Mr. Harding will be forced
                                        as a witness to state the nature of his employment; the
                                        amount of work that he does; the income which he receives,
                                        and the source from whence he obtained his appointment. We
                                        do not think he will receive much public sympathy to atone
                                        for the annoyance of such an examination."
As Eleanor read the article her face flushed with indignation,
                                        and when she had finished it, she almost feared to look up
                                        at her father.
"Well, my dear," said he, "what do you think of that—is it worth
                                        while to be a warden at that price?"
"Oh, papa—dear papa."
"Mr. Bold can't unwrite that my dear—Mr. Bold can't say that that
                                        shan't be read by every clergyman at Oxford; nay, by every
                                        gentleman in the land:" and then he walked up and down the
                                        room, while Eleanor in mute despair followed him with her
                                        eyes  —"and I'll tell you what, my dear," he
                                        continued, speaking now very calmly, and in a forced manner
                                        very unlike himself. "Mr. Bold can't dispute the truth of
                                        every word in that article you have just read—nor can I."
                                        Eleanor stared at him, as though she scarcely understood the
                                        words he was speaking. "Nor can I, Eleanor: that's the worst
                                        of all, or would be so if there were no remedy; I have
                                        thought much of all this since we were together last night;"
                                        and he came and sat beside her, and put his arm round her
                                        waist as he had done then. "I have thought much of what the
                                        archdeacon has said, and of what this paper says; and I do
                                        believe I have no right to be here."
"No right to be warden of the hospital, papa?"
"No right to be warden with eight hundred a year; no right to be
                                        warden with such a house as this; no right to spend in
                                        luxury money that was intended for charity. Mr. Bold may do
                                        as he pleases about his suit, but I hope he will not abandon
                                        it for my sake."
Poor Eleanor! this was hard upon her. Was it for this she had
                                        made her great resolve! For this that she had laid aside her
                                        quiet demeanour, and taken upon her the rants of a tragedy
                                        heroine! One may work and not for thanks, but yet feel hurt
                                        at not receiving them; and so it was with Eleanor: one  may be disinterested in one's good
                                        actions, and yet feel discontented that they are not
                                        recognised. Charity may be given with the left hand so
                                        privily that the right hand does not know it, and yet the
                                        left hand may regret to feel that it has no immediate
                                        reward. Eleanor had had no wish to burden her father with a
                                        weight of obligation, and yet she had looked forward to much
                                        delight from the knowledge that she had freed him from his
                                        sorrows: now such hopes were entirely over; all that she had
                                        done was of no avail; she had humbled herself to Bold in
                                        vain; the evil was utterly beyond her power to cure!
She had thought also how gently she would whisper to her father
                                        all that her lover had said to her about herself, and how
                                        impossible she had found it to reject him: and then she had
                                        anticipated her father's kindly kiss and close embrace as he
                                        gave his sanction to her love. Alas, she could say nothing
                                        of this now. In speaking of Mr. Bold, her father put him
                                        aside as one whose thoughts and sayings and acts could be of
                                        no moment. Gentle reader, did you ever feel yourself
                                        snubbed? Did you ever, when thinking much of your own
                                        importance, find yourself suddenly reduced to a nonentity?
                                        Such was Eleanor's feeling now.
"They shall not put forward this plea on my 
                                        behalf," continued the warden. "Whatever may be the truth of
                                        the matter, that at any rate is not true; and the man who
                                        wrote that article is right in saying that such a plea is
                                        revolting to an honest mind. I will go up to London, my
                                        dear, and see these lawyers myself, and if no better excuse
                                        can be made for me than that, I and the hospital will
                                        part."
"But the archdeacon, papa?"
"I can't help it, my dear; there are some things which a man
                                        cannot bear,—I cannot bear that"— and he put his hand upon
                                        the newspaper.
"But will the archdeacon go with you?"
To tell the truth Mr. Harding had made up his mind to steal a
                                        march upon the archdeacon. He was aware that he could take
                                        no steps without informing his dread son-in-law, but he had
                                        resolved that he would send out a note to Plumstead Episcopi
                                        detailing his plans, but that the messenger should not leave
                                        Barchester till he himself had started for London; so that
                                        he might be a day before the doctor, who, he had no doubt,
                                        would follow him. In that day, if he had luck, he might
                                        arrange it all; he might explain to Sir Abraham that he, as
                                        warden, would have nothing further to do with the defence
                                        about to be set up; he might send in his official
                                        resignation to his friend the bishop, and so make public the
                                        whole  transaction, that even the doctor would
                                        not be able to undo what he had done. He knew too well the
                                        doctor's strength and his own weakness to suppose he could
                                        do this, if they both reached London together; indeed, he
                                        would never be able to get to London, if the doctor knew of
                                        his intended journey in time to prevent it.
"No, I think not," said he; "I think I shall start before the
                                        archdeacon could be ready—I shall go early to-morrow
                                        morning."
"That will be best, papa," said Eleanor, showing that her
                                        father's ruse was appreciated.
"Why, yes, my love: the fact is, I wish to do all this before the
                                        archdeacon can—can interfere. There is a great deal of truth
                                        in all he says—he argues very well, and I can't always
                                        answer him; but there is an old saying, Nelly, 'every one
                                        knows where his own shoe pinches!' He'll say that I want
                                        moral courage, and strength of character, and power of
                                        endurance, and it's all true; but I'm sure I ought not to
                                        remain here, if I have nothing better to put forward than a
                                        quibble: so, Nelly, we shall have to leave this pretty
                                        place."
Eleanor's face brightened up, as she assured her father how
                                        cordially she agreed with him.
"True, my love," said he, now again quite happy  and
                                        at ease in his manner. "What good to us is this place or all
                                        the money, if we are to be ill-spoken of?"
"Oh, papa, I am so glad."
"My darling child. It did cost me a pang at first, Nelly, to
                                        think that you should lose your pretty drawing-room, and
                                        your ponies, and your garden: the garden will be the worst
                                        of all—but there is a garden at Crabtree, a very pretty
                                        garden."
Crabtree Parva was the name of the small living which Mr. Harding
                                        had held as a minor canon, and which still belonged to him.
                                        It was only worth some eighty pounds a year, and a small
                                        house and glebe, all of which were now handed over to Mr.
                                        Harding's curate; but it was to Crabtree glebe that Mr.
                                        Harding thought of retiring. This parish must not be
                                        mistaken for that other living, Crabtree Canonicorum as it
                                        is called. Crabtree Canonicorum is a very nice thing; there
                                        are only two hundred parishioners; there are four hundred
                                        acres of glebe; and the great and small tithes, which both
                                        go to the rector, are worth four hundred pounds a year more.
                                        Crabtree Canonicorum is in the gift of the dean and chapter,
                                        and is at this time possessed by the Honourable and Reverend
                                        Dr. Vesey Stanhope, who also fills the prebendal stall of
                                        Goosegorge in Barchester  Chapter, and holds
                                        the united rectory of Eiderdown and Stogpingum, or Stoke
                                        Pinquium as it should be written. This is the same Dr. Vesey
                                        Stanhope, whose hospitable villa on the Lake of Como is so
                                        well known to the élite of English travellers, and whose
                                        collection of Lombard butterflies is supposed to be
                                        unique.
"Yes," said the warden musing, "there is a very pretty garden at
                                        Crabtree, but I shall be sorry to disturb poor Smith." Smith
                                        was the curate of Crabtree, a gentleman who was maintaining
                                        a wife and half a dozen children on the income arising from
                                        his profession.
Eleanor assured her father that as far as she was concerned, she
                                        could leave her house and her ponies without a single
                                        regret: she was only so happy that he was going,—going where
                                        he would escape all this dreadful turmoil.
"But we will take the music, my dear."
And so they went on planning their future happiness, and plotting
                                        how they would arrange it all without the interposition of
                                        the archdeacon, and at last they again became confidential,
                                        and then the warden did thank her for what she had done, and
                                        Eleanor, lying on her father's shoulder, did find an
                                        opportunity to tell her secret: and the father 
                                        gave his blessing to his child, and said that the man whom
                                        she loved was honest, good, and kind-hearted, and
                                        right-thinking in the main—one who wanted only a good wife
                                        to put him quite upright;——a man, my love," he ended by
                                        saying,—to whom I firmly believe that I can trust my
                                        treasure with safety."
"But what will Dr. Grantly say?"
"Well, my dear, it can't be helped—we shall be out at Crabtree
                                        then."
And Eleanor ran upstairs to prepare her father's clothes for his
                                        journey; and the warden returned to his garden to make his
                                        last adieus to every tree, and shrub, and shady nook that he
                                        knew so well.

</div></body></text></TEI>