<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAP. XII. MR. BOLD'S VISIT TO PLUMSTEAD
Whether or no the ill-natured prediction made by certain
                                        ladies in the beginning of the last chapter, was or was not
                                        carried out to the letter, I am not in a position to state;
                                        Eleanor, however, certainly did feel herself to have been
                                        baffled, as she returned home with all her news to her
                                        father. Certainly she had been victorious, certainly she had
                                        achieved her object, certainly she was not unhappy, and yet
                                        she did not feel herself triumphant. Everything would run
                                        smooth now. Eleanor was not at all addicted to the Lydian
                                        school of romance; she by no means objected to her lover
                                        because he came in at the door under the name of Absolute,
                                        instead of pulling her out of a window under the name of
                                        Beverley; and yet she felt that she had been imposed upon,
                                        and could hardly think of Mary Bold with sisterly charity.
                                        "I did think I could have trusted Mary," she said to herself
                                        over and over again. "Oh that she should have dared to keep
                                        me in the room when I tried to get out!" Eleanor,  however, felt that the game was up, and
                                        that she had now nothing further to do, but to add to the
                                        budget of news which was prepared for her father, that John
                                        Bold was her accepted lover.
We will, however, now leave her on her way, and go with John Bold
                                        to Plumstead Episcopi, merely premising that Eleanor on
                                        reaching home will not find things so smooth as she fondly
                                        expected; two messengers had come, one to her father, and
                                        the other to the archdeacon, and each of them much opposed
                                        to her quiet mode of solving all their difficulties; the one
                                        in the shape of a number of the Jupiter, and the other in
                                        that of a further opinion from Sir Abraham Haphazard.
John Bold got on his horse and rode off to Plumstead Episcopi;
                                        not briskly and with eager spur, as men do ride when
                                        self-satisfied with their own intentions, but slowly,
                                        modestly, thoughtfully, and somewhat in dread of the coming
                                        interview. Now and again he would recur to the scene which
                                        was just over, support himself by the remembrance of the
                                        silence that gives consent, and exult as a happy lover; but
                                        even this feeling was not without a shade of remorse. Had he
                                        not shown himself childishly weak thus to yield up the
                                        resolve of many hours of thought to the tears of a pretty
                                        girl? How was  he to meet his lawyer? How was
                                        he to back out of a matter in which his name was already so
                                        publicly concerned? What, oh what! was he to say to Tom
                                        Towers? While meditating these painful things he reached the
                                        lodge leading up to the archdeacon's glebe, and for the
                                        first time in his life found himself within the sacred
                                        precincts.
All the doctor's children were together on the slope of the lawn
                                        close to the road, as Bold rode up to the hall door. They
                                        were there holding high debate on matters evidently of deep
                                        interest at Plumstead Episcopi, and the voices of the boys
                                        had been heard before the lodge gate was closed.
Florinda and Grizzel, frightened at the sight of so well-known an
                                        enemy to the family, fled on the first appearance of the
                                        horseman, and ran in terror to their mother's arms; not for
                                        them was it, tender branches, to resent injuries, or as
                                        members of a church militant to put on armour against its
                                        enemies: but the boys stood their ground like heroes, and
                                        boldly demanded the business of the intruder.
"Do you want to see anybody here, sir?" said Henry, with a
                                        defiant eye and a hostile tone, which plainly said that at
                                        any rate no one there wanted to see the person so addressed;
                                        and as he spoke he  brandished aloft his garden
                                        water-pot, holding it by the spout, ready for the braining
                                        of any one.
"Henry," said Charles James slowly, and with a certain dignity of
                                        diction, "Mr. Bold of course would not have come without
                                        wanting to see some one; if Mr. Bold has a proper ground for
                                        wanting to see some person here, of course he has a right to
                                        come."
But Samuel stepped lightly up to the horse's head, and offered
                                        his services. "Oh, Mr. Bold," said he, "papa, I'm sure, will
                                        be glad to see you; I suppose you want to see papa. Shall I
                                        hold your horse for you? Oh, what a very pretty horse!" and
                                        he turned his head and winked funnily at his brother; "papa
                                        has heard such good news about the old hospital today. We
                                        know you'll be glad to hear it, because you're such a friend
                                        of grandpapa Harding, and so much in love with aunt
                                        Nelly!"
"How d'ye do, lads?" said Bold, dismounting; "I want to see your
                                        father if he's at home."
"Lads!" said Henry, turning on his heel and addressing himself to
                                        his brother, but loud enough to be heard by Bold; "lads,
                                        indeed! if we're lads, what does he call himself?"
Charles James condescended to say nothing further, 
                                        but cocked his hat with much precision, and left the visitor
                                        to the care of his youngest brother.
Samuel stayed till the servant came, chatting and patting the
                                        horse; but as soon as Bold had disappeared through the front
                                        door, he stuck a switch under the animal's tail to make him
                                        kick, if possible.
The church reformer soon found himself tête à tête with
                                        the archdeacon in that same room, in that sanctum sanctorum
                                        of the rectory, to which we have already been introduced. As
                                        he entered he heard the click of a certain patent lock, but
                                        it struck him with no surprise: the worthy clergyman was no
                                        doubt hiding from eyes profane his last much-studied sermon,
                                        for the archdeacon, though he preached but seldom, was
                                        famous for his sermons. No room, Bold thought, could have
                                        been more becoming for a dignitary of the church; each wall
                                        was loaded with theology; over each separate book-case was
                                        printed in small gold letters the names of those great
                                        divines whose works were ranged beneath: beginning from the
                                        early fathers in due chronological order, there were to be
                                        found the precious labours of the chosen servants of the
                                        church down to the last pamphlet written in opposition to
                                        the consecration of Dr. Hampden; and raised above this were
                                        to be seen the busts of the greatest among the great:
                                        Chrysostom,  St. Augustine, Thomas à Becket,
                                        Cardinal Wolsey, Archbishop Laud, and Dr. Philpotts.
Every appliance that could make study pleasant and give ease to
                                        the over-toiled brain was there: chairs made to relieve each
                                        limb and muscle; reading-desks and writing-desks to suit
                                        every attitude; lamps and candles mechanically contrived to
                                        throw their light on any favoured spot, as the student might
                                        desire; a shoal of newspapers to amuse the few leisure
                                        moments which might be stolen from the labours of the day;
                                        and then from the window a view right through a bosky vista
                                        along which ran a broad green path from the rectory to the
                                        church, at the end of which the tawny-tinted fine old tower
                                        was seen with all its variegated pinnacles and parapets. Few
                                        parish churches in England are in better repair, or better
                                        worth keeping so, than that at Plumstead Episcopi; and yet
                                        it is built in a faulty style: the body of the church is
                                        low—so low, that the nearly flat leaden roof would be
                                        visible from the churchyard, were it not for the carved
                                        parapet with which it is surrounded. It is cruciform, though
                                        the transepts are irregular, one being larger than the
                                        other; and the tower is much too high in proportion to the
                                        church: but the colour of the building is perfect; it is
                                        that rich yellow grey which one finds  nowhere
                                        but in the south and west of England, and which is so strong
                                        a characteristic of most of our old houses of Tudor
                                        architecture. The stone work also is beautiful; the mullions
                                        of the windows and the thick tracery of the Gothic
                                        workmanship is as rich as fancy can desire; and though in
                                        gazing on such a structure, one knows by rule that the old
                                        priests who built it, built it wrong, one cannot bring
                                        oneself to wish that they should have made it other than it
                                        is.
When Bold was ushered into the book-room, he found its owner
                                        standing with his back to the empty fire-place ready to
                                        receive him, and he could not but perceive that that
                                        expansive brow was elated with triumph, and that those full
                                        heavy lips bore more prominently than usual an appearance of
                                        arrogant success.
"Well, Mr. Bold," said he,—"well, what can I do for you? Very
                                        happy, I can assure you, to do anything for such a friend of
                                        my father-in-law."
"I hope you'll excuse my calling, Dr. Grantly."
"Certainly, certainly," said the archdeacon; "I can assure you,
                                        no apology is necessary from Mr. Bold; only let me know what
                                        I can do for him."
Dr. Grantly was standing himself, and he did not ask Bold to sit,
                                        and therefore he had to tell his tale 
                                        standing, leaning on the table, with his hat in his hand. He
                                        did, however, manage to tell it; and as the archdeacon never
                                        once interrupted him, or even encouraged him by a single
                                        word, he was not long in coming to the end of it.
"And so, Mr. Bold, I'm to understand, I believe, that you are
                                        desirous of abandoning this attack upon Mr. Harding."
"Oh, Dr. Grantly, there has been no attack, I can assure
                                        you—"
"Well, well, we won't quarrel about words; I should call it an
                                        attack—most men would so call an endeavour to take away from
                                        a man every shilling of income that he has to live upon; but
                                        it shan't be an attack, if you don't like it; you wish to
                                        abandon this—this little game of back-gammon you've begun to
                                        play."
"I intend to put an end to the legal proceedings which I have
                                        commenced."
"I understand," said the archdeacon. "You've already had enough
                                        of it; well, I can't say that I am surprised; carrying on a
                                        losing lawsuit where one has nothing to gain, but everything
                                        to pay, is not pleasant."
Bold turned very red in the face. "You misinterpret my motives,"
                                        said he; "but, however, that is of little consequence. I did
                                        not come to trouble  you with my motives, but
                                        to tell you a matter of fact. Good morning, Dr.
                                        Grantly."
"One moment—one moment," said the other. "I don't exactly
                                        appreciate the taste which induced you to make any personal
                                        communication to me on the subject; but I dare say I'm
                                        wrong, I dare say your judgment is the better of the two;
                                        but as you have done me the honour—as you have, as it were,
                                        forced me into a certain amount of conversation on a subject
                                        which had better, perhaps, have been left to our lawyers,
                                        you will excuse me if I ask you to hear my reply to your
                                        communication."
"I am in no hurry, Dr. Grantly."
"Well, I am, Mr. Bold; my time is not exactly leisure time, and,
                                        therefore, if you please, we'll go to the point at
                                        once—you're going to abandon this lawsuit?"—and he paused
                                        for a reply.
"Yes, Dr. Grantly, I am."
"Having exposed a gentleman who was one of your father's warmest
                                        friends, to all the ignominy and insolence which the press
                                        could heap upon his name; having somewhat ostentatiously
                                        declared that it was your duty as a man of high public
                                        virtue to protect those poor old fools whom you have
                                        humbugged there at the hospital, you now find that the game
                                        costs more than it's worth, and so you make up 
                                        your mind to have done with it. A prudent resolution, Mr.
                                        Bold; but it is a pity you should have been so long coming
                                        to it. Has it struck you that we may not now choose to give
                                        over? that we may find it necessary to punish the injury you
                                        have done to us? Are you aware, sir, that we have gone to
                                        enormous expense to resist this iniquitous attempt of
                                        yours?"
Bold's face was now furiously red, and he nearly crushed his hat
                                        between his hands; but he said nothing.
"We have found it necessary to employ the best advice that money
                                        could procure. Are you aware, sir, what may be the probable
                                        cost of securing the services of the attorney-general?"
"Not in the least, Dr. Grantly."
"I dare say not, sir. When you recklessly put this affair into
                                        the hands of your friend Mr. Finney, whose six and
                                        eightpences and thirteen and fourpences may, probably, not
                                        amount to a large sum, you were indifferent as to the cost
                                        and suffering which such a proceeding might entail on
                                        others; but are you aware, sir, that these crushing costs
                                        must now come out of your own pocket?"
"Any demand of such a nature which Mr.  Harding's
                                        lawyer may have to make, will doubtless be made to my
                                        lawyer."
"Mr. Harding's lawyer and my lawyer! Did you come here merely to
                                        refer me to the lawyers? Upon my word I think the honour of
                                        your visit might have been spared! And now, sir, I'll tell
                                        you what my opinion is—my opinion is, that we shall not
                                        allow you to withdraw this matter from the courts."
"You can do as you please, Dr. Grantly; good morning."
"Hear me out, sir," said the archdeacon; "I have here in my hands
                                        the last opinion given in this matter by Sir Abraham
                                        Haphazard. I dare say you have already heard of this—I dare
                                        say it has had something to do with your visit here
                                        to-day."
"I know nothing whatever of Sir Abraham Haphazard or his
                                        opinion."
"Be that as it may, here it is; he declares most explicitly that
                                        under no phasis of the affair whatever have you a leg to
                                        stand upon; that Mr. Harding is as safe in his hospital as I
                                        am here in my rectory; that a more futile attempt to destroy
                                        a man was never made, than this which you have made to ruin
                                        Mr. Harding. Here," and he slapped the paper on the table,
                                        "I have this opinion from the very first 
                                        lawyer in the land; and under these circumstances you expect
                                        me to make you a low bow for your kind offer to release Mr.
                                        Harding from the toils of your net! Sir, your net is not
                                        strong enough to hold him; sir, your net has fallen to
                                        pieces, and you knew that well enough before I told you—and
                                        now, sir, I'll wish you good morning, for I'm busy."
Bold was now choking with passion; he had let the archdeacon run
                                        on, because he knew not with what words to interrupt him;
                                        but now that he had been so defied and insulted, he could
                                        not leave the room without some reply.
"Dr. Grantly," he commenced.
"I have nothing further to say or to hear," said the archdeacon;
                                        "I'll do myself the honour to order your horse:" and he rang
                                        the bell.
"I came here, Dr. Grantly, with the warmest, kindest
                                        feelings—"
"Oh, of course you did; nobody doubts it."
"With the kindest feelings—and they have been most grossly
                                        outraged by your treatment."
"Of course they have—I have not chosen to see my father-in-law
                                        ruined; what an outrage that has been to your feelings!"
"The time will come, Dr. Grantly, when you will understand why I
                                        called upon you to-day."

"No doubt, no doubt. Is Mr. Bold's horse there? That's right,
                                        open the front door—good morning, Mr. Bold;" and the doctor
                                        stalked into his own drawing-room, closing the door behind
                                        him, and making it quite impossible that John Bold should
                                        speak another word.
As he got on his horse, which he was fain to do feeling like a
                                        dog turned out of a kitchen, he was again greeted by little
                                        Sammy.
"Good bye, Mr. Bold; I hope we may have the pleasure of seeing
                                        you again before long; I am sure papa will always be glad to
                                        see you."
That was certainly the bitterest moment in John Bold's life; not
                                        even the remembrance of his successful love could comfort
                                        him; nay, when he thought of Eleanor, he felt that it was
                                        that very love which had brought him to such a pass. That he
                                        should have been so insulted, and be unable to reply! That
                                        he should have given up so much to the request of a girl,
                                        and then have had his motives so misunderstood! That he
                                        should have made so gross a mistake as this visit of his to
                                        the archdeacon's! He bit the top of his whip, till he
                                        penetrated the horn of which it was made: he struck the poor
                                        animal in his anger, and then was doubly angry with himself
                                        at his futile passion. He had been so completely
                                        check-mated,  so palpably overcome! and what
                                        was he to do? He could not continue his action after
                                        pledging himself to abandon it; nor was there any revenge in
                                        that— it was the very step to which his enemy had
                                        endeavoured to goad him!
He threw the reins to the servant who came to take his horse, and
                                        rushed up stairs into his drawingroom, where his sister Mary
                                        was sitting.
"If there be a devil," said he, "a real devil here on earth, it
                                        is Dr. Grantly." He vouchsafed her no further intelligence,
                                        but again seizing his hat, he rushed out, and took his
                                        departure for London without another word to any one.

</div></body></text></TEI>