<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAP. X. TRIBULATION.
Mr. Harding was a sadder man than he had ever yet been
                                        when he returned to his own house. He had been wretched
                                        enough on that well remembered morning when he was forced to
                                        expose before his son-in-law the publisher's account for
                                        ushering into the world his dear book of sacred music; when
                                        after making such payments as he could do unassisted, he
                                        found that he was a debtor of more than three hundred
                                        pounds: but his sufferings then were as nothing to his
                                        present misery;—then he had done wrong, and he knew it, and
                                        was able to resolve that he would not sin in like manner
                                        again; but now he could make no resolution, and comfort
                                        himself by no promises of firmness. He had been forced to
                                        think that his lot had placed him in a false position, and
                                        he was about to maintain that position against the opinion
                                        of the world and against his own convictions.
He had read with pity, amounting almost to horror, 
                                        the strictures which had appeared from time to time against
                                        the Earl of Guildford as master of St. Cross, and the
                                        invectives that had been heaped on rich diocesan dignitaries
                                        and overgrown sinecure pluralists. In judging of them, he
                                        judged leniently; the whole bias of his profession had
                                        taught him to think that they were more sinned against than
                                        sinning, and that the animosity with which they had been
                                        pursued was venomous and unjust; but he had not the less
                                        regarded their plight as most miserable. His hair had stood
                                        on end and his flesh had crept as he read the things which
                                        had been written; he had wondered how men could live under
                                        such a load of disgrace; how they could face their fellow
                                        creatures while their names were bandied about so
                                        injuriously and so publicly—and now this lot was to be
                                        his—he, that shy retiring man, who had so comforted himself
                                        in the hidden obscurity of his lot, who had so enjoyed the
                                        unassuming warmth of his own little corner, he was now to be
                                        dragged forth into the glaring day, and gibbeted before
                                        ferocious multitudes. He entered his own house a
                                        crest-fallen, humiliated man, without a hope of overcoming
                                        the wretchedness which affected him.
He wandered into the drawing-room where was his daughter; but he
                                        could not speak to her now, so he  left it, and
                                        went into the book room. He was not quick enough to escape
                                        Eleanor's glance, or to prevent her from seeing that he was
                                        disturbed; and in a little while she followed him. She found
                                        him seated in his accustomed chair, with no book open before
                                        him, no pen ready in his hand, no ill-shapen notes of
                                        blotted music lying before him as was usual, none of those
                                        hospital accounts with which he was so precise and yet so
                                        unmethodical: he was doing nothing, thinking of nothing,
                                        looking at nothing; he was merely suffering.
"Leave me Eleanor, my dear," he said, "leave me my darling for a
                                        few minutes, for I am busy."
Eleanor saw well how it was, but she did leave him, and glided
                                        silently back to her drawing-room. When he had sat awhile,
                                        thus alone and unoccupied, he got up to walk again—he could
                                        make more of his thoughts walking than sitting, and was
                                        creeping out into his garden, when he met Bunce on the
                                        threshold.
"Well, Bunce," said he, in a tone that for him was sharp, "what
                                        is it? do you want me?"
"I was only coming to ask after your reverence," said the old
                                        bedesman, touching his hat; "and to inquire about the news
                                        from London," he added after a pause.

The warden winced, and put his hand to his forehead and felt
                                        bewildered.
"Attorney Finney has been there this morning," continued Bunce,
                                        "and by his looks I guess he is not so well pleased as he
                                        once was, and it has got abroad somehow that the archdeacon
                                        has had down great news from London, and Handy and Moody are
                                        both as black as devils; and I hope," said the man, trying
                                        to assume a cheery tone, "that things are looking up, and
                                        that there 'll be an end soon to all this stuff which
                                        bothers your reverence so sorely."
"Well, I wish there may be, Bunce."
"But about the news, your reverence?" said the old man, almost
                                        whispering.
Mr. Harding walked on, and shook his head impatiently. Poor Bunce
                                        little knew how he was tormenting his patron.
"If there was anything to cheer you, I should be so glad to know
                                        it," said he, with a tone of affection which the warden in
                                        all his misery could not resist.
He stopped, and took both the old man's hands in his. "My
                                        friend," said he, "my dear old friend, there is nothing:
                                        there is no news to cheer me— God's will be done:" and two
                                        small hot tears broke away from his eyes and stole down his
                                        furrowed cheeks.

"Then God's will be done," said the other solemnly, "but they
                                        told me that there was good news from London, and I came to
                                        wish your reverence joy; but God's will be done;" and so the
                                        warden again walked on, and the bedesman looking wistfully
                                        after him, and receiving no encouragement to follow,
                                        returned sadly to his own abode.
For a couple of hours the warden remained thus in the garden, now
                                        walking, now standing motionless on the turf, and then, as
                                        his legs got weary, sitting unconsciously on the garden
                                        seats, and then walking again. And Eleanor, hidden behind
                                        the muslin curtains of the window, watched him through the
                                        trees as he now came in sight, and then again was concealed
                                        by the turnings of the walk; and thus the time passed away
                                        till five, when the warden crept back to the house and
                                        prepared for dinner.
It was but a sorry meal. The demure parlour-maid as she handed
                                        the dishes and changed the plates, saw that all was not
                                        right, and was more demure than ever: neither father nor
                                        daughter could eat, and the hateful food was soon cleared
                                        away, and the bottle of port placed upon the table.
"Would you like Bunce to come in, papa?" said Eleanor, thinking
                                        that the company of the old man might lighten his
                                        sorrow.

"No my dear, thank you, not to-day; but are not you going out,
                                        Eleanor, this lovely afternoon? don't stay in for me, my
                                        dear."
"I thought you seemed so sad, papa."
"Sad," said he irritated; "well, people must all have their share
                                        of sadness here; I am not more exempt than another: but kiss
                                        me, dearest, and go now; I will, if possible, be more
                                        sociable when you return."
And Eleanor was again banished from her father's sorrow. Ah! her
                                        desire now was not to find him happy, but to be allowed to
                                        share his sorrows; not to force him to be sociable, but to
                                        persuade him to be trustful.
She put on her bonnet as desired, and went up to Mary Bold; this
                                        was now her daily haunt, for John Bold was up in London
                                        among lawyers and church reformers, diving deep into other
                                        questions than that of the wardenship of Barchester;
                                        supplying information to one member of parliament, and
                                        dining with another; subscribing to funds for the abolition
                                        of clerical incomes, and seconding at that great national
                                        meeting at the Crown and Anchor a resolution to the effect,
                                        that no clergyman of the Church of England, be he who he
                                        might, should have more than a thousand a year, and none
                                        less than two  hundred and fifty. His speech on
                                        this occasion was short, for fifteen had to speak, and the
                                        room was hired for two hours only, at the expiration of
                                        which the Quakers and Mr. Cobden were to make use of it for
                                        an appeal to the public in aid of the Emperor of Russia; but
                                        it was sharp and effective: at least he was told so by a
                                        companion with whom he now lived much, and on whom he
                                        greatly depended—one Tom Towers, a very leading genius, and
                                        supposed to have high employment on the staff of the
                                        Jupiter.
So Eleanor, as was now her wont, went up to Mary Bold, and Mary
                                        listened kindly, while the daughter spoke much of her
                                        father, and, perhaps kinder still, found a listener in
                                        Eleanor, while she spoke about her brother. In the meantime
                                        the warden sat alone, leaning on the arm of his chair; he
                                        had poured out a glass of wine, but had done so merely from
                                        habit, for he left it untouched: there he sat gazing at the
                                        open window, and thinking, if he can be said to have
                                        thought, of the happiness of his past life. All manner of
                                        past delights came before his mind, which at the time he had
                                        enjoyed without considering them; his easy days, his absence
                                        of all kind of hard work, his pleasant shady home, those
                                        twelve old neighbours whose welfare till now had been the
                                        source of so much pleasant care, the excellence  of his children, the friendship of the dear old bishop,
                                        the solemn grandeur of those vaulted aisles, through which
                                        he loved to hear his own voice pealing; and then that friend
                                        of friends, that choice ally that had never deserted him,
                                        that eloquent companion that would always, when asked,
                                        discourse such pleasant music, that violoncello of his—ah,
                                        how happy he had been! but it was over now; his easy days
                                        and absence of work had been the crime which brought on him
                                        his tribulation; his shady home was pleasant no longer; may
                                        be it was no longer his; the old neighbours, whose welfare
                                        had been so desired by him, were his enemies; his daughter
                                        was as wretched as himself, and even the bishop was made
                                        miserable by his position. He could never again lift up his
                                        voice boldly as he had hitherto done among his brethren, for
                                        he felt that he was disgraced; and he feared even to touch
                                        his bow, for he knew how grievous a sound of wailing, how
                                        piteous a lamentation, it would produce.
He was still sitting in the same chair and the same posture,
                                        having hardly moved a limb for two hours, when Eleanor came
                                        back to tea, and succeeded in bringing him with her into the
                                        drawing-room.
The tea seemed as comfortless as the dinner, though the warden,
                                        who had hitherto eaten nothing  all day,
                                        devoured the plateful of bread and butter, unconscious of
                                        what he was doing.
Eleanor had made up her mind to force him to talk to her, but she
                                        hardly knew how to commence: she must wait till the urn was
                                        gone, till the servant would no longer be coming in and
                                        out.
At last everything was gone, and the drawingroom door was
                                        permanently closed; then Eleanor, getting up and going round
                                        to her father, put her arm round his neck, and said, "Papa,
                                        won't you tell me what it is?"
"What what is, my dear?"
"This new sorrow that torments you; I know you are unhappy,
                                        papa."
"New sorrow! it's no new sorrow, my dear, we have all our cares
                                        sometimes," and he tried to smile, but it was a ghastly
                                        failure; "but I should n't be so dull a companion; come,
                                        we'll have some music."
"No papa, not to-night—it would only trouble you to-night:" and
                                        she sat upon his knee, as she sometimes would in their
                                        gayest moods, and with her arm round his neck, she said,
                                        "Papa, I will not leave you till you talk to me; oh, if you
                                        only knew how much good it would do to you, to tell me of it
                                        all."
The father kissed his daughter, and pressed her to his heart; but
                                        still he said nothing: it was so hard  to him
                                        to speak of his own sorrows; he was so shy a man even with
                                        his own child.
"Oh, papa, do tell me what it is; I know it is about the
                                        hospital, and what they are doing up in London, and what
                                        that cruel newspaper has said; but if there be such cause
                                        for sorrow, let us be sorrowful together; we are all in all
                                        to each other now: dear, dear papa, do speak to me."
Mr. Harding could not well speak now, for the warm tears were
                                        running down his cheeks like rain in May, but he held his
                                        child close to his heart, and squeezed her hand as a lover
                                        might, and she kissed his forehead and his wet cheeks, and
                                        lay upon his bosom, and comforted him as a woman only can
                                        do.
"My own child," he said, as soon as his tears would let him
                                        speak; "my own, own child, why should you too be unhappy
                                        before it is necessary: it may come to that, that we must
                                        leave this place, but till that time comes, why should your
                                        young days be clouded?"
"And is that all, papa? If that be all, let us leave it, and have
                                        light hearts elsewhere: if that be all, let us go. Oh, papa,
                                        you and I could be happy if we had only bread to eat, so
                                        long as our hearts were light."
And Eleanor's face was lighted up with enthusiasm 
                                        as she told her father how he might banish all his care; and
                                        a gleam of joy shot across his brow as this idea of escape
                                        again presented itself, and he again fancied for a moment
                                        that he could spurn away from him the income which the world
                                        envied him; that he could give the lie to that wielder of
                                        the tomahawk who had dared to write such things of him in
                                        the Jupiter. That he could leave Sir Abraham, and the
                                        archdeacon, and Bold, and the rest of them with their
                                        lawsuit among them, and wipe his hands altogether of so
                                        sorrow-stirring a concern. Ah, what happiness might there be
                                        in the distance, with Eleanor and him in some small cottage,
                                        and nothing left of their former grandeur but their music!
                                        Yes, they would walk forth with their music books, and their
                                        instruments, and shaking the dust from off their feet as
                                        they went, leave the ungrateful place. Never did a poor
                                        clergyman sigh for a warm benefice more anxiously than our
                                        warden did now to be rid of his.
"Give it up, papa," she said again, jumping from his knees and
                                        standing on her feet before him, looking boldly into his
                                        face; "give it up, papa."
Oh, it was sad to see how that momentary gleam of joy passed
                                        away; how the look of hope was dispersed from that sorrowful
                                        face, as the remembrance of the archdeacon came back upon
                                        our poor warden,  and he reflected that he
                                        could not stir from his now hated post. He was as a man
                                        bound with iron, fettered with adamant: he was in no respect
                                        a free agent; he had no choice. "Give it up!" oh if he only
                                        could: what an easy way that were out of all his
                                        troubles!
"Papa don't doubt about it," she continued, thinking that his
                                        hesitation arose from his unwillingness to abandon so
                                        comfortable a home; "is it on my account that you would stay
                                        here? Do you think that I cannot be happy without a
                                        pony-carriage and a fine drawing-room? Papa, I never can be
                                        happy here, as long as there is a question as to your honour
                                        in staying here; but I could be gay as the day is long in
                                        the smallest tiny little cottage, if I could see you come in
                                        and go out with a light heart. Oh! papa, your face tells so
                                        much; though you won't speak to me with your voice, I know
                                        how it is with you every time I look at you."
How he pressed her to his heart again with almost a spasmodic
                                        pressure! how he kissed her as the tears fell like rain from
                                        his old eyes! how he blessed her, and called her by a
                                        hundred soft sweet names which now came new to his lips! how
                                        he chid himself for ever having been unhappy with such a
                                        treasure in his house, such a jewel on his bosom, with  so sweet a flower in the choice garden of
                                        his heart! and then the flood-gates of his tongue were
                                        loosed, and, at length, with unsparing detail of
                                        circumstances, he told her all that he wished, and all that
                                        he could not do. He repeated those arguments of the
                                        archdeacon, not agreeing in their truth, but explaining his
                                        inability to escape from them; how it had been declared to
                                        him that he was bound to remain where he was by the
                                        interests of his order, by gratitude to the bishop, by the
                                        wishes of his friends, by a sense of duty, which, though he
                                        could not understand it, he was fain to acknowledge. He told
                                        her how he had been accused of cowardice, and though he was
                                        not a man to make much of such a charge before the world,
                                        now in the full candour of his heart, he explained to her
                                        that such an accusation was grievous to him; that he did
                                        think it would be unmanly to desert his post, merely to
                                        escape his present sufferings, and that, therefore, he must
                                        bear as best he might the misery which was prepared for
                                        him.
And did she find these details tedious? Oh, no —she encouraged
                                        him to dilate on every feeling he expressed, till he laid
                                        bare the inmost corners of his heart to her. They spoke
                                        together of the archdeacon, as two children might of a
                                        stern, unpopular, but still respected schoolmaster, and of
                                        the bishop as  a parent kind as kind could be,
                                        but powerless against an omnipotent pedagogue.
And then, when they had discussed all this, when the father had
                                        told all to the child, she could not be less confiding than
                                        he had been; and as John Bold's name was mentioned between
                                        them, she owned how well she had learned to love him,—"had
                                        loved him once," she said, "but she would not, could not do
                                        so now—no, even had her troth been plighted to him, she
                                        would have taken it back again—had she sworn to love him as
                                        his wife, she would have discarded him and not felt herself
                                        forsworn, when he proved himself the enemy of her
                                        father."
But the warden declared that Bold was no enemy of his, and
                                        encouraged her love; and gently rebuked, as he kissed her,
                                        the stern resolve she had made to cast him off; and then he
                                        spoke to her of happier days when their trials would all be
                                        over; and declared that her young heart should not be torn
                                        asunder to please either priest or prelate, dean or
                                        archdeacon. No, not if all Oxford were to convocate
                                        together, and agree as to the necessity of the
                                        sacrifice.
And so they greatly comforted each other—and in what sorrow will
                                        not such mutual confidence give consolation!—and with a last
                                        expression of tender love they parted, and went
                                        comparatively happy to their rooms.

</div></body></text></TEI>