<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Rachel Gray: A Tale
     Founded on Fact</title><author>Kavanagh, Julia (1824-1877).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II.
Rachel went on; but she did not turn homewards. She left the broad and airy strait, where
     Mrs. Moxton lived. She entered a narrow one, long and gloomy. It led her into a large and
     gas-lit square. She crossed it without looking right or left: a thought led her on like a
     spell. Through streets and alleys, by lanes and courts—on she went, until at length she stood
     in the heart of a populous neighbourhood. Cars were dashing along the pavement; night vendors
     were screaming at their stalls, where tallow lights flared in the night wind. Drunken men were
     shouting in gin palaces, wretched looking women were coming out of pawnbroker's shops, and
     precocious London children were pouring into a theatre, where their morals were to be improved,
     and their understandings were to be enlightened, at the moderate rate of a penny a head.
Rachel sighed at all she saw, and divined. "Poor things!" she thought, "if they only knew
     better." But this compassionate feeling did not exclude a sort of fear. Rachel kept as much as
     she could in the gloomy part of the streets; she shrank back nervously from every rude group,
     and thus she at length succeeded in attracting the very thing she most wished to
     shun—observation. Three or four women, rushing out of a public-house, caught sight of her timid
     figure. At once, one of them—she was more than half-intoxicated—burst out into a loud shouting
     laugh, and, seizing Rachel's arm, swung her round on the pavement.
"Let me go!" said Rachel "I am in a hurry." She trembled from head to foot, and vainly tried
     to put on the appearance of a courage she felt not.
"Give me something for drink then," insolently said the woman.
Rachel's momentary fear was already over; she had said to herself, "and what can happen to me
     without God's will?" and the thought had nerved her. She looked very quietly at the woman's
     flushed and bloated face, and as quietly she said:
"You have drunk too much already; let me go."
"No I won't," hoarsely replied her tormentor, and she used language which, though it could
     not stain the pure heart of her who heard it, brought the blush of anger and shame to her
     cheek.
"Let me go!" she said, trembling this time with indignation.
"Yes—yes, let the young woman go, Molly," observed one of the woman's companions who had
     hitherto looked on apathetically. She officiously disengaged Rachel's arm, whispering as she
     did so: "You'd better cut now—I'll hold her. Molly's awful when she's got them fits on."
Rachel hastened away, followed by the derisive shout of the whole group. She turned down the
     first street she found; it was dark and silent, yet Rachel did not stop until she reached the
     very end of it; then she paused to breathe a while, but when she put her hand in her pocket for
     her handkerchief it was gone; with it had disappeared her purse, and two or three shillings.
     Rachel saw and understood it all—the friend of Molly, her officious deliverer, was a
     pick-pocket She hung down her head and sighed, dismayed and astonished, not at her loss, but at
     the sin. "Ah! dear Lord Jesus," she thought, full of sorrow, "that thou shouldst thus be
     crucified anew by the sins of thy people!" Then followed the perplexing inward question: "Oh!
     why is there so much sin?" "God knows best," was the inward reply, and once more calm and
     serene, Rachel went on. At first, she hardly knew where she was. She stood in a dark
     thoroughfare where three streets met—three narrow streets that scarcely broke on the
     surrounding gloom. Hesitatingly she took the first. It happened to be that which she wanted.
     When Rachel recognized it, her pace slackened, her heart beat, her colour came and went, she
     was much moved; she prayed too—she prayed with her whole heart, but she walked very slowly. And
     thus she reached at length a lonely little street not quite so gloomy as that which she had
     been following.
She paused at the corner shop for a moment. It was a second-hand ironmonger's; rusty iron
     locks, and rusty tongs and shovels, and rusty goods of every description kept grim company to
     tattered books and a few old pictures, that had contracted an iron look in their vicinity. A
     solitary gas-light lit the whole.
Rachel stopped and looked at the books, and at the pictures, but only for a few seconds. If
     she stood there, it was not to gaze with passing curiosity on those objects; she knew them all
     of old, as she knew every stone of that street; it was to wait until the flush of her cheek had
     subsided, and the beating of her heart had grown still.
At length she went on. When she reached the middle of the street she paused; she stood near a
     dark house, shrouded within the gloom of its doorway. Opposite her, on the other side of the
     way, was a small shop lit from within. From where she stood, Rachel could see everything that
     passed in that abode. A carpenter lived there, for the place was full of rough deal boards
     standing erect against the wall, and the floor was heaped high with shavings. Presently a door
     within opened, the master of the shop entered it, and set himself to work by the light of a
     tallow candle. He was a tall, thin man, grey-headed and deeply wrinkled, but strong and hale
     for his years. As he bent over his work, the light of the candle vividly defined his angular
     figure and sharp features. Rachel looked at him; her eyes filled with tears, she brushed them
     away with her hand, for they prevented her from seeing, but they returned thicker and
     faster.
"Oh! my father, my father!" she cried within her heart, "why must I stand here in darkness
     looking at you? why cannot I go in to you, like other daughters to their father? why do you not
     love your child?" Her heart seemed full to bursting; her eyes overflowed, her breathing was
     broken by sobs, and in the simple and pathetic words of Scripture, she turned away her head,
     and raised her voice and wept aloud.
Rachel Gray was the daughter of the grey-headed carpenter by a first wife; soon after whose
     death he had married again. Mrs. Gray was his second wife, and the mother of his youngest
     daughter. She was kind in her way, but that was at the best a harsh one. Rachel was a timid,
     retiring child, plain, awkward, and sallow, with nothing to attract the eye, and little to
     please the fancy. Mrs. Gray did not use her ill certainly, but neither did she give her any
     great share in her affections. And why and how should a step-mother have loved Rachel when her
     own father did not? when almost from her birth she had been to him as though she did not
     exist—as a being who, uncalled for and unwanted, had come athwart his life. Never had he, to
     her knowledge, taken her in his arms, or on his knee; never had he kissed or caressed her;
     never addressed to her one word of fondness, or even of common kindness. Neither, it is true,
     had he ill-used nor ill-treated her; he felt no unnatural aversion for his own flesh and blood,
     nothing beyond a deep and incurable indifference. For her, his heart remained as a barren and
     arid soil on which the sweet flower of love could never bloom.
There was but one being in this narrow circle who really and fondly loved Rachel Gray. And
     this was Jane, her little half-sister. Rachel was her elder by full five years. When she was
     told one morning that Jane was born, she heard the tidings with silent awe, then with eager
     curiosity, climbed up on a chair to peep at the rosy baby fast asleep in its cradle. From that
     day, she had but one thought—her little sister. How describe the mingled love and pride with
     which Rachel received the baby, when it was first confided to her care, and when to her was
     allotted the delightful task of dragging about in her arms a heavy, screaming child? And who
     but Rachel found Jane's first tooth? Who but Rachel taught Jane to speak; and taught her how to
     walk? Who else fulfilled for the helpless infant and wilful child every little office of
     kindness and of love, until at length there woke in her own childish heart some of that
     maternal fondness born with woman, the feeling whence her deepest woes and her highest
     happiness alike must spring. When her father was unkind, when her step-mother was hasty, Rachel
     turned for comfort to her little sister. In her childish caresses, and words, and ways, she
     found solace and consolation. She did not feel it hard that she was to be the slave of a
     spoiled child, to wash, comb, and dress her, to work for her, to carry her, to sing to her, to
     play with her, and that, not when she liked, but when it pleased Jane. All this Rachel did not
     mind—Jane loved her. She knew it, she was sure of it; and where there is love, there cannot be
     tyranny.
Thus the two sisters grew up together, until one day, without previous warning, Thomas Gray
     went off to America, and coolly left his wife and children behind. Mrs. Gray was a good and an
     upright woman; she reared her husband's child like her own, and worked for both, without ever
     repining at the double burden. When her husband returned to England, after three years'
     absence, Mrs. Gray lost no time in compelling him to grant her a weekly allowance for herself,
     and for the support of her children. Thomas Gray could not resist the claim; but he gave what
     the law compelled him to give, and no more. He never returned to live with his wife; he never
     expressed a wish to see either of his daughters.
He had been back some years when little Jane died at thirteen. She died, dreaming of heaven,
     with her hand in that of Rachel, and her head on Rachel's bosom. She died, blessing her eldest
     sister with her last breath, with love for her in the last look of her blue eyes, in the last
     smile of her wan lips. It was a happy death-bed—one to waken hope, not to call forth sorrow;
     and yet what became of the life of Rachel when Jane was gone? For a long time it was a dreary
     void—a melancholy succession of days and weeks and months, from which the happy light had
     fled—from which something sweet and delightful was gone for ever.
For, though it may be sweeter to love, than to be loved, yet it is hard always to give and
     never to receive in return; and when Jane died, Rachel knew well enough that all the love she
     had to receive upon earth, had been given unto her. Like the lost Pleiad, "seen no more below,"
     the bright star of her life had left the sky. It burned in other heavens with more celestial
     light; but it shone no longer over her path—to cheer, to comfort, to illume.
Mrs. Gray was kind; after her own fashion, she loved Rachel. They had grieved and suffered
     together from the same sorrows, and kindred griefs can bind the farthest hearts; but beyond
     this there was no sympathy between them, and Mrs. Gray's affection, such as it was, was free
     from a particle of tenderness.
She was not naturally a patient or an amiable woman; and she had endured great and unmerited
     wrongs from Rachel's father. Perhaps, she would have been more than human, had she not
     occasionally reminded her step-daughter of Mr. Thomas Gray's misdeeds, and now and then taunted
     her with a "He never cared about you—you know."
Aye—Rachel knew it well enough. She knew that her own father loved her not—that though he had
     cared little for Jane, not being a tender-hearted man, still that he had cared somewhat, for
     that younger, and more favoured child. That before he left England, he would occasionally
     caress her; that when she died, tears had flowed down his stern cheek on hearing the tidings,
     and that the words had escaped him: "I am sorry I was not there."
All this Rachel knew. Her mind was too noble, and too firm for jealousy; her heart too pious,
     and too humble for rebellious sorrow; but yet she found it hard to bear, and very hard to be
     reminded of it as a reproach and a shame.
Was it not enough that she could not win the affection she most longed for? She was devoted
     to her step-mother; she had fondly loved her younger sister; but earlier born in her heart than
     these two loves, deeper, and more solemn, was the love Rachel felt for her father. That
     instinct of nature, which in him was silent, in her spoke strongly. That share of love which he
     denied her, she silently added to her own, and united both in one fervent offering. Harshness
     and indifference had no power to quench a feeling, to which love in kindness had not given
     birth. She loved because it was her destiny; because, as she once said herself, when speaking
     of another: "A daughter's heart clings to her father with boundless charity."
Young as she was when Thomas Gray left his home, Rachel remembered him well. His looks, the
     very tones of his voice, were present to her. Not once, during the years of his absence, did
     the thought of her father cease to haunt her heart. When, from the bitter remarks of her
     step-mother, she learned that he had returned, and where he had taken up his home, she had no
     peace until she succeeded in obtaining a glimpse of him. Free, as are all the children of the
     poor, she made her way to the street where he lived, and many a day walked for weary miles in
     order to pass by her father's door. But she never crossed the threshold, never spoke to him,
     never let him know who she was, until the sad day when she bore to him the news of her sister's
     death.
He received her with his usual coldness—in such emotion as he showed, she had no share, like
     strangers they had met—like strangers they parted. But, though his coldness and her own
     timidity prevented nearer advances, they did not prevent Rachel from often seeking the remote
     neighbourhood and gloomy street where her father dwelt.
It was a pleasure, though a sad one, to look on his face, even if she went not near him; and
     thus it happened, that on this dark night she stood in the sheltering obscurity of the
     well-known doorway, gazing on the solitary old man, yet venturing not to cross the narrow
     street.
The wind blew from the east. It was cold and piercing; yet it could not draw Rachel from her
     vigil of love. Still she looked and lingered, wishing she knew not what; and hoping against
     hope. Thus she stayed, until Thomas Gray left his work, put up the shutters, then left the
     house by the private door, and slowly walked away to the nearest public-house.
The shop was once more a blank in the dark street. Rachel looked at the deserted dwelling and
     sighed; than softly and silently she stole away.
</div></body></text></TEI>