<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAP. XV. TOM TOWERS, DR. ANTICANT, AND MR. SENTIMENT.
" Ah , Bold! how are you? You have n't breakfasted?"
"Oh yes, hours ago. And how are you?"
When one Esquimaux meets another, do the two, as an invariable
                                        rule, ask after each other's health? is it inherent in all
                                        human nature to make this obliging inquiry? Did any reader
                                        of this tale ever meet any friend or acquaintance without
                                        asking some such question, and did any one ever listen to
                                        the reply? Sometimes a studiously courteous questioner will
                                        show so much thought in the matter as to answer it himself,
                                        by declaring that had he looked at you he need n't have
                                        asked; meaning thereby to signify that you are an absolute
                                        personification of health: but such persons are only those
                                        who premeditate small effects.
"I suppose you're busy?" inquired Bold.
Why, yes, rather; or I should say rather not: "I have a leisure
                                        hour in the day, this is it."

"I want to ask you if you can oblige me in a certain matter."
Towers understood in a moment, from the tone of his friend's
                                        voice, that the certain matter referred to the newspaper. He
                                        smiled, and nodded his head, but made no promise.
"You know this lawsuit that I've been engaged in?" said Bold.
Tom Towers intimated that he was aware of the action which was
                                        pending about the hospital.
"Well, I've abandoned it."
Tom Towers merely raised his eyebrows, thrust his hands into his
                                        trousers' pockets, and waited for his friend to proceed.
"Yes, I've given it up. I need n't trouble you with all the
                                        history; but the fact is that the conduct of Mr. Harding—Mr.
                                        Harding is the—"
"Oh yes, the master of the place; the man who takes all the money
                                        and does nothing," said Tom Towers, interrupting him.
"Well, I don't know about that; but his conduct in the matter has
                                        been so excellent, so little selfish, so open, that I cannot
                                        proceed in the matter to his detriment." Bold's heart
                                        misgave him as to Eleanor as he said this; and yet he felt
                                        that what he said was  not untrue. "I think
                                        nothing should now be done till the wardenship be
                                        vacant."
"And be again filled," said Towers, "as it certainly would,
                                        before any one heard of the vacancy; and the same objection
                                        would again exist. It's an old story that of the vested
                                        rights of the incumbent; but suppose the incumbent has only
                                        a vested wrong, and that the poor of the town have a vested
                                        right, if they only knew how to get at it: is not that
                                        something the case here?"
Bold could n't deny it, but thought it was one of those cases
                                        which required a good deal of management before any real
                                        good could be done. It was a pity that he had not considered
                                        this before he crept into the lion's mouth, in the shape of
                                        an attorney's office.
"It will cost you a good deal, I fear," said Towers.
"A few hundreds," said Bold—"perhaps three hundred; I can't help
                                        that, and am prepared for it."
"That's philosophical; it's quite refreshing to hear a man
                                        talking of his hundreds in so purely indifferent a manner.
                                        But I'm sorry you are giving the matter up; it injures a man
                                        to commence a thing of this kind, and not carry it through.
                                        Have you seen that?" and he threw a small pamphlet across
                                        the table, which was all but damp from the press.

Bold had not seen it nor heard of it; but he was well acquainted
                                        with the author of it—a gentleman whose pamphlets,
                                        condemnatory of all things in these modern days, had been a
                                        good deal talked about of late.
Dr. Pessimist Anticant was a Scotchman, who had passed a great
                                        portion of his early days in Germany; he had studied there
                                        with much effect, and had learnt to look with German
                                        subtilty into the root of things, and to examine for himself
                                        their intrinsic worth and worthlessness. No man ever
                                        resolved more bravely than he to accept as good nothing that
                                        was evil; to banish from him as evil nothing that was good.
                                        'Tis a pity that he should not have recognised the fact,
                                        that in this world no good is unalloyed, and that there is
                                        but little evil that has not in it some seed of what is
                                        goodly.
Returning from Germany, he had astonished the reading public by
                                        the vigour of his thoughts, put forth in the quaintest
                                        language. He cannot write English, said the critics. No
                                        matter, said the public; we can read what he does write, and
                                        that without yawning. And so Dr. Pessimist Anticant became
                                        popular. Popularity spoilt him for all further real use, as
                                        it has done many another. While, with some diffidence, he
                                        confined his objurgations to the occasional follies  or short-comings of mankind; while he
                                        ridiculed the energy of the squire devoted to the slaughter
                                        of partridges, or the mistake of some noble patron who
                                        turned a poet into a gauger of beer barrels, it was all
                                        well; we were glad to be told our faults and to look forward
                                        to the coming millennium, when all men, having sufficiently
                                        studied the works of Dr. Anticant, would become truthful and
                                        energetic. But the doctor mistook the signs of the times and
                                        the minds of men, instituted himself censor of things in
                                        general, and began the great task of reprobating everything
                                        and everybody, without further promise of any millennium at
                                        all. This was not so well; and, to tell the truth, our
                                        author did not succeed in his undertaking. His theories were
                                        all beautiful, and the code of morals that he taught us
                                        certainly an improvement on the practices of the age. We all
                                        of us could, and many of us did, learn much from the doctor
                                        while he chose to remain vague, mysterious, and cloudy; but
                                        when he became practical, the charm was gone.
His allusion to the poet and the partridges was received very
                                        well. 'Oh, my poor brother,' said he, 'slaughtered
                                        partridges a score of brace to each gun, and poets gauging
                                        ale barrels, with sixty pounds a-year, at Dumfries, are not
                                        the signs of a great era!  perhaps of the
                                        smallest possible era yet written of. Whatever economies we
                                        pursue, political or other, let us see at once that this is
                                        the maddest of the uneconomic: partridges killed by our land
                                        magnates at, shall we say, a guinea a-head, to be retailed
                                        in Leadenhall at one shilling and ninepence, with one
                                        poacher in limbo for every fifty birds! our poet, maker,
                                        creator, gauging ale, and that badly, with no leisure for
                                        making or creating, only a little leisure for drinking, and
                                        such like beer-barrel avocations! Truly, a cutting of blocks
                                        with fine razors while we scrape our chins so uncomfortably
                                        with rusty knives! Oh, my political economist, master of
                                        supply and demand, division of labour and high pressure—oh,
                                        my loud-speaking friend, tell me, if so much be in you, what
                                        is the demand for poets in these kingdoms of Queen Victoria,
                                        and what the vouchsafed supply?'
This was all very well; this gave us some hope. We might do
                                        better with our next poet, when we got one; and though the
                                        partridges might not be abandoned, something could perhaps
                                        be done as to the poachers. We were unwilling, however, to
                                        take lessons in politics from so misty a professor; and when
                                        he came to tell us that the heroes of Westminster were
                                        naught, we began to think that he  had written
                                        enough. His attack upon despatch boxes was not thought to
                                        have much in it; but as it is short, the doctor shall again
                                        be allowed to speak his sentiments:—
'Could utmost ingenuity in the management of red tape avail
                                        anything to men lying gasping—we may say, all but dead;
                                        could despatch boxes with never-so-much velvet lining and
                                        Chubb's patent, be of comfort to a people in
                                                extremis , I also, with so many others, would,
                                        with parched tongue, call on the name of Lord John Russell;
                                        or, my brother, at your advice, on Lord Aberdeen; or, my
                                        cousin, on Lord Derby, at yours; being, with my parched
                                        tongue, indifferent in such matters. 'Tis all one. Oh,
                                        Derby! Oh, Gladstone! Oh, Palmerston! Oh, Lord John! Each
                                        comes running with serene face and despatch box. Vain
                                        physicians! though there were hosts of such, no despatch box
                                        will cure this disorder! What! are these other doctors' new
                                        names, disciples who have not burdened their souls with
                                        tape? Well, let us call again. Oh, Disraeli, great
                                        oppositionist, man of the bitter brow! or, Oh, Molesworth,
                                        great reformer, thou who promisest Utopia. They come; each
                                        with that serene face, and each—alas, me! alas, my
                                        country!—each with a despatch box!

'Oh, the serenity of Downing Street!
'My brothers, when hope was over on the battle field, when no
                                        dimmest chance of victory remained, the ancient Roman could
                                        hide his face within his toga, and die gracefully. Can you
                                        and I do so now? If so, 't were best for us; if not, oh my
                                        brothers, we must die disgracefully, for hope of life and
                                        victory I see none left to us in this world below. I for one
                                        cannot trust much to serene face and despatch box!'
There might be truth in this, there might be depth of reasoning;
                                        but Englishmen did not see enough in the argument to induce
                                        them to withdraw their confidence from the present
                                        arrangements of the government, and Dr. Anticant's monthly
                                        pamphlet on the decay of the world did not receive so much
                                        attention as his earlier works. He did not confine himself
                                        to politics in these publications, but roamed at large over
                                        all matters of public interest, and found everything bad.
                                        According to him nobody was true, and not only nobody, but
                                        nothing; a man could not take off his hat to a lady without
                                        telling a lie—the lady would lie again in smiling. The
                                        ruffles of the gentleman's shirt would be fraught with
                                        deceit, and the ladies' flounces full of falsehood. Was ever
                                        anything more severe than that attack of his on chip  bonnets, or the anathemas with which he
                                        endeavoured to dust the powder out of the bishops' wigs?
The pamphlet which Tom Towers now pushed across the table was
                                        entitled "Modern Charity," and was written with the view of
                                        proving how much in the way of charity was done by our
                                        predecessors— how little by the present age; and it ended by
                                        a comparison between ancient and modern times, very little
                                        to the credit of the latter.
"Look at this," said Towers, getting up and turning over the
                                        pages of the pamphlet, and pointing to a passage near the
                                        end; "your friend the warden, who is so little selfish,
                                        won't like that, I fear." Bold read as follows:—
'Heavens, what a sight! Let us with eyes wide open see the godly
                                        man of four centuries since, the man of the dark ages: let
                                        us see how he does his godlike work, and, again, how the
                                        godly man of these latter days does his.
'Shall we say that the former is one walking painfully through
                                        the world, regarding, as a prudent man, his worldly work,
                                        prospering in it as a diligent man will prosper, but always
                                        with an eye to that better treasure to which thieves do not
                                        creep in? Is there not much nobility in that old man, as,
                                        leaning on his oaken staff, he walks down the high  street of his native town, and receives
                                        from all courteous salutation and acknowledgment of his
                                        worth? A noble old man, my august inhabitants of Belgrave
                                        Square and such like vicinity—a very noble old man, though
                                        employed no better than in the wholesale carding of
                                        wool.
'This carding of wool, however, did in those days bring with it
                                        much profit, so that our ancient friend, when dying, was
                                        declared, in whatever slang then prevailed, to cut up
                                        exceeding well. For sons and daughters there was ample
                                        sustenance, with assistance of due industry; for friends and
                                        relatives some relief for grief at this great loss; for aged
                                        dependants comfort in declining years. This was much for one
                                        old man to get done in that dark fifteenth century. But this
                                        was not all: coming generations of poor woolcarders should
                                        bless the name of this rich one; and a hospital should be
                                        founded and endowed with his wealth for the feeding of such
                                        of the trade as could not, by diligent carding, any longer
                                        duly feed themselves.
''Twas thus that an old man in the fifteenth century did his
                                        godlike work to the best of his power, and not ignobly, as
                                        appears to me.
'We will now take our godly man of latter days. He shall no
                                        longer be a woolcarder, for such are  not now
                                        men of mark. We will suppose him to be one of the best of
                                        the good—one who has lacked no opportunities. Our old friend
                                        was, after all, but illiterate; our modern friend shall be a
                                        man educated in all seemly knowledge; he shall, in short, be
                                        that blessed being—a clergyman of the Church of England!
'And now, in what perfectest manner does he in this lower world
                                        get his godlike work done and put out of hand? Heavens! in
                                        the strangest of manners. Oh, my brother! in a manner not at
                                        all to be believed but by the most minute testimony of
                                        eyesight. He does it by the magnitude of his appetite—by the
                                        power of his gorge; his only occupation is to swallow the
                                        bread prepared with so much anxious care for these
                                        impoverished carders of wool—that, and to sing indifferently
                                        through his nose once in the week some psalm more or less
                                        long—the shorter the better, we should be inclined to
                                        say.
'Oh, my civilised friends!—great Britons that never will be
                                        slaves, men advanced to infinite state of freedom and
                                        knowledge of good and evil—tell me, will you, what becoming
                                        monument you will erect to an highly-educated clergyman of
                                        the Church of England?'

Bold certainly thought that his friend would not like that: he
                                        could not conceive anything that he would like less than
                                        this. To what a world of toil and trouble had he, Bold,
                                        given rise by his indiscreet attack upon the hospital!
"You see," said Towers, "that this affair has been much talked
                                        of, and the public are with you. I am sorry you should give
                                        the matter up. Have you seen the first number of the
                                        'Almshouse?'"
No; Bold had not seen the 'Almshouse.' He had seen advertisements
                                        of Mr. Popular Sentiment's new novel of that name, but had
                                        in no way connected it with Barchester Hospital, and had
                                        never thought a moment on the subject.
"It's a direct attack on the whole system," said Towers. It'll go
                                        a long way to put down Rochester, and Barchester, and
                                        Dulwich, and St. Cross, and all such hotbeds of peculation.
                                        It's very clear that Sentiment has been down to Barchester,
                                        and got up the whole story there; indeed, I thought he must
                                        have had it all from you. It's very well done, as you'll
                                        see: his first numbers always are."
Bold declared that Mr. Sentiment had got nothing from him, and
                                        that he was deeply grieved to find that the case had become
                                        so notorious.
"The fire has gone too far to be quenched," said 
                                        Towers; "the building must go now; and as the timbers are
                                        all rotten, why, I should be inclined to say, the sooner the
                                        better. I expected to see you get some éclat in the
                                        matter."
This was all wormwood to Bold. He had done enough to make his
                                        friend the warden miserable for life, and had then backed
                                        out just when the success of his project was sufficient to
                                        make the question one of real interest. How weakly he had
                                        managed his business! He had already done the harm, and then
                                        stayed his hand when the good which he had in view was to be
                                        commenced. How delightful would it have been to have
                                        employed all his energy in such a cause—to have been backed
                                        by the Jupiter, and written up to by two of the most popular
                                        authors of the day! The idea opened a view into the very
                                        world in which he wished to live. To what might it not have
                                        given rise? what delightful intimacies— what public
                                        praise—to what Athenian banquets and rich flavour of Attic
                                        salt?
This, however, was now past hope. He had pledged himself to
                                        abandon the cause; and could he have forgotten the pledge,
                                        he had gone too far to retreat. He was now, this moment,
                                        sitting in Tom Towers' room with the object of deprecating
                                        any further articles in the Jupiter, and, greatly as he  disliked the job, his petition to that
                                        effect must be made.
"I could n't continue it," said he, "because I found I was in the
                                        wrong."
Tom Towers shrugged his shoulders. How could a successful man be
                                        in the wrong! "In that case," said he, "of course you must
                                        abandon it."
"And I called this morning to ask you also to abandon it," said
                                        Bold.
"To ask me," said Tom Towers with the most placid of smiles, and
                                        a consummate look of gentle surprise, as though Tom Towers
                                        was well aware that he of all men was the last to meddle in
                                        such matters.
"Yes," said Bold, almost trembling with hesitation. "The Jupiter,
                                        you know, has taken the matter up very strongly. Mr. Harding
                                        has felt what it has said deeply; and I thought that if I
                                        could explain to you that he personally has not been to
                                        blame, these articles might be discontinued."
How calmly impassive was Tom Towers' face, as this innocent
                                        little proposition was made! Had Bold addressed himself to
                                        the doorposts in Mount Olympus, they would have shown as
                                        much outward sign of assent or dissent. His quiescence was
                                        quite admirable; his discretion certainly more than
                                        human.

"My dear fellow," said he, when Bold had quite done speaking, "I
                                        really cannot answer for the Jupiter."
"But if you saw that these articles were unjust, I think you
                                        would endeavour to put a stop to them: of course nobody
                                        doubts that you could, if you chose."
"Nobody and everybody are always very kind, but unfortunately are
                                        generally very wrong."
"Come, come, Towers," said Bold, plucking up his courage, and
                                        remembering that for Eleanor's sake he was bound to make his
                                        best exertion; "I have no doubt in my own mind but that you
                                        wrote the articles yourself; and very well written they
                                        were: it will be a great favour if you will in future
                                        abstain from any personal allusion to poor Harding."
"My dear Bold," said Tom Towers, "I have a sincere regard for
                                        you. I have known you for many years, and value your
                                        friendship; I hope you will let me explain to you, without
                                        offence, that none who are connected with the public press
                                        can with propriety listen to interference."
"Interference!" said Bold, "I don't want to interfere."
"Ah, but my dear fellow, you do; what else is it? 
                                        You think that I am able to keep certain remarks out of a
                                        newspaper. Your information is probably incorrect, as most
                                        public gossip on such subjects is; but, at any rate, you
                                        think I have such power, and you ask me to use it: now that
                                        is interference."
"Well, if you choose to call it so."
"And now suppose for a moment that I had this power, and used it
                                        as you wish: is n't it clear that it would be a great abuse?
                                        Certain men are employed in writing for the public press;
                                        and if they are induced either to write or to abstain from
                                        writing by private motives, surely the public press would
                                        soon be of little value. Look at the recognised worth of
                                        different newspapers, and see if it does not mainly depend
                                        on the assurance which the public feel that such a paper is,
                                        or is not, independent. You alluded to the Jupiter: surely
                                        you cannot but see that the weight of the Jupiter is too
                                        great to be moved by any private request, even though it
                                        should be made to a much more influential person than
                                        myself: you've only to think of this, and you'll see that I
                                        am right."
The discretion of Tom Towers was boundless: there was no
                                        contradicting what he said, no arguing against such
                                        propositions. He took such high ground  that
                                        there was no getting on it. "The public is defrauded," said
                                        he, "whenever private considerations are allowed to have
                                        weight." Quite true, thou greatest oracle of the middle of
                                        the nineteenth century, thou sententious proclaimer of the
                                        purity of the press— the public is defrauded when it is
                                        purposely misled. Poor public! how often is it misled!
                                        against what a world of fraud has it to contend!
Bold took his leave and got out of the room as quickly as he
                                        could, inwardly denouncing his friend Tom Towers as a prig
                                        and a humbug. 'I know he wrote those articles,' said Bold to
                                        himself; 'I know he got his information from me. He was
                                        ready enough to take my word for gospel when it suited his
                                        own views, and to set Mr. Harding up before the public as an
                                        impostor on no other testimony than my chance conversation;
                                        but when I offer him real evidence opposed to his own views,
                                        he tells me that private motives are detrimental to public
                                        justice! Confound his arrogance! What is any public question
                                        but a conglomeration of private interests? What is any
                                        newspaper article but an expression of the views taken by
                                        one side? Truth! it takes an age to ascertain the truth of
                                        any question! The idea of Tom Towers talking of public
                                        motives and purity of purpose! Why, it wouldn't give him a
                                        moment's uneasiness  to change his politics
                                        to-morrow, if the paper required it.'
Such were John Bold's inward exclamations as he made his way out
                                        of the quiet labyrinth of the Temple; and yet there was no
                                        position of worldly power so coveted in Bold's ambition as
                                        that held by the man of whom he was thinking. It was the
                                        impregnability of the place which made Bold so angry with
                                        the possessor of it, and it was the same quality which made
                                        it appear so desirable.
Passing into the Strand, he saw in a bookseller's window an
                                        announcement of the first number of the "Almshouse;" so he
                                        purchased a copy, and hurrying back to his lodgings,
                                        proceeded to ascertain what Mr. Popular Sentiment had to say
                                        to the public on the subject which had lately occupied so
                                        much of his own attention.
In former times great objects were attained by great work. When
                                        evils were to be reformed, reformers set about their heavy
                                        task with grave decorum and laborious argument. An age was
                                        occupied in proving a grievance, and philosophical
                                        researches were printed in folio pages, which it took a life
                                        to write, and an eternity to read. We get on now with a
                                        lighter step, and quicker: ridicule is found to be more
                                        convincing than argument, imaginary  agonies
                                        touch more than true sorrows, and monthly novels convince,
                                        when learned quartos fail to do so. If the world is to be
                                        set right, the work will be done by shilling numbers.
Of all such reformers Mr. Sentiment is the most powerful. It is
                                        incredible the number of evil practices he has put down: it
                                        is to be feared he will soon lack subjects, and that when he
                                        has made the working classes comfortable, and got bitter
                                        beer put into proper-sized pint bottles, there will be
                                        nothing further for him left to do. Mr. Sentiment is
                                        certainly a very powerful man, and perhaps not the less so
                                        that his good poor people are so very good; his hard rich
                                        people so very hard; and the genuinely honest so very
                                        honest. Namby-pamby in these days is not thrown away if it
                                        be introduced in the proper quarters. Divine peeresses are
                                        no longer interesting, though possessed of every virtue; but
                                        a pattern peasant or an immaculate manufacturing hero may
                                        talk as much twaddle as one of Mrs. Ratcliffe's heroines,
                                        and still be listened to. Perhaps, however, Mr. Sentiment's
                                        great attraction is in his second-rate characters. If his
                                        heroes and heroines walk upon stilts, as heroes and
                                        heroines, I fear, ever must, their attendant satellites are
                                        as natural as though one met them in the street: they walk
                                                 and talk like men and women, and live
                                        among our friends a rattling, lively life; yes, live, and
                                        will live till the names of their callings shall be
                                        forgotten in their own, and Buckett and Mrs. Gamp will be
                                        the only words left to us to signify a detective police
                                        officer or a monthly nurse.
"The Almshouse" opened with a scene in a clergyman's house. Every
                                        luxury to be purchased by wealth was described as being
                                        there: all the appearances of household indulgence generally
                                        found among the most self-indulgent of the rich were crowded
                                        into this abode. Here the reader was introduced to the demon
                                        of the book, the Mephistopheles of the drama. What story was
                                        ever written without a demon? what novel, what history, what
                                        work of any sort, what world, would be perfect without
                                        existing principles both of good and evil? The demon of the
                                        "Almshouse" was the clerical owner of this comfortable
                                        abode. He was a man well stricken in years, but still strong
                                        to do evil: he was one who looked cruelly out of a hot,
                                        passionate, bloodshot eye; who had a huge red nose with a
                                        carbuncle, thick lips, and a great double, flabby chin,
                                        which swelled out into solid substance, like a turkey cock's
                                        comb, when sudden anger inspired him: he had a hot,
                                        furrowed, low brow, from which a few grizzled 
                                        hairs were not yet rubbed off by the friction of his
                                        handkerchief: he wore a loose unstarched white handkerchief,
                                        black loose ill-made clothes, and huge loose shoes, adapted
                                        to many corns and various bunions: his husky voice told
                                        tales of much daily port wine, and his language was not so
                                        decorous as became a clergyman. Such was the master of Mr.
                                        Sentiment's "Almshouse." He was a widower, but at present
                                        accompanied by two daughters, and a thin and somewhat
                                        insipid curate. One of the young ladies was devoted to her
                                        father and the fashionable world, and she of course was the
                                        favourite; the other was equally addicted to Puseyism and
                                        the curate.
The second chapter of course introduced the reader to the more
                                        especial inmates of the hospital. Here were discovered eight
                                        old men; and it was given to be understood that four
                                        vacancies remained unfilled, through the perverse ill-nature
                                        of the clerical gentleman with the double chin. The state of
                                        these eight paupers was touchingly dreadful:
                                        sixpence-farthing a-day had been sufficient for their diet
                                        when the almshouse was founded; and on sixpence-farthing
                                        a-day were they still doomed to starve, though food was four
                                        times as dear, and money four times as plentiful. It was
                                        shocking to find  how the conversation of these
                                        eight starved old men in their dormitory shamed that of the
                                        clergyman's family in his rich drawing-room. The absolute
                                        words they uttered were not perhaps spoken in the purest
                                        English, and it might be difficult to distinguish from their
                                        dialect to what part of the country they belonged; the
                                        beauty of the sentiment, however, amply atoned for the
                                        imperfection of the language; and it was really a pity that
                                        these eight old men could not be sent through the country as
                                        moral missionaries, instead of being immured and starved in
                                        that wretched almshouse.
Bold finished the number; and as he threw it aside, he thought
                                        that that at least had no direct appliance to Mr. Harding,
                                        and that the absurdly strong colouring of the picture would
                                        disenable the work from doing either good or harm. He was
                                        wrong. The artist who paints for the million must use
                                        glaring colours, as no one knew better than Mr. Sentiment
                                        when he described the inhabitants of his almshouse; and the
                                        radical reform which has now swept over such establishments
                                        has owed more to the twenty numbers of Mr. Sentiment's
                                        novel, than to all the true complaints which have escaped
                                        from the public for the last half century.

</div></body></text></TEI>