<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I. HIRAM'S HOSPITAL.
The Rev. Septimus Harding was, a few years since, a
                                        beneficed clergyman residing in the cathedral town of—; let
                                        us call it Barchester. Were we to name Wells or Salisbury,
                                        Exeter, Hereford, or Gloucester, it might be presumed that
                                        something personal was intended; and as this tale will refer
                                        mainly to the cathedral dignitaries of the town in question,
                                        we are anxious that no personality may be suspected. Let us
                                        presume that Barchester is a quiet town in the West of
                                        England, more remarkable for the beauty of its cathedral and
                                        the antiquity of its monuments, than for any commercial
                                        prosperity; that the west end of Barchester is the cathedral
                                        close, and that the aristocracy  of Barchester are the
                                        bishop, dean, and canons, with their respective wives and
                                        daughters.
Early in life Mr. Harding found himself located at Barchester. A
                                        fine voice and a taste for sacred music had decided the
                                        position in which he was to exercise his calling, and for
                                        many years he performed the easy but not highly paid duties
                                        of a minor canon. At the age of forty a small living in the
                                        close vicinity of the town increased both his work and his
                                        income, and at the age of fifty he became precentor of the
                                        cathedral.
Mr. Harding had married early in life, and was the father of two
                                        daughters. The eldest, Susan, was born soon after his
                                        marriage; the other, Eleanor, not till ten years later. At
                                        the time at which we introduce him to our readers he was
                                        living as precentor at Barchester with his youngest
                                        daughter, then twenty-four years of age; having been many
                                        years a widower, and having married his eldest daughter to a
                                        son of the bishop, a very short time before his installation
                                        to the office of precentor.
Scandal at Barchester affirmed that had it not been for the
                                        beauty of his daughter, Mr. Harding would have remained a
                                        minor canon; but here probably Scandal lied, as she so often
                                        does; for even as a minor canon no one had been more popular
                                         among his reverend brethren in the close, than Mr.
                                        Harding; and Scandal, before she had reprobated Mr. Harding
                                        for being made precentor by his friend the bishop, had
                                        loudly blamed the bishop for having so long omitted to do
                                        something for his friend Mr. Harding. Be this as it may,
                                        Susan Harding, some twelve years since, had married the Rev.
                                        Dr. Theophilus Grantly, son of the bishop, archdeacon of
                                        Barchester, and rector of Plumstead Episcopi, and her father
                                        became, a few months later, precentor of Barchester
                                        Cathedral, that office being, as is not usual, in the
                                        bishop's gift.
Now there are peculiar circumstances connected with the
                                        precentorship which must be explained. In the year 1434
                                        there died at Barchester one John Hiram, who had made money
                                        in the town as a woolstapler, and in his will he left the
                                        house in which he died and certain meadows and closes near
                                        the town, still called Hiram's Butts, and Hiram's Patch, for
                                        the support of twelve superannuated wool-carders, all of
                                        whom should have been born and bred and spent their days in
                                        Barchester; he also appointed that an alms-house should be
                                        built for their abode, with a fitting residence for a
                                        warden, which warden was also to receive a certain sum
                                        annually out of the rents of the said butts and patches. He,
                                        moreover,  willed, having had a soul alive to harmony,
                                        that the precentor of the cathedral should have the option
                                        of being also warden of the alms-houses, if the bishop in
                                        each case approved.
From that day to this the charity had gone on and prospered—at
                                        least, the charity had gone on, and the estates had
                                        prospered. Wool-carding in Barchester there was no longer
                                        any; so the bishop, dean, and warden, who took it in turn to
                                        put in the old men, generally appointed some hangers-on of
                                        their own; worn-out gardeners, decrepid grave-diggers, or
                                        octogenarian sextons, who thankfully received a comfortable
                                        lodging and one shilling and fourpence a day, such being the
                                        stipend to which, under the will of John Hiram, they were
                                        declared to be entitled. Formerly, indeed,—that is, till
                                        within some fifty years of the present time,—they received
                                        but sixpence a day, and their breakfast and dinner was found
                                        them at a common table by the warden, such an arrangement
                                        being in stricter conformity with the absolute wording of
                                        old Hiram's will: but this was thought to be inconvenient,
                                        and to suit the tastes of neither warden nor bedesmen, and
                                        the daily one shilling and fourpence was substituted with
                                        the common consent of all parties, including the bishop and
                                        the corporation of Barchester.

Such was the condition of Hiram's twelve old men when Mr. Harding
                                        was appointed warden; but if they may be considered as
                                        well-to-do in the world according to their condition, the
                                        happy warden was much more so. The patches and butts which,
                                        in John Hiram's time, produced hay or fed cows, were now
                                        covered with rows of houses; the value of the property had
                                        gradually increased from year to year, and century to
                                        century, and was now presumed by those who knew anything
                                        about it, to bring in a very nice income; and by some who
                                        knew nothing about it, to have increased to an almost
                                        fabulous extent.
The property was farmed by a gentleman in Barchester, who also
                                        acted as the bishop's steward—a man whose father and
                                        grandfather had been stewards to the bishops of Barchester,
                                        and farmers of John Hiram's estate. The Chadwicks had earned
                                        a good name in Barchester; they had lived respected by
                                        bishops, deans, canons, and precentors; they had been buried
                                        in the precincts of the cathedral; they had never been known
                                        as griping, hard men, but had always lived comfortably,
                                        maintained a good house, and held a high position in
                                        Barchester society. The present Mr. Chadwick was a worthy
                                        scion of a worthy stock, and the tenants living on the butts
                                        and patches, as well as those on the wide episcopal 
                                        domains of the see, were well pleased to have to do with so
                                        worthy and liberal a steward.
For many, many years,—records hardly tell how many, probably from
                                        the time when Hiram's wishes had been first fully carried
                                        out,—the proceeds of the estate had been paid by the steward
                                        or farmer to the warden, and by him divided among the
                                        bedesmen; after which division he paid himself such sums as
                                        became his due. Times had been when the poor warden got
                                        nothing but his bare house, for the patches had been subject
                                        to floods, and the land of Barchester butts was said to be
                                        unproductive; and in these hard times, the warden was hardly
                                        able to make out the daily dole for his twelve dependents.
                                        But by degrees things mended; the patches were drained, and
                                        cottages began to rise upon the butts, and the wardens, with
                                        fairness enough, repaid themselves for the evil days gone
                                        by. In bad times the poor men had had their due, and
                                        therefore in good times they could expect no more. In this
                                        manner the income of the warden had increased; the
                                        picturesque house attached to the hospital had been enlarged
                                        and adorned, and the office had become one of the most
                                        coveted of the snug clerical sinecures attached to our
                                        church. It was now wholly in the bishop's gift, and though
                                        the dean and chapter, in  former days, made a stand on
                                        the subject, they had thought it more conducive to their
                                        honour to have a rich precentor appointed by the bishop,
                                        than a poor one appointed by themselves. The stipend of the
                                        precentor of Barchester was eighty pounds a year. The income
                                        arising from the wardenship of the hospital was eight
                                        hundred, besides the value of the house.
Murmurs, very slight murmurs, had been heard in Barchester,—few
                                        indeed, and far between,—that the proceeds of John Hiram's
                                        property had not been fairly divided: but they can hardly be
                                        said to have been of such a nature as to have caused
                                        uneasiness to any one: still the thing had been whispered,
                                        and Mr. Harding had heard it. Such was his character in
                                        Barchester, so universal was his popularity, that the very
                                        fact of his appointment would have quieted louder whispers
                                        than those which had been heard; but Mr. Harding was an
                                        open-handed, just-minded man, and feeling that there might
                                        be truth in what had been said, he had, on his instalment,
                                        declared his intention of adding twopence a day to each
                                        man's pittance, making a sum of sixty-two pounds eleven
                                        shillings and fourpence, which he was to pay out of his own
                                        pocket. In doing so, however, he distinctly and repeatedly
                                        observed to  the men, that though he promised for
                                        himself, he could not promise for his successors, and that
                                        the extra twopence could only be looked on as a gift from
                                        himself, and not from the trust. The bedesmen, however, were
                                        most of them older than Mr. Harding, and were quite
                                        satisfied with the security on which their extra income was
                                        based.
This munificence on the part of Mr. Harding had not been
                                        unopposed. Mr. Chadwick had mildly but seriously dissuaded
                                        him from it; and his strong-minded son-in-law, the
                                        archdeacon, the man of whom alone Mr. Harding stood in awe,
                                        had urgently, nay, vehemently, opposed so impolitic a
                                        concession: but the warden had made known his intention to
                                        the hospital before the archdeacon had been able to
                                        interfere, and the deed was done.
Hiram's Hospital, as the retreat is called, is a picturesque
                                        building enough, and shows the correct taste with which the
                                        ecclesiastical architects of those days were imbued. It
                                        stands on the banks of the little river, which flows nearly
                                        round the cathedral close, being on the side furthest from
                                        the town. The London road crosses the river by a pretty
                                        one-arched bridge, and, looking from this bridge, the
                                        stranger will see the windows of the old men's rooms, each
                                        pair of windows separated by a small buttress. A  broad
                                        gravel walk runs between the building and the river, which
                                        is always trim and cared for; and at the end of the walk,
                                        under the parapet of the approach to the bridge, is a large
                                        and well-worn seat, on which, in mild weather, three or four
                                        of Hiram's bedesmen are sure to be seen seated. Beyond this
                                        row of buttresses, and further from the bridge, and also
                                        further from the water which here suddenly bends, are the
                                        pretty oriel windows of Mr. Harding's house, and his
                                        well-mown lawn. The entrance to the hospital is from the
                                        London road, and is made through a ponderous gateway under a
                                        heavy stone arch, unnecessary, one would suppose, at any
                                        time, for the protection of twelve old men, but greatly
                                        conducive to the good appearance of Hiram's charity. On
                                        passing through this portal, never closed to any one from
                                        six A. M. till ten P. M. , and never open afterwards, except
                                        on application to a huge, intricately hung, mediæeaval bell,
                                        the handle of which no uninitiated intruder can possibly
                                        find, the six doors of the old men's abodes are seen, and
                                        beyond them is a slight iron screen, through which the more
                                        happy portion of the Barchester élite pass into the
                                        Elysium of Mr. Harding's dwelling.
Mr. Harding is a small man, now verging on sixty years, but
                                        bearing few of the signs of age; his hair  is
                                        rather grizzled, though not grey, his eye is very mild, but
                                        clear and bright, though the double glasses which are held
                                        swinging from his hand, unless when fixed upon his nose,
                                        show that time has told upon his sight: his hands are
                                        delicately white, and both hands and feet are small; he
                                        always wears a black frock coat, black knee-breeches, and
                                        black gaiters, and somewhat scandalises some of his more
                                        hyperclerical brethren by a black neck-handkerchief.
Mr. Harding's warmest admirers cannot say that he was ever an
                                        industrious man; the circumstances of his life have not
                                        called on him to be so; and yet he can hardly be called an
                                        idler. Since his appointment to his precentorship, he has
                                        published, with all possible additions of vellum,
                                        typography, and gilding, a collection of our ancient church
                                        music, with some correct dissertations on Purcell, Crotch,
                                        and Nares. He has greatly improved the choir of Barchester,
                                        which, under his dominion, now rivals that of any cathedral
                                        in England. He has taken something more than his fair share
                                        in the cathedral services, and has played the violoncello
                                        daily to such audiences as he could collect, or, faute
                                                de mieux , to no audience at all.
We must mention one other peculiarity of Mr. Harding. As we have
                                        before stated, he has an income  of eight
                                        hundred a year, and has no family but his one daughter; and
                                        yet he is never quite at ease in money matters. The vellum
                                        and gilding of "Harding's Church Music," cost more than any
                                        one knows, except the author, the publisher, and the Rev.
                                        Theophilus Grantly, who allows none of his father-in-law's
                                        extravagances to escape him. Then he is generous to his
                                        daughter, for whose service he keeps a small carriage and
                                        pair of ponies. He is, indeed, generous to all, but
                                        especially to the twelve old men who are in a peculiar
                                        manner under his care. No doubt with such an income Mr.
                                        Harding should be above the world, as the saying is; but at
                                        any rate, he is not above Archdeacon Theophilus Grantly, for
                                        he is always more or less in debt to his son-in-law, who
                                        has, to a certain extent, assumed the arrangement of the
                                        precentor's pecuniary affairs.

</div></body></text></TEI>