<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Rachel Gray: A Tale
     Founded on Fact</title><author>Kavanagh, Julia (1824-1877).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER XVI.
The reader may easily imagine Jane and Joseph Saunders married. It was an old engagement
     Imagine them, too, retained from their wedding tour to Gravesend. It is evening; and on the
     next morning, "The two Teapots" is to open.
Richard Jones spent a sleepless night, and took down his shutters as soon as a gray, dull
     light entered the street. It availed little; only a dirty child came in for a pennyworth of
     brown sugar. It was half-past eight when Saunders opened his shop; and just about that time a
     chill, drizzling rain began to fall.
The morning was miserable, and only a few wretched figures flitted about the wet street. No
     one entered the "Teapot;" but then not a soul either crossed the threshold of the rival
     shop.
And thus the dull morning wore on until the church clock struck ten. A sprinkling of
     customers then entered the shop of Richard Jones. They were one and all mightily indignant at
     the impudence of the opposite shop in coming there—a lady in a large, black, shabby straw
     bonnet in particular.
"Ay, ay, you may flare away—you may flare away," she added, knowingly wagging her head at it,
     "you'll have none of my custom, I can tell you. An ounce of your four shilling best, Mr. Jones,
     if you please?"
"Coming, ma'am, di-rectly," was the prompt reply. .
"I never heard anythink like it—never," observed another lady, with solemn indignation. "Did
     the low fellow think we wanted his shop!"
An indignant "no," was chorused around.
Richard Jones's heart swelled, and his throat too. He was much moved.
"Gentlemen," he began, "no, ladies, I mean—ladies, I have always done my duty since I was a
     boy, and, with the help of God, I mean to do my duty till I die." Pause and approving murmur.
     "And, ladies, I am no speech-maker—all I say is this: God forgive that villain opposite! You
     know the story. I'll not trouble you with repeating it. All I say is this: ladies, if my
     customers'll stand by me, I'll stand by my customers —I'll stand by my customers!" he repeated,
     looking round the shop with a triumphant eye, and giving the counter a hearty thump with his
     fist; and, poor fellow, you may be sure that he did mean to stand by his customers.
The oration proved very successful; altogether, the day was successful. The two Teapots
     remained vacant; the Teapot was thronged. All Jones's liege subjects were anxious to prove
     their loyalty; and though, when the gas was lit, Jones could discern a few dark figures within
     his rival's shop, Jones did not care. He felt certain they were but some of the low creatures
     from the alley, and be did not care.
The second day resembled the first, and the third resembled the second. Jones felt quite
     satisfied "that it was all right," until he cast up his accounts at the end of the week. To his
     surprise, he found that his expenditure was barely covered, and that, somehow or other, his
     gains had considerably lessened. He reckoned over and over, and still he came to the same
     result. "Well, 'taint of much consequence for one week," he thought, a little impatiently, and
     he put the books by.
"What's the matter, father?" asked Mary, looking up into his overcast face.
"What's the matter!" he echoed cheerfully; "why, the matter is, that you are a saucy
     puss—that's what's the matter," and he chucked her chin, and Mary laughed.
But the next week's examination revealed a still deeper gap. Jones scratched his head, and
     pulled a long face. It was not that he minded the loss, for it was a trifling one after all;
     but be had a secret dread, and it stood in the background of his thoughts, like a ghost in a
     dark room, haunting him. Could it be—was it possible—that his customers were playing him
     false—that they were deserting him—and he began to think and think, and to remember, how many
     pennyworths of this, and of that, he had sold to the children, and how few shillings worth he
     had sold to the mothers.
"Well, father, and how's this week?" asked Mary.
Jones rubbed his chin, and looked at her fairly perplexed—his wit was none of the
     brightest—as to how he might best elude the question.
"How's this week," he echoed; "well, this week is like last week to be sure. I wonder how
     that fellow Saunders is a getting on."
"Law! father, don't mind him," said Mary. "He's low, that's what he is— he's low."
Impossible for us to translate the scorn with which Miss Mary Jones spoke. It impressed her
     father. "Spirited little thing," he thought, and he drew her fondly towards him, and kissed
     her, and Mary fortunately forgot her question.
Week after week passed, and what had been a speck on the horizon, became a dark and
     threatening cloud. Richard Jones could not shut his eyes to the truth that his customers were
     deserting him. Even Mary perceived it, and spoke uneasily on the subject, of which her father
     at once made light.
"It's business, child," he said, "and business is all ups and downs; I have had the ups, and
     the downs I must have." Spite this philosophic reflection, Mr. Jones could not help thinking he
     had rather more than his share of the downs. He was embittered, too, by daily perceiving the
     defection of some staunch customer. That lady in the large, shabby, black straw bonnet, who had
     so spiritedly told "The two Teapots" to flare away on the day of its opening, was one of the
     first who forsook the "Teapot" for its rival. Many followed her perfidious example; but Mr.
     Jones did not feel fairly cut up, until he one evening distinctly saw Rachel Gray walk out of
     the opposite shop. The stab of Brutus was nothing to Caesar in comparison with this blow to
     Richard Jones.
And he was thinking it over the next morning, and stood behind his counter breaking sugar
     rather gloomily, when Rachel herself appeared. Mr. Jones received her very coldly.
She asked for a pound of sugar.
"And no tea?" he said, pointedly.
"None to-day," quietly replied Rachel; but she saw that he knew all, and she was too sincere
     to feign ignorance. "Mr. Jones," she said, somewhat sadly, "I must go where I am told, and do
     as I am bid; but, indeed, why do you not keep better tea?"
"Better tea! better tea!" echoed Mr. Jones, in some indignation.
"Yes," quietly said Rachel, "better tea."
Mr. Jones smiled an injured smile, and rather sarcastically replied:
"Miss Gray, if you prefer that feller's tea to mine, you're welcome to leave your money to
     him, and not to me. 'Tain't because my daughter is prenticed to you that I expect nothink from
     you, Miss. All I say is this: don't go there at night, Miss Gray, and buy your tea, and then
     come here in the morning and buy your sugar. That's not giving a man your custom, you know it
     ain't. Don't do it; no offence meant, but I'm like you, Miss Gray, plain spoken, you see."
And he resumed the breaking of his sugar.
"I prefer!" sadly said Rachel, "when you know, Mr. Jones, that I am no one now, but must go
     by the will of another—indeed, you wrong me!"
Jones knew he did; but misfortune makes men wilfully unjust.
"Don't mention it," he interrupted, "ladies like new faces, and he's a young fellow, and I am
     an old one, and so there's an end of it."
Poor Rachel looked much pained. To be blamed by every one seemed her lot.
"Indeed, Mr. Jones," she said, "I must do as Mrs. Brown bids me, and she says your four
     shilling black is not equal to his four, and, indeed, Mr. Jones, I am sorry to say, that others
     say so too."
Mr. Jones did not reply one word; he fell into a brown study; at the close of it he sighed,
     and looking up, said earnestly:
"Miss Gray, let me have some of that tea, will you? and I'll see myself what it's like."
"Of course you will," said Rachel, brightening, "you shall have it directly—directly, Mr.
     Jones."
And without loss of time she hastened home, and almost immediately appeared again, bringing
     him the tea herself, and earnestly declaring that she was sure he had only to taste it, to set
     all right, to which Jones answered not a word, but rather gloomily thanked her for the trouble
     she had taken. When he was once more alone, he smelt the tea, shook his head and frowned; then
     he put it away until evening came round, when he gave it to Mary, and without further
     explanation, simply told her that was the tea they were going to have this evening. Unconscious
     Mary made the tea.
"La! Father," she exclaimed, as she poured the boiling water upon it, "what beautiful tea
     you've got; it's quite fragrant."
"Is it?" he echoed, faintly,
"Why, of course it is," she said, pettishly, "I am sure that fellow opposite ain't got
     nothink like it."
Richard Jones leaned his brow on his hand, and checked a groan. But when the tea was drawn,
     when it was poured out, when he raised the cup to his lips and tasted it, the man's courage
     forsook him; he put down the cup, and cried like a child.
"Father! father!" exclaimed Mary, frightened and bewildered.
"Oh! my darling!" he cried, "we're ruined—we're lost!—that tea is Joseph Saunders's tea; and
     he gives it for four shillings, and it's better than my five. And I can't give it, nor I can't
     get it neither," he added, despairingly; "for I have not got credit, and little cash; and I buy
     dear, and dear I must sell, or starve!"
Of this speech, all Mary understood, was that the tea she had been making was tea from Mr.
     Saunders's shop. She deliberately rose, poured the contents of the teapot on the ashes in the
     hearth; the contents of her own teacup, then of her father's quickly followed; then she sat
     down, folded her arms, and uttered a grim: "There! I only wish I could serve him so," she added
     after a pause.
But what Mary meant by this wish—to pour out Joseph Saunders like his own tea, seems rather a
     fantastic image, even for hate—the present writer does not venture to determine.
"It's all over!" sadly said Jones; "we can't compete with him. I'll shut up shop, and we'll
     go to some other neighbourhood, and live in our old way. After all, I'll not be a richer nor a
     poorer man than before my cousin left me the sixty pound."
"You ain't got no spirit!" cried Mary, turning scarlet with anger. "Give in to that
     fellow!—I'd have more spirit than that," she added with mighty scorn.
Her father attempted to remonstrate; but the wilful little thing would not listen to facts or
     to reason. She was sure Saunders could not keep up much longer—that she was. They had only to
     wait, and wear him out.
Alas! it is very hard to tear out ambition and pride from the heart of man, rich or poor. In
     an evil hour, Richard Jones yielded.
</div></body></text></TEI>