<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daisy Chain</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1856</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">
CHAPTER XXIII.

'Oh! the golden-hearted daisies,
   Witnessed there before my youth,
To the truth of things, with praises
   Of the beauty of the truth.'E.B. Browning.
'Margaret, see here.'
The Doctor threw into her lap a letter, which made her cheeks light up.
Mr. Ernescliffe wrote that his father's friend, Captain Gordon, having been appointed to the
      frigate Alcestis, had chosen him as one
       of his lieutenants, and offered a nomination as naval cadet for his brother. He
      had replied that the navy was not Hector's destination, but, as Captain Gordon had no one else
      in view, had prevailed on him to pass on the proposal to Harry May.
Alan wrote in high terms of his captain, declaring that he esteemed the having sailed with
      him as one of the greatest advantages he had ever received, and adding, that, for his own
      part, Dr. May needed no promise from him, to be assured that he would watch over Harry like
      his own brother. It was believed that the Alcestis was destined for the South American
      station.
'A three years' business,' said Dr. May, with a sigh. 'But the thing is done, and this is as
      good as we can hope.'
'Far better!' said Margaret. 'What pleasure it must have given him! Dear Harry could not
      sail under more favourable circumstances.'
'No, I would trust to Ernescliffe as I would to Richard. It is kindly done, and I will thank
      him at once. Where does he date from?'
'From Portsmouth. He does not say whether he has seen Harry.'
'I suppose he waited for my answer. Suppose I inclose a note for him to give to Harry. There
      will be rapture enough, and it is a pity he should not have the benefit of it.'
The Doctor sat down to write, while Margaret worked and mused, perhaps on outfits and new
      shirts—perhaps on Harry's lion-locks, beneath a blue cap and gold band, or, perchance, on the
      coral shoals of the Pacific.
It was one of the quiet afternoons, when all the rest were out, and which the Doctor and his
      daughter especially valued, when they were able to spend one together without interruption.
      Soon, however, a ring at the door brought an impatient exclamation from the Doctor; but his
      smile beamed out at the words, 'Miss Rivers.' They were great friends; in fact, on terms of
      some mutual sauciness, though Meta was, as yet, far less at home with his daughters, and came
      in, looking somewhat shy.
'Ah, your congeners are gone out!' was the Doctor's reception. 'You must put up with our
      sober selves.'
'Is Flora gone far?' asked Meta.
'To Cocksmoor,' said Margaret. 'I am very sorry she has missed you.'
'Shall I be in your way?' said Meta, timidly. 'Papa has several things to do, and said he
      would call for me here.'
'Good luck for Margaret,' said Dr. May.
'So they are gone to Cocksmoor!' said Meta. 'How I envy them!'

'You would not, if you saw the place,' said Dr. May. 'I believe Norman is very angry with me
      for letting them go near it.'
'Ah! but they are of real use there!'
'And Miss Meta is obliged to take to envying the black-hole of Cocksmoor, instead of being
      content with the eglantine bowers of Abbotstoke! I commiserate her!' said the Doctor.
'If I did any good instead of harm at Abbotstoke!'
'Harm!' exclaimed Margaret.
'They went on very well without me,' said Meta; 'but ever since I have had the class, they
      have been getting naughtier and noisier every Sunday; and, last Sunday, the prettiest of
      all—the one I liked best, and had done everything for—she began to mimic me—held up her
      finger, as I did, and made them all laugh!'
'Well, that is very bad!' said Margaret; 'but I suppose she was a very little one.'
'No, a quick clever one, who knew much better, about nine years old. She used to be always
      at home in the week, dragging about a great baby; and we managed that her mother should afford
      to stay at home, and send her to school. It seemed such a pity her cleverness should be
      wasted.'
The Doctor smiled. 'Ah! depend upon it, the tyrant-baby was the best disciplinarian.'
Meta looked extremely puzzled.
'Papa means,' said Margaret, 'that if she was inclined to be conceited, the being teased at
      home might do her more good than being brought forward at school.'
'I have done everything wrong, it seems,' said Meta, with a shade of what the French call
       dêpit . 'I thought it must be right and good—but it has only done mischief; and now
      papa says they are an ungrateful set, and that, if it vexes me, I had better have no more to
      do with them!'
'It does not vex you so much as that, I hope,' said Margaret.
'O, I could not bear that!' said Meta; 'but it is so different from what I thought!'
'Ah! you had an Arcadia of good little girls in straw hats, such as I see in Blanche's
      little books,' said the Doctor, 'all making the young lady an oracle, and doing wrong—if they
      do it at all—in the simplest way, just for an example to the others.'
'Dr. May! How can you know so well? But do you really think it is their fault, or mine?'
'Do you think me a conjurer?'
'Well, but what do you think?'
'What do Mr. and Mrs. Charles Wilmot think?'
'I know Mrs. Wilmot thinks I spoil my class. She spoke to me
       about making favourites, and sometimes has seemed surprised at things which I
      have done. Last Sunday, she told me she thought I had better have a steadier class, and I know
      whom she will give me—the great big, stupid ones, at the bottom of the first-class! I do
      believe it is only out of good-nature that she does not tell me not to teach at all. I have a
      great mind I will not; I know I do nothing but harm.'
'What shall you say if I tell you I think so too?' asked the Doctor.
'O, Dr. May! you don't really? Now, does he, Miss May? I am sure I only want to do them
      good. I don't know what I can have done.'
Margaret made her perceive that the Doctor was smiling, and she changed her tone, and
      earnestly begged to be told what they thought of the case; for if she should show her concern
      at home, her father and governess would immediately beg her to cease from all connection with
      the school, and she did not feel at all convinced that Mrs. Wilmot liked to have her there.
      Feeling injured by the implied accusation of mismanagement, yet, with a sense of its truth,
      used to be petted, and new to rebuffs, yet with a sincere wish to act rightly, she was much
      perplexed by this, her first reverse, and had come partly with the view of consulting Flora,
      though she had fallen on other counsellors.
'Margaret, our adviser general,' said the Doctor, 'what do you say? Put yourself in the
      place of Mrs. Charles Wilmot, and say, shall Miss Rivers teach, or not?'
'I had rather you would, papa.'
'Not I—I never kept school.'
'Well, then, I being Mrs. Wilmot, should certainly be mortified if Miss Rivers deserted me,
      because the children were naughty. I think, I think I had rather she came and asked me what
      she had better do.'
'And you would answer "teach," for fear of vexing her,' said Meta.
'I should, and also for the sake of letting her learn to teach.'
'The point where only trial shows one's ignorance,' said Dr. May.
'But I don't want to do it for my own sake,' said Meta. 'I do everything for my own sake
      already.'
'For their's, then,' said the Doctor. 'If teaching will not come by nature, you must serve
      an apprenticeship, if you mean to be of service in that line. Perhaps, it was the gift that
      the fairies omitted.
'But will it do any good to them?'
'I can't tell; but I am sure it would do them harm for you to give it up, because it is
      disagreeable.'

'Well,' said Meta, with a sigh, 'I'll go and talk to Mrs. Wilmot. I could not bear to give
      up anything that seems right, just now, because of the Confirmation.'
Margaret eagerly inquired, and it appeared that the Bishop had given notice for a
      Confirmation in August, and that Mr. Wilmot was already beginning to prepare his candidates,
      whilst Mr. Ramsden, always tardy, never gave notice till the last moment possible. The hope
      was expressed that Harry might be able to profit by this opportunity; and Harry's prospects
      were explained to Meta; then the Doctor, recollecting something that he wished to say to Mr.
      Rivers, began to ask about the chance of his coming before the time of an engagement of his
      own.
'He said he should be here at about half-past four,' said Meta. 'He is gone to the station
      to inquire about the trains. Do you know what time the last comes in?'
'At nine forty-five,' said the Doctor.
'That is what we were afraid of. It is for Bellairs, my maid. Her mother is very ill, and
      she is afraid she is not properly nursed. It is about five miles from the Milbury Station, and
      we thought of letting her go with a day-ticket, to see about her. She could go in the morning,
      after I am up; but I don't know what is to be done, for she could not get back before I dress
      for dinner.'
Margaret felt perfectly aghast at the cool tone, especially after what had passed.
'It would be quite impossible,' said the Doctor. 'Even going by the eight o'clock train, and
      returning by the last, she would only have two hours to spare—short enough measure for a sick
      mother.
'Papa means to give her whatever she wants for any nurse she may get.'
'Is there no one with her mother now?'
'A son's wife, who, they think, is not kind. Poor Bellairs was so grateful for being allowed
      to go home. I wonder if I could dress for once without her.'
'Do you know old Crabbe?' said the Doctor.
'The dear old man at Abbotstoke? O yes, of course.'
'There was a very sad case in his family. The mother was dying of a lingering illness, when
      the son met with a bad accident. The only daughter was a lady's maid, and could not be spared,
      though the brother was half crazy to see her, and there was no one to tend them but a wretch
      of a woman, paid by the parish. The poor fellow kept calling for his sister in his delirium,
      and, at last, I could not help writing to the mistress.'
'Did she let her come?' said Meta, her cheek glowing.
'As a great favour, she let her set out by the mail train, after
       dressing her for a ball, with orders to return in time for her toilette for an
      evening party the next day.'
'O, I remember,' said Margaret, 'her coming here at five in the morning, and your taking her
      home.'
'And when we got to Abbotstoke, the brother was dead. That parish nurse had not attended to
      my directions, and, I do believe, was the cause of it. The mother had had a seizure, and was
      in the most precarions state.
'Surely she stayed!'
'It was as much as her place was worth,' said the Doctor; 'and her wages were the chief
      maintenance of the family. So she had to go back to dress her mistress, while the old woman
      lay there, wailing after Betsy. She did give warning then, but, before the month was out, the
      mother was dead.'
Meta did not speak, and Dr. May presently rose, saying, he should try to meet Mr. Rivers in
      the town, and went out. Meta sat thoughtful, and, at last, sighing, said, 'I wonder whether
      Bellairs' mother is so very ill? I have a great mind to let Susan try to do my hair, and let
      Bellairs stay a little longer. I never thought of that.'
'I do not think you will be sorry,' said Margaret.
'Yes, I shall, for if my hair does not look nice, papa will not be pleased, and there is
      aunt Leonora coming. How odd it will be to be without Bellairs! I will ask Mrs. Larpent.'
'Oh, yes!' said Margaret. 'You must not think we meant to advise; but papa has seen so many
      instances of distress, from servants not spared to their friends in illness, that he feels
      strongly on the subject.'
'And I really might have been as cruel as that woman!' said Meta. 'Well, I hope Mrs.
      Bellairs may be better, and able to spare her daughter. I don't know what will become of me
      without her.'
'I think it will have been a satisfaction in one way,' said Margaret.
'In what way?'
'Don't you remember what you began by complaining of, that you could not be of use? Now, I
      fancy this would give you the pleasure of undergoing a little personal inconvenience for the
      good of another.'
Meta looked half puzzled, half thoughtful, and Margaret, who was a little uneasy at the
      style of counsel she found herself giving, changed the conversation.
It was a memorable one to little Miss Rivers, opening out to her, as did almost all her
      meetings with that family, a new scope for thought and for duty. The code, to which she had
      been brought
       up, taught that servants were the machines of their employer's convenience.
      Good-nature occasioned much kindliness of manner and intercourse, and every luxury and
      indulgence was afforded freely; but where there was any want of accordance between the
      convenience of the two parties, there was no question. The master must be the first object,
      the servants' remedy was in their own hands.
Amiable as was Mr. Rivers, this, merely from indulgence and want of reflection, was his
      principle; and his daughter had only been acting on it, though she did not know it, till the
      feelings, that she had never thought of, were thus displayed before her. These were her first
      practical lessons that life was not meant to be passed in pleasing ourselves, and being
      good-natured at small cost.
It was an effort. Meta was very dependant, never having been encouraged to be otherwise, and
      Bellairs was like a necessary of life in her estimation; but strength of principle came to aid
      her naturally kind-hearted feeling, and she was pleased by the idea of voluntarily undergoing
      a privation, so as to test her sincerity.
So when her father told her of the inconvenient times of the trains, and declared that
      Bellairs must give it up, she answered, by proposing to let her sleep a night or two there,
      gaily promised to manage very well, and satisfied him.
Her maid's grateful looks and thanks recompensed her when she made the offer to her, and
      inspirited her to an energetic coaxing of Mrs. Larpent, who, being more fully aware than her
      father, of the needfulness of the lady's maid, and also very anxious that her darling should
      appear to the best advantage before the expected aunt, Lady Leonora Langdale, was unwilling to
      grant more than one night at the utmost.
Meta carried the day, and her last assurance to Bellairs was, that she might stay as long as
      seemed necessary to make her mother comfortable.
Thereupon Meta found herself more helpful in some matters than she had expected, but at a
      loss in others. Susan, with all Mrs. Larpent's supervision, could not quite bring her dress to
      the air that was so peculiarly graceful and becoming; and she often caught her papa's eye,
      looking at her as if he saw something amiss, and could not discover what it was. Then came
      aunt Leonora, always very kind to Meta, but the dread of the rest of the household, whom she
      was wont to lecture on the proper care of her niece. Miss Rivers was likely to have a
      considerable fortune, and Lady Leonora intended her to be a very fashionable and much admired
      young lady, under her own immediate protection.
The two cousins, Leonora and Agatha, talked to her; the one of her balls, the other of her
      music—patronized her, and called her
       their good little cousin—while they criticised the stiff set of those
      unfortunate plaits made by Susan, and laughed, as if it was an unheard-of concession, at
      Bellairs' holiday.
Nevertheless, when 'Honoured Miss' received a note, begging for three days' longer grace,
      till a niece should come, in whom Bellairs could place full confidence, she took it on herself
      to return free consent. Lady Leonora found out what she had done, and reproved her, telling
      her it was only the way to make 'those people' presume, and Mrs. Larpent was also taken to
      task; but, decidedly, Meta did not regret what she had done, though she felt as if she had
      never before known how to appreciate comfort, when she once more beheld Bellairs stationed at
      her toilette table.
Meta was asked about her friends. She could not mention anyone but Mrs. Charles Wilmot and
      the Miss Mays.
'Physician's daughters; oh!' said Lady Leonora.
And she proceeded to exhort Mr. Rivers to bring his daughter to London, or its
      neighbourhood, where she might have masters, and be in the way of forming intimacies suited to
      her connections.
Mr. Rivers dreaded London—never was well there, and did not like the trouble of moving—while
      Meta was so attached to the Grange, that she entreated him not to think of leaving it, and
      greatly dreaded her aunt's influence. Lady Leonora did, indeed, allow that the Grange was a
      very pretty place; her only complaint was, the want of suitable society for Meta; she could
      not bear the idea of her growing accustomed—for want of something better—to the Vicar's wife,
      and the pet Doctor's daughters.
Flora had been long desirous to effect a regular call at Abbotstoke, and it was just now
      that she succeeded. Mrs. Charles Wilmot's little girl was to have a birth-day feast, at which
      Mary, Blanche, and Aubrey were to appear. Flora went in charge of them, and as soon as she had
      safely deposited them, and appointed Mary to keep Aubrey out of mischief, she walked up to the
      Grange, not a whit daunted by the report of the very fine ladies, who were astonishing the
      natives of Abbotstoke.
She was admitted, and found herself in the drawing-room, with a quick lively-looking lady,
      whom she perceived to be Lady Leonora, and who instantly began talking to her very civilly.
      Flora was never at a loss, and they got on extremely well; her ease and self-possession,
      without forwardness, telling much to her advantage. Meta came in, delighted to see her, but,
      of course, the visit resulted in no really intimate talk, though it was not without effect.
      Flora declared Lady Leonora Langdale to be a most charming person; and Lady Leonora, on her
      side, asked Meta who was that very elegant conversible girl. 'Flora May,' was the delighted
      answer,
       now that the aunt had committed herself by commendation. And she did not retract
      it; she pronounced Flora to be something quite out of the common way, and supposed that she
      had had unusual advantages.
Mr. Rivers took care to introduce to his sister-in-law, Dr. May, (who would fain have
      avoided it,) but ended by being in his turn pleased and entertained by her brilliant
      conversation, which she put forth for him, as her instinct showed her that she was talking to
      a man of high ability. A perfect gentleman she saw him to be, and making out some mutual
      connections far up in the family tree of the Mackenzies, she decided that the May family were
      an acquisition, and very good companions for her niece at present, while not yet come out.
So ended the visit, with this great triumph for Meta, who had a strong belief in Aunt
      Leonora's power and infallibility, and yet had not consulted her about Bellairs, nor about the
      school question.
She had missed one Sunday's school on account of her aunt's visit, but the resolution made
      beside Margaret's sofa had not been forgotten. She spent her Saturday afternoon in a call on
      Mrs. Wilmot, ending with a walk through the village; she confessed her ignorance, apologized
      for her blunders, and put herself under the direction which once she had fancied too strict
      and harsh to be followed.
And on Sunday, she was content to teach the stupid girls, and abstain from making much of
      the smooth-faced engaging set. She thought it very dull work, but she could feel that it was
      something not done to please herself; and whereas her father had feared she would be dull when
      her cousins were gone, he found her more joyous than ever.
There certainly was a peculiar happiness about Margaret Rivers; her vexations were but
      ripples, rendering the sunny course of her life more sparkling, and each exertion in the way
      of goodness was productive of so much present joy, that the steps of her ladder seemed,
      indeed, to be of diamonds.
Her ladder—for she was, indeed, mounting upwards. She was very earnest in her Confirmation
      preparation, most anxious to do right and to contend with her failings; but the struggle at
      present was easy; and the hopes, joys, and incentives, shone out more and more upon her in
      this blithe stage of her life.
She knew there was a dark side, but hope and love were more present to her than was fear.
      Happy those to whom such young days are granted.

</div></body></text></TEI>