<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daisy Chain</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1856</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAPTER. XII.

                                          'It hath do me mochil woe.'
'Yea hath it? Use,' quod he, 'this medicine;
Every daie this Maie or that thou dine,
Go lokin in upon the freshe daisie,
And though thou be for woe in poinct to die,
That shall full gretly lessen thee of thy pine.'Chaucer.
That night Norman started from, what was not so much sleep, as a trance of
      oppression and suffering, and beheld his father's face watching him attentively.
'Papa! What's the matter?' said he, starting up. 'Is anyone ill?'
'No; no one, lie down again,' said Dr. May, possessing himself of a hand, with a burning
      spot in the palm, and a throbbing pulse.
'But what made you come here? Have I disturbed anyone? Have I been talking?'

'Only mumbling a little, but you looked very uncomfortable.'
'But I'm not ill—what are you feeling my pulse for?' said Norman, uneasily.
'To see whether that restless sleep has quickened it.'
Norman scarcely let his father count for a moment, before he asked, 'What o'clock is
      it?'
'A little after twelve.'
'What does make you stay up so late, papa?'
'I often do when my arm seems likely to keep me awake. Richard has done all I want.'
'Pray don't stay here in the cold,' said Norman, with feverish impatience, as he turned
      upwards the cool side of his pillow. 'Good night!'
'No hurry,' said his father, still watching him.
'There's nothing the matter,' repeated the boy.
'Do you often have such unquiet nights?'
'Oh, it does not signify. Good night,' and he tried to look settled and comfortable.
'Norman,' said his father, in a voice betraying much grief, 'it will not do to go on in this
      way. If your mother was here, you would not close yourself against her.'
Norman interrupted him in a voice strangled with sobs: 'It is no good saying it—I thought it
      would only make it worse for you; but that's it. I cannot bear the being without her.'
Dr. May was glad to see that a gush of tears followed this exclamation, as Norman hid his
      face under the coverings.
'My poor boy,' said he, hardly able to speak, 'only One can comfort you truly; but you must
      not turn from me; you must let me do what I can for you, though it is not the same.'
'I thought it would grieve you more,' said Norman, turning his face towards him again.
'What, to find my children feeling with me, and knowing what they have lost? Surely not,
      Norman.'
'And it is of no use,' added Norman, hiding his face again, 'no one can comfort—'
'There you are wrong,' said Dr. May with deep feeling, 'there is much of comfort in
      everything, in everybody, in kindness, in all around, if one can only open one's mind to it.
      But I did not come to keep you awake with such talk; I saw you were not quite well, so I came
      up to see about you; and now, Norman, you will not refuse to own that something is the
      matter.'
'I did not know it,' said Norman, 'I really believe I am well, if I could get rid of these
      horrible nights. I either lie awake, tumbling and tossing, or I get all sorts of unbearable
      dreams.'

'Aye, when I asked master Harry about you, all the answer I could get was, that he was quite
      used to it, and did not mind it at all. As if I asked for his sake! How fast that boy
      sleeps—he is fit for a midshipman's berth!'
'But do you think there is anything amiss with me?'
'I shall know more about that to-morrow morning. Come to my room as soon as you are up,
      unless I come to you. Now, I have something to read before I go to bed, and I may as well try
      if it will put you to sleep.'
Norman's last sight that night was of the outline of his father's profile, and he was
      scarcely awake the next morning before Dr. May was there again.
Unwilling as he had been to give way, it was a relief to relinquish the struggle to think
      himself well, and to venture to lounge and dawdle, rest his heavy head, and stretch his inert
      limbs without fear of remark. His father found him after breakfast lying on the sofa in the
      drawing-room with a Greek play by his side, telling Ethel what words to look out.
'At it again!' exclaimed Dr. May. 'Carry it away, Ethel. I will have no Latin or Greek
      touched these holidays.'
'You know,' said Norman, 'if I don't sap, I shall have no chance of keeping up.'
'You'll keep no where, if you don't rest.'
'It is only Euripides, and I can't do anything else,' said Norman, languidly.
'Very likely, I don't care. You have to get well first of all, and the Greek will take care
      of itself. Go up to Margaret. I put you in her keeping, while I am gone to Whitford. After
      that, I dare say Richard will be very glad to have a holiday, and let you drive me to
      Abbotstoke.'
Norman rose, and wearily walked up stairs, while his sister lingered to excuse herself.
      'Papa, I did not think Euripides would hurt him— he knows it all so well, and he said he could
      not read anything else.'
'Just so, Ethel. Poor fellow, he has not spirits or energy for anything; his mind was forced
      into those classicalities when it wanted rest, and now it has not spring enough to turn back
      again.'
'Do you think him so very ill?'
'Not exactly, but there's low fever hanging about him, and we must look after him well, and
      I hope we may get him right. I have told Margaret about him; I can't stop any longer now.'
Norman found the baby in his sister's room, and this was just what suited him. The Daisy
      showed a marked preference for her brothers; and to find her so merry and good with him,
      pleased and flattered him far more than his victory at school. He carried her
       about, danced her, whistled to her, and made her admire her pretty blue eyes in
      the glass most successfully, till nurse carried her off. But perhaps he had been sent up
      rather too soon, for as he sat in the great chair by the fire, he was teased by the constant
      coming and going, all the petty cares of a large household transacted by Margaret —orders to
      butcher and cook—Harry racing in to ask to take Tom to the river—Tom, who was to go when his
      lesson was done, coming perpetually to try to repeat the same unhappy bit of As in
       Præsenti , each time in a worse whine.
'How can you bear it, Margaret?' said Norman, as she finally dismissed Tom, and laid down
      her account-book, taking up some delicate fancy work. 'Mercy, here's another,' as enter a
      message about lamp oil, in the midst of which Mary burst in to beg Margaret to get Miss Winter
      to let her go to the river with Harry and Tom.
'No, indeed, Mary, I could not think of such a thing. You had better go back to your
      lessons, and don't be silly,' as she looked much disposed to cry.
'No one but a Tom-boy would dream of it,' added Norman; and Mary departed disconsolate,
      while Margaret gave a sigh of weariness, and said, as she returned to her work, 'There, I
      believe I have done. I hope I was not cross with poor Mary, but it was rather too much to
      ask.'
'I can't think how you can help being cross to everyone,' said Norman, as he took away the
      books she had done with.'
'I am afraid I am,' said Margaret, sadly. 'It does get trying at times.'
'I should think so! This eternal worrying must be more than anyone can bear, always lying
      there too.'
'It is only now and then that it grows tiresome,' said Margaret. 'I am too happy to be of
      some use, and it is too bad to repine, but sometimes a feeling comes of its being always the
      same, as if a little change would be such a treat.'
'Arn't you very tired of lying in bed?'
'Yes, very sometimes. I fancy, but it is only fancy, that I could move better if I was up
      and dressed. It has seemed more so lately, since I have been stronger.'
'When do you think they will let you get up?'
'There's the question. I believe papa thinks I might be lifted to the sofa now—and oh! how I
      long for it—but then Mr. Ward does not approve of my sitting up, even as I am doing now, and
      wants to keep me flat. Papa thinks that of no use, and likely to hurt my general health, and I
      believe the end of it will be that he will ask Sir Matthew Fleet's opinion.'
'Is that the man he calls Mat?'

'Yes, you know they went through the University together, and were at Edinburgh and Paris,
      but they have never met since he set up in London, and grew so famous. I believe it would be a
      great treat to papa to have him, and it would be a good thing for papa too; I don't think his
      arm is going on right—he does not trust to Mr. Ward's treatment, and I am sure some one else
      ought to see it.'
'Did you know, Margaret, that he sits up quite late, because he cannot sleep for it?'
'Yes, I hear him moving about, but don't tell him so; I would not have him guess for the
      world, that it kept me awake.'
'And does it?'
'Why, if I think he is awake and in pain, I cannot settle myself to sleep, but that is no
      matter; having no exercise, of course I don't sleep so much. But I am very anxious about
      him—he looks so thin, and gets so fagged—and no wonder.'
'Ah! Mr. Everard told me he was quite shocked to see him, and would hardly have known him,'
      and Norman groaned from the bottom of his heart.
'Well, I shall hope much from Sir matthew's taking him in hand,' said Margaret, cheerfully;
      'he will mind him, though he will not Mr. Ward.'
'I wish the holidays were over!' said Norman, with a yawn, as expressive as a sigh.
'That's not civil, on the third day,' said Margaret, smiling, 'when I am so glad to have you
      to look after me, so as to set Flora at liberty.'
'What, can I do you any good?' said Norman, with a shade of his former alacrity.
'To be sure you can, a great deal. Better not come near me otherwise, for I make everyone
      into a slave. I want my morning reading now, that book on Advent, there.'
'Shall I read it to you?'
'Thank you, that's nice, and I shall get on with baby's frock.'
Norman read, but, ere long, took to yawning; Margaret begged for the book, which he
      willingly resigned, saying, however, that he liked it, only he was stupid. She read on aloud,
      till she heard a succession of heavy breathings, and saw him fast asleep, and so he continued
      till waked by his father's coming home.
Richard and Ethel were glad of a walk, for Margaret had found them a pleasant errand. Their
      Cocksmoor children could not go home to dinner between service and afternoon school, and
      Margaret had desired the cook to serve them up some broth in the back kitchen, to which the
      brother and sister were now to invite them.
       Mary was allowed to take her boots to Rebekah Watts, since Margaret held that
      goodness had better be profitable, at least at the outset; and Harry and Tom joined the
      party.
Norman, meantime, was driving his father—a holiday preferment highly valued in the days when
      Dr. May used only to assume the reins, when his spirited horses showed too much consciousness
      that they had a young hand over them, or when the old hack took a fit of laziness. Now, Norman
      needed Richard's assurance that the bay was steady, so far was he from being troubled with his
      ancient desire, that the steed would rear right up on his hind legs.
He could neither talk nor listen till he was clear out of the town, and found himself master
      of the animal, and even then the words were few, and chiefly spoken by Dr. May, until after
      going along about three miles of the turnpike road, he desired Norman to turn down a
      cross-country lane.
'Where does this lead?'
'It comes out at Abbotstoke, but I have to go to an outlying farm.'
'Papa,' said Norman, after a few minutes, 'I wish you would let me do my Greek.'
'Is that what you have been pondering all this time? What, may not the bonus
       Homerus slumber sometimes?'
'It is not Homer, it is Euripides. I do assure you, papa, it is no trouble, and I get much
      worse without it.'
'Well, stop here, the road grows so bad that we will walk, and let the boy lead the horse to
      meet us at Woodcote.'
Norman followed his father down a steep narrow lane, little better than a stony
      water-course, and began to repeat, 'If you would but let me do my work! I've got nothing else
      to do, and now they have put me up, I should not like not to keep my place.'
'Very likely, but—hollo—how swelled this is!' said Dr. May, as they came to the bottom of
      the valley, where a stream rushed along, coloured with a turbid creamy yellow, making little
      whirlpools where it crossed the road, and brawling loudly just above where it roared and
      foamed between two steep banks of rock, crossed by a foot-bridge of planks, guarded by a
      handrail of rough poles. The Doctor had traversed it, and gone a few paces beyond, when,
      looking back, he saw Norman very pale, with one foot on the plank, and one hand grasping the
      rail. He came back, and held out his hand, which Norman gladly caught at, but no sooner was
      the other side attained, than the boy, though he gasped with relief, exclaimed, 'This is too
      bad!' Wait one moment, please, and let me go back.'
He tried, but the first touch of the shaking rail, and glance at
       the chasm, disconcerted him, and his father, seeing his white cheeks and rigid
      lips, said, 'Stop, Norman, don't try it. You are not fit,' he added, as the boy came to him
      reluctantly.
I can't bear to be such a wretch!' said he. 'I never used to be. I will not—let me conquer
      it;' and he was turning back, but the Doctor took his arm, saying decidedly, 'No, I won't have
      it done. You are only making it worse, by putting a force on yourself.'
But the further Norman was from the bridge, the more displeased he was with himself, and
      more anxious to dare it again. 'There's no bearing it,' he muttered; 'let me only run back.
      I'll overtake you. I must do it if no one looks on.'
'No such thing,' said the Doctor, holding him fast. 'If you do, you'll have it all over
      again at night.'
'That's better than to know I am worse than Tom.'
'I tell you, Norman it is no such thing. You will recover your tone if you will only do as
      you are told, but your nerves have had a severe shock, and when you force yourself in this
      way, you only increase the mischief.'
'Nerves,' muttered Norman, disdainfully, 'I thought they were only fit for fine ladies.'
Dr. May smiled. 'Well, will it content you if I promise that as soon as I see fit, I'll
      bring you here, and let you march over that bridge as often as you like?'
'I suppose I must be contented, but I don't like to feel like a fool.'
'You need not, while the moral determination is sound.'
'But my Greek, papa.'
'At it again—I declare, Norman, you are the worst patient I ever had!'
Norman made no answer, and Dr. May presently said, 'Well, let me hear what you have to say
      about it. I assure you it is not that I don't want you to get on, but that I see you are in
      great need of rest.'
'Thank you, papa. I know you mean it for my good, but I don't think you do know how horrid
      it is. I have got nothing on earth to do or care for—the school work comes quite easy to me,
      and I'm sure thinking is worse; and then,' Norman spoke vehemently, 'now they have put me up,
      it will never do to be beaten, and all the four others ought to be able to do it. I did not
      want or expect to be Dux, but now I am, you could not bear me not to keep my place, and to
      miss the Randall scholarship, as I certainly shall, if I do not work these whole
      holidays.'
'Norman, I know it,' said his father, kindly. 'I am very sorry for you, and I know I am
      asking of you what I could not have done at your age—indeed, I dont believe I could have done
      it for you a
       few months ago. It is my fault that you have been let alone, to have an
      overstrain and pressure on your mind, when you were not fit for it, and I cannot see any
      remedy but complete freedom from work. At the same time, if you fret and harass yourself about
      being surpassed, that is, as you say, much worse for you than Latin and Greek. Perhaps I may
      be wrong, and study might not do you the harm I think it would; at any rate, it is better than
      tormenting yourself about next half year, so I will not positively forbid it, but I think you
      had much better let it alone. I don't want to make it a matter of duty. I only tell you this,
      that you may set your mind at rest as far as I am concerned. If you do lose your place, I will
      consider it as my own doing, and not be disappointed. I had rather see you a healthy,
      vigorous, useful man, than a poor puling nervous wretch of a scholar, if you were to get all
      the prizes in the University.'
Norman made a little murmuring sound of assent, and both were silent for some moments, then
      he said; 'Then you will not be displeased, papa, if I do read, as long as I feel it does me no
      harm.'
'I told you I don't mean to make it a matter of obedience. Do as you please—I had rather you
      read than vexed yourself.'
'I am glad of it. Thank you, papa,' said Norman, in a much cheered voice.
They had, in the meantime, been mounting a rising ground, clothed with stunted wood, and
      came out on a wide heath, brown with dead bracken; a hollow, traced by the tops of leafless
      trees, marked the course of the stream that traversed it, and the inequalities of ground
      becoming more rugged in outlines and greyer in colouring as they receded, till they were
      closed by a dark fir wood, beyond which rose in extreme distance, the grand mass of Welsh
      mountain heads, purpled against the evening sky, except where the crowning peaks bore a veil
      of snow. Behind, the sky was pure gold, gradually shading into pale green, and then into clear
      light wintry blue, while the sun setting behind two of the loftiest, seemed to confound their
      outlines, and blend them in one flood of soft hazy brightness. Dr. May looked at his son, and
      saw his face clear up, his brow expand, and his lips unclose with admiration.
'Yes,' said the Doctor, 'it is very fine, is it not? I used to bring mamma here now and then
      for a treat, because it put her in mind of her Scottish hills. Well, your's are the golden
      hills of heaven, now, my Maggie!' he added, hardly knowing that he spoke aloud. Norman's
      throat swelled, as he looked up in his face, then cast down his eyes hastily to hide the tears
      that had gathered on his eyelashes.
'I'll leave you here,' said Dr. May, 'I have to go to a farmhouse
       close by, in the hollow behind us, there's a girl recovering from a fever. I'll
      not be ten minutes, so wait here.'
When he came back, Norman was still where he had left him, gazing earnestly, and the tears
      standing on his cheeks. He did not move till his father laid his hand on his shoulder—they
      walked away together without a word, and scarcely spoke all the way home.
Dr. May went to Margaret and talked to her of Norman's fine character, and intense affection
      for his mother, the determined temper, and quietly borne grief, for which the Doctor seemed to
      have worked himself into a perfect enthusiasm of admiration; but lamenting that he could not
      tell what to do with him—study or no study hurt him alike—and he dreaded to see health and
      spirits shattered for ever. They tried to devise change of scene, but it did not seem possible
      just at present; and Margaret, besides her fears for Norman, was much grieved to see this
      added to her father's troubles.
At night Dr. May again went up to see whether Norman, whom he had moved into Margaret's
      former room, were again suffering from fever. He found him asleep in a restless attitude, as
      if he had just dropped off, and waking almost at the instant of his entrance, he exclaimed,
      'Is it you? I thought it was mamma. She said it was all ambition.'
Then starting, and looking round the room, and at his father, he collected himself, and
      said, with a slight smile, 'I didn't know I had been asleep. I was awake just now, thinking
      about it. Papa, I'll give it up. I'll try to put next half out of my head, and not mind if
      they do pass me.'
'That's right, my boy,' said the Doctor.
'At least if Cheviot and Forder do, for they ought. I only hope Anderson won't. I can stand
      anything but that. But that is nonsense too.'
'You are quite right, Norman,' said the Doctor, 'and it is a great relief to me that you see
      the thing so sensibly.'
'No, I don't see it sensibly at all, papa. I hate it all the time, and I don't know whether
      I can keep from thinking of it, when I have nothing to do; but I see it is wrong; I thought
      all ambition and nonsense was gone out of me, when I cared so little for the examination; but
      now I see, though I did not want to be made first, I can't bear not to be first; and that's
      the old story, just as she used to tell me to guard against ambition. So I'll take my
      chance, and if I should get put down, why 'twas not fair that I should be put up, and it is
      what I ought to be, and serves me right into the bargain—'

'Well, that's the best sort of sense, your mother's sense,' said the Doctor, more affected
      than he liked to show. 'No wonder she came to you in your dream, Norman, my boy, if you had
      come to such a resolution. I was half in hopes you had some such notion when I came upon you,
      on Far-view down.'
'I think that sky did it,' said Norman, in a low voice; 'it made me think of her in a
      different way—and what you said too.'
'What did I say? I dont remember.'
But Norman could not repeat the words, and only murmured 'golden hills'—It was enough.
'I see,' said the Doctor, 'you had dwelt on the blank here, not taken home what it is to
      her.'
'Aye'—almost sobbed Norman, 'I never could before—that made me,' after a long silence, 'and
      then I know how foolish I was, and how she would say it was wrong to make this fuss, when you
      did not like it, about my place, and that it was not for the sake of my duty, but of ambition;
      I knew that, but till I went to bed to-night, I could not tell whether I could make up my
      mind, so I would say nothing.
</div></body></text></TEI>