<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Why Paul Ferroll Killed His Wife : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Clive, Caroline Wigley (1801-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1860</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER X.
SEE that man walking up and down his room all night, except when at times he flung
     himself on the sofa, burying his head in his clenched hands. The little shred of paper lay
     sometimes on the table, sometimes on the floor, trampled on, crumpled, torn; again spread out,
     and read with unabating fury. Beside it lay the glove, which together with the note had been
     brought to him by Laura, and which with scarce any words she pressed upon him as the tokens of
     Elinor’s falsity. He saw them and believed; they seemed to him to indicate that the meetings
     between Elinor and the young soldier, which he had persuaded himself were the effects of accident,
      or of mere momentary thoughtlessness, were parts of a
     long‐continued understanding between them, and that to Elinor they had become so habitual as to
     make an apology necessary, when she was unable to keep the appointment. How could Leslie doubt?
     there was her handwriting, there was the glove of her fine hand—false hand, false heart!—her he
     had trusted then in vain! the innocence by which he had remodelled his own intentions, did not
     exist. Laura had stabbed him with this poisoned dagger, and left it to work out her own ends;
     and frantic indeed was the effect of the wound she had inflicted.
As soon as day dawned, Leslie left the house, and continued his agitated walk up and down the
     garden where he knew, by many a morning’s experience, it was Elinor’s practise to walk before
     the breakfast hour, and where of late he had usually joined her.
The cold October air chilled his frame, the heavy rime, almost frost, weighed down the
     remaining flowers and the dripping
      grass; the sun, long hidden after it had left the horizon,
     struggled with the mist that filled the whole atmosphere. It was late before the day became as
     light as the hour warranted; and the savage impatience of Leslie grew almost to delirium.
At last, a window which opened to the ground from one of the sitting‐rooms was heard to rise,
     he stood still, partly hidden by the trunk of a cedar, and saw shrouded in a gray cloak, and a
     hood concealing her face, Elinor step into the garden, and move along the walk to his place. He
     instantly came forward, and silently seizing her arm, saying no word, answering no look,
     dragged her forward with a hand which she felt violently trembling, nor stopped till they were
     in the wood together, deeply hidden, as the words they had to say together required hiding.
     Then letting go her arm from one hand, and opening the other, he showed her the little note and
     the glove, which it had clenched as they came along.
“Your’s?” he said, fixing his bloodshot eyes on her face.

“Oh, it is my glove which I had lost,” said Elinor, holding out her hand for it, and looking
     up at Leslie, perplexed, whether to smile or yield to terror.
“And where, and how did you lose it?” said Leslie; “tell me, explain ...... confess that
     ......”
“How can I tell?” said Elinor, frightened, and with a trembling voice.
“No; in one sense you cannot tell, shame forbids—your false nature forbids—can you tell me
     this? Did that glove deliver that note? look at it.”
Elinor looked at the little paper in his fierce hand, and recognised the first words of the
     billet she had written months before.
“Leslie,” she said, “I do not know, how should I? it is so long ago.”
“Silence!” cried Leslie, “you can deceive me no longer; no affected innocence, no
     well‐continued deceit can perplex or blind me now. This is then your writing?”
“Yes,” said Elinor, earnestly looking in his face, and saying the one true word, for
      she had nothing else her nature permitted her to say. Then
     his fury burst out—
“ Devil! angel! woman!” cried he. “You have failed then to deceive me! you confess—we are
     even again. I was on the point of believing in virtue—you fail—I am free, falsest, hardest,
     perfidious woman ......”
Elinor interrupted him. “What harm have I done? did not you tell me I might write to
     you.”
“To me! oh, well‐acted innocence! yes, I was so cunning. I thought to have surpassed you in
     cunning; would I had ...... any crime better than to have been smiled at till I was a fool, and
     for an instant to have been held in your mocking snares—but it is over—seek your other victim,
     if you will, follow your soldier if he will have you! I have my eyes open at last.”
“As I live and stand here, Leslie, there is no human being who cares for me, or whom I care
     for, but you.”
“Words! sweetest words!” cried Leslie, “falser than sweet, and crueller than false, were I
     not free. But they are nothing to
      me now; no, nor those; tears, nor those clasped hands, nor
     that well‐acted fear—no, no, no.”
“Leslie!” cried Elinor, laying her hand upon his arm.
He caught hold of her hand, and crushed it in his, like one whose nerves have escaped
     control, and are contracting upon the object that excites them with mechanical fury; then his
     hold relaxing, he flung her hand away, and uttering a groan, which at the same time he
     struggled to repress, lie turned, and rushed from her sight.
Elinor was changed to stone, by all that the few minutes just passed contained; she gazed on
     the blank space where Leslie had been, and had said such killing words; she thought of herself,
     entering the garden but now, about, as she believed, to converse with her lover, and part from
     him for a few days, soon never to part again; and could by no means realise that his love had
     turned to fury, that he had said he was about to leave her for ever. Her mind and body seemed
     paralyzed, and when at last
      she recovered strength of both, enough to move from the
     place where she was, she did but return with benumbed steps to her own room, and there sinking
     upon the floor, lay crushed and bowed together, sobbing as though her comfortless heart must
     break.
The guilty cause of all this woe, once more glittering in outside show, like some splendid
     serpent, was descending in apparent peace to the morning meal; but her bosom also
     burned with anxiety, and she trembled internally at the thought of what aspects she might meet.
     Might she not there see, perhaps, Leslie and Elinor, with all explained between them, and
     united for ever against her. Might she not see Leslie frowning and despising her, Elinor
     sheltered by him against all future malice, or should she see them alienated from each other,
     and she herself successful. She opened the breakfast‐room door, with a hesitation unseen on her
     serene face, and glanced round; but her conjectures were all wrong, for although all else were
     assembled, the two
      were not there. Again her heart bounded with fear, that they
     might be together, too angry to keep up any appearance of good will with her; and after
     enduring the doubt and anxiety for a few decent minutes, she affected to be anxious what could
     have become of Elinor, and left the room to look for her.
When she beheld the young girl, she knew that her artifices had succeeded, and triumph filled
     her heart. Elinor, abandoned by what was all the world to her, and terrified at her own
     solitude, no sooner saw a familiar face, than she rose and flung herself on Laura’s shoulder,
     straining her in her embrace with inarticulate mourning. Laura thought of her own fine lace and
     muslin, which Elinor was deranging; and raising her, so as to stand free of the sorrowing girl,
     asked her, with a voice as kindly as she could make it, the cause of her distress.
Elinor’s explanation would hardly have made anything clear, had not Laura possessed already a
     more perfect knowledge of the circumstances than she could receive. The
      single point she cared about was, what had become of Leslie,
     and Elinor could only repeat that he had flung her off, and rushed away through the thick wood,
     where she soon had lost that last sight of him.
“Last indeed!” said Laura; “after such a parting, there can be no reconciliation. What have
     you done Elinor?”
“Indeed, indeed, I have done nothing! he is too cruel to me.”
“Yes, too cruel; he has been very hard on you; he should have overlooked what faults your
     ignorance of the world led you into. Think of him no more, give him up as he has given
     you.”
“I must die before I do that!” said Elinor.
“Nay, nay, dear child; dying is not the thing in question. Here, dear, take a little water
     ...... can’t you? well, lie down, or sit down, I will come again to you—but they are all
     waiting now—I will bring you a cup of tea.”
And Laura departed, going down stairs elastically, and filled with the image of her
      rival, whom she had left behind humiliated, robbed of her
     beauty by tears, and abandoned by the man who once abandoned Laura for her. She made the excuse
     of headache, and having over‐walked herself, about Elinor, and now if Leslie had but come in,
     would have been perfectly happy; but his absence raised new fears in her heart, that in giving
     up one, he would not renew his allegiance to the other, nay, might commit some rash act, her
     fear and her love began to dread what.
Breakfast was nearly over when a note was brought to her brother at the other end of the
     table; he opened and read it to himself, and Laura all the time was obliged to keep smiling at
     her cousin, who sat beside her, for his last breakfast in her society, but whose words at this
     time conveyed no meaning to her at all.
“What have you got there, Lawrence?” she said, at last; “you look perplexed?”
“This fellow Leslie,” said he; “he writes me word that a messenger came for him from home,
     and he is obliged to set off at a
      moment’s warning. Who saw any messenger?”
“No, sir,” said the servant, who was waiting at breakfast.
“Who saw Mr. Leslie go?” said Mr. Chanson.
“It was not I, sir.”
“Go to his room. Are his things gone?”
Nothing was gone.
“Nor does he say anything about sending them,” said Mr. Chanson; “he’ll write again, I
     suppose—but what a nuisance for me. Now I shall have to go alone ..... I shall stay, I
     think.”
“Oh! no,” said Laura; “go, and perhaps he will meet you. What can have happened. Perhaps his
     house is burned down?”
“Perhaps he is arrested for debt?” said another.
“Perhaps the bank he deals with is stopped?” said a third; but both Mr. Chanson and Sir Peter
     looked at Laura, suspecting a quarrel between her and Leslie. She neither said nor looked any
     answer, but
      she was officious and obliging in promoting the arrangements
     of the party, and when she fancied her brother still hesitated about his journey in consequence
     of Leslie’s secession, she exerted herself to persuade her cousin to accompany him, and
     demonstrated that with a little extra, exertion he might both perform this friendly office by
     Mr. Chanson, and also get through his business in London before the time came for the sailing
     of the ship. Sir Peter, for her sake, at last consented. Mr. Chanson was satisfied to exchange
     Leslie for him, and all seemed arranged to the general satisfaction. But five minutes before
     the time of departure, Laura, watching her opportunity, followed her brother into his study,
     where he was giving his last directions to a servant, and sending the man from the room,
     suddenly put her arms round her brother’s neck and appeared to be stifling the sobs which
     stopped her utterance.
“My dear child—Laura—sister—what is it? Speak to me—can I help you? Only tell me who has
     grieved you.”

“Has he not forsaken me, Lawrence? Shall I ever see him again?”
“Who is gone, Leslie! is that it? I was afraid something had gone wrong between you.”
“Oh! I have been so wrong; I have acted so foolishly. Only that little girl’s artful
     manœuvres bewildered me. This very morning she appointed to meet him in the garden, and I could
     not bear it. I ...... I ......”
“You quarrelled with him, did you? and is it that which keeps Elinor up stairs and drives
     Leslie away? But what right had you to quarrel with him; tell me, had you any?”
“What right!” said Laura impetuously, “except that of a betrothed woman?”
“Is it so?” said her brother seriously; “in that case I have no business to go looking after
     prospective votes. My business is to stay at home, and see that my sister has justice done
     her.”
But Laura sank almost on her knees, her arms clasping her brother all the time.

“Oh! no, Lawrence—no!—don’t ruin me quite. Any interferences of that sort would destroy my
     happiness for ever. He loves me—he will return to me, but it must be by his free will. Could I
     deign to accept a hand that did not bring a heart ...... but the heart is there—it is mine—my
     own fault has alienated it for an instant, but if it be left to itself it will not fail to
     return. If he departs at my rash word, my penitent word can recall him.”
“I thought you implied it was he who had left you?”
“I cannot measure exactly what I say. I am distracted. I came to tell you all.”
“Let me remain with you, Laura; it will be best.”
“No, no! I would not have him think you know anything that has passed between us. Go, dear
     Lawrence, I will recall you if it prove necessary. All I want is to have nothing concealed from
     you on my own part, and to be able to trust my brother through good fortune and evil.”
Real tears came into Laura’s eyes, as
      though she had been spectatrix of the same scene at a play.
     Mr. Chanson was moved, and repeatedly pressed upon her his offers of assistance. She, however,
     continued steadily to refuse, and returning with him to the hall, suffered Sir Peter to think
     she had been reddening her eyes with sisterly weeping for him, and at last saw them all depart,
     and was very glad when the house was finally cleared, and she was at liberty to put the
     finishing stroke to her plans.
</div></body></text></TEI>