<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Why Paul Ferroll Killed His Wife : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Clive, Caroline Wigley (1801-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1860</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAPTER XII.
LESLIE’S excuse to himself for marrying as he did, was the ever present conviction
     that he must die. But for that sick state of mind he could have done no such thing. He believed
     the world to be closed upon him, and circumstances drifting him towards Laura, he had wearily
     yielded himself to them for the few months he expected to know the last of life, and its
     society.
Time, however, as any one more accustomed to illness would have anticipated, produced a
     gradual amelioration; and it was with reluctance that Leslie found himself compelled to
     acknowledge a renewal of the life which his will was ever prompt to lay down. The commonplace
     matters of a household in which he was called to act, did
      him good. A detected poacher, for instance, a cheating
     tradesman, a groom who neglected a horse; and he would have been ashamed to suffer the
     intellectual despair which consumed him, to show itself among practical men, or domestics of
     his house. He had letters to write about ordering claret, or paying for a dog‐cart, and not
     deigning to ask assistance, performed these commonplace tasks, and found they made inroads on
     the army of his phantoms. When he mounted his horse again, the familiar exercise was useful to
     him, and the first animal he rode being excessively perverse and obstinate, he had no time to
     meditate by brook sides, or through shadowy lanes.
Thus through the winter he went on resuming his intellectual health, though the moral sank to
     a lower and lower tone, as he continually reflected on the dream of innocence and virtue which
     had existed only to make him the dupe of a girl of seventeen. That false girl was ever present
     to his ideas, he repented his forbear‐
      ance, he imaged her to himself in the society she had
     chosen, he analysed over and over the apparent guilelessness, the exquisite innocence of her
     demeanour, baffled how to reconcile them with what he knew of her treason.
“But did not I myself bid her follow her soldier, if he would have her?” he repeated to
     himself. “Heaven! how infinitely far was I from believing such a coarse word could resemble the
     truth.”
He had more thoroughly believed that he was speaking the truth, when he told Laura, that in
     marrying her, she was perfectly indifferent to him. So she was indeed, and very soon did Laura,
     after reaching the point she had allowed to dazzle her, begin the descent which led away from
     that glittering height. All her life she had so far taken pleasure in being popular, as to make
     people as comfortable as she readily could; her brother’s habits and fancies, her cousin’s
     whims and wishes, she had never traversed, nay, much more had promoted, and this same
     patronising and good‐
      humoured compliance she was now quite willing to extend to
     her husband. But in return she had hitherto got gratitude and worship, and had been exalted to
     the place of oracle in all matters which admitted a reference. There was a difference now; for
     she had become the companion of a man excessively her superior, whose time and habits were
     spent on objects which required rather her exclusion than her assistance. She attempted
     changes, but found quickly that the ways of the house must be the ways of the master; and that
     there was an unbending will in this respect which stopped her at once. To gain the upper hand,
     she tried jealousy, she tried sickness, she tried magnanimity, but all in vain; Leslie kept her
     to her bargain, that in marrying him, it was her whim and fancy which were gratified.
“Poor Laura” he said to himself,“I promised her I would die, and here she is suffering all
     the penalties of believing me. I am sure I intended it.”
Laura’s goodhumour soon gave way to
      these trials; her next effort was anger, passion, reproach;
     but to those he put an authoritative stop. Love was far from them both he knew; but ridicule
     should be equally far; an outer decorum should prevail in his house; and as for the rest, were
     not women proved to him to be creatures undeserving respect, incapable of goodness?
Rather more than a twelvemonth had passed since their ill‐omened marriage; and however
     apparent the unsuitableness of Laura’s character became, the secret of her machinations
     remained undiscovered. In the early days of her marriage, the apprehension that some chance
     might reveal it, had continually haunted her. Every letter which she saw Leslie reading made
     her anxious; she watched his face for the sudden lighting of discovery; she dreaded when he put
     it by and said nothing about the contents, that suspicion had been excited which he would
     silently follow out; she examined his letters before they reached him, if she found it possible
     to do so; and
      made pretexts, which afforded mirth to the servants’‐hall,
     to look at the addresses of those which he left for the post; every acquaintance awakened her
     fears, lest some chance word should reveal the real position of those whom she had represented
     under such false colours; and in her anxiety and alarm, she had invented many ingenious excuses
     for avoiding communication with all who could by any chance be acquainted with the persons and
     circumstances of the past months.
But as time went by and no revelation took place, as Leslie remained unaltered, and no kind
     of allusion to the past ever arose between them, the silence in which all was involved began to
     give her confidence, and that which might have happened at any moment, and which did not
     happen, seemed like a thing gone into oblivion, which never could possess a tangible shape
     again.
Laura grew bold in impunity, and then followed the reflection that she had secured the
     position she now occupied beyond the
      power even of discovery to dispossess her. By degrees she
     began to feel as if the very discovery would have its advantages. There would be at least a
     momentary triumph, in showing how she had outwitted Leslie; and when his superiority weighed
     upon her, unsoftened by any kindness on his part, there would arise a longing on her’s, to show
     that she had once baffled his talents, and possessed herself of a place from which no efforts
     of his could now remove her. It was a heavy secret, which she dreaded to betray, yet found it
     difficult to keep, and which would come almost into the shape of words occasionally, yet shrink
     back in terror when there arose a real chance that it should escape.
In this uneasy state, irritation arose out of many a trivial circumstance; harsh words were
     said on her side; cold scorn of them was implied on his; he forgot them, and was neither more
     nor less annoyed by the companion who had forced herself upon him than he had expected to be;
     his interests were all apart from her, and were
      tinctured by the gloomy atmosphere which still clouded his
     spirits. The habits of his mind made him resort as necessarily to reading, as his bodily
     appetite to food; but the only subjects which could fix his attention were the stern expression
     of great passion, the details of strong purpose and of grand crimes—whatever was bitter towards
     man, whatever lowered human nature, he dwelt upon, and thence broke away to his own gloomy
     reflections, pursuing the phantom of past faith and hope to their disappearance, and racking
     himself against the problem of Elinor’s character and conduct (as they appeared to him), which
     it baffled him to explain. He wearied himself with restless exercise, and sought the reality or
     the semblance of danger as a means of forgetting for a while his vain longing for the past; and
     his hatred of the present. Miserable, but resolutely silent, he lived through the days.
In these circumstances Mr. Chanson found them, when, in the end of the autumn following their
     marriage, he re‐
      turned from a moor belonging to him in Scotland, and came to
     pay a visit at the Tower. He saw nothing that was going wrong; outer forms were carefully
     observed, and he was satisfied with the smooth surface which was presented to his eye; the
     bitter words which Laura could not restrain, were unanswered by her husband, or made to pass
     for jests; the complaints she suggested were unreasonable; and her brother, who, in the midst
     of all his admiration, had sometimes felt her government rather a severe one, secretly
     applauded the manner in which Leslie reigned so absolutely, yet without any ostentation of
     dominion. He was well pleased with his reception, with the amusements of the wild and extended
     country, and finding himself alone with his sister and his brother‐in‐law, his talk flowed more
     freely than it did when tramelled by society.
They were all three one afternoon upon the terrace of the Tower, where the building wanted
     most repair, and where Leslie had arranged some plans of alteration.
      Laura was very much opposed to these; she had always drawn
     the elevation of her brother’s cottages, and had as constantly met with unbounded applause; and
     when she first heard of the necessity of building at the Tower, she had prepared a drawing of
     battlements and loopholes, which Leslie negatived at once. The subject had been ever since a
     sore one, and Leslie avoided it as much as possible. To‐day he had been far from willing to
     make this spot the scene of their saunter, but Laura, who was in a bad temper, knew no ease
     till she had got her brother there, and could vent her discontent.
“I should not wish this picturesque building spoiled,” said Laura; “should you,
     Lawrence?”
“No, who would?”
“We don’t agree about the way of restoring it,” said Leslie.
“No; I incline for preserving the character of the building. I don’t see any reason for
     destroying a beautiful thing,
      merely because another person wishes to preserve it.”
“Look here, Lawrence,” said his host; “this fragment of a wall fell when I was a boy,
     climbing the Tower. It and I came down together.”
“And you not killed?” said the Squire.
“So it seems,” said Leslie.
“Is that the reason,” asked Laura; “why you mean to leave the Tower with a great rent in
     it?”
“But I don’t mean to do so.”
“Nay, the other day when I showed you my idea of the restoration, I understood you to say it
     did not suit you to do anything to the Tower.”
“Pardon me, I did not feel the merit of your suggestion; but I was and am aware, that
     restoration of some kind is essential.”
“When do you mean to begin building,” said Mr. Chanson.
“I have not thought much about it,” said Leslie.
“Then you may leave it to me. I have thought, and I have a right to do as I
      please with a part, at least, of the expenditure of the
     house.”
“What is your meaning?” said Leslie.
“Once I could do as I pleased with all that was then my own.”
“That’s a strange observation,” said Leslie; “let us speak of it this once, because your
     brother is here. Lawrence, I beg of you to say whether the implied reproach is well
     founded.”
“Laura, my dear, really I am obliged to acknowledge that for once you are wrong. Leslie’s
     magnificence to you ...... do recollect!”
“Wrong? did you ever say such a word as that to me, while I was so happy in your house.”
“One more word,” said Leslie; “be just with yourself. In bringing you here, did I deceive
     you?”
“Oh, dear no! I am not so easily blinded as others are who boast very much of
     their penetration.”
“What are you saying or meaning,” said her brother, who observed Leslie’s
      heightened colour at this last thrust, and the sudden
     compression of his stern lips. In fact, he understood Laura to allude to his fatal secret with
     regard to Elinor, which she had hitherto kept from her brother, but which he would prefer at
     once revealing, to having it held out as a threat whenever she might lose her temper.
“It is quite true,” said he to Mr. Chanson, “that I was strangely deceived by one to whom
     your sister alludes.”
“No, no, Leslie!” cried Laura; “I did not mean that.”
“What do you mean? What does anybody mean?” said Mr. Chanson.
“It is best to cast away secrets,” said Leslie; “who could bear one clinging about him like a
     poisoned shirt? That young girl ......”
“What! Elinor?” said Mr. Chanson; “nay, Laura told me all about her the very day we parted,
     when Peter took the place with me which you threw up, and went I know not where ...... but what
     does it matter? Laura forgave you.”

“Forgave me?” said Leslie.
“Well, whatever word lovers please to use. You were reconciled at all events, for here you
     are man and wife.”
“Do choose some other topic for discussion,” said Laura; “I will explain what he means
     presently,” she added, in a low voice to Leslie.
“No, allow me to understand your brother,” said Leslie; “I remember the day perfectly, but
     being absent, you know, I was not aware of the movements of the rest of the party. Your nephew
     took my place?”
“He did. Laura persuaded him.”
“Yes,” said Laura; “they travelled part of their journey together. Now, Lawrence, you
     promised to walk to the brook. Let us go, or it will be too late.”
“Well, if you wish it,” said her brother; but Leslie interposed.
“Did you ever learn where Sir Peter went when you parted?”
“To Ceylon, man! We all know that..”
“But in the interval between the time
      when you parted from him and he set out, are
      you aware where he went?”
“Nowhere at all,” answered Mr. Chanson, “except where I went. I never did part with him till
     he went abroad. How could he go anywhere?”
“I heard a very different tale,” said Laura.
“That’s unaccountable,” said Mr. Chanson; “why, you know very well that I went to sea with
     him for a dozen miles, and came back in Mendip’s yacht.”
“Are you sure,” said Leslie to Laura in the commonplace tone of conversation; “that you
      did hear a different account?”
“Did not you?” said Laura, in an abrupt, scornful voice.
“Yes. I was told another.”
“And believed it,” whispered Laura, under her breath.
Leslie looked at her fixedly. Mr. Chanson went on speaking. “Peter was sorry enough that his
     visit was at an end. He was a great admirer of Laura, and in a
      lesser degree of Elinor also. It was a pity she could not
     marry him.”
“Do you speak so easily of what passed?” said Leslie.
“Why not? if she had liked him it would have been all very well.”
“She had no mind to marry so poor a man,” said Laura.
“Poor little thing! Any fate would have been better than shutting herself up in the nunnery,”
     said Mr. Chanson; “I often think of her.”
“She is there?” said Leslie, in a voice of perfect composure, and Laura could not but start
     at the self‐command which enabled him to catch at the revelation her brother was unconsciously
     making without betraying that it was new to him.
“Certainly; it was entirely her own choice to go there, was not it, Laura?”
“Her own, solely, I suppose we must conclude,” said Laura.
“You hear of her sometimes?” asked Leslie.
“Yes; every three months an ecclesiastic
      connected with the establishment acknowledges my remittance
     of her little income. It is little, indeed, but since she has chosen that life, they tell me it
     is better not to add to it.”
“You have never failed to hear from him?” asked Leslie.
“No, except when I was absent from home. Laura had the letter then. Did not she mention
     it?”
“Not I,” said Laura; “was it worth while? I am tired of the subject—I am cold. I shall go in
     ......” and she departed, walking leisurely towards the house.
“I see how it is,” said Mr. Chanson; “Laura has not quite forgotten the fit of jealousy which
     Elinor caused her, but take no notice of it. Women are naturally unreasonable, and must be
     allowed for.”
“In what have I given her cause?” said Leslie.
“Oh! I am alluding to the time before your marriage, to your great quarrel, when we all
     parted.”
“She complained to you?”

“No, no! don’t think it; but seeing her so unhappy, I could not but inquire the cause, and
     then, for the first time I learned your engagement, and her fears that Elinor had entangled
     you, though in love all the time herself with young Bicester.”
“All that, she told you?”
“Yes.”
“Indeed!” said Leslie; “never mind. I begin to understand. And Sir Peter, what did he
     say?”
“I never said much to him on the subject. But in what little he did, say, he alleged in his
     own excuse that having learned your engagement to Laura, from Laura herself, he thought himself
     entitled to make love to Elinor, as you had no right to do so—all the time acknowledging that
     she avoided him as much as she could, and that he was wrong to have so persecuted her.”
“Did he say that?” asked Leslie; then, as Mr. Chanson made no answer beyond a brief “Ay,” he
     repeated in a tone which
      would have startled one more observant than the Squire: “Did
     he say that?”
“Yes: honourable of him was it not? I should have been quite deceived in that young girl had
     not Laura told me beforehand of her little skittish ways.”
Leslie kept silence, but with a sudden effort he broke in two the short stick which he held
     in his hand; his brother‐in‐law looked at him in astonishment.
“By Jove! that’s a strong arm. Is it some trick? How do you do it?”
“Sometimes one has a wish to do a strong thing,” said Leslie, pitching away the broken
     pieces.
Mr. Chanson rose from the stone wall where he had been sitting. Leslie also moved, and took
     the way towards the house, whither, following the impulse thus given, the Squire also bent his
     steps, and entering it by the first door they came to, Mr. Chanson turned into the hall, and
     Leslie, the moment he was alone, strode up stairs in quest of Laura.
She knew he was coming, but did not
      know herself what mood his coming would excite in her. She
     was frightened at one moment, angry and fierce at another; sometimes he seemed the Leslie upon
     whom she had let her fancy doat, and then the Leslie whom at other times she hated with all the
     violence of her former love. He found her, at apparent ease, in a lounging chair, with a
     newspaper in her hand. She looked at him as he entered almost as a wild animal would look,
     excited to self‐defence, and ready for flight or fight as the movements of the intruder might
     determine. Leslie came forward to the table which was on one side of her, and there he stood,
     saying at once in a perfectly calm voice,
“I am come to demand account from you of the deceit you have practised upon me.”
“Have I deceived you?” said Laura; “did you believe me?”
“Yes; a lie like yours there is no defence against. Unsay it.”
“What am I to say and unsay?”
“Where is that young girl?”

“Whom do you mean?” said Laura.
“Elinor Ladylift.”
Laura laughed. “You speak out. Elinor Ladylift is in the convent of St. Cécile. You heard my
     brother say so.”
“Did she at once go there, stay there? did no one ever seek her there? did she take refuge
     and remain there?”
“So Lawrence said.”
“You dare not trifle!” said Leslie, striking the table with his hand, and advancing a step
     nearer to Laura. “Do you know it of your own knowledge?”
“I know nothing to the contrary,” said Laura.
“You acknowledge, then, that your representations were false .......”
“False!” said Laura.
“Go on. There was a letter brought to me by yourself. Explain it.”
“I have often brought you letters,” said Laura.
“There was a letter purporting to be written by Elinor Ladylift to your cousin Bicester. Was
     that letter a forgery?”

“It was her writing,” said Laura.
“What is behind in your meaning? Dare you say she sent it to him? Dare you .....”
“I did dare, and it answered my purpose,” said Laura; “you believed. I could have laughed at
     times to think how the great, manly intellect yielded to despised woman.”
“Laugh! yes,” said Leslie; “that is the very word for perfidy and crime which in due time
     have lost their covering, and are carrying you to the ruin you have wrought for others.”
Laura sprang up. “Nay, not so; guilty I have been, but what has made me so? Miserable I may
     be, but I ventured all for that which I have won—I am yours!—you are mine! In that hope I knew
     nothing, cared for nothing, except itself. Whatever I have done, you, you Leslie should pardon
     me, for that for which I perilled my very soul was your love!”
But Leslie drew back as she approached him. “Love!” he said; “is it by that name you call a
     vile fancy which was con‐
      tented patiently to destroy life and hope in its object? How
     nearly you have dragged me to death, how far from happiness. But no more of that. The past has
     been yours, the present is mine. I care nothing for unravelling the web of your perfidy. Enough
     that I know all you have said and done is false. Enough. I have borne with you while what you
     acted passed for true. Now do you bear with whatsoever befalls you, dragged on
     your own head by your own deed! I have done.”
He left the room at once. Laura sprang up before he was gone, and called him, but he closed
     the door and went to his room. Here, like a man who once possessing the amulet that ensured the
     blessing of his life, and who, dropping it into some profound lake, stands despairingly gazing
     into the waters; did Leslie stand awhile, horror‐stricken at the knowledge of his own fate. All
     that he had left behind he now saw and knew; all the clouds that had hidden past actions rolled
     away, and left the view of the sunny land behind him, which he
      had exchanged for the dreary pestilential region now
     surrounding him. The horror of his entanglement bewildered him; the thought of all those days
     and months, wherein reparation for his cruel injustice had been delayed, pressed upon his
     senses; the choking feeling of distance and alienation wrought so fiercely on him, that of all
     impossible things the most impossible to his imperious and self‐indulged nature was to delay by
     even another hour to seek, nay, to force an interview with Elinor, leaving the issue of that
     interview to be what it will.
Springing out of the first torpor, he took measures at once to leave the Tower. He provided
     himself with what money was in the house; he thrust his papers and letters into the drawers,
     and summoning a servant, bade him instantly prepare what was necessary for a journey, and bring
     it after him to the neighbouring town, whither he himself would proceed at once on foot. To put
     himself into action was the only relief he could find, and hastily he passed through
      the hall, and out on his road away, able he knew to conceal
     his emotion from any one he might casually meet, but not trusting himself either with inaction
     or with the sight of the woman who had ruined him.
When joined by his servant, he took charge himself of the portmanteau, sending back the man
     without message or explanation, and hastened alone with all possible despatch to the coast.
     Here he took the first conveyance which crossed the sea, and was put ashore at early dawn on
     the Breton coast, at a village but a few miles from St. Cécile’s nunnery.
It was Thursday, and he remembered having heard Elinor say that Thursday was the day on which
     the pensioners were chiefly permitted to receive their visitors. He therefore pressed forward
     with all haste to add one more chance to those shadowy chances which remained of ever beholding
     that dear face again, but his heart died within him to think how faint they were; sixteen
     months’ grief, neglect, Time, what had they done? Was she even there? was
      she perhaps lying at perpetual rest beneath a reviving turf?
     or if she lived, was she by this time a professed nun, alive, but dead to him? Could she
     forgive him? had he not believed accusations which the deceiver herself had thought it
     incredible to impose upon him? Oh! what mountain piles of sin had he not committed against the
     gentlest, most charitable, most defenceless of beings! He saw the little low building rising
     before him with emotion that almost choked his breath. It stood on a common which descended to
     the sea‐shore, terminating in rushes and sand hills; a marshy pool or two glittered in the sun,
     and some small cows were picking up the coarse herbage under the care of a boy and girl
     bareheaded and barefooted. The building itself was low, and formed a square, of which the side
     opposite Leslie was unpierced by windows, and except for one low door at the upper end, it
     might have been, what Leslie’s gloomy feelings likened it to, a tomb.
At this door he knocked, and presented a letter he had prepared, entreating per‐
      mission, in her guardian’s name, to speak to Miss Ladylift.
     The lay sister took it, and returning before long, conducted him to another part of the low,
     gray square, where she admitted him to the parlour and there left him. There was already a
     young girl, laughing with a motherly woman, and with a child, who seemed the girl’s sister.
     Leslie turned to the window, his back to these people, his face therefore not to be seen at
     once, although he could watch whoever came in at the door. And before any long time, there was
     the voice he loved so fearfully.
“Qui me demande?” and Elinor stood there looking at the group within.
“One not worthy so much as to ask pardon,” said Leslie, turning to her and approaching.
“Mr. Leslie!” cried Elinor, starting as if a bullet had struck her heart.
“That’s the last word you said when I last beheld you,” said Leslie; “if I was mad then—if
     there was a curse upon me, can you forgive me?”

“I forgave you long since,” said Elinor.
“That is, you would wish me no harm,” said Leslie; “but is that all—is forgiveness only
     that?”
“Yes, only that” said Elinor; “but indeed, full and free forgiveness, for though you were
     more unjust than I understood, you know that, now, or you would not be here.
     Good‐bye.”
“No! no! no!” said Leslie, taking her hand, and drawing her to the window, while he spoke
     very low. “It is not all so lost between us. You are to me all that woman can be to man. You
     have my destiny in your hand; you must hear me.”
“There is nothing to hear,” said Elinor; “you renounced me, and I found shelter here. Your
     wife sent me.”
“I have none,” said Leslie.
“How! I know from herself that you have married Miss Chanson.”
“No; there is a fiend who lays claim to me; a serpent stole round me, but I am free!”

“You speak madly,” said Elinor; “I will go. May you be happy! Farewell!”
“Is that all? you loved me once, Elinor.”
“I try to forget all the past,” said Elinor. “It is quite gone... Let me go now.”
“You try? Do you say that? Alas! is it your will never to see me again?”
She did but bow her head as if in assent, but he felt her trembling hand.
“Oh, my beautiful! my perfect!” he cried, grasping that hand and trying to look into her
     eyes; “you love me still! that love is still there. You are too true and good to say ‘No!’ when
     you cannot but say to yourself ‘It is Yes!”’ Elinor hid her face as far as she could on her own
     shoulder, the tears ran down her cheeks. “You loved me once,” he repeated.
“You tried to make me,” said Elinor.
“ Oh, angel! I did. It was long before your heart gave way; very long before your colour
     mounted when I came, but it did at last, and you never can forget it.”

A sob broke from Elinor.
“La pauvre enfant,” said the old mother, who was present; “laissons les!”
“Mais, ma mère, c’est si joli,” whispered the young pensioner.
“Fi, donc, Jacqueline! un jour cela t’arrivera à toi, peutêtre. Faut être compatissant,” and
     the good woman drew away her girls, leaving the room to Leslie and Elinor.
Leslie drew a chair for her, and sank down before her. “I have been so miserable,” he said,
     dropping his face on her knees, “I am so—not at this moment, with your precious hand in mine,
     but if I loose it and am again what I was before I grasped it, I cannot go on living, I must
     die.”
“It would be best if we both could die,” said Elinor, “for on earth we must part for
     ever.”
“Then you, you—are you happy?”
“No!” said Elinor, hiding her face and weeping.
“Alas! and once we were so near it—a word or two was all that was between it
      and us. I had it in my hand, I let it go. But it is near
     again, now we are near.”
“How could you doubt me?” said Elinor; “I learned you thought I could possibly
     feel regard for one who was not you.”
“Was I not mad? was I not a fallen spirit, into whose hands an angelic one had been put? But
     you are here again to save me; it is your destiny to save me.”
“Do not talk idly; you have chosen your companion; your wife ......”
“Wife, hush! hush! there is one whom my heart acknowledges—here, this is my lawful wife. That
     woman is a mere adultress.”
“You frighten me, Leslie.”
“Ah! save me from what frightens myself—come with me now. Rise, fly with me. The world is
     waiting for us outside that open door. We cannot stay in prison; home, paradise, innocence,
     wait for us there! Come, my own Elinor!”
Elinor’s eyes raised to his face, reminded him of that day, now two years old, when
      they before so innocently looked at him, wondering at his
     meaning.
“Could I leave my Mother so? Would she allow it?”
“No, no; but to be happy is our nature. I am good if I am happy, but make me miserable,
     Elinor, and what crimes lie before me!”
“Nay,” said Elinor, “we need not be happy, but we must be good.”
“Are not those two things one,” said Leslie; “if it lie in your power to render a human
     creature the most blessed being on the earth, would you not do wrong to leave him in his
     misery? Must not that be wrong?”
“I cannot tell,” said Elinor; “we must wait—one day, no doubt, we shall be happy.”
“And will our youth wait for us, will our life wait?”
“Oh no!” said Elinor, “and I wish, with all my heart I wish, that we were old, and sick, and
     infirm, for then we should be near the land where I may come to you.”

“Ah Elinor! but should those lands be dreams! Hear me! ......”
“I cannot, dear Leslie—oh yes! indeed you are dear Leslie—I only know we are
     parted for ever.” Elinor forcibly rose, while Leslie with her hand in his, detained her,
     pleading, still more by the agony he suffered than by his words; and at that moment the door
     opened, and a tall handsome woman, her face bounded by the straight lines of her head‐gear,
     came in, and Elinor at once broke away, and took up her place, pressed close against the
     Reverend Mother. She whispered a word or two to the young girl, and Elinor instantly stood
     freely up, and though the tears ran over, spoke out, “God bless you, Leslie! Farewell!” and
     vanished through the door, from his sight.
“You have brought her bad news, I fear,” said the Superior.
“Yes, bad news,” repeated Leslie, mechanically.
“Poor child! she has need of good. Ever since she came back here so suddenly,
      she has had a weight at her heart. What sort of people were
     they, those guardians of hers?”
“I know scarcely anything about them,” said Leslie.
“Yet you came from them to her, I understood.”
“Yes,” said Leslie, “I am acquainted with them, but they are people perfectly indifferent to
     me.”
“Do you think anything happened there to make her unhappy? Who visited chiefly at the
     house?”
“I knew one, a mere fool,” said Leslie, “he thought himself clever, and was the gull of every
     female and male idiot that chose to deceive him.”
“Then he it could not be, whom she regrets.”
“Does she regret some one?”
“I cannot tell; her confessor knows; if she have proved the vanity of worldly
     affections, I hope it may turn her soul to the holy bridal of the church.”
“God forbid!” cried Leslie.

“And why, sir? Do you think she has no vocation?”
“Vocation!” repeated Leslie, hardly knowing what he said.
“Before she went to England, I thought so too,” said the lady, “but experience of the world’s
     emptiness and sorrow, often work a change for the better in the heart.”
“Alas!” said Leslie.
“There would be a difficulty, of which you are perhaps aware,” said the Superior.
“Difficulty? yes, no doubt—what is it?”
“When we have devoted ourselves to our profession, and have no leisure for the works which
     earn a living, we must have means of subsistence, live as hardly as we will. Therefore those
     who enter here for a life of devotion must be able to support themselves and others, by
     contributing to the general stock, or else they must come as menials, which would not do for
     her ...... but Elinor is so very poor.”
“Is she poor?” said Leslie, with infinite pity in his voice.
“She has perhaps ten thousand francs
      for all her fortune; what you call, she tells me, sixteen
     pounds a‐year.”
“Oh! my Elinor!” groaned Leslie.
“With that she boards, and though it is too little, we keep the precious child among us, and
     she nurses, teaches, works, up to her best strength to make up what is wanted.”
“Madam,” said Leslie, “your society is most worthy, most deserving, would not a few thousand
     francs, bestowed on it in her name, secure her more comforts, more ease?”
“Such a donation might enable her to assume the veil,” said the Superior.
Leslie shrank as if his hand had found itself on the bag of a nest of hornets.
“Don’t let her do that, Reverend Mother,” said he; “what is so dangerous as to encourage vows
     which are not voluntary, or of which the vower may repent? You might have a sin to answer
     for.”
“Fear not,” said the Superior, with dignity, “that we need the advice of a stranger in
     guiding our flock.”

“No, no, I am aware of that—yet I entreat you forbid her to become a nun.”
“Leave her to us, young man,” said the Superior.
“I must see her again,” said Leslie.
“Nay, your interview has already been long.”
“And write to her.”
“Give me your letter, if you wish to write, she shall have it.”
“But if she wishes it, I may return.”
“If she does not wish it, you cannot.”
“And you will influence her. Oh! madam, there are miseries in the world, so great that you
     would pity the very devils whom you hate, for suffering them.”
“There is a refuge from all,” the Superior began—but Leslie broke away.
“I can’t hear it now; preach to ease, not to the rack. Let me go,” and he rushed away in a
     state of mind almost beyond his own control.
For several days he wandered round the Convent, asking admittance, and still refused,
     offering rewards to get a letter con‐
      veyed to Elinor, but denied; haunted by her tearful eyes, by
     her poverty, by her desolation. He was terrified at the possibility of the vows she might
     contract, and was for ever grasping at those blessings which might have been his and hers, but
     which were now mere shadows of those real things floating away, further and further into the
     past. He was fast bound in the meshes, which a woman, a mere woman, had found the means to
     twine around him, and fiercely did he resent the injury, and gaze sternly at her falsehood and
     successful deceit. It was in vain he raged against his bonds, which Elinor refused to assist
     him in evading, and which the hand that fastened them, even if willing, had no power to untie,
     though it had sought and forced the fatal spell to make them fast. She was his fate; a
     contemptible, but all powerful agent; a hateful presence which had forced itself upon him, and
     which held him imprisoned in sight of the felicity he had once grasped,
      and let go at the false accents of that despicable
     deceiver.
Violent were the passions of the strong but fettered man, fierce the hatred of the powerful
     but baffled intellect; wild was the fury of the man, who believed in but one world of good, and
     saw the mortal moments passing away, unenjoyed, and irretrievable.
Out of those hours arose a purpose. The reader sees the man, and knows the deed. From the
     premises laid before him, he need not indeed have concluded that even that man would do that
     deed; but since it was told, in 1855, that the husband killed the wife, so now, in 1860, it is
     explained why he killed her.
</div></body></text></TEI>