<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Lady Audley's Secret</title><author>Braddon, Mary Elizabeth (1835-1915).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1862</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
CHAPTER V.
THE HEADSTONE AT VENTNOR.
Yes, there it was in black and white—"Helen Talboys, aged 22."
When George told the governess on board the Argus that if he heard any evil tidings
     of his wife he should drop down dead, he spoke in perfect good faith; and yet, here were the
     worst tidings that could come to him, and he sat rigid, white and helpless, staring stupidly at
     the shocked face of his friend.
The suddenness of the blow had stunned him. In this strange and bewildered state of mind he
     began to wonder what had happened, and why it was that one line in the Times newspaper
     could have so horrible an effect upon him.
Then by degrees even this vague consciousness of his misfortune faded slowly out of his mind,
     succeeded by a painful consciousness of external things.
The hot August sunshine, the dusty window-panes and shabby-painted blinds, a file of
     fly-blown play-bills fastened to the wall, the black and empty fire-places, a bald-headed old
     man nodding over the Morning Advertizer, the slip-shod waiter folding a tumbled
     table-cloth, and Robert Audley's handsome face looking at him full of compassionate alarm—he
     knew that all these things took gigantic proportions, and then, one by one, melted into dark
     blots and swam before his eyes, He knew that there was a great noise, as of half a dozen
     furious steam-engines tearing and grinding in his ears, and he knew nothing more—except that
     somebody or something fell heavily to the ground.
He opened his eyes upon the dusky evening in a cool and shaded room, the silence only broken
     by the rumbling of wheels at a distance.
He looked about him wonderingly, but half indifferently. His old friend, Robert Audley, was
     seated by his side smoking. George was lying on a low iron bedstead opposite to an open window,
     in which there was a stand of flowers and two or three birds in cages.
"You don't mind the pipe, do you, George?" his friend asked, quietly.
"No."
He lay for some time looking at the flowers and the birds; one canary was singing a shrill
     hymn to the setting sun.
"Do the birds annoy you, George? Shall I take them out of the room?"
"No; I like to hear them sing."
Robert Audley knocked the ashes out of his pipe, laid the precious meerschaum tenderly upon
     the mantelpiece, and going into the next room, returned presently with a cup of strong tea.
"Take this, George," he said, as he placed the cup on a little table close to George's
     pillow; "it will do your head good."
The young man did not answer, but looked slowly round the room, and then at his friend's
     grave face.
"Bob," he said, "where are we?"
"In my chambers, dear boy, in the Temple. You have no lodgings of your own, so you may as
     well stay with me while you're in town."
George passed his hand once or twice across his forehead, and then, in a hesitating manner,
     said, quietly:
"That newspaper this morning, Bob; what was it?"
"Never mind just now, old boy; drink some tea."
"Yes, yes," cried George, impatiently, raising himself upon the bed, and staring about him
     with hollow eyes. "I remember all about it. Helen! my Helen! my wife, my darling, my only love!
     Dead, dead!"
"George," said Robert Audley, laying his hand gently upon the young man's arm, "you must
     remember that the person whose name you saw in the paper may not be your wife. There may have
     been some other Helen Talboys."
"No, no!" he cried; "the age corresponds with hers, and Talboys is such an uncommon
     name."
"It may be a misprint for Talbot."
"No, no, no; my wife is dead!"
He shook off Robert's restraining hand, and rising from the bed, walked straight to the
     door.
"Where are you going?" exclaimed his friend.
"To Ventnor, to see her grave."
"Not to-night, George, not to-night. I will go with you myself by the first train
     to-morrow."
Robert led him back to the bed, and gently forced him to lie down again. He then gave him an
     opiate, which had been left for him by the medical man whom they had called in at the
     coffee-house in Bridge street, when George fainted.
So George Talboys fell into a heavy slumber, and dreamed that he went to Ventnor, to find his
     wife alive and happy, but wrinkled, old, and gray, and to find his son grown into a young
     man.
Early the next morning he was seated opposite to Robert Audley in the first-class carriage of
     an express, whirling through the pretty open country toward Portsmouth.
They landed at Ventnor under the burning heat of the midday sun. As the two young men came
     from the steamer, the people on the pier stared at George's white face and untrimmed beard.
"What are we to do, George?" Robert Audley asked. "We have no clew to finding the people you
     want to see."
The young man looked at him with a pitiful, bewildered expression. The big dragoon was as
     helpless as a baby; and Robert Audley, the most vacillating and unenergetic of men, found
     himself called upon to act for another. He rose superior to himself, and equal to the
     occasion.
"Had we not better ask at one of the hotels about a Mrs. Talboys, George?" he said.
"Her father's name was Maldon," George muttered; "he could never have sent her here to die
     alone."
They said nothing more; but Robert walked straight to a hotel where he inquired for a Mr.
     Maldon.
Yes, they told him, there was a gentleman of that name stopping at Ventnor, a Captain Maldon;
     his daughter was lately dead. The waiter would go and inquire for the address.
The hotel was a busy place at this season; people hurrying in and out, and a great bustle of
     grooms and waiters about the halls.
George Talboys leaned against the doorpost, with much the same look in his face, as that
     which had frightened his friend in the Westminister coffee-house.
The worst was confirmed now. His wife, Captain Maldon's daughter was dead.
The waiter returned in about five minutes to say that Captain Maldon was lodging at Lansdowne
     Cottage, No. 4.
They easily found the house, a shabby, low-windowed cottage, looking toward the water.
Was Captain Maldon at home? No, the landlady said; he had gone out on the beach with his
     little grandson. Would the gentleman walk in and sit down a bit?
George mechanically followed his friend into the little front parlor—dusty, shabbily
     furnished, and disorderly, with a child's broken toys scattered on the floor, and the scent of
     stale tobacco hanging about the muslin window-curtains.
"Look!" said George, pointing to a picture over the mantelpiece.
It was his own portrait, painted in the old dragooning days. A pretty good likeness,
     representing him in uniform, with his charger in the background.
Perhaps the most animated of men would have been scarcely so wise a comforter as Robert
     Audley. He did not utter a word to the stricken widower, but quietly seated himself with his
     back to George, looking out of the open window.
For some time the young man wandered restlessly about the room, looking at and sometimes
     touching the nick-nacks lying here and there.
Her workbox, with an unfinished piece of work; her album full of extracts from Byron and
     Moore, written in his own scrawling hand; some books which he had given her, and a bunch of
     withered flowers in a vase they had bought in Italy.
"Her portrait used to hang by the side of mine," he muttered; "I wonder what they have done
     with it."
By-and-by he said, after about an hour's silence:
"I should like to see the woman of the house; I should like to ask her about—"
He broke down, and buried his face in his hands.
Robert summoned the landlady. She was a good-natured garrulous creature, accustomed to
     sickness and death, for many of her lodgers came to her to die.
She told all the particulars of Mrs. Talboys' last hours; how she had come to Ventnor only
     ten days before her death, in the last stage of decline; and how, day by day, she had
     gradually, but surely, sunk under the fatal malady. Was the gentleman any relative? she asked
     of Robert Audley, as George sobbed aloud.
"Yes, he is the lady's husband."
"What!" the woman cried; "him as deserted her so cruel, and left her with her pretty boy upon
     her poor old father's hands, which Captain Maldon has told me often, with the tears in his poor
     eyes?"
"I did not desert her," George cried out; and then he told the history of his three years'
     struggle.
"Did she speak of me?" he asked; "did she speak of me—at—at the last?"
"No, she went off as quiet as a lamb. She said very little from the first; but the last day
     she knew nobody, not even her little boy, nor her poor old father, who took on awful. Once she
     went off wild-like, talking about her mother, and about the cruel shame it was to leave her to
     die in a strange place, till it was quite pitiful to hear her."
"Her mother died when she was quite a child," said George. "To think that she should remember
     her and speak of her, but never once of me."
The woman took him into the little bedroom in which his wife had died. He knelt down by the
     bed and kissed the pillow tenderly, the landlady crying as he did so.
While he was kneeling, praying, perhaps, with his face buried in this humble, snow-white
     pillow, the woman took something from a drawer. She gave it to him when he rose from his knees;
     it was a long tress of hair wrapped in silver paper.
"I cut this off when she lay in her coffin," she said, "poor dear?"
He pressed the soft lock to his lips. "Yes," he murmured; "this is the dear hair that I have
     kissed so often when her head lay upon my shoulder. But it always had a rippling wave in it
     then, and now it seems smooth and straight."
"It changes in illness," said the landlady. "If you'd like to see where they have laid her,
     Mr. Talboys, my little boy shall show you the way to the churchyard."
So George Talboys and his faithful friend walked to the quiet spot, where, beneath a mound of
     earth, to which the patches of fresh turf hardly adhered, lay that wife of whose welcoming
     smile George had dreamed so often in the far antipodes.
Robert left the young man by the side of this newly-made grave, and returning in about a
     quarter of an hour, found that he had not once stirred.
He looked up presently, and said that if there was a stone-mason's anywhere near he should
     like to give an order.
They very easily found the stonemason, and sitting down amidst the fragmentary litter of the
     man's yard, George Talboys wrote in pencil this brief inscription for the headstone of his dead
     wife's grave:
 Sacred to the Memory of HELEN, THE BELOVED WIFE OF GEORGE TALBOYS, Who departed this life
     August 24th, 18—, aged 22, Deeply regretted by her sorrowing Husband. 
</div></body></text></TEI>