<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Lady Audley's Secret</title><author>Braddon, Mary Elizabeth (1835-1915).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1862</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">The writing in the book
Mr. Audley rose from the dinner-table and walked over to the cabinet in which he kept the
     document he had drawn up relating to George Talboys. He unlocked the doors of his cabinet, took
     the paper from the pigeon-hole marked important, and seated himself at his desk to write. He
     added several paragraphs to those in the document, numbering the fresh paragraphs as carefully
     as he had numbered the old ones.
"Heaven help us all," he muttered once; "is this paper with which no attorney has had any
     hand to be my first brief?"
He wrote for about half an hour, then replaced the document in the pigeon-hole, and locked
     the cabinet. When he had done this, he took a candle in his hand, and went into the room in
     which were his own portmanteaus and the trunk belonging to George Talboys.
He took a bunch of keys from his pocket, and tried them one by one. The lock of the shabby
     old trunk was a common one, and at the fifth trial the key turned easily.
"There'd be no need for any one to break open such a lock as this," muttered Robert, as he
     lifted the lid of the trunk.
He slowly emptied it of its contents, taking out each article separately, and laying it
     carefully upon a chair by his side. He handled the things with a respectful tenderness, as if
     he had been lifting the dead body of his lost friend. One by one he laid the neatly folded
     mourning garments on the chair. He found old meerschaum pipes, and soiled, crumpled gloves that
     had once been fresh from the Parisian maker; old play-bills, whose biggest letters spelled the
     names of actors who were dead and gone; old perfume-bottles, fragrant with essences, whose
     fashion had passed away; neat little parcels of letters, each carefully labeled with the name
     of the writer; fragments of old newspapers; and a little heap of shabby, dilapidated books,
     each of which tumbled into as many pieces as a pack of cards in Robert's incautious hand. But
     among all the mass of worthless litter, each scrap of which had once had its separate purpose,
     Robert Audley looked in vain for that which he sought—the packet of letters written to the
     missing man by his dead wife Helen Talboys. He had heard George allude more than once to the
     existence of these letters. He had seen him once sorting the faded papers with a reverent hand;
     and he had seen him replace them, carefully tied together with a faded ribbon which had once
     been Helen's, among the mourning garments in the trunk. Whether he had afterward removed them,
     or whether they had been removed since his disappearance by some other hand, it was not easy to
     say; but they were gone.
Robert Audley sighed wearily as he replaced the things in the empty box, one by one, as he
     had taken them out. He stopped with the little heap of tattered books in his hand, and
     hesitated for a moment.
"I will keep these out," he muttered, "there may be something to help me in one of them."
George's library was no very brilliant collection of literature. There was an old Greek
     Testament and the Eton Latin Grammar; a French pamphlet on the cavalry sword-exercise; an odd
     volume of Tom Jones with one half of its stiff leather cover hanging to it by a thread; Byron's
     Don Juan, printed in a murderous type, which must have been invented for the special advantage
     of oculists and opticians; and a fat book in a faded gilt and crimson cover.
Robert Audley locked the trunk and took the books under his arm. Mrs. Maloney was clearing
     away the remains of his repast when he returned to the sitting-room. He put the books aside on
     a little table in a corner of the fire-place, and waited patiently while the laundress finished
     her work. He was in no humor even for his meerschaum consoler; the yellow-papered fictions on
     the shelves above his head seemed stale and profitless—he opened a volume of Balzac, but his
     uncle's wife's golden curls danced and trembled in a glittering haze, alike upon the
     metaphysical diablerie of the Peau de Chagrin, and the hideous social horrors of
      "Cousine Bette." The volume dropped from his hand, and he sat wearily watching Mrs.
     Maloney as she swept up the ashes on the hearth, replenished the fire, drew the dark damask
     curtains, supplied the simple wants of the canaries, and put on her bonnet in the disused
     clerk's office, prior to bidding her employer good-night. As the door closed upon the
     Irishwoman, he arose impatiently from his chair, and paced up and down the room.
"Why do I go on with this," he said, "when I know that it is leading me, step by step, day by
     day, hour by hour, nearer to that conclusion which, of all others, I should avoid? Am I tied to
     a wheel, and must I go with its every revolution, let it take me where it will? Or can I sit
     down here to-night and say I have done my duty to my missing friend, I have searched for him
     patiently, but I have searched in vain? Should I be justified in doing this? Should I be
     justified in letting the chain which I have slowly put together, link by link, drop at this
     point, or must I go on adding fresh links to that fatal chain until the last rivet drops into
     its place and the circle is complete? I think, and I believe, that I shall never see my
     friend's face again; and that no exertion of mine can ever be of any benefit to him. In
     plainer, crueler words I believe him to be dead. Am I bound to discover how and where he died?
     or being, as I think, on the road to that discovery, shall I do a wrong to the memory of George
     Talboys by turning back or stopping still? What am I to do?—what am I to do?"
He rested his elbows on his knees, and buried his face in his hands. The one purpose which
     had slowly grown up in his careless nature until it had become powerful enough to work a change
     in that very nature, made him what he had never been before—a Christian; conscious of his own
     weakness; anxious to keep to the strict line of duty; fearful to swerve from the conscientious
     discharge of the strange task that had been forced upon him; and reliant on a stronger hand
     than his own to point the way which he was to go. Perhaps he uttered his first earnest prayer
     that night, seated by his lonely fireside, thinking of George Talboys. When he raised his head
     from that long and silent revery, his eyes had a bright, determined glance, and every feature
     in his face seemed to wear a new expression.
"Justice to the dead first," he said; "mercy to the living afterward."
He wheeled his easy-chair to the table, trimmed the lamp, and settled himself to the
     examination of the books.
He took them up, one by one, and looked carefully through them, first looking at the page on
     which the name of the owner is ordinarily written, and then searching for any scrap of paper
     which might have been left within the leaves. On the first page of the Eton Latin Grammar the
     name of Master Talboys was written in a prim, scholastic hand; the French pamphlet had a
     careless G.T. scrawled on the cover in pencil, in George's big, slovenly calligraphy: the Tom
     Jones had evidently been bought at a book-stall, and bore an inscription, dated March 14th,
     1788, setting forth that the book was a tribute of respect to Mr. Thos. Scrowton, from his
     obedient servant, James Anderley; the Don Juan and the Testament were blank. Robert Audley
     breathed more freely; he had arrived at the last but one of the books without any result
     whatever, and there only remained the fat gilt-and-crimson-bound volume to be examined before
     his task was finished.
It was an annual of the year 1845. The copper-plate engravings of lovely ladies, who had
     flourished in that day, were yellow and spotted with mildew; the costumes grotesque and
     outlandish; the simpering beauties faded and commonplace. Even the little clusters of verses
     (in which the poet's feeble candle shed its sickly light upon the obscurities of the artist's
     meaning) had an old-fashioned twang; like music on a lyre, whose strings are slackened by the
     damps of time. Robert Audley did not stop to read any of the mild productions. He ran rapidly
     through the leaves, looking for any scrap of writing or fragment of a letter which might have
     been used to mark a place. He found nothing but a bright ring of golden hair, of that
     glittering hue which is so rarely seen except upon the head of a child—a sunny lock, which
     curled as naturally as the tendril of a vine; and was very opposite in texture, if not
     different in hue, to the soft, smooth tresses which the landlady at Ventnor had given to George
     Talboys after his wife's death. Robert Audley suspended his examination of the book, and folded
     this yellow lock in a sheet of letter paper, which he sealed with his signet-ring, and laid
     aside, with the memorandum about George Talboys and Alicia's letter, in the pigeon-hole marked
     important. He was going to replace the fat annual among the other books, when he discovered
     that the two blank leaves at the beginning were stuck together. He was so determined to
     prosecute his search to the very uttermost, that he took the trouble to part these leaves with
     the sharp end of his paper-knife, and he was rewarded for his perseverance by finding an
     inscription upon one of them. This inscription was in three parts, and in three different
     hands. The first paragraph was dated as far back as the year in which the annual had been
     published, and set forth that the book was the property of a certain Miss Elizabeth Ann Bince,
     who had obtained the precious volume as a reward for habits of order, and for obedience to the
     authorities of Camford House Seminary, Torquay. The second paragraph was dated five years
     later, and was in the handwriting of Miss Bince herself, who presented the book, as a mark of
     undying affection and unfading esteem (Miss Bince was evidently of a romantic temperament) to
     her beloved friend, Helen Maldon. The third paragraph was dated September, 1853, and was in the
     hand of Helen Maldon, who gave the annual to George Talboys; and it was at the sight of this
     third paragraph that Mr. Robert Audley's face changed from its natural hue to a sickly, leaden
     pallor.
"I thought it would be so," said the young man, shutting the book with a weary sigh. "God
     knows I was prepared for the worst, and the worst has come. I can understand all now. My next
     visit must be to Southampton. I must place the boy in better hands."
</div></body></text></TEI>