<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Lady Audley's Secret</title><author>Braddon, Mary Elizabeth (1835-1915).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1862</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">
CHAPTER XXXIII.
THE BEARER OF THE TIDINGS.
It was very late the next morning when Lady Audley emerged from her dressing-room,
     exquisitely dressed in a morning costume of delicate muslin, delicate laces, and embroideries;
     but with a very pale face, and with half-circles of purple shadow under her eyes. She accounted
     for this pale face and these hollow eyes by declaring that she had sat up reading until a very
     late hour on the previous night.
Sir Michael and his young wife breakfasted in the library at a comfortable round table,
     wheeled close to the blazing fire; and Alicia was compelled to share this meal with her
     step-mother, however she might avoid that lady in the long interval between breakfast and
     dinner.
The March morning was bleak and dull, and a drizzling rain fell incessantly, obscuring the
     landscape and blotting out the distance. There were very few letters by the morning post; the
     daily newspapers did not arrive until noon; and such aids to conversation being missing, there
     was very little talk at the breakfast table.
Alicia looked out at the drizzling rain drifting against the broad window-panes.
"No riding to-day," she said; "and no chance of any callers to enliven us, unless that
     ridiculous Bob comes crawling through the wet from Mount Stanning."
Have you ever heard anybody, whom you knew to be dead, alluded to in a light, easy going
     manner by another person who did not know of his death—alluded to as doing that or this, as
     performing some trivial everyday operation—when you know that he has vanished away
     from the face of this earth, and separated himself forever from all living creatures and their
     commonplace pursuits in the awful solemnity of death? Such a chance allusion, insignificant
     though it may be, is apt to send a strange thrill of pain through the mind. The ignorant remark
     jars discordantly upon the hyper-sensitive brain; the King of Terrors is desecrated by that
     unwitting disrespect. Heaven knows what hidden reason my lady may have had for experiencing
     some such revulsion of feeling on the sudden mention of Mr. Audley's name, but her pale face
     blanched to a sickly white as Alicia Audley spoke of her cousin.
"Yes, he will come down here in the wet, perhaps," the young lady continued, "with his hat
     sleek and shining as if it had been brushed with a pat of fresh butter, and with white vapors
     steaming out of his clothes, and making him look like an awkward genie just let out of his
     bottle. He will come down here and print impressions of his muddy boots all over the carpet,
     and he'll sit on your Gobelin tapestry, my lady, in his wet overcoat; and he'll abuse you if
     you remonstrate, and will ask why people have chairs that are not to be sat upon, and why you
     don't live in Figtree Court, and—"
Sir Michael Audley watched his daughter with a thoughtful countenance as she talked of her
     cousin. She very often talked of him, ridiculing him and inveighing against him in no very
     measured terms. But perhaps the baronet thought of a certain Signora Beatrice who very cruelly
     entreated a gentleman called Benedick, but who was, it may be, heartily in love with him at the
     same time.
"What do you think Major Melville told me when he called here yesterday, Alicia?" Sir Michael
     asked, presently.
"I haven't the remotest idea," replied Alicia, rather disdainfully. "Perhaps he told you that
     we should have another war before long, by Ged, sir; or perhaps he told you that we should have
     a new ministry, by Ged, sir, for that those fellows are getting themselves into a mess, sir; or
     that those other fellows were reforming this, and cutting down that, and altering the other in
     the army, until, by Ged, sir, we shall have no army at all, by-and-by—nothing but a pack of
     boys, sir, crammed up to the eyes with a lot of senseless schoolmasters' rubbish, and dressed
     in shell-jackets and calico helmets. Yes, sir, they're fighting in Oudh in calico helmets at
     this very day, sir."
"You're an impertinent minx, miss," answered the baronet. "Major Melville told me nothing of
     the kind; but he told me that a very devoted admirer of you, a certain Sir Harry Towers, has
     forsaken his place in Hertfordshire, and his hunting stable, and has gone on the continent for
     a twelvemonths' tour."
Miss Audley flushed up suddenly at the mention of her old adorer, but recovered herself very
     quickly.
"He has gone on the continent, has he?" she said indifferently. "He told me that he meant to
     do so—if—if he didn't have everything his own way. Poor fellow! he's a dear, good-hearted,
     stupid creature, and twenty times better than that peripatetic, patent refrigerator, Mr. Robert
     Audley."
"I wish, Alicia, you were not so fond of ridiculing Bob," Sir Michael said, gravely. "Bob is
     a good fellow, and I'm as fond of him as if he'd been my own son; and—and—I've been very
     uncomfortable about him lately. He has changed very much within the last few days, and he has
     taken all sorts of absurd ideas into his head, and my lady has alarmed me about him. She
     thinks—"
Lady Audley interrupted her husband with a grave shake of her head.
"It is better not to say too much about it as yet awhile," she said; "Alicia knows what I
     think."
"Yes," replied Miss Audley, "my lady thinks that Bob is going mad, but I know better than
     that. He's not at all the sort of person to go mad. How should such a sluggish ditch-pond of an
     intellect as his ever work itself into a tempest? He may move about for the rest of his life,
     perhaps, in a tranquil state of semi-idiotcy, imperfectly comprehending who he is, and where
     he's going, and what he's doing—but he'll never go mad."
Sir Michael did not reply to this. He had been very much disturbed by his conversation with
     my lady on the previous evening, and had silently debated the painful question, in his mind
     ever since.
His wife—the woman he best loved and most believed in—had told him, with all appearance of
     regret and agitation, her conviction of his nephew's insanity. He tried in vain to arrive at
     the conclusion he wished most ardently to attain; he tried in vain to think that my lady was
     misled by her own fancies, and had no foundation for what she said. But then, again, it
     suddenly flashed upon him, that to think this was to arrive at a worse conclusion; it was to
     transfer the horrible suspicion from his nephew to his wife. She appeared to be possessed with
     an actual conviction of Robert's insanity. To imagine her wrong was to imagine some weakness in
     her own mind. The longer he thought of the subject the more it harassed and perplexed him. It
     was most certain that the young man had always been eccentric. He was sensible, he was
     tolerably clever, he was honorable and gentlemanlike in feeling, though perhaps a little
     careless in the performance of certain minor social duties; but there were some slight
     differences, not easily to be defined, that separated him from other men of his age and
     position. Then, again, it was equally true that he had very much changed within the period that
     had succeeded the disappearance of George Talboys. He had grown moody and thoughtful,
     melancholy and absent-minded. He had held himself aloof from society, had sat for hours without
     speaking; had talked at other points by fits and starts; and had excited himself unusually in
     the discussion of subjects which apparently lay far out of the region of his own life and
     interests. Then there was even another region which seemed to strengthen my lady's case against
     this unhappy young man. He had been brought up in the frequent society of his cousin,
     Alicia—his pretty, genial cousin—to whom interest, and one would have thought affection,
     naturally pointed as his most fitting bride. More than this, the girl had shown him, in the
     innocent guilelessness of a transparent nature, that on her side at least, affection was not
     wanting; and yet, in spite of all this, he had held himself aloof, and had allowed others to
     propose for her hand, and to be rejected by her, and had still made no sign.
Now love is so very subtle an essence, such an indefinable metaphysical marvel, that its due
     force, though very cruelly felt by the sufferer himself, is never clearly understood by those
     who look on at its torments and wonder why he takes the common fever so badly. Sir Michael
     argued that because Alicia was a pretty girl and an amiable girl it was therefore extraordinary
     and unnatural in Robert Audley not to have duly fallen in love with her. This baronet, who
     close upon his sixtieth birthday, had for the first time encountered that one woman who out of
     all the women in the world had power to quicken the pulses of his heart, wondered why Robert
     failed to take the fever from the first breath of contagion that blew toward him. He forgot
     that there are men who go their ways unscathed amidst legions of lovely and generous women, to
     succumb at last before some harsh-featured virago, who knows the secret of that only philter
     which can intoxicate and bewitch him. He had forgot that there are certain Jacks who go through
     life without meeting the Jill appointed for them by Nemesis, and die old bachelors, perhaps,
     with poor Jill pining an old maid upon the other side of the party-wall. He forgot that love,
     which is a madness, and a scourge, and a fever, and a delusion, and a snare, is also a mystery,
     and very imperfectly understood by everyone except the individual sufferer who writhes under
     its tortures. Jones, who is wildly enamored of Miss Brown, and who lies awake at night until he
     loathes his comfortable pillow and tumbles his sheets into two twisted rags of linen in his
     agonies, as if he were a prisoner and wanted to wind them into impromptu ropes; this same Jones
     who thinks Russell Square a magic place because his divinity inhabits it, who thinks the trees
     in that inclosure and the sky above it greener and bluer than other trees or sky, and who feels
     a pang, yes, an actual pang, of mingled hope, and joy, and expectation, and terror, when he
     emerges from Guilford street, descending from the hights of Islington, into those sacred
     precincts; this very Jones is hard and callous toward the torments of Smith, who adores Miss
     Robinson, and cannot imagine what the infatuated fellow can see in the girl. So it was with Sir
     Michael Audley. He looked at his nephew as a sample of a very large class of young men, and his
     daughter as a sample of an equally extensive class of feminine goods, and could not see why the
     two samples should not make a very respectable match. He ignored all those infinitesimal
     differences in nature which make the wholesome food of one man the deadly poison of another.
     How difficult it is to believe sometimes that a man doesn't like such and such a favorite dish.
     If at a dinner-party, a meek looking guest refuses early salmon and cucumbers, or green peas in
     February, we set him down as a poor relation whose instincts warn him off those expensive
     plates. If an alderman were to declare that he didn't like green fat, he would be looked upon
     as a social martyr, a Marcus Curtius of the dinner-table, who immolated himself for the benefit
     of his kind. His fellow-aldermen would believe in anything rather than an heretical distaste
     for the city ambrosia of the soup tureen. But there are people who dislike salmon, and
     white-bait, and spring ducklings, and all manner of old-established delicacies, and there are
     other people who affect eccentric and despicable dishes, generally stigmatized as nasty.
Alas, my pretty Alicia, your cousin did not love you! He admired your rosy English face, and
     had a tender affection for you which might perhaps have expanded by-and-by into something warm
     enough for matrimony, that every-day jog-trot species of union which demands no very passionate
     devotion, but for a sudden check which it had received in Dorsetshire. Yes, Robert Audley's
     growing affection for his cousin, a plant of very slow growth, I am fain to confess, had been
     suddenly dwarfed and stunted upon that bitter February day on which he had stood beneath the
     pine-trees talking to Clara Talboys. Since that day the young man had experienced an unpleasant
     sensation in thinking of poor Alicia. He looked at her as being in some vague manner an
     incumbrance upon the freedom of his thoughts; he had a haunting fear that he was in some tacit
     way pledged to her; that she had a species of claim upon him, which forbade to him the right of
     thinking of another woman. I believe it was the image of Miss Audley presented to him in this
     light that goaded the young barrister into those outbursts of splenetic rage against the female
     sex which he was liable to at certain times. He was strictly honorable, so honorable that he
     would rather have immolated himself upon the altar of truth and Alicia than have done her the
     remotest wrong, though by so doing he might have secured his own comfort and happiness.
"If the poor little girl loves me," he thought, "and if she thinks that I love her, and has
     been led to think so by any word or act of mine, I'm in duty bound to let her think so to the
     end of time, and to fulfill any tacit promise which I may have unconsciously made. I thought
     once—I meant once to—to make her an offer by-and-by when this horrible mystery about George
     Talboys should have been cleared up and everything peacefully settled—but now—"
His thoughts would ordinarily wander away at this point of his reflections, carrying him
     where he never had intended to go; carrying him back under the pine-trees in Dorsetshire, and
     setting him once more face to face with the sister of his missing friend, and it was generally
     a very laborious journey by which he traveled back to the point from which he strayed. It was
     so difficult for him to tear himself away from the stunted turf and the pine-trees.
"Poor little girl!" he would think on coming back to Alicia. "How good it is of her to love
     me, and how grateful ought I to be for her tenderness. How many fellows would think such a
     generous, loving heart the highest boon that earth could give them. There's Sir Harry Towers
     stricken with despair at his rejection. He would give me half his estate, all his estate, twice
     his estate, if he had it, to be in the shoes which I am anxious to shake off my ungrateful
     feet. Why don't I love her? Why is it that although I know her to be pretty, and pure, and
     good, and truthful, I don't love her? Her image never haunts me, except reproachfully. I never
     see her in my dreams. I never wake up suddenly in the dead of the night with her eyes shining
     upon me and her warm breath upon my cheek, or with the fingers of her soft hand clinging to
     mine. No, I'm not in love with her, I can't fall in love with her."
He raged and rebelled against his ingratitude. He tried to argue himself into a passionate
     attachment for his cousin, but he failed ignominiously, and the more he tried to think of
     Alicia the more he thought of Clara Talboys. I am speaking now of his feelings in the period
     that elapsed between his return from Dorsetshire and his visit to Grange Heath.
Sir Michael sat by the library fire after breakfast upon this wretched rainy morning, writing
     letters and reading the newspapers. Alicia shut herself in her own apartment to read the third
     volume of a novel. Lady Audley locked the door of the octagon ante-chamber, and roamed up and
     down the suite of rooms from the bedroom to the boudoir all through that weary morning.
She had locked the door to guard against the chance of any one coming in suddenly and
     observing her before she was aware—before she had had sufficient warning to enable her to face
     their scrutiny. Her pale face seemed to grow paler as the morning advanced. A tiny
     medicine-chest was open upon the dressing-table, and little stoppered bottles of red lavender,
     sal-volatile, chloroform, chlorodyne, and ether were scattered about. Once my lady paused
     before this medicine-chest, and took out the remaining bottles, half-absently, perhaps, until
     she came to one which was filled with a thick, dark liquid, and labeled "opium—poison."
She trifled a long time with this last bottle; holding it up to the light, and even removing
     the stopper and smelling the sickly liquid. But she put it from her suddenly with a shudder.
     "If I could!" she muttered, "if I could only do it! And yet why should I now?"
She clinched her small hands as she uttered the last words, and walked to the window of the
     dressing-room, which looked straight toward that ivied archway under which any one must come
     who came from Mount Stanning to the Court.
There were smaller gates in the gardens which led into the meadows behind the Court, but
     there was no other way of coming from Mount Stanning or Brentwood than by the principal
     entrance.
The solitary hand of the clock over the archway was midway between one and two when my lady
     looked at it.
"How slow the time is," she said, wearily; "how slow, how slow! Shall I grow old like this, I
     wonder, with every minute of my life seeming like an hour?"
She stood for a few minutes watching the archway, but no one passed under it while she
     looked, and she turned impatiently away from the window to resume her weary wandering about the
     rooms.
Whatever fire that had been which had reflected itself vividly in the black sky, no tidings
     of it had as yet come to Audley Court. The day was miserably wet and windy, altogether the very
     last day upon which even the most confirmed idler and gossip would care to venture out. It was
     not a market-day, and there were therefore very few passengers upon the road between Brentwood
     and Chelmsford, so that as yet no news of the fire, which had occurred in the dead of the
     wintry night, had reached the village of Audley, or traveled from the village to the Court.
The girl with the rose-colored ribbons came to the door of the anteroom to summon her
     mistress to luncheon, but Lady Audley only opened the door a little way, and intimated her
     intention of taking no luncheon.
"My head aches terribly, Martin," she said; "I shall go and lie down till dinner-time. You
     may come at five to dress me."
Lady Audley said this with the predetermination of dressing at four, and thus dispensing with
     the services of her attendant. Among all privileged spies, a lady's-maid has the highest
     privileges; it is she who bathes Lady Theresa's eyes with eau-de-cologne after her ladyship's
     quarrel with the colonel; it is she who administers sal-volatile to Miss Fanny when Count
     Beaudesert, of the Blues, has jilted her. She has a hundred methods for the finding out of her
     mistress' secrets. She knows by the manner in which her victim jerks her head from under the
     hair-brush, or chafes at the gentlest administration of the comb, what hidden tortures are
     racking her breast—what secret perplexities are bewildering her brain. That well-bred attendant
     knows how to interpret the most obscure diagnosis of all mental diseases that can afflict her
     mistress; she knows when the ivory complexion is bought and paid for—when the pearly teeth are
     foreign substances fashioned by the dentist—when the glossy plaits are the relics of the dead,
     rather than the property of the living; and she knows other and more sacred secrets than these;
     she knows when the sweet smile is more false than Madame Levison's enamel, and far less
     enduring—when the words that issue from between gates of borrowed pearl are more disguised and
     painted than the lips which help to shape them—when the lovely fairy of the ball-room re-enters
     the dressing-room after the night's long revelry, and throws aside her voluminous burnous and
     her faded bouquet, and drops her mask, and like another Cinderella loses the glass-slipper, by
     whose glitter she has been distinguished, and falls back into her rags and dirt, the lady's
     maid is by to see the transformation. The valet who took wages from the prophet of Korazin must
     have seen his master sometimes unveiled, and must have laughed in his sleeve at the folly of
     the monster's worshipers.
Lady Audley had made no confidante of her new maid, and on this day of all others
     she wished to be alone.
She did lie down; she cast herself wearily upon the luxurious sofa in the dressing-room, and
     buried her face in the down pillows and tried to sleep. Sleep!—she had almost forgotten what it
     was, that tender restorer of tired nature, it seemed so long now since she had slept. It was
     only about eight-and-forty hours perhaps, but it appeared an intolerable time. Her fatigue of
     the night before, and her unnatural excitement, had worn her out at last. She did fall asleep;
     she fell into a heavy slumber that was almost like stupor. She had taken a few drops out of the
     opium bottle in a glass of water before lying down.
The clock over the mantelpiece chimed the quarter before four as she woke suddenly and
     started up, with the cold perspiration breaking out in icy drops upon her forehead. She had
     dreamt that every member of the household was clamoring at the door, eager to tell her of a
     dreadful fire that had happened in the night.
There was no sound but the flapping of the ivy-leaves against the glass, the occasional
     falling of a cinder, and the steady ticking of the clock.
"Perhaps I shall be always dreaming these sort of dreams," my lady thought, "until the terror
     of them kills me!"
The rain had ceased, and the cold spring sunshine was glittering upon the windows. Lady
     Audley dressed herself rapidly but carefully. I do not say that even in her supremest hour of
     misery she still retained her pride in her beauty. It was not so; she looked upon that beauty
     as a weapon, and she felt that she had now double need to be well armed. She dressed herself in
     her most gorgeous silk, a voluminous robe of silvery, shimmering blue, that made her look as if
     she had been arrayed in moonbeams. She shook out her hair into feathery showers of glittering
     gold, and, with a cloak of white cashmere about her shoulders, went down-stairs into the
     vestibule.
She opened the door of the library and looked in. Sir Michael Audley was asleep in his
     easy-chair. As my lady softly closed this door Alicia descended the stairs from her own room.
     The turret door was open, and the sun was shining upon the wet grass-plat in the quadrangle.
     The firm gravel-walks were already very nearly dry, for the rain had ceased for upward of two
     hours.
"Will you take a walk with me in the quadrangle?" Lady Audley asked as her step-daughter
     approached. The armed neutrality between the two women admitted of any chance civility such as
     this.
"Yes, if you please, my lady," Alicia answered, rather listlessly. "I have been yawning over
     a stupid novel all the morning, and shall be very glad of a little fresh air."
Heaven help the novelist whose fiction Miss Audley had been perusing, if he had no better
     critics than that young lady. She had read page after page without knowing what she had been
     reading, and had flung aside the volume half a dozen times to go to the window and watch for
     that visitor whom she had so confidently expected.
Lady Audley led the way through the low doorway and on to the smooth gravel drive, by which
     carriages approached the house. She was still very pale, but the brightness of her dress and of
     her feathery golden ringlets, distracted an observer's eyes from her pallid face. All mental
     distress is, with some show of reason, associated in our minds with loose, disordered garments
     and dishabilled hair, and an appearance in every way the reverse of my lady's. Why had she come
     out into the chill sunshine of that March afternoon to wander up and down that monotonous
     pathway with the step-daughter she hated? She came because she was under the dominion of a
     horrible restlessness, which, would not suffer her to remain within the house waiting for
     certain tidings which she knew must too surely come. At first she had wished to ward them
     off—at first she had wished that strange convulsions of nature might arise to hinder their
     coming—that abnormal winter lightnings might wither and destroy the messenger who carried
     them—that the ground might tremble and yawn beneath his hastening feet, and that impassable
     gulfs might separate the spot from which the tidings were to come and the place to which they
     were to be carried. She wished that the earth might stand still, and the paralyzed elements
     cease from their natural functions, that the progress of time might stop, that the Day of
     Judgment might come, and that she might thus be brought before an unearthly tribunal, and so
     escape the intervening shame and misery of any earthly judgment. In the wild chaos of her
     brain, every one of these thoughts had held its place, and in her short slumber on the sofa in
     her dressing-room she had dreamed all these things and a hundred other things, all bearing upon
     the same subject. She had dreamed that a brook, a tiny streamlet when she first saw it, flowed
     across the road between Mount Stanning and Audley, and gradually swelled into a river, and from
     a river became an ocean, till the village on the hill receded far away out of sight and only a
     great waste of waters rolled where it once had been. She dreamt that she saw the messenger, now
     one person, now another, but never any probable person, hindered by a hundred hinderances, now
     startling and terrible, now ridiculous and trivial, but never either natural or probable; and
     going down into the quiet house with the memory of these dreams strong upon her, she had been
     bewildered by the stillness which had betokened that the tidings had not yet come.
And now her mind underwent a complete change. She no longer wished to delay the dreaded
     intelligence. She wished the agony, whatever it was to be, over and done with, the pain
     suffered, and the release attained. It seemed to her as if the intolerable day would never come
     to an end, as if her mad wishes had been granted, and the progress of time had actually
     stopped.
"What a long day it has been!" exclaimed Alicia, as if taking up the burden of my lady's
     thoughts; "nothing but drizzle and mist and wind! And now that it's too late for anybody to go
     out, it must needs be fine," the young lady added, with an evident sense of injury.
Lady Audley did not answer. She was looking at the stupid one-handed clock, and waiting for
     the news which must come sooner or later, which could not surely fail to come very
     speedily.
"They have been afraid to come and tell him," she thought; "they have been afraid to break
     the news to Sir Michael. Who will come to tell it, at last, I wonder? The rector of Mount
     Stanning, perhaps, or the doctor; some important person at least."
If she could have gone out into the leafless avenues, or onto the high road beyond them; if
     she could have gone so far as that hill upon which she had so lately parted with Phoebe, she
     would have gladly done so. She would rather have suffered anything than that slow suspense,
     that corroding anxiety, that metaphysical dryrot in which heart and mind seemed to decay under
     an insufferable torture. She tried to talk, and by a painful effort contrived now and then to
     utter some commonplace remark. Under any ordinary circumstances her companion would have
     noticed her embarrassment, but Miss Audley, happening to be very much absorbed by her own
     vexations, was quite as well inclined to be silent as my lady herself. The monotonous walk up
     and down the graveled pathway suited Alicia's humor. I think that she even took a malicious
     pleasure in the idea that she was very likely catching cold, and that her Cousin Robert was
     answerable for her danger. If she could have brought upon herself inflammation of the lungs, or
     ruptured blood-vessels, by that exposure to the chill March atmosphere, I think she would have
     felt a gloomy satisfaction in her sufferings.
"Perhaps Robert might care for me, if I had inflammation of the lungs," she thought. "He
     couldn't insult me by calling me a bouncer then. Bouncers don't have inflammation of the
     lungs."
I believe she drew a picture of herself in the last stage of consumption, propped up by
     pillows in a great easy-chair, looking out of a window in the afternoon sunshine, with medicine
     bottles, a bunch of grapes and a Bible upon a table by her side, and with Robert, all
     contrition and tenderness, summoned to receive her farewell blessing. She preached a whole
     chapter to him in that parting benediction, talking a great deal longer than was in keeping
     with her prostrate state, and very much enjoying her dismal castle in the air. Employed in this
     sentimental manner, Miss Audley took very little notice of her step-mother, and the one hand of
     the blundering clock had slipped to six by the time Robert had been blessed and dismissed.
"Good gracious me!" she cried, suddenly—"six o'clock, and I'm not dressed."
The half-hour bell rung in a cupola upon the roof while Alicia was speaking.
"I must go in, my lady," she said. "Won't you come?"
"Presently," answered Lady Audley. "I'm dressed, you see."
Alicia ran off, but Sir Michael's wife still lingered in the quadrangle, still waited for
     those tidings which were so long coming.
It was nearly dark. The blue mists of evening had slowly risen from the ground. The flat
     meadows were filled with a gray vapor, and a stranger might have fancied Audley Court a castle
     on the margin of a sea. Under the archway the shadows of fastcoming night lurked darkly, like
     traitors waiting for an opportunity to glide stealthily into the quadrangle. Through the
     archway a patch of cold blue sky glimmered faintly, streaked by one line of lurid crimson, and
     lighted by the dim glitter of one wintry-looking star. Not a creature was stirring in the
     quadrangle but the restless woman who paced up and down the straight pathways, listening for a
     footstep whose coming was to strike terror to her soul. She heard it at last!—a footstep in the
     avenue upon the other side of the archway. But was it the footstep? Her sense of hearing, made
     unnaturally acute by excitement, told her that it was a man's footstep—told even more, that it
     was the tread of a gentleman, no slouching, lumbering pedestrian in hobnailed boots, but a
     gentleman who walked firmly and well.
Every sound fell like a lump of ice upon my lady's heart. She could not wait, she could not
     contain herself, she lost all self-control, all power of endurance, all capability of
     self-restraint, and she rushed toward the archway.
She paused beneath its shadow, for the stranger was close upon her. She saw him, oh, God! she
     saw him in that dim evening light. Her brain reeled, her heart stopped beating. She uttered no
     cry of surprise, no exclamation of terror, but staggered backward and clung for support to the
     ivied buttress of the archway. With her slender figure crouched into the angle formed by the
     buttress and the wall which it supported, she stood staring at the new-comer.
As he approached her more closely her knees sunk under her, and she dropped to the ground,
     not fainting, or in any manner unconscious, but sinking into a crouching attitude, and still
     crushed into the angle of the wall, as if she would have made a tomb for herself in the shadow
     of that sheltering brickwork.
"My lady!"
The speaker was Robert Audley. He whose bedroom door she had double-locked seventeen hours
     before at the Castle Inn.
"What is the matter with you?" he said, in a strange, constrained manner. "Get up, and let me
     take you indoors."
He assisted her to rise, and she obeyed him very submissively. He took her arm in his strong
     hand and led her across the quadrangle and into the lamp-lit hall. She shivered more violently
     than he had ever seen any woman shiver before, but she made no attempt at resistance to his
     will.
</div></body></text></TEI>