<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Hard Cash, by Charles Reade</title><author>Reade, Charles (1814-1884).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="17">
CHAPTER XVI
SKINNER—called “young” because he had once had a father on the premises—was the mole-catcher.
     The feelings with which he had now for some months watched his master grubbing were curiously
     mingled. There was the grim sense of superiority every successful detective feels as he sees
     the watched one working away unconscious of the eye that is on him; but this was more than
     balanced by a long habit of obsequious reverence. When A. has been looking up to B. for thirty
     years, he cannot look down on him all of a sudden, merely because he catches him falsifying
     accounts. Why, Man is a cooking animal: bankrupt Man especially.
And then Richard Hardie overpowered Skinner's senses: he was Dignity in person: he was six
     feet two, and always wore a black surtout buttoned high, and a hat with a brim a little broader
     than his neighbours', yet not broad enough to be eccentric or slang. He moved down the street
     touching his hat—while other hats were lifted high to him—a walking volume of cash. And when he
     took off this ebon crown and sat in the bank parlour, he gained in appearance more than he
     lost; for then his whole head was seen, long, calm, majestic: that senatorial front and
     furrowed face overawed all comers. Even the little sharp-faced clerk would stand and peep at
     it, utterly puzzled between what he knew and what he eyed: nor could he look at that head and
     face without excusing them. What a lot of money they must have sunk before they came down to
     fabricating a balance-sheet!
And by-and-bye custom somewhat blunted his sense of the dishonesty, and he began to criticise
     the thing arithmetically instead of morally. That view once admitted, he was charmed with the
     ability and subtlety of his dignified sharper; and so the mole-catcher began gradually, but
     effectually, to be corrupted by the mole. He who watches a dishonest process and does not stop
     it, is half way towards conniving: who connives, is half way towards abetting.
The next thing was, Skinner felt mortified at his master not trusting him. Did he think old
     Bob Skinner's son would blow on Hardie after all these years?
This rankled a little, and set him to console himself by admiring his own cleverness in
     penetrating this great distrustful man. Now of all sentiments, Vanity is the most restless and
     the surest to peep out. Skinner was no sooner inflated than his demure obsequious manner
     underwent a certain change: slight and occasional only; but Hardie was a subtle man, and the
     perilous path he was treading made him wonderfully watchful, suspicious, and sagacious. He said
     to himself, “What has come to Skinner? I must know.” So he quietly watched his watcher; and
     soon satisfied himself he suspected something amiss. From that hour Skinner was a doomed
     clerk.
It was two o'clock: Hardie had just arrived, and sat in the parlour, Cato-like, and
     cooking.
Skinner was in high spirits: it was owing to his presence of mind the bank had not been
     broken some hours ago by Maxley. So now, while concluding his work, he was enjoying by
     anticipation his employer's gratitude. “He can't hold aloof after this,” said Skinner; “he must
     honour me with his confidence. And I will deserve it. I do deserve it.”
A grave, calm, passionless voice invited him into the parlour.
He descended from his desk and went in, swelling with demure complacency.
He found Mr. Hardie seated garbling his accounts with surpassing dignity. The great man
     handed him an envelope, and cooked majestic on. A wave of that imperial hand, and Skinner had
     mingled with the past.
For know that the envelope contained three things: a cheque for a month's wages; a character;
     and a dismissal, very polite and equally peremptory.
Skinner stood paralysed: the complacency died out of his face, and rueful wonder came
     instead. It was some time before he could utter a word: at last he faltered, “Turn me away,
     sir? turn away Noah Skinner? Your father would never have said such a word to my
     father.” Skinner uttered this his first remonstrance in a voice trembling with awe, but
     gathered courage when he found he had done it, yet lived.
Mr. Hardie evaded his expostulation by a very simple means: he made no reply, but continued
     his work, dignified as Brutus, inexorable as Fate, cool as Cucumber.
Skinner's anger began to rise, he watched Mr. Hardie in silence, and said to himself, “Curse
     you! you were born without a heart!”
He waited, however, for some sign of relenting, and, hoping for it the water came into his
     own eyes. But Hardie was impassive as ice.
Then the little clerk, mortified to the core as well as wounded, ground his teeth and drew a
     little nearer to this incarnate Arithmetic, and said with an excess of obsequiousness, “Will
     you condescend to give me a reason for turning me away all in a moment after five-and-thirty
     years' faithful services?”
“Men of business do not deal in reasons,” was the cool reply: “it is enough for you that I
     give you an excellent character, and that we part good friends.”
“That we do not,” replied Skinner sharply: “if we stay together we are friends; but we part
     enemies, if we do part.”
“As you please, Mr. Skinner. I will detain you no longer.”
And Mr. Hardie waved him away so grandly that he started and almost ran to the door. When he
     felt the handle, it acted like a prop to his heart. He stood firm, and rage supplied the place
     of steady courage. He clung to the door, and whispered at his master—such a whisper: so loud,
     so cutting, so full of meaning and malice; it was like a serpent hissing at a man.
“But I'll give you a reason, a good reason, why you had better not insult me so
     cruel: and what is more, I'll give you two: and one is that but for me the bank must have
     closed this day at ten o'clock—ay, you may stare; it was I saved it, not you—and the other is
     that, if you make an enemy of me, you are done for. I know too much to be made an enemy of,
     sir—a great deal too much.”
At this Mr. Hardie raised his head from his book and eyed his crouching venomous assailant
     full in the face, majestically, as one can fancy a lion rearing his ponderous head, and looking
     lazily and steadily at a snake that has just hissed in a corner. Each word of Skinner's was a
     barbed icicle to him, yet not a muscle of his close countenance betrayed his inward
     suffering.
One thing, however, even he could not master: his blood; it retired from that stoical cheek
     to the chilled and foreboding heart; and the sudden pallor of the resolute face told Skinner
     his shafts had gone home. “Come, sir,” said he, affecting to mingle good fellowship with his
     defiance, “why bundle me off these premises, when you will be bundled off them yourself before
     the week is out?”
“You insolent scoundrel! Humph! Explain, Mr. Skinner.”
“Ah! what, have I warmed your marble up a bit? Yes, I'll explain. The bank is rotten, and
     can't last forty-eight hours.”
“Oh, indeed! blighted in a day—by the dismissal of Mr. Noah Skinner. Do not repeat that after
     you have been turned into the streets, or you will be indicted: at present we are confidential.
     Anything more before you quit the rotten bank?”
“Yes, sir, plenty. I'll tell you your own history, past, present, and to come. The road to
     riches is hard and rugged to the likes of me, but your good father made it smooth and easy to
     you, sir. You had only to take the money of a lot of fools that fancy they can't keep it
     themselves; invest it in Consols and Exchequer bills, live on half the profits, put by the
     rest, and roll in wealth. But this was too slow and too sure for you: you must be Rothschild in
     a day; so you went into blind speculation, and flung old Mr. Hardie's savings into a well. And
     now for the last eight months you have been doctoring the ledger”—Hardie winced just
     perceptibly—“You have put down our gains in white, our losses in black, and so you keep feeding
     your pocket-book and empty our tills; the pear will soon be ripe, and then you will let it
     drop, and into the Bankruptcy Court we go. But, what you forget, fraudulent bankruptcy isn't
     the turnpike way of trade: it is a broad road, but a crooked one: skirts the prison wall, sir,
     and sights the herring-pond.”
An agony went across Mr. Hardie's great face, and seemed to furrow as it ran.
“Not but what you are all right, sir,” resumed his little cat-like tormentor, letting him go
     a little way, to nail him again by-and-bye: “You have cooked the books in time: and Cocker was
     a fool to you. 'Twill be all down in black and white. Great sacrifices: no reserve: creditors
     take everything; dividend fourpence in the pound, furniture of house and bank, Mrs. Hardie's
     portrait, and down to the coalscuttle. Bankrupt saves nothing but his honour, and—the six
     thousand pounds or so he has stitched into his old great-coat: hands his new one to the
     official assignees, like an honest man.”
Hardie uttered something between a growl and a moan.
“Now comes the per contra: poor little despised Noah Skinner has kept genuine books while you
     have been preparing false ones. I took the real figures home every afternoon on loose leaves,
     and bound 'em: and very curious they will read in court alongside of yours. I did it for
     amusement o' nights: I'm so solitary, and so fond of figures. I must try and turn them to
     profit; for I'm out of place now in my old age. Dearee me! how curious that you should go and
     pick out me of all men to turn into the street—like a dog—like a dog—like a dog.”
Hardie turned his head away; and in that moment of humiliation and abject fear, drank all the
     bitterness of moral death.
His manhood urged him to defy Skinner and return to the straight path, cost what it might.
     But how could he? His own books were all falsified. He could place a true total before
     his creditors by simply adding the contents of his secret hoard to the assets of the Bank; but
     with this true arithmetical result he could not square his books, except by conjectural and
     fabricated details, which would be detected, and send him to prison; for who would believe he
     was lying in figures only to get back to the truth? No, he had entangled himself in his own
     fraud, and was at the mercy of his servant. He took his line. “Skinner, it was your interest to
     leave me whilst the bank stood; then you would have got a place directly; but since you take
     umbrage at my dismissing you for your own good, I must punish you—by keeping you.”
“I am quite ready to stay and serve you, sir,” replied Skinner hastily “and as for my angry
     words, think no more of them! It went to my heart to be turned away at the very time you need
     me most.”
(“Hypocritical rogue!” thought Hardie.) “That is true, Skinner,” said he; “I do indeed need a
     faithful and sympathising servant, to advise, support, and aid me. Ask yourself whether any man
     in England needs a confidant more than I. It was bitter at first to be discovered even by you:
     but now I am glad you know all; for I see I have undervalued your ability as well as your
     zeal.”
Thus Mr. Hardie bowed his pride to flatter Skinner, and soon saw by the little fellow's
     heightened colour that this was the way to make him a clerk of wax.
The banker and his clerk were reconciled. Then the latter was invited to commit himself by
     carrying on the culinary process in his own hand. He trembled a little, but complied, and so
     became an accomplice. On this his master took him into his confidence, and told him everything
     it was impossible to hide from him.
“And now, sir,” said Skinner, “let me tell you what I did for you this morning. Then perhaps
     you won't wonder at my being so peppery. Maxley suspects: he came here and drew out
     every shilling. I was all in a perspiration what to do. But I put a good face on, and——”
Skinner then confided to his principal how he had evaded Maxley and saved the Bank; and the
     stratagem seemed so incredible and droll, that they both laughed over it long and loud. And in
     fact it turned out a first-rate practical jest: cost two lives.
While they were laughing, the young clerk looked in and said, “Captain Dodd, to speak with
     you, sir!”
“Captain Dodd!!!” And all Mr. Hardie's forced merriment died away, and his face betrayed his
     vexation for once. “Did you go and tell him I was here?”
“Yes, sir: I had no orders; and he said you would be sure to see him.”
“Unfortunate! Well, you may show him in when I ring your bell.”
The youngster being gone, Mr. Hardie explained to his new ally in a few hurried words the
     danger that threatened him from Miss Julia Dodd. “And now,” said he, “the women have sent her
     father to soften his. I shall be told his girl will die if she can't have my boy, etc. As if
     I care who lives or dies.”
On this Skinner got up all in a hurry and offered to go into the office.
“On no account,” said Mr. Hardie sharply. “I shall make my business with you the excuse for
     cutting this love-nonsense mighty short. Take your book to the desk, and seem buried in
     it.”
He then touched the bell, and both confederates fell into an attitude: never were a pair so
     bent over their little accounts—lies, like themselves.
Instead of the heart-broken father their comedy awaited, in came the gallant sailor with a
     brown cheek reddened by triumph and excitement and almost shouted in a genial jocund voice,
     “How d'ye do sir? It is a long time since I came across your hawse.” And with this he held out
     his hand cordially. Hardie gave his mechanically, and remained on his guard, but somewhat
     puzzled. Dodd shook his cold hand heartily. “Well, sir, here I am, just come ashore, and
     visiting you before my very wife; what d'ye think of that?”
“I am highly honoured, sir,” said Hardie: then, rather stiffly and incredulously, “and to
     what may I owe this extraordinary preference? Will you be good enough to state the purport of
     this visit—briefly—as Mr. Skinner and I are much occupied?”
“The purport? Why, what does one come to a banker about? I have got a lot of money I want to
     get rid of.”
Hardie stared, but was as much on his guard as ever; only more and more puzzled.
Then David winked at him with simple cunning, took out his knife, undid his shirt, and began
     to cut the threads which bound the Cash to his flannel.
At this Skinner wheeled round on his stool to look, and both he and Mr. Hardie inspected the
     unusual pantomime with demure curiosity.
Dodd next removed the oilskin cover, and showed the pocket-book, brought it down with a
     triumphant smack on the hollow of his hand, and, in the pride of his heart, the joy of his
     bosom and the fever of his blood—for there were two red spots on his cheek all the time—told
     the cold pair Its adventures in a few glowing words: the Calcutta firm—the two pirates—the
     hurricane—the wreck—the land-sharks—he had saved it from. “And here It is, safe in spite of
     them all. But I won't carry It on me any more: it is unlucky; so you must be so good as to take
     charge of It for me, sir.”
“Very well, Captain Dodd. You wish it placed to Mrs. Dodd's account, I suppose?”
“No! no! I have nothing to do with that: this is between you and me.”
“As you please.”
“Ye see it is a good lump, sir.”
“Oh, indeed!” said Hardie a little sneeringly.
“I call it a thundering lot o' money. But I suppose it is not much to a rich banker like
     you.” Then he lowered his voice, and said with a certain awe: “It's—fourteen—thousand
     pounds.”
“Fourteen thousand pounds!!!” cried Hardie. Then with sudden and consummate coolness, “Why,
     certainly an established bank like this deals with more considerable deposits than that.
     Skinner, why don't you give the Captain a chair?”
“No! no!” said Dodd. “I'll heave-to till I get this off my mind, but I won't anchor anywhere
     but at home.” He then opened the pocket-book and spread the contents out before Mr. Hardie, who
     ran over the notes and bills, and said the amount was 14,010,l. 12s. 6d.
Dodd asked for a receipt.
“Why, it is not usual when there is an account.”
Dodd's countenance fell: “Oh, I should not like to part with it unless I had a receipt.”
“You mistake me,” said Hardie with a smile. “An entry in your banker's book is a receipt.
     However, you can have one in another form.” He then unlocked a desk, took out a banker's
     receipt; and told Skinner to fill it in. This done, he seemed to be absorbed in some more
     important matter.
Skinner counted the notes and left them with Mr. Hardie; the bills he took to his desk to
     note them on the back of the receipt. Whilst he was writing this with his usual slowness and
     precision, poor Dodd's heart overflowed. “It is my children's fortune, ye see: I don't look on
     a sixpence of it as mine: that it is what made me so particular. It belongs to my little Julia,
     bless her:—she is a rosebud if ever there was one; and oh! such a heart; and so fond of her
     poor father; but not fonder than he is of her—and to my dear boy Edward; he is the honestest
     young chap you ever saw: what he says, you may swear to with your eyes shut. But how could they
     miss either good looks or good hearts, and her children? the best wife and the best
     mother in England. She has been a true consort to me this many a year, and I to her, in deep
     water and shoal, let the wind blow high or low. Here is a Simple Simon vaunting his own flesh
     and blood! No wonder that little gentleman there is grinning at me. Well, grin away, lad!
     perhaps you haven't got any children. But you have, sir: and you know how it is with us
     fathers; our hearts are so full of the little darlings, out it must come. You can understand
     how joyful I feel at saving their fortune from land-sharks and sea-sharks, and landing it safe
     in an honest man's hands like you and your father before you.”
Skinner handed him the receipt.
He cast his eye over it. “All right, little gentleman. Now my heart is relieved of such a
     weight: I feel to have just cleared out a cargo of bricks. Good-bye: shake hands. I wish you
     were as happy as I am. I wish all the world was happy. God bless you! God bless you both!”
And with this burst he was out of the room and making ardently for Albion Villa.
The banker and his clerk turned round on their seats and eyed one another a long time in
     silence and amazement. Was this thing a dream? their faces seemed to ask. Then Mr. Hardie
     rested his senatorial head on his hand and pondered deeply. Skinner too reflected on this
     strange freak of Fortune: and the result was that he burst in on his principal's reverie with a
     joyful shout: “The bank is saved! Hardie's is good for another hundred years.”
The banker started, for Skinner's voice sounded like a pistol-shot in his ear, so high strung
     was he with thought.
“Hush! hush!” he said, and pondered again in silence. At last he turned to Skinner. “You
     think our course is plain? I tell you it is so dark and complicated it would puzzle Solomon to
     know what is best to be done.”
“Save the bank, sir, whatever you do.”
“How can I save the bank with a few thousand pounds, which I must refund when called on? You
     look keenly into what is under your eye, Skinner, but you cannot see a yard beyond your nose.
     Let me think.”
After a while he took a sheet of paper, and jotted down “the materials,” as he called them,
     and read them out to his accomplice:—
“1. A bank too far gone to be redeemed. If I throw this money into it, I shall ruin Captain
     Dodd, and do myself no good, but only my creditors.
“2. Miss Julia Dodd, virtual proprietor of this 14,000,l. or of the greater part, if I
     choose. The child that marries first usually jockeys the other.
“3. Alfred Hardie, my son, and my creditor, deep in love with No. 2, and at present somewhat
     alienated from me by my thwarting a silly love affair; which bids fair to improve into a sound
     negotiation.
“4. The 14,000l. paid to me personally after banking hours, and not entered on the banking
     books, nor known but to you and me.
“Now suppose I treat this advance as a personal trust? The bank breaks: the money disappears.
     Consternation of the Dodds, who, until enlightened by the public settlement, will think it has
     gone into the well.
“In that interval I talk Alfred over, and promise to produce the L.14,000 intact, with my
     paternal blessing on him and Miss Dodd, provided he will release me from my debt to him, and
     give me a life interest in half the money settled on him by my wife's father, to my most unjust
     and insolent exclusion. Their passion will soon bring the young people to reason, and then they
     will soon melt the old ones.”
Skinner was struck with this masterly little sketch. But he detected one fatal flaw: “You
     don't say what is to become of me.”
“Oh, I haven't thought of that yet.”
“But do think of it, sir, that I may have the pleasure of co-operating. It would never do for
     you and me to be pulling two ways, you know.”
“I will not forget you,” said Hardie, wincing under the chain this little wretch held him
     with, and had jerked him by way of reminder.
“But surely, Skinner, you agree with me it would be a sin and a shame to rob this honest
     captain of his money—for my creditors—curse them! Ah! you are not a father. How quickly he
     found that out! Well, I am, and he touched me to the quick. I love my little Jane as dearly as
     he loves his Julia, every bit: and I feel for him. And then he put me in mind of my
     own father, poor man. That seems strange, doesn't it? a sailor and a banker. Ah! it was because
     they were both honest men. Yes, it was like a wholesome flower coming into a close room, and
     then out again and heaving a whiff behind was that sailor. He left the savour of Probity and
     Simplicity behind, though he took the things themselves away again. Why, why couldn't he leave
     us what is more wanted here than even his money? His integrity: the pearl of price, that my
     father, whom I used to sneer at, carried to his grave; and died simple, but wise; honest, but
     rich—rich in money, in credit, in honour, and eternal hopes. Oh, Skinner! Skinner! I wish I had
     never been born.”
Skinner was surprised: he was not aware that intelligent men who sin are subject to fits of
     remorse. Nay, more, he was frightened; for the emotion of this iron man, so hard to move, was
     overpowering when it came: it did not soften, it convulsed him.
“Don't talk so, sir,” said the little clerk. “Keep up your heart! Have a drop of
     something.”
“You are right,” said Mr. Hardie gloomily; “it is idle to talk: we are all the slaves of
     circumstances.”
With this, he unlocked a safe that stood against the wall, chucked the 14,000l. in, and
     shammed the iron door sharply; and, as it closed upon the Cash with a clang, the parlour door
     burst open as if by concert, and David Dodd stood on the threshold, looking terrible. His ruddy
     colour was all gone, and he seemed black and white with anger and anxiety; and out of this
     blanched yet lowering face his eyes glowed like coals, and roved keenly to and fro between the
     banker and the clerk.
A thunder-cloud of a man.
</div></body></text></TEI>