<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Hard Cash, by Charles Reade</title><author>Reade, Charles (1814-1884).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="50">
CHAPTER XLVIII.
No life was ever yet a play: I mean, an unbroken sequence of dramatic incidents. Calms will
     come; unfortunately for the readers, happily for the read. And I remember seeing it objected to
     novelists, by a young gentleman just putting his foot for the first time into “Criticism,” that
     the writers aforesaid suppress the small intermediate matters which in real life come by the
     score between each brilliant event: and so present the ordinary and the extraordinary parts of
     life in false proportions. Now, if this remark had been offered by way of contrast between
     events themselves and all mortal attempts to reproduce them upon paper or the stage, it would
     have been philosophical; but it was a strange error to denounce the practice as distinctive of
     fiction: for it happens to be the one trait the novelist and dramatist have in common with the
     evangelist. The Gospels skip fifteen years of the most interesting life Creation has witnessed;
     they relate Christ's birth in full, but hurry from His boyhood to the more stirring events of
     His thirtieth and subsequent years. And all the inspired histories do much the same thing. The
     truth is, that epics, dramas, novels, histories, chronicles, reports of trials at law, in a
     word, all narratives true or fictitious, except those which, true or fictitious, nobody reads,
     abridge the uninteresting facts as Nature never did, and dwell as Nature never did on the
     interesting ones.
Can nothing, however, be done to restore, in the reader's judgment, that just balance of “the
     sensational” and the “soporific,” which all writers, that have readers, disturb? Nothing, I
     think, without his own assistance. But surely something with it. And, therefore, I throw myself
     on the intelligence of my readers; and ask them to realise, that henceforth pages are no strict
     measure of time, and that to a year big with strange events, on which I have therefore dilated
     in this story, succeeded a year in which few brilliant things happened to the personages of
     this tale: in short, a year to be skimmed by chronicler or novelist, and yet (mind you) a year
     of three hundred and sixty-five days six hours, or thereabouts, and one in which the quiet,
     unobtrusive troubles of our friends' hearts, especially the female hearts, their doubts,
     divisions, distresses, did not remit—far from it. Now this year I propose to divide into
     topics, and go by logical, rather than natural, sequence of events.
 THE LOVERS. 
Alfred came every day to see Julia, and Mrs. Dodd invariably left the room at his knock.
At last Julia proposed to Alfred not to come to the house for the present; but to accompany
     her on her rounds as district visitor. To see and soothe the bitter calamities of the poor had
     done her own heart good in its worst distress, and she desired to apply the same medicine to
     her beloved, who needed it: that was one thing: and then another was, that she found her own
     anger rising when her mother left the room at that beloved knock: and to be angry with her poor
     widowed, mother was a sin. “She is as unfortunate as I am happy,” thought Julia; “I have got
      mine back.”
Alfred assented to this arrangement with rather an ill grace. He misunderstood Julia, and
     thought she was sacrificing him to what he called her mother's injustice. This indeed was the
     interpretation any male would have been pretty sure to put on it. His soreness, however, did
     not go very far; because she was so kind and good to him when they were together. He used to
     escort her back to the door of 66: and look imploringly; but she never asked him in. He thought
     her hard for this. He did not see the tears that flowed for that mute look of his the moment
     the door was closed; tears she innocently restrained for fear the sight of them should make him
     as unhappy as his imploring look made her. Mauvais calcul! She should have cried right
     out. When we men are unhappy, we like our sweethearts to be unhappier—that consoles
      us.
But when this had gone on nearly a month, and no change, Alfred lost patience: so he lingered
     one day at the door to make a request. He asked Julia to marry him: and so put an end to this
     state of things.
“Marry you, child?” cried Julia, blushing like a rose with surprise and pleasure. “Oh, for
     shame!”
After the first thrill, she appealed to his candour whether that would not be miserably
     selfish of her to leave her poor mother in her present distressed condition. “Ah, Alfred,
      so pale, so spiritless, and inconsolable! My poor, poor mother!”
“You will have to decide between us two one day.”
“Heaven forbid!” said Julia, turning pale at the very idea. But he repeated doggedly that it
     must come to that, sooner or later. Then he reminded her of their solemn engagement, and put it
     to her whether it was a moral proceeding in her to go back from her plighted troth? What had he
     done to justify her in drawing back from her word? “I admit,” said he, “that I have
      suffered plenty of wrong for your sake: but what have I done wrong?”
Undeterred by the fear of immorality, the monotonous girl had but one reply to his multiform
     reasons: “This is no time for me to abandon my mother.”
“Ah, it is her you love: you don't care for me,” snapped Alfred.
“Don't I, dear Alfred?” murmured Julia.
“Forgive me! I'm a ruffian, a wretch.”
“You are my Alfred. But oh, have a little patience, dear.”
“A little patience? I have the patience of Job. But even his went at last.”
[I ought to have said they were in the passage now. The encroaching youth had gained an
     entrance by agitating her so at the door that she had to ask him in to hide her own blushes
     from the public.] She now gently reminded him how much happier they were than they had been for
     months. “Dear me,” said she, “I am almost happy: happier than I ought to be; could be quite so,
     but that I see you discontented.”
“Ah, you have so many about you that you love: I have only you.”
“And that is true, my poor Alfred.”
This softened him a little; and then she interwove her fingers together, and so put both
     palms softly on his shoulder (you never saw a male do that, and never will), and implored him
     to be patient, to be generous. “Oh,” said she, “if you knew the distress it gives me to refuse
     to you anything on earth, you would be generous, and not press me when my heart says 'Yes,' but
     my lips must say 'No.'”
This melted him altogether, and he said he would not torment her any more.
But he went away discontented with himself for having yielded: my lord did not call it
     “yielding,” but “being defeated.” And as he was not only very deep in love, but by nature
     combative, he took a lodging nearly opposite No. 66, and made hot love to her, as hot as if the
     attachment was just forming. Her mother could not go out but he was at the door directly: she
     could not go out but he was at her heels. This pleased her at first and thrilled her with the
     sense of sweet and hot pursuit: but by-and-by, situated as she was between him and her mother,
     it worried her a little at times, and made her nervous. She spoke a little sharply to him now
     and then. And that was new. It came from the nerves, not the heart. At last she advised him to
     go back to Oxford. “I shall be the ruin of your mind if we go on like this,” said she
     sadly.
“What, leave the field to my rivals? No, thank you.”
“What rivals, sir?” asked Julia, drawing up.
“Your mother, your brother, your curates that would come buzzing the moment I left; your sick
     people, who bask on your smiles and your sweet voice till I envy them: Sarah, whom you permit
     to brush your lovely hair, the piano you play on, the air you deign to breathe and brighten,
     everybody and everything that is near you; they are all my rivals; and shall I resign you to
     them, and leave myself desolate? I'm not such a fool.”
She smiled, and could not help feeling it was sweet to be pestered. So she said with matronly
     dignity, and the old Julian consistency, “You are a foolish impetuous boy. You are the plague
     of my life: and—the sun of my existence.” That passed off charmingly. But presently his evil
     genius prompted Alfred to endeavour to soften Mrs. Dodd by letter, and induce her to consent to
     his marriage with her daughter. He received her answer at breakfast-time. It was wonderfully
     polite and cold; Mrs. Dodd feigned unmixed surprise at the proposal, and said that insanity
     being unfortunately in her own family, and the suspicion of insanity resting on himself, such a
     union was not to be thought of; and therefore, notwithstanding her respect for his many good
     qualities, she must decline with thanks the honour he offered her. She inserted a poisoned
     sting by way of postscript. “When you succeed in publicly removing the impression your own
     relations share with me, and when my husband owes his restoration to you, instead of his
     destruction, of course you will receive a very different answer to your proposal—should you
     then think it consistent with your dignity to renew it.”
As hostile testators used to leave the disinherited one shilling, not out of a shilling's
     worth of kindly feeling, but that he might not be able to say his name was omitted through
     inadvertency, so Mrs. Dodd inserted this postscript merely to clench the nail and tantalise her
     enemy. It was a masterpiece of feminine spite.
She would have been wonderstruck could she have seen how Alfred received her missive.
To be sure he sat in a cold stupor of dejection for a good half hour; but at the end of that
     time he lifted up his head, and said quietly, “So be it. I'll get the trial over, and my sanity
     established, as soon as possible: and then I'll hire a yacht and hunt her husband till I find
     him.”
Having settled this little plan, he looked out for Julia, whose sympathy he felt in need of
     after such a stern blow.
She came out much later than usual that day, for to tell the truth, her mother had detained
     her to show her Alfred's letter, and her answer.
“Ah, mamma,” said poor Julia, “you don't love me as you did once. Poor Alfred!”
Mrs. Dodd sighed at this reproach, but said she did not deserve it. No mother in her senses
     would consent to such a match.
Julia bowed her head submissively and went to her duties. But when Alfred came to her
     open-mouthed to complain of her mother's cruelty, she stopped him at once, and asked him how he
     could go and write that foolish, unreasonable letter. Why had he not consulted her first? “You
     have subjected yourself to a rebuff,” said she angrily, “and one from which I should have saved
     you. Is it nothing that mamma out of pity to me connives at our meeting and spending hours
     together? Do you think she does no violence to her own wishes here? and is she to meet with no
     return?”
“What, are you against me too?” said poor Alfred.
“No, it is you who are our enemy with your unreasonable impatience.”
“I am not so cold-blooded as you are, certainly.”
“Humility and penitence would become you better than to retort on me. I love you both, and
     pray God on my knees to show me how to do my duty to both.”
“That is it; you are not single-hearted like me. You want to please all the world, and
     reconcile the irreconcilable. It won't do: you will have to choose between your mother and me
     at last.”
“Then of course I shall choose my mother.”
“Why?”
“Because she claims my duty as well as my love; because she is bowed down with sorrow, and
     needs her daughter just now more than you do; besides, you are my other self, and we must deny
     ourselves.”
“We have no more right to be unjust to ourselves than to anybody else; injustice is
     injustice.”
“Alfred, you are a high-minded Heathen, and talk Morality. Morality is a snare. What I pray
     to be is a Christian, as your dear sister was, and to deny myself; and you make it, oh so
     difficult.”
“So I suppose it will end in turning out your heathen and then taking your curate. Your
     mother would consent to that directly.”
“Alfred,” said Julia with dignity, “these words are harsh, and—forgive me for saying so—they
     are coarse. Such words would separate us two, without my mother, if I were to hear many of
     them; for they take the bloom off affection, and that mutual reverence, without which no
     gentleman and lady could be blessed in holy wedlock.”
Alfred was staggered and mortified too: they walked on in silence now.
“Alfred,” said Julia at last, “do not think me behind you in affection, but wiser, for once,
     and our best friend. I do think we had better see less of one another for a time, my poor
     Alfred.”
“And why for a time? Why not for ever?”
“If your heart draws no distinction, why not indeed?”
“So be it then: for I will be no woman's slave. There's my hand, Julia: let us part
     friends.”
“Thank you for that, dear Alfred: may you find some one who can love you more—than—I do.”
The words choked her. But he was stronger, because he was in a passion. He reproached her
     bitterly. “If I had been as weak and inconstant as you are, I might have been out of Drayton
     House long before I did escape. But I was faithful to my one love. I have some right to sing
     'Aileen Aroon,' you have none. You are an angel of beauty and goodness; you will go to Heaven,
     and I shall go to the devil now for want of you; but then you have no constancy nor true
     fidelity: so that has parted us, and now nothing is left me but to try and hate you.”
He turned furiously on his heel.
“God bless you, go where you will,” faltered Julia.
He replied with a fierce ejaculation of despair, and dashed away.
Thus temper and misunderstanding triumphed, after so many strange and bitter trials had
     failed.
But alas! it is often so.
</div></body></text></TEI>