<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Mistress and Maid</title><author>Craik, Dinah Maria (1826-1887)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII.
Time slipped by. Robert Lyon had been away more than three years. But in the monotonous life
     of the three sisters at Stowbury, nothing was changed. Except, perhaps, Elizabeth, who had
     grown quite a woman; might have passed almost for thirty; so solidly old fashioned were her
     figure and her manners.
Ascott Leaf had finished his walking the hospitals and his examinations, and was now fitted
     to commence practice for himself. His godfather had still continued his allowance, though once
     or twice, when he came down to Stowbury, he had asked his aunts to help him in small debts the
     last time in one a little more serious; when, after some sad and sore consultation, it had been
     resolved to tell him he must contrive to live within his own allowance. For they were poorer
     than they used to be; many more schools had arisen in the town, and theirs had dwindled away.
     It was becoming a source of serious anxiety whether they could possibly make ends meet; and
     when, the next Christmas, Ascott sent them a five pound note—an actual five pound note,
     together with a fond, grateful letter that was worth it all—the aunts were deeply thankful, and
     very happy.
But still the school declined. One night they were speculating upon the causes of this, and
     Hilary was declaring, in a half jocular, half earnest way, that it must be because a prophet is
     never a prophet in his own country.
"The Stowbury people will never believe how clever I am. Only, it is a useless sort of
     cleverness, I fear. Greek, Latin, and mathematics are no good to infants under seven, such as
     Stowbury persists in sending to us."
"They think I am only fit to teach little children—and perhaps it is true," said Miss
     Leaf.
"I wish you had not to teach at all. I wish I was a daily governess—I might be, and earn
     enough to keep the whole family; only, not here."
"I wonder," said Johanna, thoughtfully, "if we shall have to make a change."
"A change!" It almost pained the elder sister to see how the younger brightened up at the
     word. "Where to—London? Oh, I have so longed to go and live in London! But I thought you would
     not like it, Johanna."
That was true. Miss Leaf, whom feeble health had made prematurely old, would willingly have
     ended her days in the familiar town; but Hilary was young and strong. Johanna called to mind
     the days when she too had felt that rest was only another name for dullness; and when the most
     difficult thing possible to her was what seemed now so easy—to sit down and endure.
Besides, unlike herself, Hilary had her life all before her. It might be a happy life, safe
     in a good man's tender keeping; those unfailing letters from India seemed to prophecy that it
     would. But no one could say. Miss Leaf's own experience had not led her to place much faith in
     either men or happiness.
Still, whatever Hilary's future might be, it would likely be a very different one from that
     quiet, colorless life of hers. And as she looked at her younger sister, with the twilight glow
     on her face—they were taking an evening stroll up and down the terrace—Johanna hoped and prayed
     it might be so. Her own lot seemed easy enough for herself; but for Hilary—she would like to
     see Hilary something better than a poor schoolmistress at Stowbury.
No more was said at that time, but Johanna had the deep, still, Mary-like nature, which
     "kept" things, and "pondered them in her heart." So that when the subject came up again she was
     able to meet it with that sweet calmness which was her especial characteristic—the unruffled
     peace of a soul which no worldly storms could disturb overmuch, for it had long since cast
     anchor in the world unseen.
The chance which revived the question of the Great Metropolitan Hegira, as Hilary called it,
     was a letter from Mr. Ascott, as follows:
"MISS LEAF. MADAM,—I shall be obliged by your informing me if it is your wish, as it seems to
     be your nephew's, that instead of returning to Stowbury, he should settle in London as a
     surgeon and general practitioner? His education complete, I consider that I have done my duty
     by him; but I may assist him occasionally still, unless he turns out—as his father did before
     him—a young man who prefers being helped to helping himself, in which case I shall have nothing
     more to do with him. I remain, Madam, your obedient servant, PETER ASCOTT."
The sisters read this letter, passing it round the table, none of them apparently liking to
     be the first to comment upon it. At length Hilary said: "I think that reference to poor Henry
     is perfectly brutal."
"And yet he was very kind to Henry. And if it had not been for his common sense in sending
     poor little Ascott and the nurse down to Stowbury the baby might have died. But you don't
     remember any thing of that time, my dear," said Johanna, sighing.
"He has been kind enough, though he has done it in such a patronizing way," observed Selina.
     "I suppose that's the real reason of his doing it. He thinks it fine to patronize us, and show
     kindness to our family; he, the stout, bullet-headed grocer's boy, who used to sit and stare at
     us all church time."
"At you—you mean. Wasn't he called your beau?" said Hilary mischievously, upon which Selina
     drew herself up in great indignation.
And then they fell to talking of that anxious question—Ascott's future. A little they
     reproached themselves that they had left the lad so long in London—so long out of the influence
     that might have counteracted the evil, sharply hinted in his godfather's letter. But once
     away—to lure him back to their poor home was impossible.
"Suppose we were to go to him," suggested Hilary.
The poor and friendless possess one great advantage—they have nobody to ask advice of; nobody
     to whom it matters much what they do or where they go. The family mind has but to make itself
     up, and act accordingly. Thus within an hour or two of the receipt of Mr. Ascott's letter
     Hilary went into the kitchen, and told Elizabeth that as soon as her work was done Miss Leaf
     wished to have a little talk with her.
"Eh! what's wrong? Has Miss Selina been a-grumbling at me?"
Elizabeth was in one of her bad humors, which, though of course they never ought to have,
     servants do have as well as their superiors. Hilary perceived this by the way she threw the
     coals on and tossed the chairs about. But to-day her heart was full of far more serious cares
     than Elizabeth's ill temper. She replied, composedly—
"I have not heard that either of my sisters is displeased with you. What they want to talk to
     you about is for your own good. We are thinking of making a great change. We intend to leave
     Stowbury and going to live in London."
"Going to live in London!"
Now, quick as her tact and observation were—her heart taught her these things—Elizabeth's
     head was a thorough Saxon one, slow to receive impressions. It was a family saying, that
     nothing was so hard as to put a new idea into Elizabeth except to get it out again.
For this reason Hilary preferred paving the way quietly, before startling her with the sudden
     intelligence of their contemplated change.
"Well, what do you say to the plan?" asked she, good-humoredly.
"I dunnot like it at all," was the brief gruff answer of Elizabeth Hand. 
Now it was one of Miss Hilary's doctrines that no human being is good for much unless he or
     she has what is called "a will of one's own." Perhaps this, like many another creed, was with
     her the result of circumstances. But she held it firmly, and with that exaggerated
     one-sidedness of feeling which any bitter family or personal experience is sure to leave
     behind—a strong will was her first attraction to every body. It had been so in the case of
     Robert Lyon, and not less in Elizabeth's.
But this quality has its inconveniences. When the maid began sweeping up her hearth with a
     noisy, angry gesture, the mistress did the wisest and most dignified thing a mistress could do
     under the circumstances and which she knew was the sharpest rebuke she could administer to the
     sensitive Elizabeth—she immediately quitted the kitchen.
For an hour after the parlor bell did not ring; and though it was washing day, no Miss Hilary
     appeared to help in folding up the clothes. Elizabeth, subdued and wretched, waited till she
     could wait no longer; then knocked at the door, and asked humbly if she should bring in
     supper?
The extreme kindness of the answer, to the effect that she must come in, as they wanted to
     speak to her, crushed the lingering fragments of ill humor out of the girl.
"Miss Hilary has told you our future plans, Elizabeth; now we wish to have a little talk with
     you about yours."
"Eh?"
"We conclude you will not wish to go with us to London; and it would be hardly advisable you
     should. You can get higher wages now than any we can afford to give you; indeed, we have more
     than once thought of telling you so, and offering you your choice of trying for a better
     place."
"You're very kind," was the answer, stolid rather than grateful.
"No; I think we are merely honest. We should never think of keeping a girl upon lower wages
     than she was worth. Hitherto, however, the arrangement has been quite fair you know, Elizabeth,
     you have given us a deal of trouble in the teaching of you." And Miss Leaf smiled, half sadly,
     as if this, the first of the coming changes, hurt her more than she liked to express. "Come, my
     girl," she added, "you needn't look so serious. We are not in the least vexed with you; we
     shall be very sorry to lose you, and we will give you the best of characters when you
     leave."
"I dunnot—mean—to leave."
Elizabeth threw out the words like pellets, in a choked fashion, and disappeared suddenly
     from the parlor.
"Who would have thought it!" exclaimed Selina; "I declare the girl was crying."
No mistake about that; though when, a few minutes after, Miss Hilary entered the kitchen,
     Elizabeth tried in a hurried, shamefaced way to hide her tears by being very busy over
     something. Her mistress took no notice, but began, as usual on washing days, to assist in
     various domestic matters, in the midst of which she said, quietly, "And so, Elizabeth, you
     would really like to go to London?"
"No! I shouldn't like it at all; never said I should. But if you go, I shall go too; though
     Missis is so ready to get shut o' me." 
"It was for your own good, you know."
"You always said it was for a girl's good to stop in one place; and if you think I'm going to
     another. I aren't that's all."
Rude as the form of the speech was—almost the first rude speech that Elizabeth had ever made
     to Miss Hilary, and which, under other circumstances she would have felt bound severely to
     reprove—the mistress passed it over. That which lay beneath it, the sharpness of wounded love,
     touched her heart. She felt that, for all the girl's rough manner, it would have been hard to
     go into her London kitchen and meet a strange London face, instead of that fond homely one of
     Elizabeth Hand's.
Still, she thought it right to explain to her that London life might have many difficulties,
     that; for the present at least, her wages could not be raised, and the family might at first be
     in even more straitened circumstances than they were at Stowbury.
"Only at first, though, for I hope to find plenty of pupils, and by-and-by our nephew will
     get into practice."
"Is it on account of him you're going, Miss Hilary?"
"Chiefly."
Elizabeth gave a grunt which said as plainly as words could say, "I thought so;" and relapsed
     into what she, no doubt, believed to be virtuous indignation, but which, as it was testified
     against the wrong parties, was open to the less favorable interpretation of ill humor—a small
     injustice not uncommon with us all.
I do not pretend to paint this young woman as a perfect character. She had her fierce
     dislikes as well as her strong fidelities; her faults within and without, which had to be
     struggled with, as all of us have to struggle to the very end of our days. Oftentimes not till
     the battle is high over—sometimes not till it is quite over—does God give us the victory.
Without more discussion on either side, it was agreed that Elizabeth should accompany her
     mistresses. Even Mrs. Hand seemed to be pleased thereat, her only doubt being lest her daughter
     should meet and be led astray by that bad woman, Mrs. Cliffe, Tommy Cliffe's mother, who was
     reported to have gone to London. But Miss Hilary explained that this meeting was about as
     probable as the rencontre of two needles in a hay-rick; and besides, Elizabeth was not the sort
     of girl to be easily "led astray" by any body.
"No, no; her's a good wench, though I says it," replied the mother, who was too hard worked
     to have much sentiment to spare. "I wish the little 'uns may take pattern by our Elizabeth.
     You'll send her home, may be, in two or three years' time, to let us have a look at her?"
Miss Hilary promised, and then took her way back through the familiar old town—so soon to be
     familiar no more—thinking anxiously, in spite of herself, upon those two or three years, and
     what they might bring.
It happened to be a notable day—that sunshiny 28th of June—when the little, round-cheeked
     damsel, who is a grandmother now, had the crown of three kingdoms first set upon her youthful
     head; and Stowbury, like every other town in the land, was a perfect bower of green arches,
     garlands, banners; white covered tables were spread in the open air down almost every street,
     where poor men dined, or poor women drank tea; and every body was out and abroad, looking at or
     sharing in the holiday' making, wild with merriment, and brimming over with passionate loyalty
     to the Maiden Queen.
That day is now twenty-four years ago; but all those who remember it must own there never has
     been a day like it, when, all over the country, every man's heart throbbed with chivalrous
     devotion, every woman's with womanly tenderness, toward this one royal girl, who, God bless
     her! has lived to retain and deserve it all.
Hilary called for, and protected through the crowd, the little, timid, widow lady who had
     taken off the Misses Leaf's hands their house and furniture, and whom they had made very
     happy—as the poor often can make those still poorer than themselves—by refusing to accept any
     thing for the "good will" of the school. Then she was fetched by Elizabeth, who had been given
     a whole afternoon's holiday; and mistress and maid went together home, watching the last of the
     festivities, the chattering groups that still lingered in the twilight streets, and listening
     to the merry notes of the "Triumph" which came down through the lighted windows of the Town
     Hall, where the open-air tea drinkers had adjourned to dance country dances, by civic
     permission, and in perfectly respectable jollity.
"I wonder," said Hilary—while, despite some natural regret, her spirit stretched itself out
     eagerly from the narrowness of the place where she was born into the great wide world; the
     world where so many grand things were thought and written and done; the world Robert Lyon had
     so long fought with, and was fighting bravely still—"I wonder, Elizabeth, what sort of place
     London is, and what our life will be in it?"
Elizabeth said nothing. For the moment her face seemed to catch the reflected glow of her
     mistress's, and then it settled down into that look of mingled resistance and resolution which
     was habitual to her. For the life that was to be, which neither knew—oh, if they had known!—she
     also was prepared.
</div></body></text></TEI>