<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Hard Cash, by Charles Reade</title><author>Reade, Charles (1814-1884).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
CHAPTER XL
THE tenacity of a private lunatic asylum is unique. A little push behind your back and you
     slide into one; but to get out again is to scale a precipice with crumbling sides. Alfred,
     luckier than many, had twice nearly escaped; yet now he was tighter in than ever. His father at
     first meant to give him but a year or two of it, and let him out on terms, his spirit broken
     and Julia married. But his sister's death was fatal to him. By Mrs. Hardie's settlement the
     portion of any child of hers dying a minor, or intestate and childless, was to go to the other
     children; so now the prisoner had inherited his sister's ten thousand pounds, and a good slice
     of his bereaved enemy's and father's income. But this doubled his father's bitterness—that he,
     the unloved one, should be enriched by the death of the adored one!—and also tempted his
     cupidity: and unfortunately shallow legislation conspired with that temptation. For when an
     Englishman, sane or insane, is once pushed behind his back into a madhouse, those relatives who
     have hidden him from the public eye, i.e., from the eye of justice, can grab hold of
     his money behind his back, as they certified away his wits behind his back, and can administer
     it in the dark, and embezzle it, chanting “But for us the 'dear deranged' would waste it.” Nor
     do the monstrous enactments which confer this unconstitutional power on subjects, and shield
     its exercise from the light and safeguard of Publicity, affix any penalty to the abuse of that
     power, if by one chance in a thousand detected. In Lunacy Law extremes of intellect meet; the
     British senator plays at Satan; and tempts human frailty and cupidity beyond what they are able
     to bear.
So behold a son at twenty-one years of age devoted by a father to imprisonment for life. But
     stop a minute; the mad statutes, which by the threefold temptation of Facility, Obscurity, and
     Impurity, insure the occasional incarceration and frequent detention of sane but moneyed men,
     do provide, though feebly, for their bare liberation, if perchance they should not yield to the
      genius loci, and the natural effect of confinement plus anguish, by going mad or
     dying. The Commissioners of Lunacy had power to liberate Alfred in spite of his relations. And
     that power, you know, he had soberly but earnestly implored them to exercise.
After a delay that seemed as strange to him as postponing a hand to a drowning man, he
     received an official letter from Whitehall. With bounding heart he broke the seal, and devoured
     the contents. They ran thus—
“Sir,—By order of the Commissioners of Lunacy, I am directed to inform you that they are in
     the receipt of your letter of the 29th ultimo, which will be laid before the Board at their
     next meeting.—I am, etc.”
Alfred was bitterly disappointed at the small advance he had made. However, it was a great
     point to learn that his letters were allowed to go to the Commissioners at all, and would be
     attended to by degrees.
He waited and waited, and struggled hard to possess his soul in patience. At times his brain
     throbbed and his blood boiled, and he longed to kill the remorseless, kinless monsters who
     robbed him of his liberty, his rights as a man, and his Julia. But he knew this would not do;
     that what they wanted was to gnaw his reason away, and then who could disprove that he had
     always been mad? Now he felt that brooding on his wrong would infuriate him; so he clenched his
     teeth, and vowed a solemn vow that nothing should drive him mad. By advice of a patient he
     wrote again to the Commissioners begging for a special Commission to inquire into his case;
     and, this done, with rare stoicism, self-defence, and wisdom in one so young, he actually sat
     down to read hard for his first class. Now, to do this, he wanted the Ethics, Politics, and
     Rhetoric of Aristotle, certain dialogues of Plato, the Comedies of Aristophanes, the
     first-class Historians, Demosthenes, Lucretius, a Greek Testament, Wheeler's Analysis,
     Prideaux, Horne, and several books of reference sacred and profane. But he could not get these
     books without Dr. Wycherley, and unfortunately he had cut that worthy dead in his own
     asylum.
“The Scornful Dog” had to eat wormwood pudding and humble pie. He gulped these delicacies as
     he might; and Dr. Wycherley showed excellent qualities; he entered into his maniac's studies
     with singular alacrity, supplied him with several classics from his own shelves, and borrowed
     the rest at the London Library. Nor did his zeal stop there; he offered to read an hour a day
     with him; and owned it would afford him the keenest gratification to turn out an Oxford first
     classman from his asylum. This remark puzzled Alfred and set him thinking; it bore a subtle
     family resemblance to the observations he heard every day from the patients; it was so
     one-eyed.
Soon Alfred became the doctor's pet maniac. They were often closeted together in high
     discourse, and indeed discussed Psychology, Metaphysics, and Moral Philosophy with
     indefatigable zest, long after common sense would have packed them both off to bed, the
     donkeys. In fact, they got so thick that Alfred thought it only fair to say one day, “Mind,
     doctor, all these pleasant fruitful hours we spend together so sweetly will not prevent my
     indicting you for a conspiracy as soon as I get out: it will rob the retribution of half its
     relish, though.”
“Ah, my dear young friend and fellow-student,” said the doctor blandly, “let us not sacrifice
     the delights of our profitable occupation of imbibing the sweets of intellectual intercourse to
     vague speculations as to our future destiny. During the course of a long and not, I trust,
     altogether unprofitable career, it has not unfrequently been my lot to find myself on the verge
     of being indicted, sued, assassinated, hung. Yet here I sit, as yet unimmolated on the altar of
     phrenetic vengeance. This is ascribable to the fact that my friends and pupils always adopt a
     more favourable opinion of me long before I part with them; and ere many days (and this I
     divine by infallible indicia), your cure will commence in earnest; and in proportion
     as you progress to perfect restoration of the powers of judgment, you will grow in suspicion of
     the fact of being under a delusion; or rather I should say a very slight perversion and
     perturbation of the forces of your admirable intellect, and a proper subject for temporary
     seclusion. Indeed this consciousness of insanity is the one diagnostic of sanity that never
     deceives me and, on the other hand, an obstinate persistence in the hypothesis of perfect
     rationality demonstrates the fact that insanity yet lingers in the convolutions and recesses of
     the brain, and that it would not be humane as yet to cast the patient on a world in which he
     would inevitably be taken some ungenerous advantage of.”
Alfred ventured to inquire whether this was not rather paradoxical.
“Certainly,” said the ready doctor; “and paradoxicality is an indicial characteristic of
     truth in all matters beyond the comprehension of the vulgar.”
“That sounds rational,” said the maniac very drily.
One afternoon, grinding hard for his degree, he was invited downstairs to see two
     visitors.
At that word he found out how prison tries the nerves. He trembled with hope and fear. It was
     but for a moment: he bathed his face and hands to compose himself; made his toilet carefully,
     and went into the drawing-room, all on his guard. There he found Dr. Wycherley and two
     gentlemen; one was an ex-physician, the other an ex-barrister, who had consented to resign
     feelessness and brieflessness for a snug 1500l. a year at Whitehall. After a momentary greeting
     they continued the conversation with Dr. Wycherley, and scarcely noticed Alfred. They were
     there pro forma; a plausible lunatic had pestered the Board, and extorted a visit of
     ceremony. Alfred's blood boiled, but he knew it must not boil over. He contrived to throw a
     short, pertinent remark in every now and then. This, being done politely, told; and at last Dr.
     Eskell, Commissioner of Lunacy, smiled and turned to him: “Allow me to put a few questions to
     you.”
“The more the better, sir,” said Alfred.
Dr. Eskell then asked him to describe minutely, and in order, all he had done since seven
     o'clock that day. And he did it. Examined him in the multiplication table. And he did it. And,
     while he was applying these old-fashioned tests, Wycherley's face wore an expression of pity
     that was truly comical. Now this Dr. Eskell had an itch for the classics: so he went on to say,
     “You have been a scholar, I hear.”
“I am not old enough to be a scholar, sir,” said Alfred; “but I am a student.”
“Well, well; now can you tell me what follows this line—

 “Jusque datum sceleri canimus populuinque potentem'?” 
“Why, not at the moment.”
“Oh, surely you can,” said Dr. Eskell ironically. “It is in a tolerably well-known passage.
     Come, try.”
“Well, I'll try,” said Alfred, sneering secretly. “Let me see—

 'Mum—mum—mum—populumque potentem, In sua victrici conversum viscera dextra.'” 
“Quite right; now go on, if you can.”
Alfred, who was playing with his examiner all this time, pretended to cudgel his brains, then
     went on, and warmed involuntarily with the lines—

 “Cognatasque acies et rupto foedere regni Certatum totis concussi viribus orbis In commune
      nefas; infestis que obvia signis Signa, pares aquilas, et pila minantia pilis.” 
“He seems to have a good memory,” said the examiner, rather taken aback.
“Oh, that is nothing for him,” observed Wycherley;
 “He has Horace all by heart; you'd wonder: And mouths out Homer's Greek like thunder.” 
The great faculty of Memory thus tested, Dr. Eskell proceeded to a greater: Judgment.
     “Spirited lines those, sir.”
“Yes, sir; but surely rather tumid. 'The whole forces of the shaken globe?' But
     little poets love big words.”
“I see; you agree with Horace, that so great a work as an epic poem should open modestly with
     an invocation.”
“No, sir,” said Alfred. “I think that rather an arbitrary and peevish canon of friend Horace.
     The AEneid, you know, begins just as he says an epic ought not to begin; and the AEneid is the
     greatest Latin Epic. In the next place the use of Modesty is to keep a man from writing an epic
     poem at all but, if he will have that impudence, why then he had better have the courage to
     plunge into the Castalian stream, like Virgil and Lucan, not crawl in funking and holding on by
     the Muse's apron-string. But—excuse me—quorsum haec tam putida tendunt? What have the Latin
     poets to do with this modern's sanity or insanity?”
Mr. Abbott snorted contemptuously in support of the query. But Dr. Eskell smiled, and said:
     “Continue to answer me as intelligently, and you may find it has a great deal to do with
     it.”
Alfred took this hint, and said artfully, “Mine was a thoughtless remark: of course a
     gentleman of your experience can test the mind on any subject, however trivial.” He added
     piteously, “Still, if you would but leave the poets, who are all half crazy themselves, and
     examine me in the philosophers of Antiquity. Surely it would be a higher criterion.”
Dr. Wycherley explained in a patronising whisper, “He labours under an abnormal contempt for
     poetry, dating from his attack. Previously to that he actually obtained a prize poem
     himself.”
“Well, doctor, and after that am I wrong to despise poetry?”
They might have comprehended this on paper, but spoken it was too keen for them all three.
     The visitors stared. Dr. Wycherley came to their aid “You might examine my young friend for
     hours and not detect the one crevice in the brilliancy of his intellectual armour.”
The maniac made a face as one that drinketh verjuice suddenly. “For pity's sake, doctor,
     don't be so inaccurate. Say a spot on the brilliancy, or a crevice in the armour; but not a
     crevice in the brilliancy. My good friend here, gentlemen, deals in conjectural certificates
     and broken metaphors. He dislocates more tropes, to my sorrow, than even his friend
     Shakespeare, whom he thinks a greater philosopher than Aristotle, and who calls the murder of
     an individual sleeper the murder of sleep, confounding the concrete with the abstract, and then
     talks of taking arms against a sea of troubles; query, a cork jacket and a flask of
     brandy?”
“Well, Mr. Hardie,” said Dr. Eskell, rather feebly, “let me tell you those passages, which so
     shock your peculiar notions, are among the most applauded.”
“Very likely, sir,” retorted the maniac, whose logic was up; “but applauded only in a nation
     where the floods clap their hands every Sunday morning, and we all pray for peace,
     giving as our exquisite reason that we have got the God of hosts on our side in war.”
Mr. Abbott, the other commissioner, had endured all this chat with an air of weary
     indifference. He now said to Dr. Wycherley, “I wish to put to you a question or two in
     private.”
Alfred was horribly frightened: this was the very dodge that had ruined him at Silverton
     House. “Oh no, gentlemen,” he cried imploringly. “Let me have fair play. You have given me no
     secret audience; then why give my accuser one? I am charged with a single delusion; for mercy's
     sake, go to the point at once, and examine me on that head.”
“Now you talk sense,” said Mr. Abbott; as if the previous topics had been chosen by
     Alfred.
“But that will excite him,” objected Dr. Eskell? “it always does excite them.”
“It excites the insane, but not the sane,” said Alfred. “So there is another test; you will
     observe whether it excites me.” Then, before they could interrupt him, he glided on. “The
     supposed hallucination is this: I strongly suspect my father, a bankrupt—and therefore
     dishonest—banker, of having somehow misappropriated a sum of fourteen thousand pounds, which
     sum is known to have been brought from India by one Captain Dodd, and has disappeared.”
“Stop a minute,” said Mr. Abbott. “Who knows it besides you?”
“The whole family of the Dodds. They will show you his letter from India, announcing his
     return with the money.”
“Where do they live?”
“Albion Villa, Barkington.”
Mr. Abbott noted the address in his book, and Alfred, mightily cheered and encouraged by this
     sensible act, went on to describe the various indications, which, insufficient singly, had by
     their united force driven him to his conclusion. When he described David's appearance and words
     on his father's lawn at night, Wycherley interrupted him quietly: “Are you quite sure this was
     not a vision, a phantom of the mind heated by your agitation, and your suspicions?”
Dr. Eskell nodded assent, knowing nothing about the matter.
“Pray, doctor, was I the only person who saw this vision?” inquired Alfred slily.
“I conclude so,” said Wycherley, with an admirable smile.
“But why do you conclude so? Because you are one of those who reason in a circle of
     assumptions. Now it happens that Captain Dodd was seen and felt on that occasion by three
     persons besides myself.”
“Name them,” said Mr. Abbott sharply.
“A policeman called Reynolds, another policeman, whose name I don't know, and Miss Julia
     Dodd. The policemen helped me lift Captain Dodd off the grass, sir; Julia met us chose by, and
     we four carried Dr. Wycherhey's phantom home together to Albion Villa.”
Mr. Abbott noted down all the names, and then turned to Dr. Wycherley. “What do you say to
     that?”
“I say it is a very important statement,” said the doctor blandly; “and that I am sure my
     young friend would not advance it unless he was firmly persuaded of its reality.”
“Much obliged, doctor; and you would not contradict me so rashly in a matter I know all about
     and you know nothing about, if it was not your fixed habit to found facts on theories instead
     of theories on facts.”
“There, that is enough,” said Mr. Abbott. “I have brought you both to an issue at last. I
     shall send to Barkington, and examine the policemen and the Dodds.”
“Oh, thank you, sir,” cried Alfred with emotion. “If you once apply genuine tests like that
     to my case, I shall not be long in prison.”
“Prison?” said Wycherley reproachfully.
“Have you any complaint, then, to make of your treatment here?” inquired Dr. Eskell.
“No, no, sir,” said Alfred warmly. “Dr. Wycherley is the very soul of humanity. Here are no
     tortures, no handcuffs nor leg-locks, no brutality, no insects that murder Sleep—without
     offence to Logic. In my last asylum the attendants inflicted violence, here they are only
     allowed to endure it. And, gentlemen, I must tell you a noble trait in my enemy there: nothing
     can make him angry with madmen; their lies, their groundless and narrow suspicions of him,
     their deplorable ingratitude to him, of which I see examples every day that rile me on his
     account; all these things seem to glide off him, baffled by the infinite kindness of his heart
     and the incomparable sweetness of his temper; and he returns the duffers good for evil with
     scarcely an effort.”
At this unexpected tribute the water stood in the doctor's eyes. It was no more than the
     truth; but this was the first maniac he had met intelligent enough to see his good qualities
     clearly and express them eloquently.
“In short,” continued Alfred, “to be happy in his house all a man wants is to be insane. But,
     as I am not insane, I am miserable; no convict, no galley slave is so wretched as I am,
     gentlemen. And what is my crime?”
“Well, well,” said Dr. Eskell kindly, “I think it likely you will not be very long in
     confinement.” They then civilly dismissed him; and on his departure asked Dr. Wycherley his
     candid opinion. Dr. Wycherley said he was now nearly cured; his ability to discuss his delusion
     without excitement was of itself a proof of that. But in another month he would be better
     still. The doctor concluded his remarks thus—
“However, gentlemen, you have heard him: now judge for yourselves whether anybody can be as
     clever as he is, without the presence of more or less abnormal excitement of the organs of
     intelligence.”
It was a bright day for Alfred; he saw he had made an excellent impression on the
     Commissioners, and, as luck does not always come single, after many vain attempts to get a
     letter posted to Julia, he found this very afternoon a nurse was going away next day. He
     offered her a guinea, and she agreed to post a letter. Oh the hapiness it was to the poor
     prisoner to write it, and unburden his heart and tell his wrongs. He kept his manhood for his
     enemies; his tears fell on the paper he sent to his forlorn bride. He had no misgivings of her
     truth; he judged her by himself: gave her credit for anxiety, but not for doubt. He concluded a
     long, ardent, tender letter by begging her to come and see him, and, if refused admission, to
     publish his case in the newspapers, and employ a lawyer to proceed against all the parties
     concerned in his detention. Day after day he waited for an answer to his letter; none came.
     Then he began to be sore perplexed, and torn with agonising doubts. What if her mind was
     poisoned too! What if she thought him mad! What if some misfortune had befallen her! What if
     she had believed him dead, and her heart had broken! Hitherto he had seen his own trouble
     chiefly; but now he began to think day and night on hers; and though he ground on for his
     degree not to waste time, and not to be driven mad, yet it was almost superhuman labour; sighs
     issued from his labouring breast while his hard, indomitable brain laboured away, all uphill,
     at Aristotle's Divisions and Definitions.
On the seventh day, the earliest the mad statute allowed, the two Commissioners returned, and
     this time Mr. Abbott took the lead, and told him that the policeman Reynolds had left the
     force, and the Dodds had left the town, and were in London, but their address not known.
At this Alfred was much agitated. She was alive, and perhaps near him.
“I have heard a good deal of your story,” said Mr. Abbott, “and coupling it with what we have
     seen of you, we think your relatives have treated you, and a young lady of whom everybody
     speaks with respect—”
“God bless you for saying that! God bless you!”
“—treated you both, I say, with needless severity.”
Dr. Eskell then told him the result of the Special Commission, now closed. “I believe you to
     be cured,” said he; “and Mr. Abbott has some doubts whether you were ever positively insane. We
     shall lay your case before the Board at once, and the Board will write to the party who signed
     the order, and propose to him to discharge you at once.”
At this magnificent project Alfred's countenance fell, and he stared with astonishment.
     “What! have you not the power to do me justice without soliciting Injustice to help you?”
“The Board has the power,” said Dr. Eskell; “but for many reasons they exercise it with
     prudence and reserve. Besides, it is only fair to those who have signed the order, to give them
     the graceful office of liberating the patient; it paves the way to reconciliation.”
Alfred sighed. The Commissioners, to keep up his heart, promised to send him copies of their
     correspondence with the person who had signed the order. “Then,” said Mr. Abbott kindly, “you
     will see your case is not being neglected.”
The following precis, though imperfect, will give some idea of the correspondence:
1. The Board wrote to Thomas Hardie, letting him know the result of the Special Commission,
     and requesting him to discharge his nephew.
Thomas quaked. Richard smiled, and advised Thomas to take no notice. By this a week was
     gained to Injustice, and lost to Justice.
2. The Board pointed out Thomas Hardie's inadvertence in not answering No. 1; enclosed copy
     of it, and pressed for a reply.
Thomas quaked, Richard smiled.
3. Thomas Hardie to the Board. From what he had heard, it would be premature to discharge
     Alfred. Should prefer to wait a month or two.
4. Board to Alfred, conveying this in other terms.
5. Alfred to Board, warning them against this proposal. To postpone justice was to refuse
     justice, certainly for a time, probably for ever.
6. The Board to Thomas Hardie, suggesting that if not released immediately Alfred ought to
     have a trial—i.e., be allowed to go into the world with a keeper.
7. Alfred to the Board, begging that Dr. Sampson, an honest independent physician, might be
     allowed to visit him and report to them.
8. The Board to Alfred, declining this, for the present as unadvisable, they being in
     correspondence with the person who had signed the order—with a view to his liberation.
9. T. Hardie to the Board, shuffling, and requesting time to make further inquiries.
10. The Board, suggesting there should be some reasonable limit to delay.
11. T. Hardie, asking for a month to see about it.
12. The Board, suggesting a week.
13. Alfred Hardie, asking permission to be visited by a solicitor with a view to protection
     of his liberty and property.
14. The Board, declining this, pending their correspondence with other parties; but asking
     him for the names and addresses of all his trustees.
15. Thomas Hardie, informing the Board he had now learned Alfred had threatened to kill his
     father as soon as ever he should get out, and leaving the Board to discharge him on their own
     responsibility if they chose after this warning: but declining peremptorily to do so
     himself.
16, 17, 18. The Board, by advice of Mr. Abbott, to Alfred's trustees, warning them against
     any alienation of Alfred's money under the notion that he was legally a lunatic; and saying
     that a public inquiry appeared inevitable, owing to Mr. T. Hardie's unwillingness to enter into
     their views.
19. To Alfred, inquiring whether he wished to encounter the expense of Chancery proceedings
     to establish his sanity.
20. Alfred to the Board, imploring them to use their powers and discharge him without further
     delay, and assuring them he meditated no violence on his liberation, but should proceed against
     all parties under legal advice.
21. The Board to T. Hardie, warning him that he must in future pay Alfred's maintenance in
     Asylum out of his own pocket, and pressing him either to discharge the young man, or else to
     apply to the Lord Chancellor for a Commission de Lunatico Inquirendo, and enclosing copy of a
     letter from Wycherley saying the patient was harmless.
22. T. Hardie respectfully declining to do either, but reminding the Commissioners that the
     matter could be thrown into Chancery without his consent; only the expense, which would be
     tremendous, would fall on the lunatic's estate, which might hereafter be regretted by the party
     himself. He concluded by promising to come to town and visit Alfred with his family physician,
     and write further in a week.
Having thus thrown dust in the eyes of the Board, Thomas Hardie and Richard consulted with a
     notoriously unscrupulous madhouse keeper in the suburbs of London, and effected a masterstroke;
     whereof anon.
The correspondence had already occupied three months, and kept Alfred in a fever of the mind;
     of all the maddening things with which he had been harassed by the pretended curers of
     insanity, this tried him hardest. To see a dozen honest gentlemen wishing to do justice, able
     to do justice by one manly stroke of the pen, yet forego their vantage-ground, and descend to
     coax an able rogue to do their duty and undo his own interest and rascality! To see a strong
     cause turned into a weak one by the timidity of champions clad by law in complete steel; and a
     rotten cause, against which Law and Power, as well as Truth, Justice, and Common Sense, had now
     declared, turned into a strong one by the pluck and cunning of his one unarmed enemy! The
     ancients feigned that the ingenious gods tortured Tantalus in hell by ever-present thirst, and
     water flowing to just the outside of his lips. A Briton can thirst for liberty as hard as
     Tantalus or hunted deer can thirst for cooling springs and this soul-gnawing correspondence
     brought liberty, and citizenhood, and love, and happiness, to the lips of Alfred's burning,
     pining, aching heart, again, and again, and again; then carried them away from him in mockery.
     Oh, the sickening anguish of Hope deferred, and deferred:

 “The Hell it is in suing long to bide.” 
But indeed his hopes began to sicken for good when he found that the Board would not allow
     any honest independent physician to visit him, or any solicitor to see him. At first, indeed,
     they refused it because Mr. Thomas Hardie was going to let him out: but when T. Hardie would
     not move at their request, then on a fresh application they refused it, giving as their reason
     that they had already refused it. Yet in so keen a battle he would not throw away a chance: so
     he determined to win Dr. Wycherley altogether by hook or by crook, and get a certificate of
     sanity from him. Now a single white lie, he knew would do the trick. He had only to say that
     Hamlet was mad. And “Hamlet was mad” is easily said.
Dr. Wycherley was a collector of mad people, and collectors are always amateurs, and very
     seldom connoisseurs. His turn of mind co-operating with his interests, led him to put down any
     man a lunatic, whose intellect was manifestly superior to his own. Alfred Hardie, and one or
     two more contemporaries, had suffered by this humour of the good doctor's. Nor did the dead
     escape him entirely. Pascal, according to Wycherley, was a madman with an illusion about a
     precipice; John Howard a moral lunatic in whom the affections were reversed; Saul a moping
     maniac with homicidal paroxysms and nocturnal visions; Paul an incoherent lunatic, who in his
     writings flies off at a tangent, and who admits having once been the victim of a photopsic
     illusion in broad daylight; Nebuchadnezzar a lycanthropical lunatic; Joan of Arc a theomaniac;
     Bobby Burton and Oliver Cromwell melancholy maniacs; Napoleon an ambitious maniac, in whom the
     sense of impossibility became gradually extinguished by visceral and cerebral derangement;
     Porson an oinomaniac; Luther a phrenetic patient of the old demoniac breed, alluded to by
     Shakespeare:

 “One sees more devils than vast Hell can hold. 
That is the madman.” 
But without intending any disrespect to any of these gentlemen, he assigned the golden crown
     of Insanity to Hamlet. To be sure, this character tells his friends in the play he shall
      feign insanity, and swears them not to reveal the reason; and after this hint to his
     friends and the pit (it is notorious he was not written for readers) he keeps his word, and
     does it as cleverly as if his name was David or Brutus instead of Hamlet; indeed, like Edgar,
     he rather overdoes it, and so puzzles his enemies in the play, and certain German criticasters
     and English mad doctors in the closet, and does not puzzle his bosom friend in the play one
     bit, nor the pit for whom he was created. Add to this his sensibility, and his kindness to
     others, and his eloquent grief at the heart-rending situation which his father's and mother's
     son was placed in and had brains to realise, though his psychological critics, it seems, have
     not; and add to all that the prodigious extent of his mind, his keen observation, his deep
     reflection; his brilliant fancy, united for once in a way with the great Academic, or judicial,
     intellect, that looks down and sees all the sides of everything—and what can this rare
     intellectual compound be? Wycherley decided the question. Hamlet was too much greater in the
     world of mind than S. T. Coleridge and his German criticasters; too much higher, deeper, and
     broader than Esquirol, Pinel, Sauze, Haslam, Munro, Pagan, Wigan, Prichard, Romberg, Wycherley,
     and such small deer, to be anything less than a madman.
Now, in their midnight discussions, Dr. Wycherley more than once alluded to the insanity of
     Hamlet; and offered proofs. But Alfred declined the subject as too puerile. “A man must exist
     before he can be insane,” said the Oxonian philosopher, severe in youthful gravity. But when he
     found that Dr. Wycherley, had he lived in Denmark at the time, would have conferred cannily
     with Hamlet's uncle, removed that worthy relative's disbelief in Hamlet's insanity, and signed
     the young gentleman away behind his back into a lunatic asylum, Alfred began to sympathise with
     this posthumous victim of Psychological Science. “I believe the bloke was no madder than I am,”
     said he. He got the play, studied it afresh, compared the fiction with the legend, compared
     Hamlet humbugging his enemies and their tool, Ophelia, with Hamlet opening his real mind to
     himself or his Horatio the very next moment; contrasted the real madness the author has
     portrayed in the plays of Hamlet and Lear by the side of these extravagant imitations, to save,
     if possible, even dunces, and dreamers, and criticasters from being taken in by the latter; and
     at their next seance pitched into the doctor's pet chimera, and what with logic, fact,
     ridicule, and the author's lines, knocked it to atoms.
Now, in their midnight discussions, Dr. Wycherley had always handled the question of Alfred
     Hardie's Sanity or Insanity with a philosophical coolness the young man admired, and found it
     hard to emulate; but this philosophic calmness deserted him the moment Hamlet's insanity was
     disputed, and the harder he was pressed the angrier, the louder, the more confused the
     Psychological physician became; and presently he got furious, burst out of the anti-spasmodic
     or round-about style and called Alfred a d—d ungrateful, insolent puppy, and went stamping
     about the room; and, finally, to the young man's horror, fell down in a fit of an epileptic
     character, grinding his teeth and foaming at the mouth.
Alfred was filled with regret, and, though alarmed, had the presence of mind not to call for
     assistance. The fit was a very mild one in reality, though horrible to look at. The doctor came
     to, and asked feebly for wine. Alfred got it him, and the doctor, with a mixture of cunning and
     alarm in his eye, said he had fainted away, or nearly. Alfred assented coaxingly, and looked
     sheepish. After this he took care never to libel Hamlet's intellect again by denying his
     insanity; for he was now convinced of what he had long half suspected, that the doctor had a
     bee in his own bonnet; and Alfred had studied true insanity all this time, and knew how
     inhumane it is to oppose a monomaniac's foible; it only infuriates and worries him. No power
     can convince him.
But now he resolved to play on the doctor's foible. It went against his conscience; but the
     temptation was so strong. He came to him with a hang-dog air.
“Doctor,” said he, “I have been thinking over your arguments, and I capitulate. If Hamlet
     ever existed, he was as mad as a March hare.” And he blushed at this his first quibble.
Dr. Wycherley beamed with satisfaction.
“My young friend, this gives me sincere pleasure; not on my account, but on your own. There
     goes one of your illusions then. Now tell me—the 4,000l.! Have you calmly reconsidered that
     too?”
Alfred hung his head, and looked guiltier and guiltier.
“Why,” said he, “that never amounted to anything more than a strong suspicion. It has long
     ceased to occupy my mind in excess. However, should I ever be so fortunate as to recover my
     liberty, I have no objection to collect the evidence about it pro and con., and then make you
     the judge instead of myself.” This he delivered with an admirable appearance of
     indifference.
“Very well, sir,” said the doctor drily. “Then, now I have a piece of good news for
      you.
“Oh, doctor, what is that?”
“Your cure is complete; that is all! You are now a sane man, as sane as I am.”
Alfred was a little disappointed at this piece of news; but recovering himself, asked him to
     certify that and let him send the certificate to the Board. Dr. Wycherley said he would with
     pleasure.
“I'll bring it to you when I make my round,” said he.
Alfred retired triumphant, and went in at Plato with a good heart.
In about an hour Dr. Wycherley paid him the promised visit. But what may not an hour bring
     forth? He came with mortification and regret in his face to tell Alfred that an order of
     transfer had been signed by the proper parties, and counter-signed by two Commissioners, and he
     was to go to Dr. Wolf's asylum that day.
Alfred groaned. “I knew my father would out-wit my feeble friends somehow or other,” said he.
     “What is his game! do you know?”
“I suppose to obtain a delay; and meantime get you into an asylum, where they will tell the
     Commissioners you are worse again, and perhaps do something to make their words good. Dr. Wolf,
     between ourselves, will say or do almost anything for money. And his asylum is conducted on the
     old system; though he pretends not.”
“My dear friend,” said Alfred, “will you do me a favour?”
“How could I deny you anything at this sorrowful moment?”
“Here is an advertisement I want inserted in the Morning Advertiser.”
“Oh, I can't do that, I fear.”
“Look at it before you break my heart by refusing me.”
Dr. Wycherley looked at it, and said it was innocent, being unintelligible: and he would
     insert it himself.
“Three insertions, dear doctor,” said Alfred. “Here is the money.
The doctor then told him sorrowfully he must pack up his things—Dr. Wolf's keepers were
     waiting for him.
The moment of parting came. Then Alfred solemnly forgave Dr. Wycherley for signing away his
     wits, and thanked him for all his kindness and humanity. “We shall never meet again, I fear,”
     said he; “I feel a weight of foreboding here about my heart I never felt before; yet my trials
     have been many and great. I think the end is at hand.” Dr. Wolf's keepers received him, and
     their first act was to handcuff him. The cold steel struck into him deeper than his wrist, and
     reminded him of Silverton Grove; he could not suppress a shudder. The carriage rolled all
     through London with him. He saw the Parks with autumn's brown and golden tints: he saw the
     people, some rich, some poor, but none of them prisoners. He saw a little girl all rags. “Oh if
     I could be as ragged as you are,” he said, “and free.”
At last they reached Drayton House—a huge old mansion, fortified into a jail. His handcuffs
     were whipped off in the yard. He was ushered into a large gloomy drawing-room. Dr. Wolf soon
     came to him, and they measured each other by the eye like two prize-fighters. Dr. Wolf's eye
     fell under Alfred's, and the latter felt he was capable of much foul play. He was one of the
     old bull-necked breed: and contained the bull-dog and the spaniel in his single nature. “I hope
     you will be comfortable here, sir,” said he doggedly.
“I will try, sir.”
“The first-class patients dine in half an hour.”
“I will be ready, sir.”
“Full dress in the evening; there are several ladies.” Alfred assented by a bow. Dr. Wolf
     rang a bell, and told a servant to show Mr. Hardie his room.
He had just time to make his toilet when the bell rang for dinner.
As he went down a nurse met him, held up something white to him as she came, lowered it
     quickly, and dropped it at his feet in passing.
It was a billet-doux.
It was twisted into a pretty shape, scented and addressed to Mr. Hardie, in a delicate
     Italian hand, and in that pale ink which seems to reflect the charming timidity of the fair who
     use it.
He wondered; carried it into a recess; then opened it and read it. It contained but this one
     line—
“Drink nothing but water at dinner.”
These words in that delicate Italian hand sent a chill through Alfred. What on earth was all
     this? Was he to be poisoned? Was his life aimed at now instead of his reason? What was this
     mysterious drama prepared for him the very moment he set his foot in the place, perhaps before?
     A poisoner, and a friend! Both strangers. He went down to dinner: and contrived to examine
     every lady and gentleman at the table. But they were all strangers. Presently a servant filled
     his glass with beer; he looked and saw it was poured from a small jug holding only his portion.
     Alfred took his ring off his finger, and holding the glass up dropped his ring in.
“What is that for?” inquired one or two.
“Oh, my ring has a peculiar virtue, it tells me what is good for me. Ah! what do I see? My
     ruby changes colour. Fetch me a clean glass.” And he filled it with water from a caraffe. “No,
     sir, leave the beer. I'll analyse it in my room after dinner. I'm a chemist.”
Dr. Wolf changed colour, and was ill at ease. Here was a bold and ugly customer. However, he
     said nothing, and felt sure his morphia could not be detected in beer by any decomposer but the
     stomach. Still he was rather mystified.
In the evening Alfred came dressed into the drawing-room, and found several gentlemen and
     ladies there. One of the ladies seemed to attract the lion's share of male homage. Her back was
     turned to Alfred: but it was a beautiful back, with great magnificent neck and shoulders, and a
     skin like satin; she was tall but rounded and symmetrical, had a massive but long and shapely
     white arm, and perfect hand: and masses of thick black hair sat on her grand white poll like a
     raven on a marble pillar.
It was not easy to get near her; for the mad gentlemen were fawning on her all round; like
     Queen Elizabeth's courtiers.
However, Dr. Wolf, seeing Alfred standing alone, said, “Let me introduce you,” and took him
     round to her. The courtiers fell back a little. The lady turned her stately head, and her dark
     eyes ran lightly all over Alfred in a moment.
He bowed, and blushed like a girl. She curtseyed composedly and without a symptom of
     recognition—deep water runs still—and Dr. Wolf introduced them ceremoniously.
“Mr. Hardie—Mrs. Archbold.”
</div></body></text></TEI>