<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Mistress and Maid</title><author>Craik, Dinah Maria (1826-1887)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER XI.
Aunt Hilary fixed her honest eyes on the lad's face—the lad, so little younger than herself,
     and yet who at tunes, when he let out sayings such as this, seemed so awfully, so pitifully
     old; and she felt thankful that, at all risks and costs, they had come to London to be beside
     him, to help him, to save him, if he needed saving, as women only can. For, after all, he was
     but a boy. And though as he walked by her side, stalwart and manly, the thought smote her
     painfully that many a young fellow of his age was the stay and bread winner of some widowed
     mother or sister, nay even of wife and child, still she repeated cheerfully. "What can one
     expect from him? He is only a boy."
God help the women who, for those belonging to them—husbands, fathers, brothers, lovers,
     sons—have ever so tenderly to apologize.
When they came in sight of St. Pancras's Church, Ascott said, suddenly, "I think you'll knew
     your way now, Aunt Hilary."
"Certainly. Why?"
"Because—you wouldn't be vexed if I left you? I have an engagement; some fellows that I dine
     with, out at Hampstead, or Richmond, or Blackwell, every Sunday. Nothing wicked, I assure you.
     And you know it's capital for one's health to get a Sunday in fresh air."
"Yes; but Aunt Johanna will be sorry to miss you."
"Will she? Oh, you'll smooth her down. Stay! Tell her I shall be back to tea."
"We shall be having tea directly."
"I declare I had quite forgotten. Aunt Hilary, you must change your hours. They don't suit me
     at all. No men can ever stand early dinners. By, by! You are the very prettiest auntie. Be sure
     you get home safe. Hollo, there! That's my omnibus."
He jumped on the top of it, and was off.
Aunt Hilary stood quite confounded, and with one of those strange sinkings of the heart which
     had come over her several times this day. It was not that Ascott showed any unkindness—that
     there was any actual badness in his bright and handsome young face. Still there was a want
     there—want of earnestness, steadfastness, truthfulness, a something more discoverable as the
     lack of something else than as aught in itself tangibly and perceptibly wrong. It made her sad;
     it caused her to look forward to his future with an anxious heart. It was so different from the
     kind of anxiety, and yet settled repose, with which she thought of the only other man in whose
     future she felt the smallest interest. Of Robert Lyon, she was certain that whatever misfortune
     visited him he would bear it in the best way it could be borne; whatever temptation assailed
     him he would fight against it as a brave and good Christian should fight. But Ascott?
Ascott's life was as yet an unanswered query. She could but leave it in Omnipotent hands.
So she found her way home, asking it once or twice of civil policemen, and going a little
     distance round—dare I make this romantic confession about so sensible and practical a little
     woman?—that she might walk once up Burton Street and down again. But nobody knew the fact, and
     it did nobody any harm.
Meantime at No 15 the afternoon had passed heavily enough. Miss Selina had gone to lie down;
     she always did of Sundays, and Elizabeth, after making her comfortable, by the little
     attentions the lady always required, had descended to the dreary wash house, which had been
     appropriated to herself, under the name of a "private kitchen," in the which, after all the
     cleanings and improvements she could achieve, sat like Marius among the rains of Carthage, and
     sighed for the tidy bright house place at Stowbury. Already, from her brief experience, she had
     decided that London people were horrid shams, because they did not in the least care to have
     their kitchens comfortable. She wondered how she should ever exist in this one, and might have
     carried her sad and sullen face up stairs, if Miss Leaf had not come down stairs, and glancing
     about with that ever gentle smile of hers, said kindly, "Well, it is not very pleasant, but you
     have made the best of it, Elizabeth. We must all put up with something, you know. Now, as my
     eyes are not very good to-day, suppose you come up and read me a chapter."
So, in the quiet parlor, the maid sat down opposite her mistress, and read aloud out of that
     Book which says distinctly: "Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to
     the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ: knowing, that
     whatsoever good thing a man doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or
     free."
And yet says immediately after: "Ye masters, to the same things unto them, forbearing
     threatening: knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons
     with him."
And I think that Master whom Paul served, not in preaching only, but also in practice, when
     he sent back the slave Onesimus to Philemon, praying that he might be received, "no' now as a
     servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved," that Divine Master must have looked tenderly
     upon these two women—both women, though of such different age and position, and taught them
     through His Spirit in His word, as only He can teach.
The reading was disturbed by a carriage driving up to the door, and a knock, a tremendously
     grand and forcible footman's knock, which made Miss Leaf start in her easy chair.
"But it can't be visitors to us. We know nobody. Sit still, Elizabeth." 
It was a visitor, however, though by what ingenuity he found them out remained, when they
     came to think of it, a great puzzle. A card was sent in by the dirty servant of Mrs. Jones,
     speedily followed by a stout, bald headed, round faced man—I suppose I ought to write
     "gentleman"—in whom, though she had not seen him for years, Miss Leaf found no difficulty in
     recognizing the grocer's prentice boy, now Mr. Peter Ascott, of Russell Square.
She rose to receive him: there was always a stateliness in Miss Leaf's reception of
     strangers; a slight formality belonging to her own past generation, and to the time when the
     Leafs were a "county family." Perhaps this extra dignity, graceful as it was, overpowered the
     little man; or else, being a bachelor, he was unaccustomed to ladies' society: but he grew red
     in the face, twiddled his hat, and then cast a sharp inquisitive glance toward her.
"Miss Leaf, I presume, ma'am. The eldest?"
"I am the eldest Miss Leaf, and very glad to have an opportunity of thanking you for your
     long kindness to my nephew. Elizabeth, give Mr. Ascott a chair."
While doing so, and before her disappearance, Elizabeth took a rapid observation of the
     visitor, whose name and history were perfectly familiar to her. Most small towns have their
     hero, and Stowbury's was Peter Ascott, the grocer's boy, the little fellow who had gone up to
     London to seek his fortune, and had, strange to say, found it. Whether by industry or
     luck—except that industry is luck, and luck is only another word for industry—he had gradually
     risen to be a large city merchant, a dry-salter I conclude it would be called, with a handsome
     house, carriage, etc. He had never revisited his native place, which indeed could not be
     expected of him, as he had no relations, but, when asked, as was not seldom of course, he
     subscribed liberally to its charities.
Altogether he was a decided hero in the place, and though people really knew very little
     about him, the less they knew the more they gossiped, holding him up to the rising generation
     as a modern Dick Whittington, and reverencing him extremely as one who had shed glory on his
     native town. Even Elizabeth had conceived a great idea of Mr. Ascott. When she saw this little
     fat man, coarse and common looking in spite of his good clothes and diamond ring, and in manner
     a curious mixture of pomposity and awkwardness, she laughed to herself, thinking what a very
     uninteresting individual it was about whom Stowbury had told so many interesting stories.
     However, she went up to inform Miss Selina, and prevent her making her appearance before him in
     the usual Sunday dishabille in which she indulged when no visitors were expected.
After his first awkwardness, Mr. Peter Ascott became quite at his ease with Miss Leaf. He
     began to talk—not of Stowbury, that was tacitly ignored by both—but of London, and then of "my
     house in Russell Square," "my carriage," "my servants"—the inconvenience of keeping coachmen
     who would drink, and footmen who would not clean the plate properly; ending by what was a
     favorite moral axiom of his, that "wealth and position are heavy responsibilities."
He himself seemed, however, not to have been quite overwhelmed by them; he was fat and
     flourishing—with an acuteness and power in the upper half of his face which accounted for his
     having attained his present position. The lower half, somehow Miss Leaf did not like it, she
     hardly knew why, though a physiognomist might have known. For Peter Ascott had the
     underhanging, obstinate, sensual lip, the large throat—bull-necked, as it has been
     called—indications of that essentially animal nature which may be born with the nobleman as
     with the clown; which no education can refine, and no talent, though it may co-exist with it,
     can ever entirely remove. He reminded one, perforce, of the rough old proverb; "You can't make
     a silk purse out of a sow's ear."
Still, Mr. Ascott was not a bad man, though something deeper than his glorious indifference
     to grammar, and his dropped h's—which, to steal some one's joke, might have been swept up in
     bushels from Miss Leaf's parlor—made it impossible for him ever to be, by any culture whatever,
     a gentleman.
They talked of Ascott, as being the most convenient mutual subject; and Miss Leaf expressed
     the gratitude which her nephew felt, and she earnestly hoped would ever show, toward his kind
     godfather.
Mr. Ascott looked pleased.
"Um—yes, Ascott's not a bad fellow—believe he means well: but weak, ma'am, I'm afraid he's
     weak. Knows nothing of business—has no business habits whatever. However, we must make the best
     of him; I don't repent any thing I've done for him."
"I hope not," said Miss Leaf, gravely.
And then there ensued an uncomfortable pause, which was happily broken by the opening of the
     door, and the sweeping in of a large, goodly figure.
"My sister, Mr. Ascott; my sister Selina."
The little stout man actually started, and, as he bowed, blushed up to the eyes.
Miss Selina was, as I have stated, the beauty of the family, and had once been an
     acknowledged Stowbury belle. Even now, though nigh upon forty, when carefully and becomingly
     dressed, her tall figure, and her well featured, fair complexioned, unwrinkled face, made her
     still appear a very personable woman. At any rate, she was not faded enough, nor the city
     magnate's heart cold enough to prevent a sudden revival of the vision which—in what now seemed
     an almost antediluvian stage of existence—had dazzled, Sunday after Sunday, the eyes of the
     grocer's lad. If there is one pure spot in a man's heart—oven the very worldliest of men—it is
     usually his boyish first love.
So Peter Ascott looked hard at Miss Selina, then into his hat, then, as good luck would have
     it, out of the window, where he caught sight of his carriage and horses. These revived his
     spirits, and made him recognize what he was—Mr. Ascott, of Russell Square, addressing himself
     in the character of a benevolent patron to the Leaf family.
"Glad to see you, Miss. Long time since we met—neither of us so young as we have been—but you
     do wear well, I must say."
Miss Selina drew back; she was within an inch of being highly offended, when she too happened
     to catch a glimpse of the carriage and horses. So she sat down and entered into conversation
     with him; and when she liked, nobody could be more polite and agreeable than Miss Selina. So it
     happened that the handsome equipage crawled round and round the Crescent, or stood pawing the
     silent Sunday street before No. 15, for very nearly an hour, even till Hilary came home. It was
     vexatious to have to make excuses for Ascott: particularly as his godfather said with a laugh,
     that "young fellows would be young fellows," they needn't expect to see the lad till midnight,
     or till to-morrow morning.
But though in this, and other things, he somewhat annoyed the ladies from Stowbury, no one
     could say he was not civil to them—exceedingly civil. He offered them Botanical Garden
     tickets—Zoological Garden tickets; he even, after some meditation and knitting of his shaggy
     grey eyebrows, bolted out with an invitation for the whole family to dinner at Russell Square
     the following Sunday.
"I always give my dinners on Sunday. I've no time any other day," said he, when Miss Leaf
     gently hesitated. "Come or not, just as you like."
Miss Selina, to whom the remark was chiefly addressed, bowed the most gracious acceptance.
     The visitor took very little notice of Miss Hilary. Probably, if asked, he would have described
     her as a small, shabbily-dressed person, looking very like a governess. Indeed, the fact of her
     governess-ship seemed suddenly to recur to him; he asked her if she meant to set up another
     school, and being informed that she rather wished private pupils, promised largely that she
     should have the full benefit of his "patronage" among his friends. Then he departed, leaving a
     message for Ascott to call next day, as he wished to speak to him.
"For you must be aware, Miss Leaf, that though your nephew's allowance is nothing—a mere drop
     in the bucket out of my large income—still, when it comes year after year, and no chance of his
     shifting for himself, the most benevolent man in the world feels inclined to stop the supplies.
     Not that I shall do that—at least not immediately: he is a fine young fellow, whom I'm rather
     proud to have helped a step up the ladder, and I've a great respect"—here he bowed to Miss
     Selina—"a great respect for your family. Still there must come a time when I shall be obliged
     to shut up my purse-strings. You understand, ma'am."
"I do," Miss Leaf answered, trying to speak with dignity, and yet with patience, for she saw
     Hilary's face beginning to flame. "And I trust, Mr. Ascott, my nephew will soon cease to be an
     expense to you. It was your own voluntary kindness that brought it upon yourself, and I hope
     you have not found, never will find, either him or us ungrateful."
"Oh, as to that, ma'am, I don't look for gratitude. Still, if Ascott does work his way into a
     good position—and he'll be the first of his family that ever did, I reckon—but I beg your
     pardon, Miss Leaf. Ladies, I'll bid you good day. Will your servant call my carriage?"
The instant he was gone Hilary burst forth—
"If I were Ascott, I'd rather starve in a garret, break stones in the high road, or buy a
     broom and sweep a crossing, than I'd be dependent on this man, this pompous, purse-proud,
     illiterate fool!"
"No, not a fool," reproved Johanna. "An acute, clear-headed, nor, I think, bad-hearted man.
     Coarse and common, certainly; but if we were to hate every thing coarse or common, we should
     find plenty to hate. Besides, though he does his kindness in an unpleasant way, think how very,
     very kind he has been to Ascott."
"Johanna, I think you would find a good word for the de'il himself, as we used to say," cried
     Hilary, laughing. "Well, Selina; and what is your opinion of our stout friend?"
Miss Selina, bridling a little, declared that she did not see so much to complain of in Mr.
     Ascott. He was not educated, certainly, but he was a most respectable person. And his calling
     upon them so soon was most civil and attentive. She thought, considering his present position,
     they should forget—indeed, as Christians they were bound to forget—that he was once their
     grocer's boy, and go to dine with him next Sunday.
"For my part, I shall go, though it is Sunday. I consider it quite a religious duty—my duty
     towards my neighbor."
"Which is to love him as yourself. I am sure, Selina, I have no objection. It would be a
     grand romantic wind-up to the story which Stowbury used to tell—of how the 'prentice boy stared
     his eyes out at the beautiful young lady; and you would get the advantage of 'my house in
     Russell Square,' 'my carriage and servants,' and be able to elevate your whole family. Do, now!
     set your cap at Peter Ascott." Here Hilary, breaking out into one of her childish fits of
     irrepressible laughter, was startled to see Selina's face in one blaze of indignation.
"Hold your tongue, you silly chit, and don't chatter about things you don't understand."
And she swept majestically out of the room.
"What have I done? Why she is really vexed. If I had thought she would have taken it in
     earnest I would never have said a word. Who would have thought it!"
But Miss Selina's fits of annoyance were so common that the sisters rarely troubled
     themselves long on the matter. And when at tea-time she came down in the best of spirits, they
     met her half-way, as they always did, thankful for these brief calms in the family atmosphere,
     which never lasted too long. It was a somewhat heavy evening. They waited supper till after
     ten; and yet Ascott did not appear. Miss Leaf read the chapter as usual; and Elizabeth was sent
     to bed, but still no sign of the absentee.
"I will sit up for him. He cannot be many minutes new," said his Aunt Hilary, and settled
     herself in the solitary parlor, which one candle and no fire made as cheerless as could
     possibly be. There she waited till midnight before the young man came in. Perhaps he was struck
     with compunction by her weary white face—by her silent lighting of his candle, for he made her
     a thousand apologies.
"'Pon my honor, Aunt Hilary, I'll never keep you up so late again. Poor dear auntie, how
     tired she looks!" and he kissed her affectionately. "But if you were a young fellow, and got
     among other young fellows, and they over-persuaded you."
"You should learn to say, No."
"Ah"—with a sigh—"so I ought, if I were as good as my Aunt Hilary."
</div></body></text></TEI>