<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Mistress and Maid</title><author>Craik, Dinah Maria (1826-1887)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">
CHAPTER XXVI.
Let us linger a little over this chapter of happy love: so sweet, so rare a thing. Aye, most
     rare: though hundreds continually meet, love, or fancy they do, engage themselves, and marry;
     and hundreds more go through the same proceeding, with the slight difference of the love
     omitted—Hamlet, with the part of Hamlet left out. But the real love, steady and true: tried in
     the balance, and not found wanting: tested by time, silence, separation; by good and ill
     fortune; by the natural and inevitable change which years make in every character—this is the
     rarest thing to be found on earth, and the most precious.
I do not say that all love is worthless which is not exactly this sort of love. There have
     been people who have succumbed instantly and permanently to some mysterious attraction, higher
     than all reasoning; the same which made Hilary "take an interest" in Robert Lyon's face at
     church, and made him, he afterward confessed, the very first time he gave Ascott a lesson in
     the parlor at Stowbury, say to himself, "If I did marry, I think I should like such a wife as
     that brown-eyed bit lassie." And there have been other people, who choosing their partners from
     accidental circumstances, or from mean worldly motives, have found Providence kinder to them
     than they deserved, and settled down into happy, affectionate husbands and wives.
But none of these loves can possibly have the sweetness, the completeness of such a love as
     that between Hilary Leaf and Robert Lyon.
There was nothing very romantic about it. From the moment when Johanna entered the parlor,
     found them standing hand-in-hand at the fireside, and Hilary came forward and kissed her, and
     after a slight hesitation Robert did the same, the affair proceeded in most millpond
     fashion:
        "Unruffled by those cataracts and breaks,         That humor interposed too often
     makes.': 
There were no lovers' quarrels; Robert Lyon had chosen that best blessing next to a good
     woman, a sweet tempered woman; and there was no reason why they should quarrel more as lovers
     than they had done as friends. And, let it be said to the eternal honor of both, now, no more
     than in their friendship days, was there any of that hungry engrossment of each other's
     society, which is only another form of selfishness, and by which lovers so often make their own
     happy courting time a season of never-to-be-forgotten bitterness to every body connected with
     them.
Johanna suffered a little: all people do when the new rights clash with the old ones; but she
     rarely betrayed it. She was exceedingly good: she saw her child happy, and she loved Robert
     Lyon dearly. He was very mindful of her, very tender; and as Hilary still persisted in doing
     her daily duty in the shop, he spent more of his time with the elder sister than he did with
     the younger, and sometimes declared solemnly that if Hilary did not treat him well he intended
     to make an offer to Johanna!
Oh, the innumerable little jokes of those happy days! Oh, the long, quiet walks by the river
     side, through the park, across Ham Common—any where—it did not matter; the whole world looked
     lovely, even on the dullest winter day! Oh, the endless talks; the renewed mingling of two
     lives, which, though divided, had never been really apart, for neither had any thing to
     conceal; neither had ever loved any but the other.
Robert Lyon was, as I have said, a good deal changed, outwardly and inwardly. He had mixed
     much in society, taken an excellent position therein, and this had given him not only a more
     polished manner, but an air of decision and command, as of one used to be obeyed. There could
     not be the slightest doubt, as Johanna once laughingly told him, that he would always be
     "master in his own house."
But he was very gentle with his "little woman" as he called her. He would sit for hours at
     the "ingle-neuk"—how he did luxuriate in the English fires!—with Hilary on a footstool beside
     him, her arm resting on his knee, or her hand fast clasped in his. And sometimes, when Johanna
     went out of the room, he would stoop and gather her close to his heart. But I shall tell no
     tales; the world has no business with these sort of things.
Hilary was very shy of parading her happiness; she disliked any demonstrations thereof, even
     before Johanna. And when Miss Balquidder, who had, of course, been told of the engagement, came
     down one day expressly to see her "fortunate fellow countryman," this Machiavellian little
     woman actually persuaded her lover to have an important engagement in London! She could not
     bear him to be "looked at."
"Ah, well, you must leave me, and I will miss you terribly, my deal," said the old Scotch
     woman. But it's an ill wind that blows nobody good, and I have another young lady quite ready
     to step into your shoes. When shall you be married?"
"I don't know—hush: we'll talk another time," said Hilary, glancing at Johanna.
Miss Balquidder took the hint and was silent.
That important question was indeed beginning to weigh heavily on Hilary's mind. She was fully
     aware of what Mr. Lyon wished, and indeed, expected; that when, the business of the firm being
     settled, in six months hence he returned to India, he should not return alone. When he said
     this, she had never dared to answer, hardly even to think. She let the peaceful present float
     on, day by day, without recognizing such a thing as the future.
But this could not be always. It came to an end one January afternoon, when he had returned
     from a second absence in Liverpool. They were walking up Richmond Hill. The sun had set
     frostily and red over the silver curve of the Thames, and Venus, large and bright, was shining
     like a great eye in the western sky. Hilary long remembered exactly how every thing looked,
     even to the very tree they stood under, when Robert Lyon asked her to fix definitely the day
     that she would marry him. Would she consent—there seemed no special reason to the contrary—that
     it should be immediately? Or would she like to remain with Johanna as she was, till just before
     they sailed? He wished to be as good as possible to Johanna—still.
And something in his manner impressed Hilary more than ever before with the conviction of all
     she was to him; likewise, all he was to her. More, much more than even a few short weeks since.
     Then, intense as it was, the love had a dream like unreality; now it was close, home-like,
     familiar. Instinctively she clung to his arm; she had become so used to being Robert's darling
     now. She shivered as she thought of the wide seas rolling between them; of the time when she
     should look for him at the daily meal and daily fireside, and find him no more.
"Robert, I want to talk to you about Johanna."
"I guess what it is," said he, smiling; "you would like her to go out to India with us.
     Certainly, if she chooses. I hope you did not suppose I should object."
"No; but it is not that. She would not live six months in a hot climate; the doctor tells me
     so."
"You consulted him?"
"Yes, confidentially, without her knowing it. But I thought it right. I wanted to make quite
     sure before—before— Oh, Robert—." 
The grief of her tone caused him to suspect what was coming, He started.
"You don't mean that? Oh no, you can not! My little woman, my own little woman—she could not
     be so unkind."
Hilary turned sick at heart. The dim landscape, the bright sky, seemed to mingle and dance
     before her, and Venus to stare at her with a piercing, threatening, baleful lustre.
"Robert, let me sit down on the bench, and sit you beside me. It is too dark for people to
     notice us, and we shall not be very cold."
"No, my darling;" and he slipped his plaid round her shoulders, and his arm with it.
She looked up pitifully. "Don't be vexed with me, Robert, dear; I have thought it all over;
     weighed it on every side; nights and nights I have been awake pondering what was right to do.
     And it always comes to the same thing."
"What?"
"It's the old story," she answered with a feeble smile. "'I canna leave my minnie.' There is
     nobody in the world to take care of Johanna but me, not even Elizabeth, who is engrossed in
     little Henry. If I left her, I am sure it would kill her. And she can not come with me. Dear!"
     (the only fond name she ever called him) "for these three years—you say it need only be three
     years—you will have to go back to India alone."
Robert Lyon was a very good man; but he was only a man, not an angle; and though he made
     comparatively little show of it, he was a man very deeply in love. With that jealous tenacity
     over his treasure, hardly blamable, since the love is worth little which does not wish to have
     its object "all to itself," he had, I am afraid, contemplated not without pleasure the carrying
     off of Hilary to his Indian home; and it had cost him something to propose that Johanna should
     go too. He was very fond of Johanna; still—
If I tell what followed will it forever lower Robert Lyon in the estimation of all readers?
     He said, coldly, "As you please, Hilary;" rose up, and never spoke another word till they
     reached home.
It was the first dull tea table they had ever known; the first time Hilary had ever looked at
     that dear face, and seen an expression there which made her look away again. He did not sulk;
     he was too gentlemanly for that; he even exerted himself to make the meal pass pleasantly as
     usual; but he was evidently deeply wounded; nay, more, displeased. The strong, stern man's
     nature within him had rebelled; the sweetness had gone out of his face, and something had come
     into it which the very best of men have sometimes: alas for the woman who cannot understand and
     put up with it!
I am not going to preach the doctrine of tyrants and slaves; but when two walk together they
     must be agreed, or if by any chance they are not agreed, one must yield. It may not always be
     the weaker, or in weakness may lie the chiefest strength; but it must be one or other of the
     two who has to be the first to give way; and, save in very exceptional cases, it is, and it
     ought to be, the woman. God's law and nature's which is also God's, ordains this; instinct
     teaches it; Christianity enforces it.
Will it inflict a death blow upon any admiration she may have excited, this brave little
     Hilary, who fought through the world by herself; who did not shrink from traversing London
     streets alone at seemly and unseemly hours; from going into sponging houses and debtor's
     prisons; from earning her own livelihood, even in a shop—if I confess that Robert Lyon, being
     angry with her, justly or unjustly, and she, looking upon him as her future husband, her "lord
     and master" if you will, whom she would one day promise, and intended, literally "to obey"—she
     thought it her duty, not only her pleasure but her duty, to be the first to make reconciliation
     between them? ay, and at every sacrifice, except that of principle.
And I am afraid, in spite of all that "strong-minded" women may preach to the contrary, that
     all good women will have to do this to all men who stand in any close relation toward them,
     whether fathers, husbands, brothers, or lovers, if they wish to preserve peace, and love, and
     holy domestic influence; and that so it must be to the end of time.
Miss Leaf might have discovered that something was amiss; but she was too wise to take any
     notice, and being more than usually feeble that day, immediately after tea she went to lie
     down. When Hilary followed her, arranged her pillows, and covered her up, Johanna drew her
     child's face close to her and whispered,
"That will do, love. Don't stay with me. I would not keep you from Robert on any account." 
Hilary all but broke down; and yet the words made her stronger firmer; set more clearly
     before her the solemn duty which young folks in love are so apt to forget, that there can be no
     blessing on the new tie, if for any thing short of inevitable necessity they let go one link of
     the old.
Yet, Robert— It was such a new and dreadful feeling to be standing outside the door and
     shrink from going in to him; to see him rise up formally, saying, "Perhaps he had better
     leave;" and have to answer with equal formality, "Not unless you are obliged;" and for him
     then, with a shallow pretence of being at ease, to take up a book and offer to read aloud to
     her while she worked. He—who used always to set his face strongly against all sewing of
     evenings—because it deprived him temporarily of the sweet eyes, and the little soft hand. Oh,
     it was hard, hard!
Nevertheless, she sat still and tried to listen; but the words went in at one ear and out at
     the other; she retained nothing. By-and-by her throat began to swell, and she could not see her
     needle and thread. Yet still he went on reading. It was only when, by some blessed chance,
     turning to reach a paper cutter, he caught sight of her, that he closed the book and looked
     discomposed; not softened, only discomposed.
Who shall be first to speak? Who shall catch the passing angel's wing? One minute, and it may
     have passed over. I am not apologizing for Hilary the least in the world. I do not know even if
     she considered whether it was her place or Robert's to make the first advance. Indeed, I fear
     she did not consider it at all, but just acted upon impulse, because it was so cruel, so heart
     breaking, to be at variance with him. But if she had considered it I doubt not she would have
     done from duty exactly what she did by instinct—crept up to him as he sat at the fireside, and
     laid her little hand on his.
"Robert, what makes you so angry with me still?"
"Not angry; I have no right to be."
"Yes, you would have if I had really done wrong. Have I?"
"You must judge for yourself. For me—I thought you loved me better than I find you do, and I
     made a mistake; that is all."
Ay, he had made a mistake, but it was not that one. It was the other mistake that men
     continually make about women; they can not understand that love is not worth having, that it is
     not love at all, but merely a selfish carrying out of selfish desires, if it blinds us to any
     other duty, or blunts in us any other sacred tenderness. They can not see how she who is false
     in one relation may be false in another; and that, true as human nature's truth, ay, and often
     fulfilling itself, is Brabantio's ominous warning to Othello—
        "Look to her, Moor! have a good eye to see;         She has deceived her father, and
     may thee." 
Perhaps as soon as he had said the bitter word Mr. Lyon was sorry, any how, the soft answer
     which followed it thrilled through every nerve of the strong willed man—a man not easily made
     angry, but when he was, very hard to move.
"Robert, will you listen to me for two minutes?"
"For as long as you like, only you must not expect me to agree with you. You can not suppose
     I shall say it is right for you to forsake me."
"I forsake you? Oh, Robert!"
Words are not always the wisest arguments. His "little woman" crept closer, and laid her head
     on his breast: he clasped convulsively.
"Oh, Hilary, how could you wound me so?"
And in lieu of the discussion, a long silence brooded over the fireside—the silence of
     exceeding love.
"Now, Robert, may I talk to you?"
"Yes. Preach away, my little conscience."
"It shall not be preaching, and it is not altogether for conscience," said she smiling. "You
     would not like me to tell you I did not love Johanna?"
"Certainly not. I love her very much myself, only I prefer you, as is natural. Apparently you
     do not prefer me, which may also be natural."
"Robert!"
There are times when a laugh is better than a reproach; and something else, which need not be
     more particularly explained, is safer than either. It is possible Hilary tried the experiment,
     and then resumed her "say."
"Now, Robert put yourself in my place, and try to think for me. I have been Johanna's child
     for thirty years; she is entirely dependent upon me. Her health is feeble; every year of her
     life is at least doubtful. If she lost me I think she would never live out the next three
     years. You would not like that?"
"No."
"In all divided duties like this somebody must suffer; the question is, which can suffer
     best? She is old and frail, we are young; she is alone, we are two; she never had any happiness
     in her life, except, perhaps me; and we—oh how happy we are! I think, Robert, it would be
     better for us to suffer than poor Johanna."
"You little Jesuit," he said: but the higher nature of the man was roused; he was no longer
     angry.
"It is only for a short time, remember—only three years."
"And how can I do without you for three years?"
"Yes, Robert, you can." And she put her arms round his neck, and looked at him, eye to eye.
     "You know I am your very own, a piece of yourself, as it were; that when I let you go it is
     like tearing myself from myself; yet I can bear it, rather than do, or let you do, in the
     smallest degree, a thing which is not right."
Robert Lyon was not a man of many words; but he had the rare faculty of seeing a case
     clearly, without reference to himself, and of putting it clearly also, when necessary.
"It seems to me, Hilary, that this is hardly a matter of abstract right or wrong, or a good
     deal might be argued on my side of the subject. It is more a case of personal conscience. The
     two are not always identical, though they look so at first; but they both come to the same
     result."
"And that is—"
"If my little woman thinks it right to act as she does, I also think it right to let her. And
     let this be the law of our married life, if we ever are married," and he sighed, "that when we
     differ each should respect the other's conscience, and do right in the truest sense, by
     allowing the other to do the same."
"Oh, Robert! how good you are."
So these two, an hour after, met Johanna with cheerful faces; and she never knew how much
     both had sacrificed for her sake. Once only, when she was for a few minutes absent from the
     parlor, did Robert Lyon renew the subject, to suggest a medium course.
But Hilary resolutely refused. Not that she doubted him—she doubted herself. She knew quite
     well by the pang that darted through her like a shaft of ice, as she felt his warm arm round
     her, and thought of the time when she would feel it no more, that, after she had been Robert
     Lyon's happy wife for three months, to let him go to India without her would be simply and
     utterly impossible.
Fast fled the months; they dwindled into weeks, and then into days. I shall not enlarge upon
     this time. Now, when the ends of the world have been drawn together, and every family has one
     or more relatives abroad, a grief like Hilary's has become so common that nearly every one can,
     in degree, understand it. How bitter such partings are, how much they take out of the brief
     span of mortal life, and, therefore, how far they are justifiable, for any thing short of
     absolute necessity, Heaven knows.
In this case it was an absolutely necessity. Robert Lyon's position in "our firm," with which
     he identified himself with the natural pride of a man who has diligently worked his way up to
     fortune, was such that he could not, without sacrificing his future prospects, and likewise
     what he felt to be a point of honor, refuse to go back to Bombay until such time as his senior
     partner's son, the young fellow whom he had "coached" in Hindostanee, and nursed through a
     fever years ago, could conveniently take his place abroad.
"Of course," he said, explaining this to Hilary and her sister, "accidental circumstances
     might occur to cause my return home before the three years were out, but the act must be none
     of mine; I must do my duty."
"Yes, you must," answered Hilary, with a gleam lighting up her eyes. She loved so in him this
     one great principle of his life—the back-bone of it, as it were—duty before all things.
Johanna asked no questions. Once she had inquired, with a tremulous, hardly concealed alarm,
     whether Robert wished to take Hilary back with him, and Hilary had kissed her, smilingly,
     saying, "No, that was impossible." Afterward the subject was never revived.
And so these two lovers, both stern in what they thought their duty, went on silently
     together to the last day of parting.
It was almost as quiet a day as that never-to-be-forgotten Sunday at Stowbury. They went a
     long walk together, in the course of which Mr. Lyon forced her to agree to what hitherto she
     had steadfastly resisted, that she and Johanna should accept from him enough, in addition to
     their own fifty pounds a year, to enable them to live comfortably without her working any
     more.
"Are you ashamed of my working?" she asked, with something between a tear and a smile.
     "Sometimes I used to be afraid you would think the less of me because circumstances made me an
     independent woman, earning my own bread. Do you?"
"My darling, no. I am proud of her. But she must never work any more. Johanna says right; it
     is a man's place, and not a woman's. I will not allow it."
When he spoke in that tone Hilary always submitted.
He told her another thing while arranging with her all the business part of their concerns,
     and to reconcile her to this partial dependence upon him, which, he urged, was only
     forestalling his rights; that before he first quitted England, seven years ago, he had made his
     will, leaving her, if still unmarried, his sole heir and legatee, indeed in exactly the
     position that she would have been had she been his wife.
"This will exists still; so that in any case you are safe. No further poverty can ever befall
     my Hilary."
His—his own—Robert Lyon's own. Her sense of this was so strong that it took away the
     sharpness of the parting, made her feel, up to the very last minute, when she clung to him—was
     pressed close to him—heart to heart and lip to lip—for a space that seemed half a life-time of
     mixed anguish and joy—that he was not really going; that somehow or other, next day or next
     week he would be back again, as in his frequent re-appearances, exactly as before.
When he was really gone—when, as she sat with her tearless eyes fixed on the closed
     door—Johanna softly touched her, saying, "My child" then Hilary learned it all.
The next twenty-four hours will hardly bear being written about. Most people know what it is
     to miss the face out of the house—the life out of the heart. To come and go, to eat and drink,
     to lie down and rise, and find all thing the same, and gradually to recognize that it must be
     the same, indefinitely, perhaps always. To be met continually by small trifles—a dropped glove,
     a book, a scrap of handwriting that yesterday would have been thrown into the fire, but to-day
     is picked up and kept as a relic; and at times, bursting through the quietness which must be
     gained, or at least assumed, the cruel craving for one word more—one kiss more—for only one
     five minutes of the eternally ended yesterday!
All this hundreds have gone through; so did Hilary. She said afterward it was good for her
     that she did; it would make her feel for others in a way she had never felt before. Also,
     because it taught her that such a heart-break can be borne and lived through when help is
     sought where only real help can be found; and where, when reason fails, and those who, striving
     to do right irrespective of the consequences, cry out against their torments and wonder why
     they should be made so to suffer, childlike faith comes to their rescue. For, let us have all
     the philosophy at our fingers' ends, what are we but children? We know not what a day may bring
     forth. All wisdom resolves itself into the simple hymn which we learned when we were young:
        "Deep in unfathomable mines         Of never-failing skill.         He treasures up
     His vast designs,         And works His sovereign will. 
        "Blind unbelief is sure to err.         And scan His work in vain:         God is His
     own interpreter.         And He will make it plain." 
The night after Robert Lyon left, Hilary and Johanna were sitting together in their parlor.
     Hilary had been writing a long letter to Miss Balquidder, explaining that she would now give up
     in favor of the other young lady, or any other of the many to whom it would be a blessing, her
     position in the shop; but that she hoped still to help her—Miss Balquidder—in any way she could
     point out that would be useful to others. She wished, in her humble way, as a sort of thank
     offering from one who had passed through the waves and been landed safe ashore, to help those
     who were still struggling, as she herself had struggled once. She desired, as far as in her
     lay, to be Miss Balquidder's "right hand" till Mr. Lyon came home.
This letter she read aloud to Johanna, whose failing eye sight refused all candle light
     occupation, and then came and sat beside her in silence. She felt terribly worn and weary, but
     she was very quiet now.
"We must go to bed early," was all she said.
"Yes, my child."
And Johanna smoothed her hair in the old, fond way, making no attempt to console her, but
     only to love her—always the safest consolation. And Hilary was thankful that never, even in her
     sharpest agonies of grief, had she betrayed that secret which would have made her sister's life
     miserable, have blotted out the thirty years of motherly love, and caused the other love to
     rise up like a cloud between her and it, never to be lifted until Johanna sank into the
     possibly not far-off grave.
"No, no," she thought to herself, as she looked on that frail, old face, which even the
     secondary, grief of this last week seemed to have made frailer and older. "No, it is better as
     it is; I believe I did right. The end will show."
The end was nearer than she thought. So, sometimes—not often, lest self-sacrifice should
     become a less holy thing than it is—Providence accepts the will for the act, and makes the
     latter needless.
There was a sudden knock at the hall door. "It is the young people coming in to supper."
"It's not," said Hilary, starting up—"it's not their knock. It is—"
She never finished the sentence, for she was sobbing in Robert Lyon's arms.
"What does it all mean?" cried the bewildered Johanna, of whom, I must confess, for once
     nobody took the least notice.
It meant that, by one of these strange accidents, as we call them, which in a moment alter
     the whole current of things, the senior partner had suddenly died, and his son, not being
     qualified to take his place in the Liverpool house, had to go out to India instead of Robert
     Lyon, who would now remain permanently, as the third senior partner, in England.
This news had met him at Southampton. He had gone thence direct to Liverpool, arranged
     affairs so far as was possible, and returned, traveling without an hour's intermission, to tell
     his own tidings, as was best—or as he thought it was.
Perhaps at the core of his heart lurked the desire to come suddenly back, as, it is said, if
     the absent or the dead should come, they would find all things changed; the place filled up in
     home and hearth—no face of welcome—no heart leaping to heart in the ecstasy of reunion.
Well, if Robert Lyon had any misgivings—and being a man, and in love, perhaps he had—they
     were ended now.
"Is she glad to see me?" was all he could find to say when, Johanna having considerately
     vanished, he might have talked as much as he pleased.
Hilary's only answer was a little, low laugh of inexpressible content.
He lifted up between his bands the sweet face, neither so young nor so pretty as it had been,
     but oh! so sweet, with the sweetness that long outlives beauty—a face that a man might look on
     all his life time and never tire of—so infinitely loving, so infinitely true! And he knew it
     was his wife's face, to shine upon him day by day, and year by year, till it faded into old
     age—beautiful and beloved even then. All the strong nature of the man gave way; he wept almost
     like a child in his "little woman's" arms.
Let us leave them there, by that peaceful fireside—these two, who are to sit by one fire-side
     as long as they live. Of their further fortune we know nothing—nor do they themselves—except
     the one fact, in itself joy enough for any mortal cup to hold, that it will be shared together.
     Two at the hearth, two abroad; two to labor, two to rejoice; or, if so it must be, two to weep,
     and two to comfort one another; the man to be the head of the woman, and the woman the heart of
     the man. This is the ordination of God; this is the perfect life; none the less perfect that so
     many fall short of it.
So let us bid them good-by: Robert Lyon and Hilary Leaf, "Good-by; God be with ye!" for we
     shall see them no more. 
</div></body></text></TEI>