<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Mistress and Maid</title><author>Craik, Dinah Maria (1826-1887)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER XX.
Ascott Leaf never came home.
Day after day appeared the advertisement, sometimes slightly altered, as hope or fear
     suggested; but no word, no letter, no answer of any kind reached the anxious women.
By-and-by, moved by their distress, or perhaps feeling that the scape-grace would be safer
     got rid of if found and dispatched abroad in some decent manner, Mr. Ascott himself took
     measures for privately continuing the search. Every outward-bound ship was examined; every
     hospital visited; every case of suicide investigated: but in vain. The unhappy young man had
     disappeared, suddenly and completely, as many another has disappeared, out of the home circle,
     and been never heard of more.
It is difficult to understand how a family can possibly hear such a sorrow, did we not know
     that many have had to bear it, and have borne it, with all its load of agonizing suspense,
     slowly dying hope,
"The hope that keeps alive despair," settling down into a permanent grief, compared to which
     the grief for loss by death is light and endurable.
The Leaf family went through all this. Was it better or worse for them that their anguish had
     to be secret? that there were no friends to pity, inquire, or console? that Johanna had to sit
     hour by hour and day by day in the solitary parlor, Selina having soon gone back to her old
     ways of "gadding about," and her marriage preparations; and that, hardest of all, Hilary had on
     the Monday morning to return to Kensington and work, work, work, as nothing were amiss?
But it was natural that all this should tell upon her; and one day Miss Balquidder said,
     after a long covert observation of her face, "My dear, you look ill. Is there any thing
     troubling you? My young people always tell me their troubles, bodily or mental. I doctor
     both."
"I am sure of it," said Hilary, with a sad smile, but entered into no explanation, and Miss
     Balquidder had the wise kindliness to inquire no further. Nevertheless, on some errand or other
     she came to Kensington nearly every evening and took Hilary back with her to sleep at No.
     15.
"Your sister Selina must wish to have you with her as much as possible till she is married."
     she said, as a reason for doing this.
And Hilary acquiesced, but silently, as we often do acquiesce in what ought to be a truth,
     but which we know to be the saddest, most painful falsehood.
For Selina, it became plain to see, was one of the family no more. After her first burst of
     self-reproachful grief she took Mr. Ascott's view of her nephew's loss—that it was a good
     riddance; went on calmly with her bridal preparations, and seemed only afraid lest any thing
     should interfere to prevent her marriage.
But the danger was apparently tided over. No news of Ascott came. Even the daily inquiries
     for him by his creditors had ceased. His Aunt Selina was beginning to breathe freely, when, the
     morning before the wedding day, as they were all sitting in the midst of white finery, but as
     sadly and silently as if it were a funeral, a person was suddenly shown in "on business."
It was a detective officer sent to find out from Ascott Leaf's aunts whether a certain
     description of him, in a printed hand-bill, was correct. For his principal creditor,
     exasperated, had determined on thus advertising him in the public papers as having
     "absconded."
Had a thunder-bolt fallen in the little parlor the three aunts could not have been more
     utterly overwhelmed. They made no "scene"—a certain sense of pride kept these poor gentlewomen
     from betraying their misery to a strange man; though he was a very civil man, and having
     delivered himself of his errand, like an automaton, sat looking into his hat, and taking no
     notice of aught around him. He was accustomed to this sort of thing.
Hilary was the first to recover herself. She glanced round at her sisters, but they had not a
     word to say. In any crisis of family difficulty they always left her to take the helm.
Rapidly she ran over in her mind all the consequences that would arise from this new
     trouble—the public disgrace; Mr. Ascott's anger and annoyance, not that she cared much for
     this, except so far as it would affect Selina; lastly, the death-blow it was to any possible
     hope of reclaiming the poor prodigal. Who she did not believe was dead, but still, fondly
     trusted he would return one day from his wanderings and his swine's husks, to have the fatted
     calf killed for him and glad tears shed over him. But after being advertised as "absconded,"
     Ascott never would, never could, come home any home.
Taking as cool and business-like a tone as she could, she returned the paper to the
     detective.
"This is a summary proceeding. Is there no way of avoiding it?"
"One, Miss," replied the man, very respectfully. "If the family would pay the debt."
"Do you know how much it is?"
"Eighty pounds."
"Ah!"
That hopeless sigh of Johanna's was sufficient answer, though no one spoke.
But in desperate cases some women acquire a desperate courage, or rather it is less courage
     than faith—the faith which is said to "remove mountains"—the belief that to the very last there
     must be something to be done, and, if it can be done, they will have strength to do it. True,
     the mountain may not be removed, but the mere act of faith, or courage sometimes teaches how to
     climb over it.
"Very well. Take this paper back to your employer. He must be aware that his only chance of
     payment is by suppressing it. If he will do that, in two days he shall hear from us, and we
     will make arrangements about paying the debt."
Hilary said this, to her sisters' utter astonishment; so utter that they let her say it, and
     let the detective go away with a civil "Good morning," before they could interfere or
     contradict by a word.
"Paying the debt! Hilary, what have you promised? It is an impossibility."
"Like the Frenchman's answer to his mistress—'Madame, if it had been possible it would have
     been done already; if it is impossible, it shall be done.' It shall, I say."
"I wonder you can jest about our misfortunes," said Selina, in her most querulous voice.
"I'm not jesting. But where is the use of sitting down to moan! I mean what I say. The thing
     must be done."
Her eyes glittered—her small, red lips were set tightly together.
"If it is not done, sisters—if his public disgrace is not prevented, don't you see the
     result? Not as regards your marriage, Selina—the man must be a coward who would refuse to marry
     a woman he cared for, even though her nearest kinsman had been hanged at the Old Bailey—but
     Ascott himself. The boy is not a bad boy, though he has done wickedly; but there is a
     difference between a wicked act and a wicked nature. I mean to save him if I can."
"How?"
"By saving his good name; by paying the debt."
"And where on earth shall you get the money?"
"I will go to Miss Balquidder and—"
"Borrow it?"
"No, never! I would as soon think of stealing it."
Then controlling herself, Hilary explained that she meant to ask Miss Balquidder to arrange
     for her with the creditor to pay the eighty pounds by certain weekly or monthly installments,
     to be deducted from her salary at Kensington.
"It is not a very great favor to ask of her: merely that she should say, 'This young woman is
     employed by me: I believe her to be honest, respectable, and so forth; also, that when she
     makes a promise to pay, she will to the best of her power perform it.' A character which is at
     present rather a novelty in the Leaf family."
"Hilary!"
"I am growing bitter, Johanna; I know I am. Why should we suffer so much! Why should we be
     always dragged down—down—in this way? Why should we never have had any one to cherish and take
     care of us, like other women! Why—"
Miss Leaf laid her finger on her child's lips—
"Because it is the will of God."
Hilary flung herself on her dear old sister's neck and burst into tears.
Selina too cried a little, and said that she should like to help in paying the debt, if Mr.
     Ascott had no objection. And then she turned back to her white splendors, and became absorbed
     in the annoyance of there being far too much clematis and far too little orange blossom in the
     bridal bonnet—which it was now too late to change. A little, also, she vexed herself about the
     risk of confiding in Miss Balquidder, lest by any chance the story might get round to Russell
     Square; and was urgent that at least nothing should be said or done until after to-morrow. She
     was determined to be married, and dreaded any slip between the cup and lip.
But Hilary was resolute. "I said that in two days the matter should be arranged, and so it
     must be, or the man will think we too break our promises."
"You can assure him to the contrary," said Selina, with dignity. "In fact, why can't you
     arrange with him without going at all to Miss Balquidder?"
Again the fierce, bitter expression returned to Hilary's face.
"You forget, Miss Balquidder's honest name is his only guarantee against the dishonesty of
     ours."
"Hilary, you disgrace us—disgrace me—speaking in such a way. Are we not gentle women?"
"I don't know, Selina. I don't seem to know or to feel any thing, except that I would live on
     bread and water in order to live peaceably and honestly. Oh, will it ever, ever be?"
She walked up and down the parlor, disarranging the white draperies which lay about, feeling
     unutterable contempt for them and for her sister. Angry and miserable, with every nerve
     quivering, she was at war with the whole world.
This feeling lasted even when, after some discussion, she gained her point and was on her way
     to call on Miss Balquidder. She went round and round the Square many times, trying to fix in
     her mind word for word what she meant to say; revealing no more of the family history than was
     absolutely necessary, and stating her business in the briefest, hardest, most matter-of-fact
     way—putting it as a transaction between employer and employed, in which there was no more favor
     asked or bestowed than could possibly be avoided. And as the sharp east wind blew across her at
     every corner, minute by minute she felt herself growing more fierce, and hard, and cold.
"This will never do. I shall be wicked by-and-by. I must go in and get it over."
Perhaps it was as well. Well for her, morally as physically, that there should have been that
     sudden change from the blighting weather outside to the warm, well-lighted room where the good
     rich woman sat at her early and solitary tea.
Very solitary it looked—the little table in the centre of that large handsome parlor, with
     the one cup and saucer, the one easy-chair. And as Hilary entered she noticed, amidst all this
     comfort and luxury, the still, grave, almost sad expression which solitary people always get to
     wear.
But the next minute Miss Balquidder had turned round, and risen, smiling.
"Miss Leaf, how very kind of you to come and see me! Just the day before the wedding, too,
     when you must be so busy! Sit down and tell me all about it. But first, my dear, how wet your
     boots are! Let me take them off at once."
Which she did, sending for her own big slippers, and putting them on the tiny feet with her
     own hands.
Hilary submitted—in truth she was too much surprised to resist.
Miss Balquidder had, like most folk, her opinions or "crotchets"—as they might be—and one of
     them was, to keep her business and friendly relations entirely distinct and apart. Whenever she
     went to Kensington or her other establishments she was always emphatically "the mistress"—a
     kindly and even motherly mistress, certainly, but still authoritative, decided. Moreover, it
     was her invariable rule to treat all her employees alike—"making no step-bairns" among them.
     Thus for some time it had happened that Hilary had been, and felt herself to be, just Miss
     Leaf, the book keeper, doing her duty to Miss Balquidder, her employer, and neither expecting
     nor attaining any closer relation.
But in her own house, or it might be from the sudden apparition of that young face at her
     lonely fireside, Miss Balquidder appeared quite different.
A small thing touches a heart that is sore with trouble. When the good woman rose up—after
     patting the little feet, and approving loudly of the woolen stockings—she saw that Hilary's
     whole face was quivering with the effort to keep back her tears.
There are some woman of whom one feels by instinct that they were, as Miss Balquidder had
     once jokingly said of herself, specially meant to be mothers. And though, in its strange
     providence, Heaven often denies the maternity, it can not and does not mean to shut up the
     well-spring of that maternal passion—truly a passion to such women as these, almost as strong
     as the passion of love—but lets the stream, which might otherwise have blessed one child or one
     family, flow out wide and far, blessing wherever it goes.
In a tone that somehow touched every fibre of Hilary's heart, Miss Balquidder said, placing
     her on a low chair beside her own. 
"My dear, you are in trouble. I saw it a week or two ago, but did not like to speak. Couldn't
     you say it out, and let me help you? You need not be afraid. I never tell any thing, and every
     body tells every thing to me."
That was true. Added to this said mother-liness of hers, Miss Balquidder, possessed that
     faculty, which some people have in a remarkable degree, and some—very good people too—are
     totally deficient in, of attracting confidence. The secrets she had been trusted with, the
     romances she had been mixed up in, the Quixotic acts she had been called upon to perform during
     her long life, would have made a novel—or several novels—such as no novelist could dare to
     write, for the public would condemn them as impossible and unnatural. But all this
     experience—though happily it could never be put into a book—had given to the woman herself a
     view of human nature at once so large, lenient, and just, that she was the best person possible
     to hear the strange and pitiful story of young Ascott Leaf.
How it came out Hilary hardly knew; she seemed to have told very little, and yet Miss
     Balquidder guessed it all. It did not appear to surprise or shock her. She neither began to
     question nor preach; she only laid her hand, her large, motherly, protecting hand, on the bowed
     head, saying.
"How much you must have suffered, my poor bairn!"
The soft Scotch tone and word—the grave, quiet Scotch manner, implying more than it even
     expressed—was it wonderful if underlying as well as outside influences made Hilary completely
     give way?
Robert Lyon had had a mother, who died when he was seventeen, but of whom he kept the
     tenderest remembrance, often saying that of all the ladies he had met with in the world there
     was none equal to her—the strong, tender, womanly peasant woman—refined in mind and word and
     ways—though to the last day of her life she spoke broad Scotch, and did the work of her cottage
     with her own hands. It seems as if that mother—toward whom Hilary's fancy had clung, lovingly
     as a woman ought to cling, above all others, to the mother of the man she loves—were speaking
     to her now, comforting her and helping her—comfort and help that it would have been sweeter to
     receive from her than from any woman living.
A mere fancy; but in her state of long uncontrolled excitement it took such possession of her
     that Hilary fell on her knees and hid her face in Miss Balquidder's lap, sobbing aloud.
The other was a little surprised; it was not her Scotch way to yield to emotion before folk;
     but she was a wise woman she asked no questions, merely held the quivering hands and smoothed
     the throbbing head, till composure returned. Some people have a magical, mesmeric power of
     soothing and controlling; it was hers. When she took the poor face between her hands, and
     looked straight into the eyes, with, "There, you are better now," Hilary returned the gaze as
     steadily, nay, smilingly, and rose.
"Now, may I tell you my business?"
"Certainly, my dear. When one's friends are in trouble, the last thing one ought to do is to
     sit down beside them and moan. Did you come to ask my advice, or had you any definite plan of
     your own?"
"I had." And Hilary told it.
"A very good plan, and very generous in you to think of it. But I see two strong objections:
     first, whether it can be carried out; secondly, whether it ought."
Hilary shrank, sensitively.
"Not on my account, my dear, but your own. I often see people making martyrs of themselves
     for some worthless character on whom the sacrifice is utterly wasted. I object to this, as I
     would object to throwing myself or my friend into a blazing house, unless I were morally
     certain there was a life to be saved. Is there in this case?"
"I think there is! I trust in Heaven there is!" said Hilary, earnestly.
There was both pleasure and pity expressed in Miss Balquidder's countenance as she replied,
     "Be it so: that is a matter on which no one can judge except yourself. But on the other matter
     you ask my advice, and I must give it. To maintain two ladies and pay a debt of eighty pounds
     out of one hundred a year is simply impossible."
"With Johanna's income and mine it will be a hundred and twenty pounds and some odd shillings
     a year."
"You accurate girl! But even with this it can not be done, unless you were to live in a
     manner so restricted in the commonest comforts that at your sister's age she would be sure to
     suffer. You must look on the question from all sides, my dear. You must be just to others as
     well as to that young man, who seems never to— But I will leave him unjudged."
They were both silent for a minute, and then Miss Balquidder said: "I feel certain there is
     but one rational way of accomplishing the thing if you are bent upon doing it, if your own
     judgment and conscience tell you it ought to be done. Is it so?"
"Yes," said Hilary, firmly.
The old Scotswoman took her hand with a warm pressure. "Very well. I don't blame you. I might
     have done the same myself. Now to my plan. Miss Leaf, have you known me long enough to confer
     on me the benediction—one of the few that we rich folk possess 'It is more blessed to give than
     to receive?' "
"I don't quite understand."
"Then allow me to explain. I happen to know this creditor of your nephew's. He being a tailor
     and outfitter, we have had dealings together in former times, and I know him to be a hard man,
     an unprincipled man, such a one as no young woman should have to do with, even in business
     relations. To be in his power, as you would be for some years if your scheme of gradual payment
     were carried out, is the last thing I should desire for you. Let me suggest another way. Take
     me for your creditor instead of him. Pay him at once, and I will write you a check for the
     amount."
The thing was put so delicately, in such an ordinary manner, as if it were a mere business
     arrangement, that at first Hilary hardly perceived all it implied. When she did—when she found
     that it was in plain terms a gift or loan of eighty pounds offered by a person almost a
     stranger, she was at first quite bewildered. Then (ah! let us not blame her if she carried to a
     morbid excess that noble independence which is the foundation of all true dignity in man or
     woman) she shrunk back into herself, overcome with annoyance and shame. At last she forced
     herself to say, though the words came out rather coldly.
"You are very good, and I am exceedingly obliged to you; but I never borrowed money in my
     life. It is quite impossible."
"Very well; I can understand your feelings. I beg your pardon," replied Miss Balquidder, also
     somewhat coldly.
They sat silent and awkward, and then the elderly lady took out a pencil and began to make
     calculations in her memorandum book.
"I am reckoning what is the largest sum per month that you could reasonably be expected to
     spare, and how you may make the most of what remains. Are you aware that London lodgings are
     very expensive? I am thinking that if you were to exchange out of the Kensington shop into
     another I have at Richmond, I could offer you the first floor above it for much less rent than
     you pay Mrs. Jones; and you could have your sister living with you."
"Ah! that would make us both so much happier! How good you are!"
"You will see I only wish to help you to help yourself; not to put you under any obligation.
     Though I can not see any thing so very terrible in your being slightly indebted to an old
     woman, who has neither chick nor child, and is at perfect liberty to do what she likes with her
     own."
There was a pathos in the tone which smote Hilary into quick contrition.
"Forgive me! But I have such a horror of borrowing money—you must know why after what I have
     told you of our family. You must surely understand—"
"I do fully; but there are limits even to independence. A person who, for his own pleasure,
     is ready to take money from any body and every body, without the slightest prospect or
     intention of returning it, is quite different from a friend who in a case of emergency accepts
     help from another friend, being ready and willing to take every means of repayment, as I knew
     you were, and meant you to be. I meant, as you suggested, to stop out of your salary so much
     per month, till I had my eighty pounds sate back again."
"But suppose you never had it back? I am young and strong; still I might fall ill—I might
     die, and you never be repaid."
"Yes, I should," said Miss Balquidder, with a serious smile. "You forget, my dear bairn,
     'Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of these little ones, ye have done it unto ME.' 'He that
     giveth to the poor lendeth to the LORD.' I have lent Him a good deal at different times, and He
     has always paid me back with usury."
There was something at once solemn and a little sad in the way the old lady spoke. Hilary
     forgot her own side of the subject; her pride, her humiliation.
"But do you not think, Miss Balquidder, that one ought to work on, struggle on, to the last
     extremity, before one accepts an obligation, most of all a money obligation?"
"I do, as a general principle. Yet money is not the greatest thing in this world, that a
     pecuniary debt should be the worst to bear. And sometimes one of the kindest acts you can do to
     a fellow-creature—one that touches and softens his heart, nay, perhaps wins it to you for life,
     is to accept a favor from him."
Hilary made no reply.
"I speak a little from experience. I have not had a very happy life myself; at least most
     people would say so if they knew it; but the Lord has made it up to me by giving me the means
     of bringing happiness, in money as well as other ways, to other people. Most of us have our
     favorite luxuries; this is mine. I like to do people good; I like, also—though maybe that is a
     mean weakness—to feel that I do it. If all whom I have been made instrumental in helping had
     said to me, as you have done, 'I will not be helped, I will not be made happy,' it would have
     been rather hard for me."
And a smile, half humorous, half sad, came over the hard-featured face, spiritualizing its
     whole expression.
Hilary wavered. She compared her own life, happy still, and hopeful, for all its cares, with
     that of this lonely woman, whose only blessing was her riches, except the generous heart which
     sanctified them, and made them such. Humbled, nay, ashamed, she took and kissed the kindly hand
     which has succored so many, yet which, in the inscrutable mystery of Providence, had been left
     to go down to the grave alone; missing all that is personal, dear, and precious to a woman's
     heart, and getting instead only what Hilary now gave her—the half-sweet, half-bitter payment of
     gratitude.
"Well, my bairn, what is to be done?"
"I will do whatever you think right," murmured Hilary.
</div></body></text></TEI>