<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Fern's Hollow,
                              by Hesba Stretton.</title><author>Stretton, Hesba [pseud Sara Smith]
                         (1832-1911).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
CHAPTER XIII.
THE OLD SHAFT.
Black Bess began to visit the cinder-hill cabin very often. But there was a
                         fatal mistake, which poor Stephen, in his simplicity and
                         single-heartedness, was a long time in discovering. Martha herself had not
                         truly set out on the path of obedience to God's commandments; and it was
                         not possible that she could teach Bess how to keep them. A Christian cannot
                         be like a finger-post, which only points the way to a place, but never goes
                         there itself. She could teach Bess the words of the hymn, and the tunes
                         they were sung to; but she could tell her nothing of the feeling of praise
                         and love to the Saviour with which Stephen sang them, and out of which all
                         true obedience must flow. With her lips she could say, 'Blessed are the
                         poor in spirit,' and 'Blessed are the meek,' and 'Blessed are they that do
                         hunger and thirst after righteousness;' but she cared for none of these
                         things, and felt none of their blessedness in her own soul; and Bess very
                         quickly found out that she would far rather talk about other matters. And
                         because our hearts, which are foolish, and deceitful above all things, and
                         desperately wicked, soon grow weary of good, but are ever ready to delight
                         in evil, it came to pass that, instead of Martha teaching poor ignorant
                         Bess how to do God's will, Bess was leading her into all sorts of folly and
                         wickedness.
It would be no very easy task to describe how unhappy Stephen was when, from
                         day to day, he saw Martha's pleasant sisterly ways change into a rude and
                         careless harshness, and her thrifty, cleanly habits give place to the dirty
                         extravagance of the collier-folk at Botfield. But who could tell how he
                         suffered in his warm, tender-hearted nature, when he came home at night,
                         and found the poor old grandfather neglected, and left desolate in his
                         blindness; and little Nan herself severely punished by Martha's unkindness
                         and quick temper? Not that Martha became bad suddenly, or was always unkind
                         and neglectful; there were times when she was her old self again, when she
                         would listen patiently enough to Stephen's remonstrances and Miss Anne's
                         gentle teaching; but yet Stephen could never feel sure, when he was at his
                         dismal toil underground, that all things were going on right in his home
                         overhead. Often and often, as he looked up to Fern's Hollow, where the new
                         red-brick house was now to be seen plainly, like a city set on a hill, he
                         longed to be back again, and counted the months and weeks until the spring
                         should bring home the good clergyman to Danesford.
One day, during the time allowed to the pit-girls for eating their dinner,
                         Bess came running over the cinderhills in breathless haste to the old
                         cabin. Martha had been busy all the morning, and was still standing at the
                         washing-tub; but she was glad of an excuse for resting herself, and when
                         Bess sprang over the door-sill, she received her very cordially.
'Martha! Martha!' cried Bess; 'come away quickly. Here's Andrew the packman
                         in the lane, with such shawls, Martha! Blue and red and yellow and green!
                         Only five shillings a-piece; and thee canst pay him a shilling a week. Come
                         along, and be sharp with thee.'
'I've got no money to spend,' said Martha sullenly. 'Stephen ought to let
                         grandfather go into the House, and then we shouldn't be so pinched. What
                         with buying for him and little Nan, I've hardly a brass farthing in the
                         world for myself.'
'I'd not pinch,' Bess answered; 'let Stephen pinch if he will. Why, all the
                         lads in Botfield are making a mock at thee, calling thee an old-fashioned
                         piece and Granny Fern. But come and look, anyhow; Andrew will be gone
                         directly.'
Bess dragged Martha by the arm to the top of the cinder-hill, where they
                         could see the pit-girls clustering round the packman in the lane. The black
                         linen wrapper in which his pack was carried was stretched along the hedge,
                         and upon it was spread a great show of bright-coloured shawls and dresses,
                         and the girls were flitting from one to another, closely examining their
                         quality; while Andrew's wife walked up and down, exhibiting each shawl by
                         turns upon her shoulders. The temptation was too strong for Martha; she
                         wiped the soap-suds from her arms upon her apron, and ran as eagerly down
                         to the lane as Black Bess herself.
'Eh! here's a clean, tight lass for you!' cried Andrew, comparing Martha with
                         the begrimed pit-girls about him. 'The best shawl in my pack isn't good
                         enough for you, my dear. Pick and choose. Just make your own choice, and
                         I'll accommodate you about the price.'
'I've got no money,' said Martha.
'Oh, you and me'll not quarrel about money,' replied Andrew; 'you make your
                         choice, and I'll wait your time. I'm coming my rounds pretty regular, and
                         you can put up a shilling or two agen I come, without letting on to father.
                         But maybe you're married, my dear?'
'No,' she answered, blushing.
'It's not far off, I'll be bound,' he continued, 'and with a shawl like this,
                         now, you'd look like a full-blown rose. Come, I'll not be hard upon you, as
                         it's the first time you've dealt with me. That shawl's worth ten shillings
                         if it's worth a farthing, and I'll let you have it for seven shillings and
                         sixpence; half a crown down, and a shilling a fortnight till it's paid
                         up.'
Andrew threw the shawl over her shoulders, and turned her round to the
                         envying view of the assembled girls, who were not allowed to touch any of
                         his goods with their soiled hands. Martha softly stroked the bright blue
                         border, and felt its texture between her fingers; while she deliberated
                         within herself whether she could not buy it from the fund procured by the
                         bilberry picking in the autumn. As Stephen had never known the full amount,
                         she could withdraw the half-crown without his knowledge, and the sixpence a
                         week she could save out of her own earnings. In ten minutes, while Andrew
                         was bargaining with some of the others, she came to the conclusion that she
                         could not possibly do any longer without a new shawl; so, telling the
                         packman that she would be back again directly, she ran as swiftly as she
                         could over the cinder-hill homewards.
In her hurry to accompany Bess to the lane, she had left her cabin door
                         unfastened, never thinking of the danger of the open pit to her blind
                         grandfather and the child. Little Nan had been wearying all morning for a
                         run in the wintry sunshine, out of the close steam of washing in the small
                         hut; but Martha had not dared to let her run about alone, as she had been
                         used to do at Fern's Hollow, in their safe garden. After Martha and Black
                         Bess had left her, the child stood looking wistfully through the open door
                         for some time; but at last she ventured over the door-sill, and her tiny
                         feet painfully climbed the frozen bank behind the house, whence she could
                         see the group of girls in the lane below. Perhaps she would have found her
                         way down to them, but Martha had been cross with her all the morning, and
                         the child's little spirit was frightened with her scolding. She turned back
                         to the cabin, sobbing, for the north wind blew coldly upon her; and then
                         she must have caught sight of the shaft, where Stephen had been throwing
                         stones down for her the night before, without a thought of the little one
                         trying to pursue the dangerous game alone. As Martha came over the
                         cinder-hill, her eyes fell upon little Nan, rosy, laughing, screaming with
                         delight as her tiny hands lifted a large stone high above her curly head,
                         while she bent over the unguarded margin of the pit. But before Martha
                         could move in her agony of terror, the heavy stone dropped from her small
                         fingers, and Nan, little Nan, with her rosy, laughing face, had fallen
                         after it.
Martha never forgot that moment. As if with a sudden awaking of memory, there
                         flashed across her mind all the child's simple, winning ways. She seemed to
                         see her dying mother again, laying the helpless baby in her arms, and
                         bidding her to be a mother to it. She heard her father's last charge to
                         take care of little Nan, when he also was passing away. Her own wicked
                         carelessness and neglect, Stephen's terrible sorrow if little Nan should be
                         dead, all the woeful consequences of her fault, were stamped upon her heart
                         with a sudden and very bitter stroke. Those who were watching her from the
                         lane saw her stand as if transfixed for a moment; and then a piercing
                         scream, which made every one within hearing start with terror, rang through
                         the frosty air, as Martha sprang forward to the mouth of the old pit, and,
                         peering down its dark and narrow depths, could just discern a little white
                         figure lying motionless at the bottom of the shaft.
</div></body></text></TEI>