<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER IX.
Soon afterwards, Ann Maples went to the place which she had obtained in
                            Lady Cranberry's household; and I determined to begin my search.
"Mrs. Shelfer, do you know London well?"
My landlady was feeding her birds, and I had made up for her
                            disappointment about Lady Cranberry, by fitting the lame blackbird with
                            a wooden leg, cut from a skewer, and tipped with a button: it was pretty
                            to see how kindly and cleverly he took to it, and how proudly he
                            contemplated it, when he thought there was no one watching. His mistress
                            now stopped her work, and made ready for a long speech, with the usual
                            snap of her lips.
"Know London, Miss Vaughan! I was born in Red Cross Street, and I've
                            never been further out of town than Chalk Farm fair, or Hampstead
                            Waterworks, and, please God, I never will. Bless me, what an awful place
                            the country is, awful! What with the trees, and the ditches, and the
                            sting-nettles, and the black wainscot with skewers on the top—"
"Too bad of you, Mrs. Shelfer, to be frightened at palings—and your
                            husband a gardener, too! But tell me whereabouts is Grove Street?"
"What Grove Street, my good friend?"
"Grove Street, London, to be sure."
"Why, dear me, Miss, I thought you knew everything; you can doctor Jack,
                            and the Bully, and tell me all about Sandy the squirrel's tail and the
                            hair coming off and when it's going to rain! Don't you know there's a
                            dozen Grove Streets in London, for all I know. Leastways I knows
                            four."
"And where are those four, Mrs. Shelfer?"
"Now please, my good friend, give me just a minute to think. It is
                            dreadful work to be hurried, ever since I fell downstairs, when I were
                            six year old. Let me see now. Charley knows. Can't you wait, Miss, till
                            Charley comes home, and he's coming quite early this evening, and two
                            friends of his to supper."
"No, Mrs. Shelfer, I cannot wait. If you can't tell me, I must go and get
                            a book."
"Oh them books is no good. Why they ain't got Charley in, and he with the
                            lease one time of the garden in Hollyhock Square, and a dahlia named
                            after him at the Royal Heretical Society! And they did say the Queen
                            would have handed him the spade she liked his looks so much, only his
                            nails wasn't clean. Very likely you heard, Miss—And how he was cheated
                            out of it."
"Do you expect me to wait all day?"
"No no, my good friend, to be sure not. You never will wait a minute,
                            partikler when I spill the coals, and when I wants to baste the meat.
                            And how can the gravy run, and a pinch of salt in the dripping-pan—"
"Yesterday, Mrs. Shelfer, you basted my pound and a half of mutton with
                            three pounds of coals. Now don't go off into a treatise. Answer me,
                            where is Grove Street?"
"Bless my heart, Miss Vaughan. You never gives one a chance. And we
                            thought a young lady from the country as had been brought up with tags,
                            and lace, and bobbin, and pigs, and hay—"
"Could be cheated anyhow. No, I don't mean that: I beg your pardon, dear
                            Patty. I often speak very hastily. What I mean is that you thought I
                            should know nothing at all. And I don't know much, but one thing I do
                            know, that you would never cheat me much."
To my surprise she was not at all sensitive on this subject. In fact she
                            had dealt with so many lodgers, that she expected to be suspected. But I
                            believe she never cheated me more than she could help. She answered me
                            quite calmly, after some meditation:
"To be sure, Miss, to be sure, I only does my dooty. A little dripping
                            may be, or a drop of milk for old Tom, and a piece of soap you left in
                            the water, Miss, I kept it for Charley to shave with."
"Now, Mrs. Shelfer, no more of that. Come back to Grove Street; surely, I
                            have given you time enough now."
"Well, Miss, there is one I know close by here. You keep down the Willa
                            Road, and by the fishmonger's shop, and then you turn on the right over
                            against the licensed pursuant to Act of George the Fourth. I knows
                            George the Fourth acted badly, but I never thought it was that way. Sam
                            the Sweep lives with him, and the young man with a hook for his hand
                            that lets out the 'Times' for a penny, and keeps all his brothers and
                            sisters."
"And where are the other three that you know?"
"There's one in Hackney, and one in Bethnal Green, and there's one in
                            Mile-end Road. Bless me, to be sure! I've been there with dear Miss
                            Minto after a cat she lost, a tabby with a silver collar on, and a notch
                            in his left ear. It would make you cry, Miss—"
"Thank you, Mrs. Shelfer; that will do for the present. I'll go up to the
                            'drawing-room' now."
In a few minutes I went forth with my dark plaid shawl around me, which
                            had saved my mother's life, and was thenceforth sacred. It was the first
                            time I walked all alone in London, and though we lived quite in the
                            suburbs it seemed very odd to me. For a while I felt rather nervous, but
                            no one molested me then or at any other time; although I have heard some
                            plain young ladies declare that they could not walk in London without
                            attracting unpleasant attention. Perhaps because they knew not the way
                            either to walk or to dress.
Without any trouble, I found No. 19, Grove Street, then rang the bell and
                            looked round me. It was a clean unpretentious street, not to be known by
                            its architecture from a thousand others in London. The bell was answered
                            by a neat little girl, and I asked for the Master of the house. Clever
                            tactics truly for commencing a task like mine.
Being told that the Master was from home, I begged to see the Mistress.
                            The little maid hesitated awhile, with the chain of the door in her
                            hand, and then invited me into the parlour, a small room, but neat and
                            pretty.
"Please, Miss, what name shall I say?"
"Miss Vaughan, if you please." Then I said to myself, "What good am I? Is
                            this my detective adroitness?"
Presently a nice old lady, with snow-white hair, came in.
"Miss Vaughan," she asked with a pleasant smile, "do you wish to see
                            me?"
"Yes, if you please. Just to ask a few questions as to the inmates of
                            this house."
Despite her kindness and good breeding, the lady stared a little.
"May I inquire your motives? Do you know me at all? I have not the
                            pleasure of knowing you."
"My motives I must not tell you. But, as a lady, I assure you, that
                            curiosity is not one. Neither are they improper."
She looked at me in great surprise, examined me closely, and then
                            replied:
"Young lady, I believe what you say. It is impossible not to do so. But
                            my answering you must depend on the nature of your inquiries. You have
                            done, excuse my saying it, you have done a very odd thing."
"I will not ask many questions. How many people live here?"
"I will answer you curtly as you ask, unless you ask what I do not choose
                            to answer. Four people live here, namely, my husband, myself, our only
                            daughter—but for whom I might have been ruder to you—and the child who
                            let you in. Also a woman comes every day to work."
"Are there no more? Forgive my impertinence. No strangers to the
                            family?"
"No lodgers whatever. My son is employed in the City, and sleeps there.
                            My only daughter is in very weak health, and though we do not want all
                            the house, we are not obliged to take lodgers. A thing I never would do,
                            because they always expect to be cheated."
"And is your husband an Englishman?"
"Yes, and an English writer, not altogether unknown."
She mentioned a name of good repute in the world of letters, as even I
                            was aware.
"You have quite satisfied me. I thank you most heartily. Very few would
                            have been so polite and kind. I fear you must think me a very singular
                            being. But I have powerful motive, and am quite a stranger in
                            London."
"My dear, I knew that at once. No Londoner would have learned from me the
                            family history I have told you. I should have shown them out at the very
                            first question. Thank you, oh thank you, my child. But I am sure you
                            have hurt yourself. Oh, the shell has run into your forehead."
As she looked so intently at me, on her way to the door of the room, her
                            foot had been caught by the claw of the what-not, and I barely saved her
                            from falling.
"No, Mrs. Elton, I am not hurt at all. How stupid of me, to be sure. And
                            all my fault that you fell. I hope the shell is not broken. Ah, I bring
                            very bad luck to all who treat me kindly."
"The shell is not worth sixpence. The fault was all my own. If you had
                            not been wonderfully quick, I must have fallen heavily. Pray sit down,
                            and recover yourself, Miss Vaughan. Look, you have dropped a letter.
                            Dear me, I know that writing! Excuse me; it is I that am now
                            impertinent."
"If you know that writing, pray tell me how and where."
The letter she had seen was the anonymous one which brought me from
                            Devonshire to London. I had put it into my pocket, thinking that it
                            might be wanted. It fell out as I leaped forward, and it lay on the
                            floor wide open.
"May I look at the writing more closely? Perhaps I am deceived."
For a while I hesitated. But it seemed so great a point to know who the
                            writer was, that I hushed my hesitation. However, I showed the letter so
                            that she could not gather its import.
"Yes," said Mrs. Elton, "I am quite certain now. That is the writing of a
                            Polish lady, whom at one time I knew well. My husband has written a work
                            upon Poland, which brought him into contact with some of the refugees.
                            Among them was a gentleman of some scientific attainments, who had a
                            pretty lively warm-hearted wife, very fond of dancing, and very fond of
                            dogs. She and I have had many a laugh at one another and ourselves; for,
                            though my hair is grey, I am fond of lively people."
"And where is that lady now?"
"My child, I cannot tell you. Her name I will tell you, if you like, when
                            I have consulted my husband. But it will help you very little towards
                            finding her; for they change their names almost every time they move.
                            Even in London they forget that they are not heard every time they
                            sneeze. The furtive habits born of oppression cling about them
                            still."
"And where did they live at the time you knew them?"
Wrung by suspense and anxiety, I had forgotten good manners. But Mrs.
                            Elton had good feeling which knows when to dispense with them.
                            Nevertheless I blushed with shame at my own effrontery.
"Not very far from here, in a part that is called 'Agar Town.' But they
                            have now left London, and England too, I believe. I must tell you no
                            more, because they had reasons for wishing to be unknown."
"Only tell me one thing. Were they cruel or violent people?"
"The very opposite. Most humane and warm-hearted They would injure no
                            one, and hated all kinds of cruelty. How pale you are, my child! You
                            must have a glass of wine. It is useless to say no."
As this clue, which seemed so promising, led to nothing at all, I may as
                            well wind it up at once, and not tangle my story with it. Mr. Elton
                            permitted his wife to tell me all she knew about the Polish exiles, for
                            they were gone to America, and nothing done here could harm them. But at
                            the same time he made me promise not to mention to the police, if my
                            case should ever come before them, the particulars which he gave me; and
                            I am sure he would not wish me to make free with the gentleman's name. A
                            gentleman he was, as both my kind friends assured me, and not likely to
                            conceal any atrocious secret, unless he had learned it in a way which
                            laid it upon his honour. Mr. Elton had never been intimate with him, and
                            knew not who his friends were, but Mrs. Elton had liked the lady who was
                            very kind and passionate. Also she was very apt to make mistakes in
                            English names, and to become confused at moments of excitement.
                            Therefore Mrs. Elton thought that she had confounded the Eltons' address
                            with that of some other person; for it seemed a most unlikely thing that
                            she should know the residents at two Nos. 19 Grove Street. However so it
                            proved—but of that in its place. It was now six months since they had
                            quitted London, perhaps on account of the climate, for the gentleman had
                            been ill some time, and quite confined to the house. It would be
                            altogether vain to think of tracing them in America. While living in
                            London they owned a most magnificent dog, a truly noble fellow but
                            afflicted with a tumour. This dog suddenly disappeared, and they would
                            not tell what had become of him, but the lady cried most violently one
                            day when he was spoken of. Directly after this they left the country,
                            with a very brief farewell.
All this I learned from Mr. and Mrs. Elton during my second visit, for
                            Mrs. Elton was too good a wife to dispense with her husband's judgment.
                            Also I saw their daughter, a pleasing delicate girl; they learned of
                            course some parts of my story, and were most kind and affectionate to
                            me; and I am proud to have preserved their friendship to the present
                            time. But as they take no prominent share in the drama of my life,
                            henceforth they will not be presented upon its stage.
As I returned up the Villa Road, thinking of all I had heard, and feeling
                            down at heart, something cold was gently placed in my ungloved hand.
                            Turning in surprise and fright I saw an enormous dog, wagging his tail,
                            and looking at me with magnificent brown eyes. Those great brown eyes
                            were begging clearly for the honour of my acquaintance, and that huge
                            muzzle was deposited as a gage of love. As I stooped to ascertain his
                            sentiments, he gravely raised one mighty paw and offered it to me
                            delicately, with a little sigh of self-approval. Upon my accepting it
                            frankly and begging to congratulate him upon his noble appearance and
                            evident moral excellence, he put out his tongue, a brilliant red one,
                            and gave me a serious kiss. Then he shrugged his shoulders and looked
                            with patient contempt at a nicely-dressed young lady, who was exerting
                            her lungs at a silver whistle some fifty yards down the road. "Go, good
                            dog," I said with a smile, "run, that's a good dog, your Mistress wants
                            you immediately." "Let her wait," he said with his eyes, "I am not in a
                            hurry this morning, and she doesn't know what to do with her time.
                            However, if you think it would be rude of me—" And with that he resumed
                            a long bone, laid aside while he chatted to me, tucked it lengthwise in
                            his mouth, like a tobacco-pipe, and after shaking hands again, and
                            saying "Now don't forget me," the great dog trotted away sedately,
                            flourishing his tail on high, like a plume of Pampas grass. At the
                            corner of the railings he overtook his young Mistress, whose features I
                            could not descry; though from her air and walk I knew that she must be a
                            pretty girl. A good-tempered one too she seemed to be, for she only
                            shook her little whip lightly at the dog, who made an excursion across
                            the road and sniffed at a heap of dust.
</div></body></text></TEI>