<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="59">
CHAPTER V.
I believe that my heart would have burst, if they had not cut my stays;
                            and how I wished it had. When I came back to my unlucky self, there was
                            something shivery cold in the forehead wave of my hair. Was it Conrad's
                            finger? I put up my hand to dash it away, and caught a fine fat leech.
                            Dr. Franks was sitting by me, holding a basin and a sponge.
"That's the last of them, my dear child. Don't disturb him. He is doing
                            his duty by you."
"His duty! Was it his duty to say such fearful things? To break my heart
                            with every word! Ashamed of me—ashamed of my darling father! Low and
                            licentious! What have I done? what have I done? Oh, it I only knew what
                            harm I have ever done!"
"No harm, my poor dear, no harm in the world; let me bathe your pretty
                            face. Come now, you shan't cry another drop. What is to become of the
                            beautiful eyes I was so proud of saving?"
"Oh, I wish you hadn't, how I wish you hadn't. Dr. Franks, I have no
                            father, and no mother, and no one in all the world to love me, and I was
                            just getting so nice and happy again, so proud of myself, and so much
                            prouder of him, and I began to think how glad my own dear father would
                            be; and, Dr. Franks, I did love him so, with all my heart, perhaps it's
                            not very large, but with every morsel and atom of my heart—and now, now
                            I must hate him as much as ever I can. Oh let me go home, do let me go
                            home, where my father and mother are buried." And I rose in the bed to
                            start, and the candles glimmered in my eyes.
"Please to go out of the room, every one please to go; and don't let
                            Isola come. I can't bear the sight of her now. It won't take me long to
                            dress, and I don't want any luggage; and, Mrs. Shelfer, please to go for
                            a cab: and I shan't want the rooms any more, and it does not matter a
                            bit about any letters. I'll tell my father everything when I see him,
                            and then perhaps he'll tell me what harm it is I have done. Why don't
                            you go, when you see I want to get up?'
"Don't you see, my dear child, we are going? Only you must take this
                            glass of wine first, to prepare you for your long journey. Will you take
                            it now, while we fetch the cab?"
"Yes, anything, anything: I don't care what it is. Only let me get
                            ready."
And I drank, without even tasting it, a glass of some dark liquid, which
                            saved me from wandering further either in mind or body.
When I awoke, it was broad noon once more, and Dr. Franks was sitting by
                            me with one of my hands in his. "Magnificent constitution," I thought I
                            heard him mutter, "glorious constitution." What good was it to me? At
                            the foot of the bed, sat Isola crying terribly. Slowly I remembered all
                            my great disaster, but saw it only through a dull gray veil. The power
                            of the opiate was still upon my brain. But a cold dead pain lay heavy on
                            my heart, and always seemed to want a heavy hand upon it. After he had
                            given me a reviving draught, Dr. Franks perceived that I wished to speak
                            to Isola, and accordingly withdrew.
Poor Isola came slowly and sat beside my pillow, doubting whether she
                            should dare to take my hand. Therefore I took hers, drew her face
                            towards me, and covered it with kisses. Isola had done no harm to me
                            whatever, and I felt it something to have even her to love. She was
                            overcome with affectionate surprise.
"Oh, Clara dearest, I am so very glad to find you love me still. I feared
                            that you would never care for me again. What is it all about, dear, if
                            you are well enough to tell me, what is all this dreadful misery
                            about?"
"That is the very thing I want to learn from you, dear. Surely you must
                            know better far than I do."
I would not even ask her what had become of Conrad.
"No, I don't dear. I don't know at all. All I know is there must have
                            been some dreadful quarrel between you and Conrad. I must tell you,
                            dear, I was so anxious about something you can guess, that I stole up to
                            the door soon after he came in; and you were so intent upon the window,
                            that you never even saw me put the door ajar; and then I heard him tell
                            you how very much he loved you, and I was so glad. And then I thought it
                            was not quite fair of me, and I knew all I wanted, so I ran downstairs
                            again. And the next thing I heard was your bedroom door bang and then
                            Conny dashed out the house, and Judy came down to me looking very
                            sorrowful. And I ran up to you, and here I found you shrieking so, and
                            rolling, and clutching at the bedclothes, and I was so frightened I
                            could not even move. And then Judy came and made such a dreadful
                            howling, and Mrs. Shelfer ran straight off for the doctor, and I poured
                            the water in the decanter over you, and I can't tell any more."
"But surely, darling, you have been home since that?"
"Oh yes; when Dr. Franks came, and you were a little better, he would
                            make me go home, because he did not want two patients, he said; and his
                            eldest daughter, such a nice girl, came with me; and my papa didn't even
                            know that I had been out of the house. He was still upstairs, brooding
                            over his relics, and all the sixth form at the College had to go to
                            dinner without their lectures; but I do believe the stupid girls were
                            glad."
"And did you hear—no, it doesn't matter."
"No, I never heard what became of Conrad. No doubt he went back to his
                            favourite chip, chipping. He has got a splendid thing he is full of now,
                            and it prevents his sleeping; something or other very horrible from
                            Dante, and the leading figure is modelled after you. I have seen the
                            drawings, and he has got you exactly."
"How gratifying to be sure! I will ask you no more questions. Pray let me
                            know when I am for sale; though I should call it a work of illegitimate
                            art."
My eyes were on her face, but she showed no consciousness whatever, which
                            she must have done had she known the fact referred to, for she was quick
                            of perception, and open as the day. I was angry with myself for the low
                            and bootless sneer, which was pretty certain to be conveyed to her
                            brother.
"Now I will delay no longer. Let me speak to Dr. Franks. I shall go this
                            afternoon."
Poor Isola turned pale; she had looked upon the occurrence as only a
                            lover's quarrel, sure to be set right in a day or two. She could not
                            harbour any great resentment long, and forgot that I could.
"Don't talk so, dear; and you so very weak! it would be sure to kill you.
                            And what will Conny think? You must not go, at any rate, till you have
                            been to see him."
"I go to him! I hope to see him never more until I charge him in another
                            world with this bitter wrong. No, no more if you please; I will not hear
                            his name again. How can he be your brother? Darling Idols, I never shall
                            forget you. Take this, my pet, and think of me sometimes, for you will
                            never see me more."
I gave her an emerald ring, set with lovely pearls, small types of
                            herself. It was not the one I had reclaimed from her brother, that was a
                            plain keeper.
"Oh Clara, Clara, don't say that, whatever you do, because I know you
                            will keep to it, you are so shamefully obstinate. And I never loved any
                            one in the world like you; no, not even Conny."
"And not even your father or mother?"
"No, not half so much. I like Pappy very well when he is good and kind,
                            but that is not very often now"—the poor little thing's eyes filled
                            again with tears,—"and as for my mother, I never even saw her; she died
                            when I was born."
"And I love you too, my sweet, best of all the world—now. Nevertheless,
                            we must part."
"And never see each other? I don't call that loving. Tell me why: do tell
                            me why. There seems some horrid mystery about every one I love."
And she was overcome with grief. She had not been, like me, apprenticed
                            young to trouble.
"Darling, I will write to you sometimes. You can come here for the
                            letters. I will have no secrets any more from you; but you must never
                            attempt to write to me—only send your name on a bit of paper when my
                            letters go."
"But why on earth mayn't I write to you, Clara dear?"
"I can't tell you why. Only I cannot bear it." The truth was I could
                            never have borne to read about her brother. So all that was settled, and
                            I said good-bye with plenty of bitter crying. As for Balaam and Balak,
                            from whom I expected tidings, and George Cutting, whom I had thought it
                            right to send for—I had not the heart to attend to any of them. Dr.
                            Franks had done his utmost to oppose my sudden journey, but I told him
                            truly that I should go mad if I stopped there any longer. I could not
                            bear the mere sight of the room where I had been, in the height of
                            delicious joy, so trampled upon and outraged. My brain was burning, and
                            my heart was aching for the only spot on earth where true love could be
                            found, the spot where lay my father and my mother.
Seeing how the fever of the mind was kindling, the doctor, like a good
                            physician, knew that the best plan was to indulge, and so allay it. Yet
                            he begged me, if I had any regard for him, not to travel all alone while
                            in that dangerous state. With most unlooked-for and unmerited kindness,
                            he even sent his eldest daughter, at an hour's notice, to see me home in
                            safety.
The last farewell was said to Judy, whom I would not take away, greatly
                            as I loved him still; and he received most stringent orders first to
                            conduct dear Isola home, and then to go to his old quarters at the
                            livery stables. Apparently he acquiesced, though with wistful glances;
                            but at Paddington, as I was getting the tickets, to my amazement in he
                            rushed, upset a couple of porters, and demanded his ticket too. Under
                            the circumstances there was nothing for it, except to let him go with
                            us, or to lose the train. So his ticket was taken, and he dashed into
                            the dog-box with an enthusiasm which earned him a hard knock on the
                            head.
</div></body></text></TEI>