<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">
CHAPTER VI.
Two or three days after this, I was keeping school in the dairy, the
                            parlour being too small for that purpose, and the kitchen and "wash-up"
                            (as they called the back-kitchen) too open to inroads from Suke and Tim.
                            My class consisted of ten, or rather was eight strong, the two weames
                            (big baby and little baby), only attending for the sake of example, and
                            because they would have roared, if parted from the other children. So
                            those two were allowed to spraddle on the floor, where sometimes they
                            made little rollers of themselves, with much indecorum, and between
                            whiles sat gravely sucking their fat red fingers, and then pointed them
                            in a glistening state at me or my audience, and giggled with a large
                            contempt. The eight, who made believe to learn something, were the six
                            elder Huxtables, and two of Tim Badcock's "young uns." I marshalled
                            them, four on each side, against the low lime-whitened walls, which bore
                            the pans of cream and milk. Little Sally, my head scholar, was very
                            proud of measuring her height, by the horizontal line on the milk-pan
                            where the glazing ended; which Tabitha Badcock, even on tiptoe, could
                            not reach. They were all well "claned," and had white pinnies on, and
                            their ruddy cheeks rubbed up to the highest possible polish, with yellow
                            soap and the jack-towel behind the wash-up door. Hence, I never could
                            relieve them from the idea that Sunday now came every day in the
                            week.
I maintained strict discipline, and allowed no nonsense; but two sad
                            drawbacks constantly perplexed me. In the first place, their ways were
                            so ridiculous, and they laboured so much harder to make me laugh, than
                            they did to learn, that I could not always keep my countenance, and when
                            the spelling-book went up before my face, they knew, as well as
                            possible, what was going on behind it, and peeped round or below, and
                            burst out all together. The second drawback was, that Mrs. Huxtable, in
                            spite of all my protests, would be always rushing in, upon errands
                            purely fictitious; and the farmer himself always found some special
                            business in the yard, close to the wired and unglazed window, whence
                            every now and then his loud haw-haws, and too audible soliloquies, "Dang
                            me! wull done, Zally, that wor a good un; zay un again, cheel! zay un
                            again, wull 'e?" utterly overthrew my most solemn institutions.
"Coom now, smarl chillers"—I addressed them in my unclassical Devonshire
                            dialect, for it kept their attention alive to criticise me when I "spak
                            unvitty"—"coom now, e've a been spulling lang enough: ston round me now,
                            and tull me what I axes you."
Already, I had made one great mistake, by saying "round" instead of
                            "raound," and Billy, the genius of the family, was upon the giggle.
"Now thun, wutt be a quadripade?"
"Ai knoo!" says Sally, with her hand held out.
"Zo do ai," says Jack, thrusting forth his stomach.
"Who wur axing of you?" I inquire in a stately manner. "You bain't the
                            smarl chillers, be 'e? Bill knows," I continue, but wax doubtful from
                            the expression of Bill's face.
"Ees fai," cries Bill, suddenly clearing up, "her be wutt moother zits on
                            vor to mulk the coos. Bain't her now?"
"Thee bee'st ony wan leg out, Bill. Now Tabby Badcock?"
While Tabby is splashing in her memory (for I told them all last week),
                            the farmer much excited, and having no idea what the answer should be,
                            but hoping that one of his own children may discover it first, boldly
                            shows his face at the wired window, but is quite resolved to allow fair
                            play. Not so Mrs. Huxtable, who, in full possession of the case,
                            suddenly appears behind me, and shakes her fist at poor puzzled Tabby.
                            "Thee'dst best pretend to know more than thy betters." She tries to make
                            Tabby hear, without my catching her words. But the farmer hotly shouts,
                            "Lat un alo-un, waife. Tak thee hon from thee mouth, I tull 'e. Spak up
                            now, little wanch."
Thus encouraged, Tabby makes reply, looking cross-wise at Mrs.
                            Huxtable.
"Plase, Miss, it be a beastie wi vour taials."
"Raight," cries the farmer, with admiration conquering his
                            disappointment; "raight this taime, ai'll tak my oath on it. I zeed wan
                            to Barnstaple vair last year, and her wor karled, 'Phanominy
                            Quadripade,' her Kirsten name and her zurname, now ai coom to
                            racollack."
Tabby looks elated, and Mrs. Huxtable chagrined. Before I can redress the
                            situation, a sound of heavy blows, delivered on some leathery substance,
                            causes a new stir. All recognise the arrival of Her Majesty's mail, a
                            boy from Martinhoe, who comes upon a donkey twice a week, if there
                            happen to be any letters for the village below.
Out rush Mrs. Huxtable and Suke (who once received an epistle), and the
                            children long to go, but know better. The boy, however, has only a
                            letter for me, which is from Mrs. Shelfer (a cousin of Ann Maples), to
                            whom I wrote a few days since, asking whether she had any rooms to let.
                            Mrs. Shelfer replies that "she has apartments, and they are splendid,
                            and the rent quite trifling;" so the mail is bribed with a pint of
                            cider, while I write to secure a new home.
My departure being now fixed and inevitable, the women naturally began to
                            remonstrate more than over. It had been settled that Ann Maples should
                            go with me, not to continue as my servant, but to find a place for
                            herself in London.
My few arrangements, which cost me far more pain than trouble, were not
                            long in making; and after saying good-bye to all the dear little
                            children and weanies, and kissing their pretty faces in their little
                            beds, amid an agony of tears from Sally, I was surprised, on entering
                            the kitchen, to find there Mr. Beany Dawe. There was little time for
                            talking, and much less for poetry. We were to start at three in the
                            morning, the farmer having promised to drive us to meet the coach in
                            Barnstaple, whence there would be more than thirty miles of hilly road
                            to Tiverton, the nearest railway station. The journey to London could
                            thus be made in a day, though no one in the parish could be brought to
                            believe it.
The poet had been suborned, no doubt, by Mrs. Huxtable, and now detained
                            me to listen to an elegy upon the metropolis of England. I cannot stop
                            to repeat it, neither does it deserve the trouble; but it began
                            thus:—

"Fayther was wance to Lonnon town,
And a zed, zed he, whan a coom down,
'Don't e niver goo there, Ebenezer my son,
For they mulks a coo, when her ain't gat none.
They kapes up sich a hollerin, naight and day,
And a Devonsheer man dunno the impudence they zay.
Their heads and their hats wags regular, like the
scratchers of a harrow,
And they biles their taties peeled, and ates them
in a barrow.
They raides on a waggon top with their wives squazed
up inside her,
And they drinks black dose and yesty pops in the
place of wholesome zider.
They want take back anything they've zelled,
And the beds can bite, and the cats can speak:
And a well-dress'd man be a most compelled
To channge his shirt in the middle of the week!'"
 

"Lor," cried Mrs. Huxtable, "however could they do their
                            washing? Thee vayther must a been as big a liar as thee, Beany. Them
                            gifts always runs in the family."
When, with remarkable patience, I had heard out his elegant effusion, the
                            author, who had conceived much good will towards me, because I listened
                            to his lays and called him Mr. Dawe, the author dived with a deep-drawn
                            sigh into a hole in his sack, and produced in a mysterious manner
                            something wrapped in greasy silver paper, and well tied up. He begged me
                            to accept, and carry it about me most carefully and secretly, as long as
                            I should live. To no other person in the world would he have given this,
                            but I had earned it, as a true lover of poetry, and required it as a
                            castaway among the perils of London. In vain I declined the present;
                            refusal only confirmed his resolution. As the matter was of so little
                            importance, I soon yielded upon condition that I should first examine
                            the gift. He gave me leave with much reluctance, and I was surprised at
                            the beauty and novelty of the thing. It was about the size of a Geneva
                            watch, but rather thicker, jet black and shining, and of the exact shape
                            of a human heart. Around the edge ran a moulding line or cord of
                            brilliant red, of the same material as the rest. In the centre was a
                            white spot like a siphuncle. What it was I could not guess, but it
                            looked like some mineral substance. Where the two lobes met, a small
                            hole had been drilled to receive a narrow riband. After putting me
                            through many guesses, Mr. Dawe informed me that it was a pixie's heart,
                            a charm of unequalled power against witchcraft and assassination, and to
                            enthral the affection of a loved one. He only smiled, and rubbed his
                            nose, on hearing that I should never want it in the last capacity. Being
                            greatly pleased with it, I asked him many questions, which he was very
                            loth to answer. Nevertheless I extorted from him nearly all he knew.
As he was sawing into boards a very large oak-tree, something fell from
                            the very heart of it almost into his mouth, for poor Ebenezer was only
                            an undersawyer. As he could not stop the saw without his partners
                            concurrence, and did not wish to share his prize, he kicked some sawdust
                            over it until he could stoop to pick it up unobserved. In all his long
                            experience of the woods, he had seen but two of these rare and beautiful
                            things, and now assured me that any sawyer was considered lucky who
                            found only one in the course of his career. The legend on the subject
                            was rather quaint and graceful, and deserves a better garb than he or I
                            can furnish.

"All in the olden time, there lived
A little Pixie king,
So lovely and so light of foot
That when he danced the ring,
The moonlight always shifted, to gaze upon his face,
And the cowslip-bells uplifted, rang time with every pace.
 
There came a dozen maidens,
Almost as tall as bluebells;
The cowslips hushed their cadence,
And bowed before the true belles:
The maidens shyly glancing, betwixt the cummer darts,
Espied the monarch dancing, and lost a dozen hearts.
 
He was fitted up so neatly,
With dewdrops for his crown,
And he footed it so featly
He never shook them down.
The maids began advancing, along a lily stem,
Not to stop the monarch's dancing, but to make him look at them.
 
The king could not afford them
The proper time to gaze,
But sweetly bowed toward them,
At the turn of every maze:
Till full of pretty faces, and his sandals getting worn,
He was puzzled in his paces, and fell upon a thorn.
 
The maidens broke the magic ring,
And leaped the cummer dart;
'Alas, our little Pixie king,
The thorn is in his heart!'
They laid him in a molehill, and piteously they cried:
Yet this was not the whole ill, for all the maidens died.
 
Each took a spindled acorn, found
Below a squirrel's nest,
And set the butt against the ground,
The barb beneath her breast:
So truly she addressed the stroke unto her loving part,
That when the acorn grew an oak, it held her little heart.'
 

By no means a "little heart," it seemed to me, for a fairy
                            to have owned, but as large as it was loving. I assured Mr. Dawe that he
                            was quite untaught in fairy lore, or he never would have confounded
                            fairies with pixies, a different class of society. But he treated my
                            learning with utter contempt, and reasonably enough declared that he who
                            spent all his time in the woods must know more than any books could
                            tell.
He also informed me, that the proper name for the lignified fairy heart,
                            was a "gordit:" but he did not choose to tell me what had become of the
                            other, which was not so large or handsome as this, yet it had saved him
                            a month's sawing, and earned him "a rare time," which meant, I fear,
                            that the proceeds had been spent in a very long cruise.
After refusing all compensation, Mr. Dawe made his farewell in several
                            couplets of uncouth but hearty blessing, begging me only to shake hands
                            with him once, and venturing as a poet to prophesy that we should meet
                            again. The "gordit" was probably nothing more than a rare accretion, or
                            ganglion, in the centre of an aged oak. However, it was very pretty; and
                            of course I observed the condition upon which I had received it, valuing
                            it moreover as a token of true friends.
But how can I think of such trifles, while sitting for the last time in
                            the room where my mother died? To-morrow all the form and colour of my
                            life shall change; even now I feel once more my step on the dark track
                            of justice, which is to me revenge. How long have I been sauntering on
                            the dreary moor of listlessness and hollow weariness, which spreads, for
                            so many dead leagues, below the precipice of grief? How long have I been
                            sauntering, not caring to ask where, and conscious of existence only
                            through the nerves and fibres of the memory. The things I have been
                            doing, the duties I have discharged, the vague unlinked ideas, startling
                            me by their buffoonery to grief—might not these have all passed through
                            me, every whit as well, if I had been set against a wall, and wound up
                            for three months, and fitted with the mind expressed in the chuckle of a
                            clock? Nay, worse than all—have I not allowed soft thoughts to steal
                            throughout my heart, the love of children, the warmth of kindness, the
                            pleasure of doing good in however small a way? Much more of this, and I
                            shall learn forgiveness of my wrong!
But now I see a clearer road before me. Returning health renews my gall.
                            Death recedes, and lifts his train from the swords that fell before him.
                            Once more my pulse beats high with hatred, with scorn of meanness,
                            treachery, and lies, with admiration of truth and manhood, not after the
                            fashion of fools.
But dare I mount the Judge's throne? Shall the stir of one frail heart,
                            however fresh from its Maker's hand, be taken for His voice pronouncing
                            right and wrong?
These thoughts give me pause, and I dwell again with my mother. But in
                            all the strength of youth and stern will, I tread them down; and am once
                            more that Clara Vaughan whose life shall right her father's death.
</div></body></text></TEI>