<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">
CHAPTER XIII.
There was a school of design not very far from my lodgings, and thither I
                            went the next morning. My landlady offered to come with me and see me
                            safe in the room; and of course her Charley, who seemed to know
                            everybody, knew some one even there, to whom she kindly promised to
                            recommend me. So I gladly accepted her offer.
In some respects, Mr. Shelfer was more remarkable than even his wife. He
                            was so shy, that on the rare occasions when we met, I never could get
                            him to look at me, except once when he was drunk; yet by some mysterious
                            process he seemed to know everything about me—the colour of my eyes, the
                            arrangement of my hair, the dresses I put on, the spirits I was in—a
                            great deal more, in fact, than I ever cared to know. So that sometimes
                            my self-knowledge was largely increased, through his observations
                            repeated by his wife. But I was not allowed to flatter myself that this
                            resulted from any especial interest; for he seemed to possess an equal
                            acquaintance with the affairs of all his neighbours. Mention any one
                            anywhere around, and he, without seeming to mean it, would describe him
                            or her unmistakably in half a dozen words. He never praised or blamed,
                            he simply identified. He must have seen more with a blink of his eye,
                            than most people see in five minutes of gazing. He seldom brought any
                            one home with him, though he often promised to do so; he never seemed to
                            indulge in gossip, at any rate not with his wife. "Cut it short, old
                            'ooman," was all the encouragement he ever gave her in that way. When he
                            was at home—a thing of rare occurrence—he sat with his head down and a
                            long pipe in his mouth; he walked in the street with his head down, and
                            never accosted any one. Where did he get all his knowledge? I doubt if
                            there were a public-house in London, but what Shelfer knew at the
                            furthest a cousin of the landlord, and a brother of one of the potboys.
                            "Charley Shelfer" everybody called him, and everybody spoke of him, not
                            with distinguished respect, but with a kindly feeling. His luck was
                            proverbial; he had a room full of things which he had won at raffles,
                            and he was in constant requisition to throw for less fortunate people.
                            As for his occupation—he called himself a nurseryman, but he had no
                            nursery that I could discover. He received a pound a week for looking
                            after the garden in the great square; but when any one came for him, he
                            was never to be found there. I think he spent most of his time in
                            jobbing about, and "swopping" (as Mrs. Shelfer called it) among his
                            brother gardeners. Sometimes, he brought home beautiful plants,
                            perfectly lovely flowers, unknown to me even by name, and many of these
                            he presented to me by Mrs. Shelfer's hands. Every Sunday morning he was
                            up before the daylight, and away for an excursion, or rather an
                            incursion, through the Hampstead, Highgate, and Holloway district. From
                            these raids he used to return as I came home from the morning service.
                            By the way, if I had wanted to puzzle him and find a blank in his
                            universal acquaintance, the best chance would have been to ask him about
                            the clergyman. He never gave the pew-openers any trouble, neither indeed
                            did Mrs. Shelfer, who called herself a Catholic; but the lively little
                            woman's chiefest terror was death, and a parson to her was always an
                            undertaker. If Mr. Shelfer had not spent the Sunday morning quite so
                            well as I had, at any rate he had not wasted his time. I think he must
                            have robbed hen-roosts and allotment grounds; and yet he was too
                            respectable for that. But whence and how could he ever have come by the
                            gipsey collection he always produced from his hat, from his countless
                            pockets, from his red cotton handkerchief, every Sunday at 1 P.M.? Eggs,
                            chickens, mushrooms, sticks of horseradish and celery,
                            misletoe-thrushes, cucumbers, cabbages red and white, rabbits,
                            watercress, Aylesbury ducks—I cannot remember one quarter of his
                            manifold forage. All I can say is, that if these things are to be found
                            by the side of the road near London, Middlesex is a far better field for
                            the student of natural history than Gloucestershire, or even beloved
                            Devon. Mrs. Shelfer said it was all his luck; but I hardly think it
                            could have rained Aylesbury ducks, even for Mr. Shelfer.
All the time he was extracting from his recesses this multifarious store,
                            he never once smiled, or showed any symptoms of triumph, but gravely
                            went through the whole, as if a simple duty.
How was it such a man had not made his fortune? Because he had an
                            incurable habit of "backing bills" for any one who asked him; and hence
                            he was always in trouble.
Mrs. Shelfer and I were admitted readily into the school of design. It
                            was a long low room, very badly lighted, and fitted up for the time
                            until a better could be provided. It looked very cold and comfortless;
                            forms instead of chairs, and desks like a parish school. The whitewashed
                            walls were hung with diagrams, sections, tracings, reductions, most of
                            them stiff and ugly, but no doubt instructive. At one end was a raised
                            platform, reserved for lecturers and the higher powers. Shelves round
                            the wall were filled with casts and models, and books of instruction
                            were to be had out of cupboards. Of course we were expected to bring our
                            own materials, and a code of rules was exhibited. The more advanced
                            students were permitted to tender any work of their own which might be
                            of service to the neophytes. From no one there did I ever receive any
                            insolence. At first, the young artists used to look at me rather hard,
                            but my reserved and distant air was quite enough to discourage them.
After the introduction, which Mrs. Shelfer accomplished in very great
                            style, I dismissed her, and set to in earnest to pore once more over the
                            rudiments of perspective. One simple truth as to the vanishing point
                            struck me at once. I was amazed that I had never perceived it before. It
                            was not set forth in the book I was studying; but it was the sole key to
                            all my errors of distance. At once I closed the book; upon that one
                            subject I wanted no more instruction, I had caught the focus of truth.
                            Books, like bad glass, would only refract my perception. All I wanted
                            now was practice and adaptation of the eye.
Strange as it seemed to me then, I could draw no more that day. I was so
                            overcome at first sight by the simple beauty of truth, mathematical yet
                            poetical truth, that error and obscurity (for there is a balance in all
                            things) had their revenge for a while on my brain. But the truth, once
                            seen, could never be lost again. Thenceforth there were few higher
                            penances for me, in a small way, than to look at one of my early
                            drawings.
When my brain was clear, I returned to do a real day's work. For the
                            cups, and vases, and plates, and things of "æsthetic art" (as they chose
                            to call it), I did not care at all; but the copies and models and
                            figures were most useful to me. Unless I am much mistaken, I made more
                            advance in a fortnight there, than I had in any year of my life
                            before.
With my usual perseverance—if I have no other virtue, I have that—I
                            worked away to correct my many shortcomings; not even indulging (much as
                            I wanted the money) in any attempts at a finished drawing, until I felt
                            sure that all my foundations were thoroughly laid and set. "And now," I
                            cried towards Christmas, "now for Mr. Oxgall; if I don't astonish him
                            this time, my name is not Clara Vaughan!" It did me good when I was
                            alone, to call myself by my own name, and my right to be my father's
                            daughter.
</div></body></text></TEI>