<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="49">
CHAPTER XIII.
Tossil's Barton, estimating the British Post by the standard of Joe
                            Queen's boy, placed but little confidence in that institution. Moreover,
                            Tossil's Barton held that a "papper scrawl," as it termed a letter, was
                            certain to be lost for want of size, unless it were secured in something
                            large, "something as a man can zee and hold on to," as the farmer
                            himself expressed it.
Therefore I was not surprised at receiving, instead of a letter by post,
                            a packet delivered by the parcels van. This packet was bound round like
                            the handle of a whip. and stuck at either end with a mass of cobbler's
                            wax. bearing the vivid impress of a mighty thumb. Within the wrappings
                            first appeared an ominous crumpled scroll. Ye stars, where angels so
                            buffooned by eminent painters dwell! Once more I behold Eli on the
                            turnpike gate, the Great Western steamer, Job with a potsherd of
                            willow-pattern plate, the Prodigal Son, and worse than all, that hideous
                            Death and the Lady. Recklessly I tumble out all the rest of the packet.
                            Three great bolts with silver clasps, three apostle spoons, two old
                            silver salt-cellars marked W.H.J.H., a child's christening cup, a horn
                            tobacco-stopper with a silver tip, an agate from the beach, a
                            tortoise-shell knife with a silver blade, half a dozen coins and a
                            bronze fibula found upon the farm, an infant's coral, a neck-pin
                            garnished with a Bristol diamond, a number of mother-of-pearl buttons
                            and blue beads, and a mass of mock jewelry bought by the farmer from the
                            Cheapjacks at Barum fair with the produce of his wrestling triumphs.
                            Separate from the rest, and packed most carefully, were all but two of
                            the trinkets I had sent as Christmas gifts for the family.
Touched to the heart by all this loving kindness, I felt so ashamed of my
                            paltry petulance at Eli, Jonah, and the rest, that I would not indulge
                            in a peep at Sally's letter, which came last of all, until I had starved
                            myself for a day. That literary effort showed so much improvement, both
                            in writing and in spelling, that any critic would have endorsed Mr.
                            Huxtable's conclusion that the gift must be in the family. A few words
                            still there were of rather doubtful texture, but who can bind or bound
                            the caprice and luxury of the English language? Moreover, Sally's stops
                            were left once more to the discretion of the reader. But if Lord Byron
                            could not grasp the mysteries of punctuation, how could Sally Huxtable?
                            Yet that eager little maid would have learned in half an hour the art
                            which might have mellowed the self-tormentor's howling. Sally's was a
                            healthy, sweet, and wholesome nature.
Tossil's Barton Farm, Trentisoe.
                            The tenth day of March A.D. 1851.
"DEAR MISS CLARA DEAR,—If you please, father and mother and me and our
                            little Jack hope this letter will find you in good health as it leaves
                            all of us at this present, or when it will be finished, thank God for
                            the same, and hoping no offence. The baby as was born on the 20th day of
                            October last is a very fine and lusty wench at this time of writing, and
                            have got two teeth, and her hair coming again, and answers to the name
                            of Clara, as you know Miss you was so kind to give her leave and
                            liberty, and father call Clara to her now, and so do I and Jack, but
                            mother will call her Babby still, and so the chillers does.
Father often say, "Babby! Why there be a hundred babbies in the world,
                            and a thousand either, for ought I knows again it, but I reckon there
                            isn't half a dozen Claras." But mother say she can't help it: she always
                            did call them babbies till they was put into short-clothes, and longer
                            too, if so be there wasn't another, and she feels a call on her to do
                            it, and no offence Miss Clara for that same. If you please Miss, when
                            the parson say "Name this child," and Aunt Muxworthy, from over to
                            Rowley Mires, say, quite peart, "Clara, sir"—father had been learning
                            her, you see Miss, all the morning—parson look, so mother say, the same
                            as a skinned sheep all skivered out to dry; and Tim Badcock go haw haw,
                            till father was forced to slip behind the godmothers and fetch him a
                            little clout on the side of his head. Then parson say at last, "Clara
                            maam! There be no child of that name to this side of Coom, and it seem
                            to me to go again the rub rick." Father say the parson must be a high
                            farmer, for none of us ever hear tell of that rick in this country. "Now
                            take my advice and think better of it Mrs. Muxworthy," the parson say
                            again. So she looks to father, for you see Miss she were not edified
                            about it being right, because she could not find it in the Bible
                            nowhere. And she say, "Think better of it farmer now; if you wants a
                            handsome name, there's Tryphena and Tryphosa, and has been in the family
                            afore." "Mother," says my father, and he looked the way he do when he
                            don't intend to talk about a thing, "Mother, go home with the child, and
                            I'll take her to Parracombe Church next Sunday: and tell Suke not to put
                            the goose down."
You see, Miss, we was going to have a supper after church, and the best
                            goose on the farm, and the parson was coming too. "Sober now," say the
                            parson, "if so be now, farmer John, you have put your mind upon naming
                            this here infant Clara, why I will christen her so, only an under
                            Protestant, and with difference to the chapter." Father only say "Amen,
                            so be it;" and then parson do it, and do it uncommon well too, father
                            say. and she only laugh when they give her the splash. Father told us
                            afterwards as he believed parson was feared he couldn't spell Clara
                            fitty; but mother say he be wrong there, and all along of his pride, for
                            parson be a college chap and so he can spell anything amost, in one way
                            or another.
Miss Clara, all them beautiful things as you sent for us to Christmas
                            time, with the forepart of all our names upon them, except Sally, was
                            sunk in the bottom of the brook in the hole below the stickle by the
                            hollow ash, where the big trout hath his hover, all along of Joe the
                            Queen's boy; and we never knew ought about it till your after letter
                            come. Then our little Jack, who be quite a big boy now, and button his
                            own corduroys, go down to the brook at once, and pull off all his
                            things, and there he rake and feel among the stones for the biggest part
                            of a day, though the ice was on the edge but the water were quite clear;
                            and Tabby Badcock want to pull off her things and go in too, but Jack
                            would not let her, and be ashamed of herself, and I sat on the bank and
                            Tabby, and Jack pull out nine beautiful things, as were meant for
                            father, and mother, and him, and Billy, and little Honor, and Bobby, and
                            Peggy, and the two weanies, but he couldn't find nothing as were meant
                            for me Sally, unless Tabby stole it, and she be quite equal to it I am
                            afeared: and we all returns you many many kind thanks and love,
                            especially the ones as had it, and me. Our Jack say, No her wouldn't do
                            it, he'll go bail for that, no fie! But I shake my head; though perhaps
                            she never had the chance, if so be there wasn't none marked Sally, and
                            thank you every bit the same, Miss, so long as there wasn't none for
                            Tabby."
Poor little Sally! She must have cried bitterly to think of her being
                            forgotten. But the best of all, next to the farmer's, was for her, and
                            there was one for Tabby too.
"Miss Clara dear, the things was not hurt at all by being under water for
                            a week, and father say they must be made of the very same gold as Queen
                            Victoria's crown and sceptre is, as never can rust with the briny waves;
                            and Beany Dawe feel cock sure as it was the fairy of the brook stole
                            them from Joe's breeches pocket, and keep mine still he say because it
                            be the prettiest. But there, he never know much, any more than Tabby
                            does.
If you please Miss, asking your pardon, when Aunt Muxworthy were here, to
                            the christening time, she said she never see such writing in her life as
                            mine, and it wasn't my best copy neither, and she said it was a sin to
                            make a scholar of a honest wench like that, and I should want to be the
                            parson next, and read the forty-two generations and play the fort piano;
                            and I didn't know, Miss, whether to laugh or cry, so I began to eat an
                            apple; but father say quite slowly, "Sister Muxworthy, you was never
                            gifted with no eddication no more nor I Jan Uxtable, and how be us to
                            know if it be good or bad? Once I had a horse, say father, as afore ever
                            he went into the field, turned up his nose at the grass like, and with
                            turning up so much he died at last of the glanders. But I never see that
                            there horse persuade the others to starve." Aunt Muxworthy toss her
                            head, and we thought she wouldn't eat no goose, but the smell of the
                            stuffing and the weather was too many for her; and she eat a wing, and a
                            leg, and one side of the breast, and it do her good. And afore she had
                            had much brandy, "John," she say, "you was right and I was wrong. Let
                            the little wench crack on, and some day they'll hear of her to tother
                            side of Hexmoor." So father laugh and kiss her, and the chillers was put
                            to bed, and we drink your health Miss, and Clara's nine times nine, and
                            father say he'll learn himself some day, when he give up wrestling, only
                            he fear it would make his hand shake terrible, and then some laugh and
                            some of us cry, and they has more hot water, and Beany Dawe set to, and
                            make so many poems he turn the stairs somehow inside out, and Suke and
                            Tim was forced to heave him into the tallat, and keep him from going
                            abroad by a rope of onions round him and two truss of hay on the top.
                            Next day, he make no poems at all till he drink more than a gallon of
                            cider.
Oh Miss Clara dear, what ever is the matter with you? Father be in such a
                            taking I never see. To-day your letter come about selling that
                            knob-thing of Beany Dawe's, and we knows it must be all along of the
                            crown jewels you bought for us, as we meant to keep in the family to the
                            end of all our time. Mother double up, and cry into the churn, and spoil
                            all the butter; and father were that upset he stamp out of the house a
                            trying hard to whistle, and he couldn't see no one there to let it off
                            on but Timothy Badcock, and he were a little saucy, so he toss Tim up on
                            the linhay roof and his legs come through the thatch, and father was
                            forced to ease him out with the pitchfork. Tim was stiff a bit in the
                            evening, and serve him right say mother, for laughing so at the
                            Cornishers; but father give him some neatsfoot oil and cider, and we
                            knew us couldn't hurt him because he be double-jointed.
And if you please Miss Clara dear, we would not stoop to ask Beany Dawe
                            and he nothing but a sawing poet; so father go to the old oak chest with
                            the whitewash on it, and pull it open without the key, and take out some
                            old rubbish he saith, and order mother to pack it without a word, and
                            mother want to put in a pair of linen sheets and the best table-cloth,
                            but father say quite crusty like, "Do e take our Miss Clara for a common
                            packman?" And when I say, "Please father what shall I say about it all?"
                            he answer me quite low, "How ever can I tell child? Ask your mother
                            there. Only give my best respects and most humble duty, and tell Miss
                            Clara I wishes I could find a man to throw me all four pins, for being
                            such a drunken hosebird not to have more to send her. But I know her
                            won't take money from the likes of us. Stop," father say, "ask her to
                            please to lift our horn up as the horn of an unicorn. I knows where to
                            go for lots of money and all to be had for asking. I'll go to Bodmin
                            town next week," say father, "and show them Cornishers a trick of
                            Abraham Cann. Since honest Abraham took the sprain, he left it all to
                            me, though God knows, and thank him for the same, I never want it yet. I
                            should like to see the Cornisher as could stand my grip." And then
                            father pull both his hands out of his pockets. Mother say he wear them
                            out he do spraddle both his thumbs so.
It seems a curious thing, Miss Clara dear, father never get vexed or
                            weist like, but what he want to wrestle, and other times he never think
                            of it, unless it be to fair or revel time.
When I asked mother and said as father tell me to, the tears was in her
                            eyes, and she try to look angry with me, and then she broke out crying
                            as loud as Suke when the cow Molly kick her. So between the both of
                            them, Miss, I can't know what to say, so please to make it yourself
                            Miss, for I am sure I can't find any thing only the best love of our
                            hearts and a side of bacon us would like to send, and the butter from my
                            own little cow, all sweet hay and no turmots; I be to sit in Coom
                            market, all by myself, on Saturday, and mother not come nigh me, and I
                            know you'll let me send you the money, and I expects elevenpence a
                            pound, because you never was proud with your loving scholar ever to
                            command and obey. SALLY HUXTABLE.
All this here underneath and over the leaf is going to be written after
                            the rest of this here paper.
If you please Miss Clara dear, there come now just a very fine spoken
                            gentleman with a long coat the colour of udder, and blue flaps, and blue
                            at the hands, and ever so many great silver buttons with a print like
                            pats of best butter, and gold ribbon round his hat. We seemed at first
                            he be an officer of dragoons, till we see'd the flour in his hair, and
                            then us knowed he was the Queen's miller. Father was a great mind to
                            show him a forehip and send his buttons to you Miss, because he see they
                            be worth ever so much more than these little things all put together,
                            only mother stop him.
Then the gentleman say he know Mr. Henwood well, and respect him much,
                            and he be sent here by expression to discover where you be Miss Clara,
                            and it be most particular, and if we wished you well, us would tell him
                            to once. Father and mother and me puts him in the parlour and gives him
                            a jug of the very best cider, and then we goes and lays our heads
                            together about him in the cheese-room, and mother and me was for telling
                            him, only father say no. You never give us leave, and us wants to do
                            what is right and upright, unless you order us contrary, and us has no
                            right to tell without ask you, and you so full of enemies.
So father say, very grand for him: "Honoured sir, us hopes the honour of
                            a papper scrawl from Miss Clara in ten days time, or may be a fortnight,
                            according to the weather please God, and us be satisfied too. My eldest
                            daughter here be writing to Miss Clara for a week or more, and if so be
                            she have got room left on the papper scrawl she ask Miss Clara's leave,
                            and us shall have time enough to hear what her say in a fortnight, or
                            mebbe three weeks."
"Oh then, she be gone to Hitaly at the least." The gentleman say. Father
                            never hear tell of Hitaly whether it be in London town or no, but he
                            look to mother and me to hold our noise. The gentleman say something
                            sound very much like "Dang," and father hoped he would be saucy, because
                            then he send his buttons in spite of mother and me; but when he look at
                            father he think better of it, and go off very civil in the carriage he
                            come by, only say he would find out in spite of us.
And please Miss Clara dear, mother say she be ashamed to send you a
                            parcel all rubbage, except the pictures, but she do hope they wont cheat
                            you about them there, for they be the finest ever come to these parts,
                            and warranted real London made. All the farmers hereaway want to buy
                            them of us. And father say, "Dang the pictures, tell Miss Clara to come
                            to us, and her shan't want Beany Dawe's things, nor the Queen's miller
                            either." Oh do come, Miss Clara dear, the banks be yellow with
                            primroses, and white and blue with violets, and I know three blackbirds
                            nests already and an ousel's down by the river. Oh do come. I have got
                            such a lot to tell you, things as I can't make head or tail of when I
                            try to spell them, and you shall milk my own cow Sally, and have all my
                            black hen's eggs, and the ducks too if they hatch,—and sling all the
                            small potatoes from the plough field to the hazel hedge. Your best
                            scholar as ever was and loving pupil.
SALLY HUXTABLE."
</div></body></text></TEI>