<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III.
Thus far, I have written in sore haste, to tell, as plainly and as
                            briefly as possible, that which has darkened all my life. Though it
                            never leaves my waking thoughts, to dwell upon it before others is agony
                            to me. Henceforth my tale will flow perhaps more easily, until I fall
                            again into a grief almost as dark, and am struck by storms of passion
                            which childhood's stature does not reach.
When the shock of the household, and the wonder of the county, and the
                            hopes of constables (raised by a thousand pounds' reward) had subsided
                            gradually, my mother continued to live in the old mansion, perhaps
                            because none of her friends came forward to remove her. Under my
                            father's will she was the sole executrix; but all the estates (including
                            house and park) were left to my father's nearest relative, as trustee
                            for myself, with a large annuity to my mother charged upon them. There
                            were many other provisions and powers in the will, which are of no
                            consequence to my story. The chief estate was large and rich, extending
                            three or four miles from the house, which stood in a beautiful part of
                            Gloucestershire. The entire rental was about 12,000*l.* a year. My
                            father (whose name was Henry Valentine Vaughan), being a very active man
                            in the prime of life, had employed no steward, but managed everything
                            himself. The park, and two or three hundred acres round it, had always
                            been kept in hand; the rest was let to thriving tenants, who loved (as
                            they expressed it) "every hair on the head of a Vaughan." There was also
                            a small farm near the sea, in a lonely part of Devonshire; but this was
                            my mother's, having been left to her by her father, a clergyman in that
                            neighbourhood.
My father's nearest relative was his half-brother, Edgar Vaughan, who had
                            been educated for the Bar, and at one time seemed likely to become
                            eminent; then suddenly he gave up his practice, and resided (or rather
                            roved) abroad, during several years. Sinister rumours about him reached
                            our neighbourhood, not long before my father's death. To these, however,
                            the latter paid no attention, but always treated his brother Edgar with
                            much cordiality and affection. But all admitted that Edgar Vaughan had
                            far outrun his income as a younger son, which amounted to about 600*l.*
                            a year. Of course, therefore, my father had often helped him.
On the third day after that night, my guardian came to Vaughan Park. He
                            was said to have hurried from London, upon learning there what had
                            happened.
The servants and others had vainly and foolishly tried to keep from me
                            the nature of my loss. Soon I found out all they knew, and when the
                            first tit and horror left me, I passed my whole time, light or dark, in
                            roving from passage to passage, from room to room, from closet to
                            closet, searching every chink and cranny for the murderer of my father.
                            Though heretofore a timid child, while so engaged I knew not such a
                            thing as fear; but peered, and groped, and listened, feeling every inch
                            of wall and wainscot, crawling lest I should alarm my prey, spying
                            through the slit of every door, and shaking every empty garment. Certain
                            boards there were near the east window which sounded hollow; at these I
                            scooped until I broke my nails. In vain nurse Maples locked me in her
                            room, held me at her side, or even bound me to the bed. My ravings
                            forced her soon to yield, and I would not allow her, or any one else, to
                            follow me. The Gloucester physician said that since the disease of my
                            mind had taken that shape, it would be more dangerous to thwart than to
                            indulge it.
It was the evening of the third day, and weary with but never of my search, I was groping down the great
                            oak-staircase in the dusk, hand after hand, and foot by foot, when
                            suddenly the main door-bell rang. The snow was falling heavily, and had
                            deadened the sound of wheels. At once I slid (as my father had taught me
                            to do) down the broad balustrade, ran across the entrance-hall, and with
                            my whole strength drew back the bolt of the lock. There I stood in the
                            porch, unfrightened, but with a new kind of excitement on me. A tall
                            dark man came up the steps, and shook the snow from his boots. The
                            carriage-lamp shone in my face. I would not let him cross the threshold,
                            but stood there and confronted him. He pretended to take me for some
                            servant's child, and handed me a parcel covered with snow. I flung it
                            down, and said, looking him full in the face, "I am Clara Vaughan, and
                            you are the man who killed my father." "Carry her in, John," he said to
                            the servant—"carry her in, or the poor little thing will die. What
                            eyes!" and he used some foreign oath—"what wonderful eyes she has!"
That burst of passion was the last conscious act of the young and
                            over-laboured brain. For three months I wandered outside the gates of
                            sorrow. My guardian, as they told me, was most attentive throughout the
                            whole course of the fever, and even in the press of business visited me
                            three times every day. Meanwhile, my mother was slowly shaking off the
                            stupor which lay upon her, and the new fear of losing me came through
                            that thick heaviness, like the wind through a fog. Doubtless it helped
                            to restore her senses, and awoke her to the work of life. Then, as time
                            went on, her former beauty and gentleness came back, and her reason too,
                            as regarded other subjects. But as to that which all so longed to know,
                            not a spark of evidence could be had from her. The faintest allusion to
                            that crime, the name of her loved husband, the mere word "murder"
                            uttered in her presence—and the consciousness would leave her eyes, like
                            a loan withdrawn. Upright she sat and rigid as when she was found that
                            night, with the lines of her face as calm and cold as moonlight. Only
                            two means there were by which her senses could be restored: one was low
                            sweet music, the other profound sleep. She was never thrown into this
                            cataleptic state by her own thoughts or words, nor even by those of
                            others when in strict sequence upon her own. But any attempt to lead her
                            to that one subject, no matter how craftily veiled, was sure to end in
                            this. The skilful physician, who had known her many years, judged, after
                            special study of this disease, in which he felt deep interest, that it
                            was always present in her brain, but waited for external aid to master
                            her. I need not say that she was now unfit for any stranger's converse,
                            and even her most careful friends must touch sometimes the motive
                            string.
As I recovered slowly from long illness, the loss of my best friend and
                            the search for my worst enemy revived and reigned within me. Sometimes
                            my guardian would deign to reason with me upon what he called "my
                            monomania." When he did so, I would fix my eyes upon him, but never
                            tried to answer. Now and then, those eyes seemed to cause him some
                            uneasiness; at other times he would laugh and compare them pleasantly to
                            the blue fire-damp in a coal-mine. His dislike of their scrutiny was
                            well known to me, and incited me the more to urge it. But in spite of
                            all, he was ever kind and gentle to me, and even tried some grimly
                            playful overtures to my love, which fled from him with loathing, albeit
                            a slow conviction formed that I had wronged him by suspicion.
Edgar Malins Vaughan, then about thirty-seven years old, was (I suppose)
                            a very handsome man, and perhaps of a more striking presence than my
                            dearest father. His face, when he was pleased, reminded me strongly of
                            the glance and smile I had lost, but never could it convey that soft
                            sweet look, which still came through the clouds to me, now and then in
                            dreams. The outlines of my guardian's face were keener too and stronger,
                            and his complexion far more swarthy. His eyes were of a hard steel-blue,
                            and never seemed to change. A slight lameness, perceptible only at
                            times, did not impair his activity, but served him as a pretext for
                            declining all field-sports, for which (unlike my father) he had no real
                            taste.
His enjoyments, if he had any—and I suppose all men have some—seemed to
                            consist in the management of the estate (which he took entirely upon
                            himself), in satiric literature and the news of the day, or in lonely
                            rides and sails upon the lake. It was hinted too, by Thomas Kenwood, who
                            disliked and feared him strangely, that he drank spirits or foreign
                            cordials in his own room, late at night. There was nothing to confirm
                            this charge; he was always up betimes, his hand was never tremulous, nor
                            did his colour change.
</div></body></text></TEI>