<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="36">
CHAPTER XVIII.
Inspector Cutting gave me some minute instructions, and in less than half
                            an hour we set forth upon our enterprise. I was wrapped in a loose grey
                            cloak having a hooded cape; and carefully hidden I carried for
                            self-defence a very keen stiletto. I had procured it indirectly from the
                            best cutler in London, but neither workmanship nor material could be
                            compared to that of Italy.
The night was dark and cold, the streets were almost deserted, and all
                            the shops except the chemists' and the public-houses closed. We walked
                            straightway to the nearest cabstand, where Mr. Cutting ordered a
                            vehicle, and put me inside, himself riding with the driver. So little
                            did I know as yet of London, that after the first turn or two, I could
                            not even guess what direction we were taking. I had such confidence in
                            my guide, a staid respectable man with a grown up family, that I never
                            thought there could be harm in my journeying with him at night. And even
                            had I thought so, most likely I should have done it all the same. Ever
                            since the time he wounded me, or allowed me to wound myself, his manner
                            towards me had been most kind, considerate, and respectful; though he
                            found it his duty now and then to repress my impetuosity.
With all my perception alert, I kept a sharp look-out from the window,
                            but vainly strove to find anything that might serve for a landmark. Once
                            we stopped for about five minutes, at a police-station somewhere in
                            Clerkenwell, where, by the light of a lamp, I read, without leaving the
                            cab, the ghastly descriptions of all the dead bodies recently found in
                            London and waiting identification. Hereupon my courage began to ooze,
                            and the weather seemed much colder. The type was hard to read at that
                            distance, and the imagination had fair play, as it does when words come
                            slowly.
Anon the inspector reappeared, so altered in dress and countenance, that
                            I did not know him until he made me a bow. With a glance of
                            encouragement, and a little grin of dry humour, he mounted the box
                            again. After another long drive, in the course of which we ran silently
                            over a wooden road,—probably High Holborn,—we stopped in a broad but
                            deserted thoroughfare, very badly lighted. Here Mr. Cutting opened the
                            door, helped me out, and discharged the cab, but whispered something to
                            the driver before he let him go.
"Now take my arm, Miss Valence, if you please. I have escorted many a
                            lady of higher birth than yours."
"Of higher title perhaps, Mr. Cutting; and their grandfathers
                            money-lenders, or perhaps far worse."
"I am sure I don't know; we must take things as we find them. I thought
                            you despised such nonsense. But the cabbage that runs to seed is the
                            tallest in the field. No Englishman sees the nonsense of it, unless he
                            happens to be a detective or a grave-digger."
"Do you mean to say that those of lofty birth are worse than those of low
                            birth?"
"No, I mean nothing of the sort. But I do mean that they ought to be
                            better, and on the whole are not so. Nature holds the balance, and
                            temptation and education chuck into the opposite scales, and I think the
                            first chucks fastest. At any rate I would rather have a good drunken
                            navvy than a lord to take to the station. I mean of course when my own
                            rank was not what it is."
This little dissertation was meant to divert my thoughts. I made no
                            reply, being ignorant of such matters; neither did I care to talk about
                            them then. Nevertheless, I believe Inspector Cutting was wrong. As we
                            entered a narrow street he suddenly turned and looked at me.
"Poor child! how you tremble! Draw your cape more forward; the bitter
                            cold requires it. Are you trembling from fear?"
"No; only from cold." But I tried in vain to think so.
"A steady hand and steadfast nerve are wanted for your task. If you
                            cannot rely on them, say so at once. In five minutes you will have no
                            retreat."
"I shall be better directly. But I am so cold. Inspector Cutting, it must
                            be freezing hard—ten degrees, I should think."
"It does not freeze at all. I see we must warm you a little. But no more
                            'Inspector Cutting,' if you please, until to-morrow."
Hereupon he led me into a little room, fenced off from the bar of some
                            refreshment-house. A glorious fire was burning, by which he set and left
                            me. Presently he returned, with a small glass in his hand.
"Drink this, young lady. It will warm you, and brace your nerves."
I saw by the firelight that it was brandy, or some dark-coloured
                            spirit.
"No, I thank you. Do you suppose that I require Dutch courage?"
I threw such emphasis on the personal pronoun, and looked at him so
                            indignantly, that he laughed outright.
"I thank you in turn. You suppose that I do. I will justify your
                            discernment." And with that he tipped it off, and then returned to
                            business, all the graver for the interlude.
"Now, if you are really warm, we will start again. Stop one moment. I
                            have heard you cough two or three times. Can you keep it under?"
I assured him that I could very easily do so, and that it was nothing but
                            the sudden effect of the cold. Forth we went again into the winter
                            night, after I had learned from him that we were now in Whitechapel, not
                            far from Goodman's Fields.
After another short walk, we came to the end of a narrow by-street, where
                            there was an archway. Passing through this archway, we descended some
                            steep and broken steps. Then the Inspector produced a small lamp
                            brightly burning, which he must have lit at the public-house. It was not
                            what is called a bull's-eye, but a reflector-lamp. By its light I saw
                            that the chief entrance to the house must be round the corner, and
                            perhaps in another street. With a small key which he took from his
                            pocket, Mr. Cutting unlocked a little iron gate, and we entered a narrow
                            passage. At the end of it was a massive door studded with great nails.
                            Here my guide gave a gentle knock, and hid the lamp as before.
Presently we heard a shrill sound from the keyhole, like a dryad's voice.
                            The Inspector stooped thereto, and pronounced the password. Not without
                            some difficulty the lock was turned and the bolts withdrawn, and we
                            stood inside. A child, under-sized and unnaturally sharp, stared at us
                            for a moment, then dodged away from the lamp, as if more accustomed to
                            darkness. Mr. Cutting closed the door and refastened it, then led me
                            through some basement rooms unpaved and unfurnished, until we came to an
                            iron step-ladder. This he ascended, and helped me up, and we found
                            ourselves in a small dark lobby, containing no furniture, except a high
                            three-legged stool. When he closed his lamp all around was dark, but on
                            the rafters overhead a faint patch of light appeared—ceiling there was
                            none.
"Do you see that light?" he whispered to me, pointing, as I could just
                            perceive, to a narrow glazed opening high in the wall, whence the faint
                            gleam proceeded.
"Then jump upon this stool, and do your best to see through."
He cast the light of his lamp upon the stool for a moment, while I did as
                            he bade me. Standing there, I found that I was tall enough to look
                            through; but the narrow pane which formed the window was thickly covered
                            with size, or some opaque integument. All I could tell was, that the
                            space beyond was lighted.
"I know you can't see now," he said, as I came down despairing, "but you
                            shall see by and by. The fools who were here before sized the glass on
                            the wrong side, and this lot, though much sharper, have not corrected
                            the error. They keep that window for escape in the last resort. Now take
                            this bottle and this camel's-hair brush; it will make the glass
                            transparent without the smallest noise. The men are not there yet. We
                            could easily rub it clear now, but they will examine it. When the time
                            comes, use the liquid most carefully and lightly, and don't spread it
                            higher than an inch from the bottom of the frame. The lights are at this
                            end; the shadow of the sill will allow you just an inch."
"And how far may I go horizontally?"
"The whole length of the glass, to command as much view as possible. The
                            effect will pass in three or four minutes, but you must not do it again.
                            If you do, the glass will fly, and you will be in their hands. Desperate
                            men they are, and though I shall be near, I might be too late to save
                            you. See all you can, to be able to swear to them all."
"How shall I know the one?"
"I cannot tell you. I must leave it to your instinct, or your intuition.
                            I only know myself that he is one of the four. My information, such as
                            it is, was obtained very oddly, and I trust to this night's work to make
                            it more precise. One thing more: No noise, if you value your life. Keep
                            the bottle stopped. Don't let the stuff drop on you; don't put your eyes
                            to it, or it will blind you for ever. There is very little of it,
                            because it is so deadly."
"When shall I do it?"
"In one hour from this time. Take this repeater. I have shown you how to
                            use it. Look well at it now, while you have the light."
I looked at the watch; it was nearly midnight.
"Am I to be left in the dark—all in the dark here, by myself?"
"Yes. I must be seen elsewhere, or the whole thing fails. They know me
                            even in this dress, and they watch me as I do them. But for to-night I
                            believe I have misled them. When it is over, wait here till I come for
                            you, or the little girl you saw."
"Oh! I wish I had never come; and all so vague and indecisive!"
"You can go back now, if you please; though ever that would be
                            dangerous."
"I will not go back. No doubt I shall know him. When will you secure
                            him?"
"When my evidence is completed. Now, remember, you have to deal with men
                            keen as hawks, and stealthy as tigers. But there is no real danger, if
                            you keep your self-command. Observe all four as narrowly as you can,
                            both for your own sake and for mine. Be careful to stand on the centre
                            of the stool. But you had better not get upon it until they have
                            searched the room. Now, good-bye. I trust to your courage. If any harm
                            comes, I will avenge you."
"A comfort that! What good will it be to me?"
"If vengeance is no good, what are you doing here?"
"Thank you. That is no business of yours. Don't let me detain you."
He told me afterwards that he had vexed me on purpose to arouse my
                            mettle. And I am sure I needed it.
"Ah! now you are all right. If your caution fails you, the man who slew
                            your father will be sure to escape us."
"If it fails me, 'twill be from anger, not from terror."
"I know it. Let me look at you."
He threw the full light on my face. The burnished concave was not
                            brighter or firmer than my eyes.
"Pale as death, and quite as resolute. Rely only upon yourself."
"God and myself," I whispered, as he glided out of sight along the vaults
                            below. I could see no other entrance to the place in which I sat; but
                            how could I tell?
For a minute excitement kept me hot; but as the last gleam of the light
                            died upon the wall below, my heart began to throb heavily, and a chill
                            came over me. The pulse thumped in my ears, like a knocking in the
                            cellar. "Was it fear?" I asked myself, in scorn that I should ask. No,
                            it was not fear, but horrible suspense. The balance of life and death,
                            of triumph and disgrace, swung there before me in the dark, as if my
                            breath would turn it. No dream of a child, no vagary of the brain—the
                            clear perception of strong will and soul poised upon this moment.
The moment was too long; the powers began to fail, the senses grew more
                            faint and confused at every heavy throb. Little images and little
                            questions took the place of large ones. In vain I looked for even a
                            cobweb, or the skeleton of a fly, where the dull light flickered through
                            the pane of glass. In vain I listened for a mouse. Even a rat (much as I
                            hate him) would have been welcome then. The repeater was purposely made
                            so low of tick, that I got no comfort thence. All was deep, unfathomable
                            silence, except the sound of my rebel heart.
As a forlorn hope, I began to reckon sixty slowly, as a child keeps with
                            a ticking clock.
It would not do. My heart was beating louder than ever, and my hands were
                            trembling; even my teeth rattled like dice in a box as the time
                            approached.
The nerves will not be hoodwinked; the mind cannot swindle the body. I
                            once slapped the cheeks of my governess. I cannot treat nature so. Try
                            the sweet influence, and the honest coin of reason. It will not do. All
                            trembling, I strike the repeater. Five minutes more, and the trial must
                            come. My heart is fluttering like a pigeon's throat. The long suspense
                            has been too much. Oh! why was I submitted to this cruel ordeal? The
                            walls are thick. I can hear no movement in the secret room.
There comes a creeping, fingering, sound, as of one whose candle is out,
                            groping for the door. It passes along the pane of glass, and a shadow is
                            thrown on the rafter. Who can it be? What stealthy hand but that of my
                            father's murderer?
The word—the thought is enough. What resolution, reason, justice, all in
                            turn, have failed to do, passion has done at once—passion at myself, as
                            well as at my enemy. Is it Clara Vaughan, who, for eight long years of
                            demon's reign, has breathed but for this moment—is Clara Vaughan to
                            shake like the wooden-legged blackbird now her chance is come?
A rush of triumph burned, like vitriol, through my veins. Every nerve was
                            braced, every sense alert and eager. Against the light of that window,
                            dull as it was, I could have threaded the finest needle that ever was
                            made.
I struck my repeater again. It was the hour, the minute, when my father
                            died. With the mere spring of my instep I leaped upon the stool. I could
                            see it clearly now. I dipped the broad camel's-hair brush in the flat
                            phial, holding it carefully at arm's length, and then drew it lightly
                            along the pane, quite at the bottom, from corner to corner. One more
                            dip, one more stripe above, a steam hovered on the glass, and there was
                            a gazing-place, clear as crystal, and wide enough to show most of the
                            narrow room. Of the room itself I took no heed; the occupants were my
                            study.
Only four in all. One man at a high desk writing rapidly; three men
                            sitting round a small table, talking earnestly, and with much
                            gesticulation, but the tone too low for me even to guess their language.
                            From the appearance, manner, and action of the speakers, I felt sure
                            that it was not English, and I thought that it was not French. Why, I
                            cannot say; but my attention fixed itself upon the man who was writing
                            at the top of the room. Perhaps it was because I could see him best, for
                            he stood with his face full towards me.
He was a man of middle age and stature, strongly framed, closely knit,
                            and light of limb, with a handsome, keenly oval face, broad forehead,
                            black eyes, glancing quickly and scornfully at his three comrades, long
                            hair of an iron grey, falling on his shoulders, and tossed back often
                            with a jerk of the head. His hands were white and restless, quick as
                            light in their motion. On the left thumb flashed a large red jewel.
                            Though I could not see the paper, I knew by the course of the quill that
                            the writing was very small. But one minute I watched him, for the film
                            was returning upon the glass, and I must scan the others; yet in that
                            time he had written several lines, half of them without looking at the
                            paper, but with his eyes upon the other three.
I knew him now he was in clear light, I could swear to him anywhere
                            again. The last glance I could spare him sent a shudder through me, for
                            in his impatience he shifted one foot from the shade of the desk. It was
                            small, pointed, and elegant.
The film was thickening, like frost upon the pane, when I began to
                            observe the others. But I saw enough to print their faces on my memory,
                            or those at least of two. The third I could not see so well. He seemed
                            older than the rest. All the men wore loose grey tunics, with a red sash
                            over the left shoulder. I judged that the three were debating hotly, as
                            to some measure, upon which the fourth had resolved. Every now and then,
                            they glanced at him uneasily.
At him I gazed again, with deadly hatred, cold as ice, upon my heart. I
                            felt my dagger handle. Oh for one moment with him! In my fury I forgot
                            the Inspector's warning. The film was closing over. I touched the glass
                            with my lashes. A flash of agony shot through my eyes. With a jerk I
                            drew back, the stool rocked under me, one foot of it struck the wall. I
                            clutched the window sill, and threw my weight inwards. Down came the
                            foot of the stool, loud as the bang of a door.
I thought it was all over. How I stifled a scream I know not; had it
                            escaped me, I should never have told this story. I had the presence of
                            mind to stand still, and watch, though my eyes were maddening me, what
                            the cut-throats would do. Through the agony, and the dimness, I could
                            just see them all start, and rush to the door at the side of the room.
                            The writer stood first, with his papers thrust anyhow into his bosom, a
                            pistol in one hand, a poniard in the other. Did I know the shape of it?
                            The other three were armed, but I could not see with what. They crouched
                            behind a heavy screen, presenting (I supposed) their pistol muzzles at
                            the door. Finding no attack ensue, they began to search. Now was the
                            real danger to me. If they searched that window before the size
                            returned, my life ended there. Fear was past. Desperation seized me. If
                            I was doomed to blindness, just as well to death. But I clutched my
                            dagger.
My left ear was against the wall. I heard a hand graze the partition
                            inside, then a chair placed under the embrasure, and a step upon it. I
                            was still upon the stool, stooping close beneath the window frame.
                            Suddenly the light streak vanished, the size flew over it, as the breath
                            flies over glass in the hardest frost. The hand felt along the window
                            frame, the dull shadow of a head flitted upon the beam. It was within a
                            foot of mine. The searcher passed on, without suspicion.
Strange it was, but now the deadliest peril was over, triple fear fell
                            upon me. The heat flew back to my heart, just now so stanch and rigid;
                            my hair seemed to creep with terror. Dear life, like true love scorned,
                            would have its way within me. Quietly I slid down from the stool, and
                            cowered upon it, in a storm of trembling. My eyelids dropped in agony, I
                            could not lift them again, but blue and red lights seemed to dance
                            within them. I had made up my mind to blindness; but not, oh not just
                            yet, to death.
How long I remained in this abject state, scorning myself, yet none the
                            braver, is more than I can tell, or even cared to ask. May it never be
                            the lot of any, not even the basest murderer! Worn out at last, in a
                            lull of pain and terror, I fell into deep sleep, from which I was
                            awakened by a hand upon my shoulder.
I tried to look up, but could not. Sight was fled, and as I thought for
                            ever. But I felt that it was a friend.
"Ah, I see how it is"—the voice was Inspector Cutting's—"my poor child,
                            there is now no danger. Give me your hand:" he tried to lift me, but I
                            fell against the wall.
"Take a sip of this, we must restore circulation. It is the cold as much
                            as anything; another sip, Miss Vaughan." He used my true name on
                            purpose; it helped to restore me. He was most humane and kind; he did
                            not even remind me of Dutch courage.
</div></body></text></TEI>