<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="34">
CHAPTER XVI.
I was much grieved at the loss of my last letter to Tossil's Barton,
                            because it contained my little Christmas presents for all the family. It
                            was registered for security, but I suppose they "took no count" of that
                            where the delivery of letters depended so much upon luck. Of their
                            Christmas present to me I resolved to give the surplus to those who
                            would be the better for it, and not (according to the usual law of such
                            things) to those who did not want it, and would make return with
                            interest. So on the Christmas morning Mrs. Shelfer and myself, each
                            carrying a large basket, went to the mews round the corner, and
                            distributed among the poor lodgers there, more Christmas dinners than
                            had ever entered those doors before; and how grateful the poor things
                            were, only they all wanted the best.
Now the school of design was closed for a while, and I worked hard for
                            several days at the landscape for Mr. Oxgall, though the store of
                            provisions sent me and the rent enclosed in the turkey had saved me from
                            present necessity.
On the day of all days in the year the saddest and darkest to me, I could
                            not keep to my task, but went for a change of thoughts to the school,
                            now open again.
It was the 30th of December, 1850, and, though I crouch not to the
                            mumming of prigs scolloped out at the throat, who block out with a
                            patchwork screen the simple hearth of religion, and kneel at an ashbin
                            to warm themselves; though I don't care a herring for small
                            anniversaries dotted all over the calendar, and made by some Murphy of
                            old; yet I reverence deeply the true feasts of Church and Chapel, the
                            refreshings of faith and charity, whereupon we forgive and are sorry for
                            those who work hard to mar them. Neither does it seem to me—so far as my
                            timid and wavering judgment extends—to be superstition or vanity, if we
                            dare to set mark by those dates in our own little span which God has
                            scarred on our memory.
In the long dark room so bare and comfortless, and, to-day, so lonely and
                            cold, I got my usual books and studies, and tried, all in vain, to fix
                            my attention on them. Finding the effort so fruitless, I packed up my
                            things in the little black bag and rose to depart. Turning round, I saw
                            on the table, where students' works were exhibited, a small object newly
                            placed there. It was a statuette in white marble of a magnificent red
                            deer, such as I had seen once or twice in the north of Devon. The
                            listening attitude, the turn of the neck, the light poise of the massive
                            head, even the mild, yet spirited eye, and the quivering sensitive lip,
                            I could answer for them all, they were done to the very life. Truth,
                            power, and elegance triumphed in every vein of it. For a minute I stood
                            overcome with wonder. If this were the work of a youthful sculptor,
                            England might hope at last for something beyond the grotesque.
Before me rose at once all the woodland scenery, the hill-side garbed
                            with every shade of green, the brambled quarry standing forth, the
                            trees, the winding vales embosoming the light, the haze that hovers
                            above the watersmeet, bold crests of amaranth heath behind, and far away
                            the russet wold of Exmoor. The stag in the foreground of my landscape, I
                            feel so grateful to him for this expanse of vision that I stoop down and
                            kiss him, while no one can see me. As I bend, the gordit drops from its
                            warm home in my breast. By some impulse undefined I lift the ribbon from
                            my neck, and hang the little fairy's heart on the antlers of the
                            Devonshire deer. Out springs from behind a chest full of casts and
                            models—what model can compare with her?—the loveliest of all lovely
                            beings, my little Isola Ross.
I hide the tears in my eyes, and try to look cold and reserved. What use
                            is it? One smile of hers would have disarmed Belial.
"It isn't my fault, dear. It isn't indeed. Oh, please give me that
                            cordetto. No don't. That is why I loved you so at first sight. And here
                            is all my money dear. I have carried it about ever since, though I sewed
                            up the purse not to spend it, and only once cut it open. They made me
                            promise, and I would not eat for three days, and I tried to be sulky
                            with Pappy because he did not care; they made me promise with all my
                            honour not to go and see you, and Cora came about with me so that I had
                            no chance of breaking it. And I would not tell them where you lived,
                            dear; but I led old Cora a dance through your street on the side you
                            live, till she began to suspect. But I could never see you, though I
                            looked in at all the windows till I was quite ashamed, and the people
                            kissed their hands to me."
Poor little dear! I lived upstairs, and could not have seen her without
                            standing out on the balcony, which was about the size of a chess-board.
                            If she had not been so simple as to walk on my side of the street, she
                            must have seen me ere long, for I sat all day near the window to draw,
                            when I was not away at my school.
I forgave her most graciously for having done me no wrong, and kissed her
                            with all my heart. Her breath was as sweet as violets in Spring clover,
                            and her lips warm and soft as a wren's nest. On receiving my
                            forgiveness, away she went dancing down the long room, with her cloak
                            thrown off, and her hair tossing all out of braid, and her exquisite
                            buoyant figure floating as if on a cloud. Of course there was no one
                            there, or even impulsive Isola would hardly have taken her frolic; and
                            yet I am not sure. She never thought harm of any one, and never imagined
                            that any one could think harm of her.
After a dozen flits of some rapid elegant dance quite unknown to me (who
                            have never had much of dancing), but which I supposed to be Scotch, back
                            she came out of breath, and kissed me ever so many times, and kissed my
                            gordit too, and told me never to part with it. One thing she was sure
                            of, that her Papa could not resist me now, and when he was told of it I
                            should come to their house the next day. And she knew I was dreadfully
                            proud, but would I, for her sake, forgive her Pappy? Of course, he knew
                            nothing about me, and she had never told him my name, though she could
                            not help telling my story, at least all she knew of it; but he was so
                            dreadfully jealous of her, he did not want any one to have a touch of
                            her glove but himself.
Looking at her pure sweet face, I could well believe it; but how could he
                            bear to see that dear little thing go three days without food? Most
                            likely she had exaggerated. Although she was truthful as light,
                            sometimes her quick fancy and warmth, like the sunshine itself, would
                            bring out some points too strongly. However, I was prepared, without
                            that, to dislike the Professor, for, as a general rule, I don't like men
                            who moralise; at least if their philosophy is frigid. Nevertheless, I
                            promised very readily to forgive her Papa, for I did so love that Isola.
                            Her nature was so different to mine, so light and airy, elastic and
                            soft; in short (if I must forsake my language), the complement of my
                            own. We chatted, or rather she did, for at least half an hour; and then
                            she told me old Cora was coming to fetch her at three o'clock. Once more
                            I rose to depart, for I feared she might get into trouble, if the old
                            nurse should find her so intimate with a stranger.
But Isola told me that she did not care for her a bit, and she had quite
                            set her heart on my meeting her brother Conrad, the sculptor of that
                            magnificent stag. Perhaps he would come with Cora, but he was so altered
                            now, she could never tell what he would do. Since the time she first saw
                            me, Conrad had come of age, and she could not guess what it was all
                            about, but there had been a dreadful disturbance between him and his
                            father, and he had actually gone to live away from the family. She
                            thought it must be about money, or some such nasty thing; but even Cora
                            did not know, or if she did, the old thing would not tell. It had made
                            poor Isola cry till her eyes were sore, but now she supposed she must
                            make up her mind to it all. But she would tell the truth, she did hate
                            being treated like a baby when she was a full-grown woman; how much
                            taller did they expect her to be? And what was much worse, she did want
                            so to comfort them both, and how could she do it without knowing what
                            was the matter? It was too bad, and she wished she was a boy, with all
                            her heart she did.
She went on talking like this till her gentle breast fluttered, and her
                            coral lips quivered, and the tears stole down her long lashes, and she
                            crept to me closer for comfort.
I was clasping her round little waist, and kissing the bright drops away,
                            when in burst a dark, scraggy woman, who must, of course, be old Cora.
                            She tore the poor child from my arms, and scowled at me fiercely enough
                            to frighten a girl unacquainted with real terrors.
I met her dark gaze with a calm contempt, beneath which it quailed and
                            fell. She mumbled some words in a language or patois, which I supposed
                            to be Gaelic, and led off her charge towards the door.
She had mistaken her adversary. Was I to be pushed aside, like a
                            gingerbread woman tempting a weak-stomached child? I passed them; then
                            turned and confronted the hag.
"Have the goodness, old woman, to walk behind this young lady and me.
                            When we want your society, we will ask for it. Isola Ross, come with me,
                            unless you prefer a rude menial's tyranny to a lady's affection."
Isola was too frightened to speak. I know not what would have been the
                            result, if the old hag, who was glaring about, rather taken aback, but
                            still clutching that delicate arm, had not suddenly spied my fairy's
                            heart, as yet unrestored to its sanctuary.
She stared, for a moment, in wide amazement; then her whole demeanour was
                            altered. She cringed, and fawned, and curtseyed, as if I had worn a
                            tiara. She dropped my dear Isola's arm, and fell behind like a negress.
                            My poor little pet was trembling and cold with fright, for (as she told
                            me afterwards) she had never seen old Cora in such a passion before, and
                            the superstitious darling dreaded the evil eye.
As we went towards Isola's home, I could not help thinking how fine the
                            interview would be between Mrs. Shelfer and Cora, if I only chose to
                            carry that vanquished beldame thither; but sage discretion (was I not
                            now eighteen?), and the thought of that solemn day prevented me. So I
                            took them straight home, leading Isola while she guided me, and turning
                            sometimes, with complacency, to encourage old Cora behind us.
The house they lived in was a high but narrow one, dull-looking and dark,
                            with area rails in front. Some little maiden came to the door, and I
                            took my leave on the steps. Dear Isola, now in high spirits again,
                            kissed me, like a peach quite warm in the sun, and promised to come the
                            next day, about which there could now be no difficulty.
Old Cora bent low as she wished me good evening and begged leave to kiss
                            my cordetto. This I granted, but took good care not to let it pass out
                            of my hands; she admired it so much, especially when allowed to examine
                            it, and there was such a greedy light in her eyes, that I was quite sure
                            she would steal it upon the first chance; and therefore I went
                            straightway and bought a guard of thick silk cord, as a substitute for
                            the black riband, which was getting worn.
And so I came home before dark, full of wonder, but feeling rather
                            triumphant, and greatly delighted at having recovered dear Isola.
</div></body></text></TEI>