<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I.
I do not mean to describe myself. Already I feel that the personal
                            pronoun will appear too often in these pages. Knowing the faults of my
                            character almost as well as my best friends know them, I shall attempt
                            to hide them no more than would those beloved ones. Enough of this: the
                            story I have to tell is strange, and short as my own its preamble.
The day when I was ten years old began my serious life. It was the 30th
                            of December, 1842; and proud was the kiss my loving father gave me for
                            spelling, writing, and pronouncing the date in English, French, and
                            Italian. No very wonderful feat, it is true, for a clever child
                            well-taught; but I was by no means a clever child; and no one except my
                            father could teach me a single letter. When, after several years of
                            wedlock, my parents found new joy in me, their bliss was soon overhung
                            with care. They feared, but durst not own the fear, lest the wilful,
                            passionate, loving creature, on whom their hearts were wholly set,
                            should be torn from their love to a distance greater than the void of
                            death; in a word, should prove insane. At length they could no longer
                            hide this terror from each other. One look told it all; and I vaguely
                            remember my hazy wonder at the scene that followed. Like a thief, I came
                            from the corner behind the curtain-loops, and trembled at my father's
                            knee, for him to say something to me. Then frightened at his silence—a
                            thing unknown to me—I pulled his hands from before his eyes, and found
                            hot tears upon them. I coaxed him then, and petted him, and felt his
                            sorrows through me; then made believe to scold him for being so naughty
                            as to cry. But I could not get his trouble from him, and he seemed to
                            watch me through his kisses.
Before I had ceased to ponder dreamily over this great wonder, a vast
                            event (for a child of seven) diverted me. Father, mother, and Tooty—for
                            so I then was called—were drawn a long way by horses with yellow men
                            upon them: from enlarged experience I infer that we must have posted to
                            London. Here, among many marvels, I remember especially a long and
                            mysterious interview with a kind, white-haired old gentleman, who wore
                            most remarkable shoes. He took me upon his lap, which seemed to me
                            rather a liberty; then he smoothed down my hair, and felt my head so
                            much that I asked if he wanted to comb it, having made up my mind to
                            kick if he dared to try such a thing. Then he put all sorts of baby
                            questions to me which I was disposed to resent, having long discarded
                            Cock Robin and Little Red-riding-hood. Unconsciously too, I was moved by
                            Nature's strong hate of examination. But my father came up, and with
                            tears in his eyes begged me to answer everything. Meanwhile my mother
                            sat in a dark corner, as if her best doll was dying. With its innate
                            pugnacity, my hazy intellect rose to the situation, and I narrowly
                            heeded every thing.
"Now go, my dear," the old gentleman said at last; "you are a very good
                            little girl indeed."
"That's a great lie," I cried; for I had learned bad words from a flighty
                            girl, taken rashly as under-nurse.
The old gentleman seemed surprised, and my mother was dreadfully shocked.
                            My father laughed first, then looked at me sadly; and I did what he
                            expected, I jumped into his arms. At one word from him, I ran to the
                            great physician, and humbly begged his pardon, and offered him my very
                            dearest toy. He came up warmly, and shook my father's hand, and smiled
                            from his heart at my mother.
"Allow me, Mrs. Vaughan—allow me, my dear sir—to congratulate you
                            cordially. The head is a noble and honest one. It is the growth of the
                            brain that causes these little commotions; but the congestion will not
                            be permanent. The fits, that have so alarmed you, are at this age a good
                            symptom; in fact, they are Nature's remedy. They may last for seven
                            years, or even for ten; of course they will not depart at once. But the
                            attacks will be milder, and the intervals longer, when she has turned
                            fourteen. For the intellect you need have no fear whatever. Only keep
                            her quiet, and never force her to learn. She must only learn when it
                            comes as it were with the wind. She will never forget what she does learn."
Hereupon, unless I am much mistaken, my father and mother fell to and
                            kissed and hugged one another, and I heard a sound like sobbing; then
                            they caught me up, and devoured me, as if I were born anew; and staring
                            round with great childish eyes, I could not catch the old gentleman's
                            glance at all.
Henceforth I learned very little, the wind, perhaps, being unfavourable;
                            and all the little I did learn came from my father's lips. His patience
                            with me was wonderful; we spent most of the day together, and when he
                            was forced to leave me, I took no food until he returned. Whenever his
                            horse was ordered, Miss Clara's little grey pony began to neigh and to
                            fidget, and Miss Clara was off in a moment to get her blue riding-skirt.
                            Even when father went shooting or fishing, Tooty was sure to go too,
                            except in the depth of winter; and then she was up at the top of the
                            house, watching all round for the gun-smoke.
Ah, why do I linger so over these happy times—is it the pleasure of
                            thinking how fondly we loved one another, or is it the pain of knowing
                            that we can do so no more?
Now, the 30th of December was my parents' wedding-day, for I had been
                            born six years exact after their affectionate union. And now that I was
                            ten years old—a notable hinge on the door of life—how much they made, to
                            be sure, of each other and of me! At dinner I sat in glory between them,
                            upsetting all ceremony, pleasing my father, and teasing my mother, by
                            many a childish sally. So genial a man my father was that he would talk
                            to the servants, even on state occasions, quite as if they were human
                            beings. Yet none of them ever took the smallest liberty with him, unless
                            it were one to love him. Before dessert, I interred my queen doll, with
                            much respect and some heartache, under a marble flag by the door, which
                            had been prepared for the purpose. My father was chief-mourner, but did
                            not cry to my liking, until I had pinched him well. After this typical
                            good-bye to childhood, I rode him back to the dining-table, and helped
                            him and my mother to the last of the West's St. Peter grapes, giving him
                            all the fattest ones. Then we all drank health and love to one another,
                            and I fell to in earnest at a child's delight. Dearest father kept
                            supplying me with things much nicer than are now to be got, while my
                            mother in vain pretended to guard the frontier. It was the first time I
                            tasted Guava jelly; and now, even at the name, that scene is bright
                            before me. The long high room oak-panelled, the lights and shadows
                            flickering as on a dark bay horse, the crimson velvet curtains where the
                            windows were gone to bed, the great black chairs with damask cushions,
                            but hard and sharp at the edge, the mantel-piece all carved in stone
                            which I was forbidden to kick, the massive lamp that never would let me
                            eat without loose clouds of hair dancing all over my plate, and then the
                            great fire, its rival, shuddering in blue flames at the thought of the
                            frost outside; all these things, and even the ticking of the timepiece,
                            are more palpable to me now than the desk on which I write. My father
                            sat in his easy chair, laughing and joking, full of life and comfort,
                            with his glass of old port beside him, his wife in front, and me, his
                            "Claricrops," at his knee. More happy than a hundred kings, he wished
                            for nothing better. At one time, perhaps, he had longed for a son to
                            keep the ancient name, but now he was quite ashamed of the wish, as
                            mutiny against me. After many an interchange, a drink for father, a sip
                            for Tooty, he began to tell wondrous stories of the shots he had made
                            that day; especially how he had killed a woodcock through a magpie's
                            nest. My mother listened with playful admiration; I with breathless
                            interest, and most profound belief.
Then we played at draughts, and fox and goose, and pretended even to play
                            at chess, until it was nine o'clock, and my hour of grace expired. Three
                            times Ann Maples came to fetch me, but I would not go. At last I went
                            submissively at one kind word from my father. My mother obtained but a
                            pouting kiss, for I wanted to wreak some vengeance; but my father I
                            never kissed with less than all my heart and soul. I flung both arms
                            around his neck, laid my little cheek to his, and whispered in his ear
                            that I loved him more than all the world. Tenderly he clasped and kissed
                            me, and now I am sure that through his smile he looked at me with
                            sadness. Turning round at the doorway, I stretched my hands towards him,
                            and met once more his loving, laughing eyes. Once more and only once.
                            Next I saw him in his coffin, white and stark with death. By-and-by I
                            will tell what I know; at present I can only feel. The emotions—away
                            with long words—the passions which swept my little heart, with equal
                            power rend it now. Long I lay dumb and stunned at the horror I could not
                            grasp. Then with a scream, as in my fits, I flung upon his body. What to
                            me were shroud and shell, the rigid look and the world of awe? Such
                            things let step-children fear. Not I, when it was my father.
</div></body></text></TEI>