<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER XVIII.
But for the present, curiosity, gratitude, hate, all feelings indeed and
                            passions, except from the bled vein of love, and the heart-rooted fibres
                            of sorrow, were to be crushed within me. Evening after evening, my dear
                            mother's presence seemed more and more dreamy and shadowy; and night
                            after night she went feebler and feebler to bed. In the morning indeed
                            she had gathered some fragile strength, such strength as so wasted a
                            form could exert, and the breeze and the fresh May sun made believe of
                            health on her cheeks. But no more was I tempted to lay my arm round her
                            waist, and rally her on its delicate girlish span, nor could I now look
                            gaily into her eyes, and tell her how much she excelled her child. Those
                            little liberties, which with less than a matron's dignity, and more than
                            a mother's fondness she had so long allowed me, became as she still
                            expected, and I could not bear to take them, so many great distresses.
                            Even at night, when I twined in its simple mode her soft brown hair, as
                            I thought how few the times my old task would be needed again, it cost
                            me many a shift to prevent her descrying my tears in the glass, or
                            suspecting them in my voice. For herself, she knew well what was coming;
                            she had learned how soon she must be my sweet angel instead of my
                            mother, and her last trouble was that she could not bring me to think
                            the difference small. So calmly she spoke of her end, not looking at me
                            the while for fear we both should weep, so gently and sweetly she talked
                            of the time when I should hearken no more, as if she were going to visit
                            a garden and hand me the flowers outside. Then, if I broke forth in an
                            anguish of sobs, she would beg my forgiveness, as if she could have done
                            wrong, and mourn for my loneliness after her, as though she could help
                            forsaking me.
Looking back, even now, on that time, how I condemn and yet pardon
                            myself, reflecting how little I tried to dissemble my child-like
                            woe.
When all things rejoiced in their young summer strength, and scarcely the
                            breeze turned the leaves for the songs of the birds, and the pure white
                            hawthorn was calm as the death of the good, and the soul of gladness was
                            sad, we talked for the last time together, mother and child, looking
                            forth on the farewell of sunset. The room under the thatch smelled musty
                            in summer, and I had made up a bed on the sofa downstairs. The wasting
                            low fever was past, and the wearisome cough exhausted, and the flush had
                            ebbed from her cheeks (as the world from her heart), and of all human
                            passions, and wishes, and cares, not one left a trace in her bosom,
                            except a mother's love. This and only this retarded her flight to
                            heaven, as the sight of his nest delays the rising of the lark.
"My child," she began, and her voice was low, but very distinct, "my only
                            and darling child, who has minded me so long, and laid her youth, and
                            beauty, and high courageous spirit, at the feet of her weak mother; my
                            child, who fostered in wealth and love, will be to-morrow an orphan,
                            cast upon the wide world"—here she fairly broke down, in spite of
                            religion, and heaven, and turned her head to the pillow, a true daughter
                            and mother of earth. I would fain have given that fortune, whose loss to
                            me she lamented, for leave to cry freely with her, without adding to her
                            distress.
In a minute or two, she was able to proceed; with her thin hand she
                            parted the hair shaken purposely over my eyes.
"I am sure that my pet will listen, with kindness and patience, while I
                            try to say what has lain so long at my heart. You know how painfully I
                            have always been moved by any allusion to the death of your dear father.
                            It has been a weakness no doubt on my part, but one which I vainly
                            strove against; and for which I trust to be pardoned where all is pardon
                            and peace."
Her voice began to tremble, and her eyes became fixed, and I feared a
                            return of the old disorder; but she shook it off, and spoke again
                            distinctly, though with great labour:
"This is a bitter subject, and I never could bring myself to it, till
                            now, when it seems too late. But, my poor love, I am so anxious about
                            it. For the rest—that Providence which has never forsaken us, repine as
                            I would, I can trust that Providence still to protect my darling child.
                            There is one thing, and only one, by promising which you will make my
                            departure quite happy. Then I shall go to rejoin your father, and carry
                            such tidings of you, as will enable us both to wait, in the fulness of
                            time, your coming."
"Oh, that the fulness of time were come!" I cried in my selfish
                            loneliness; "for me it is empty enough."
"My precious, my own darling Clara, you sob so, you make me most
                            wretched."
"Mother, I will not cry any more;" neither did I, while she could see
                            me.
"I need not tell you," she said, "what is that promise which I crave for
                            your own dear sake."
"No, ma'am," I replied, "I know quite well what it is."
I saw that I had grieved her. How could I call her then anything else
                            than "mother"?
"My mother dear, you wish me to promise this—that I will forego my
                            revenge upon him who slew my father."
She bowed her head, with a look I cannot describe. In the harsh way I had
                            put it, it seemed as if she were injuring both my father and me.
"Had you asked me anything else, although it were sin against God and man
                            (if you could ask such a thing)—I would have pledged myself to it, as
                            gladly as I would die—die, at least, if my task were done. But this,
                            this one thing only—to abandon what I live for, what I was born to do,
                            to be a traitor to my own father and you—I implore you, mother, by Him
                            whose glory is on you now, do not ask me this."
Her face in its sadness and purity made me bury my eyes and forget
                            things.
"Then I must die, and leave my only child possessed with a murderer's
                            spirit!"
The depth of her last agony, and which I believed would cling to her even
                            in heaven, was more than I could bear. I knelt on the floor and put my
                            hand to her side. Her worn out heart was throbbing again, with the pang
                            of her disappointment.
"Mother," I cried, "I will promise you this. When I have discovered, as I
                            must do, that man who has made you a widow and me an orphan, if I find
                            any plea whatever to lessen his crime, or penitence to atone for it, as
                            I hope to see my father and mother in heaven, I will try to spare and
                            forgive him. Can you wish me to rest in ignorance, and forget that
                            deed?"
"Clara," she answered weakly, and she spoke more slowly and feebly every
                            time, "you have promised me all I can hope for. How you loved your
                            father! Me too you have loved I cannot say how much. For my sake, you
                            have borne poverty, trouble, and illness, without a complaining word. By
                            day, and by night, through my countless wants, and long
                            fretfulness."
I put my finger upon her pale lips. How could she tell such a story then?
                            Her tears came now and then, and would not be stopped, as she laid her
                            weak hand on my head.
"May the God of the fatherless and the poor, who knows and comforts the
                            widow's grief, the God who is taking me now to His bosom, bless with all
                            blessings of earth and heaven, and restore to me this my child."
A sudden happiness fell upon her, as if she had seen her prayer's
                            acceptance. She let her arms fall round me, and laid my cheek by the
                            side of her bright flowing smile. It was the last conscious stir of the
                            mind; all the rest seemed the flush of the soul. In the window the
                            night-scented heath was blooming; outside it, the jessamine crossed in a
                            milky way of white stars, and the lush honeysuckle had flung down her
                            lap in clusters. The fragrance of flowers lay heavy upon us, and we were
                            sore weary with the burden of sorrow and joy. So tranquil and kind was
                            the face of death, that sleep, his half-brother, still held his
                            hand.
The voice of the thrush, from the corner laurel, broke the holy
                            stillness. Like dreams of home that break our slumbers, his melody was
                            its own excuse. My mother awoke, and said faintly, with no gleam in her
                            eyes:
"Raise me upon the pillow, my love, that I may hear him once more. He
                            sings like one your father and I used to listen to every evening, in the
                            days when we watched your cradle."
I lifted her gently. The voice of nature made way for her passing
                            spirit.
"Now kiss me, my child; once more, my own loved child, my heart is with
                            you for ever. Light of my eyes, you are growing dim."
She clasped her hands in prayer, with one of mine between them. My other
                            was round her neck.
Then she spoke slowly, and with a waning voice; but firmly, as if it had
                            been her marriage-response.
"Thou art my guide, and my staff. I have no fear, neither shadow of
                            trembling. Make no long tarrying, oh my God!"
The bird went home to his nest, and she to that refuge where all is home.
                            Though the hands that held mine grew cold as ice, and her lips replied
                            to no kiss, and the smile on her face slept off into stillness, and a
                            grey shade crept on her features;—I could not believe that all this was
                            death.
</div></body></text></TEI>