<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Can You Forgive Her?</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1865</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER IX. The Rivals.  
There had been a pretence of fishing, but no fish had been caught. It was soon found that
      such an amusement would interfere with the ladies' dresses, and the affairs had become too
      serious to allow of any trivial interruption. "I really think, Mr. Cheesacre," an anxious
      mother had said, "that you'd better give it up. The water off the nasty cord has got all over
      Maria's dress, already." Maria made a faint protest that it did not signify in the least; but
      the fishing was given up,—not without an inward feeling on the part of Mr. Cheesacre that if
      Maria chose to come out with him in his boat, having been invited especially to fish, she
      ought to have put up with the natural results. "There are people who like to take everything
      and never like to give anything," he said to Kate afterwards, as he was walking up with her to
      the picnic dinner. But he was unreasonable and unjust. The girls had graced his party with
      their best hats and freshest muslins, not that they might see him catch a mackerel, but that
      they might flirt and dance to the best advantage. "You can't suppose that any girl will like
      to be drenched with sea-water when she has taken so much trouble with her starch," said Kate.
      "Then she shouldn't come fishing," said Mr. Cheesacre. "I hate such airs."
But when they arrived at the old boat, Mrs. Greenow shone forth pre-eminently as the
      mistress of the occasion, altogether overshadowing Mr. Cheesacre by the extent of her
      authority. There was a little contest for supremacy between them, invisible to the eyes of the
      multitude; but Mr. Cheesacre in such a matter had not a chance against Mrs. Greenow. I am
      disposed to think that she would have reigned even though she had not contributed to the
      eatables; but with that point in her favour, she was able to make herself supreme. Jeannette,
      too, was her servant, which was a great thing. Mr. Cheesacre soon gave way; and though he
      bustled about and was conspicuous, he bustled about in obedience to orders received, and
      became a head servant. Captain Bellfield also made himself useful, but he drove Mr. Cheesacre
      into paroxysms of suppressed anger by giving directions, and by having those directions
      obeyed. A man to whom he had lent twenty pounds the day before yesterday, and who had not
      contributed so much as a bottle of champagne!
"We're to dine at four, and now it's half-past three," said Mrs. Greenow, addressing herself
      to the multitude.
"And to begin to dance at six," said an eager young lady.
"Maria, hold your tongue," said the young lady's mother.
"Yes, we'll dine at four," said Mr. Cheesacre. "And as for the music, I've ordered it to be
      here punctual at half-past five. We're to have three horns, cymbals, triangle, and a
      drum."
"How very nice; isn't it, Mrs. Greenow?" said Charlie Fairstairs.
"And now suppose we begin to unpack," said Captain Bellfield. "Half the fun is in arranging
      the things."
"Oh, dear, yes; more than half," said Fanny Fairstairs.
"Bellfield, don't mind about the hampers," said Cheesacre. "Wine is a ticklish thing to
      handle, and there's my man there to manage it."
"It's odd if I don't know more about wine than the boots from the hotel," said Bellfield.
      This allusion to the boots almost cowed Mr. Cheesacre, and made him turn away, leaving
      Bellfield with the widow.
There was a great unpacking, during which Captain Bellfield and Mrs. Greenow constantly had
      their heads in the same hamper. I by no means intend to insinuate that there was anything
      wrong in this. People engaged together in unpacking pies and cold chickens must have their
      heads in the same hamper. But a great intimacy was thereby produced, and the widow seemed to
      have laid aside altogether that prejudice of hers with reference to the washerwoman. There was
      a long table placed on the sand, sheltered by the upturned boat from the land side, but open
      towards the sea, and over this, supported on poles, there was an awning. Upon the whole the
      arrangement was not an uncomfortable one for people who had selected so very uncomfortable a
      dining-room as the sand of the sea-shore. Much was certainly due to Mr. Cheesacre for the
      expenditure he had incurred,—and something perhaps to Captain Bellfield for his ingenuity in
      having suggested it.
Now came the placing of the guests for dinner, and Mr. Cheesacre made another great effort.
      "I'll tell you what," he said, aloud, "Bellfield and I will take the two ends of the table,
      and Mrs. Greenow shall sit at my right hand." This was not only boldly done, but there was a
      propriety in it which at first sight seemed to be irresistible. Much as he had hated and did
      hate the captain, he had skilfully made the proposition in such a way as to flatter him, and
      it seemed for a few moments as though he were going to have it all his own way. But Captain
      Bellfield was not a man to submit to defeat in such a matter as this without an effort. "I
      don't think that will do," said he. "Mrs. Greenow gives the dinner, and Cheesacre gives the
      wine. We must have them at the two ends of the table. I am sure Mrs. Greenow won't refuse to
      allow me to hand her to the place which belongs to her. I will sit at her right hand and be
      her minister." Mrs. Greenow did not refuse,—and so the matter was adjusted.
Mr. Cheesacre took his seat in despair. It was nothing to him that he had Kate Vavasor at
      his left hand. He liked talking to Kate very well, but he could not enjoy that pleasure while
      Captain Bellfield was in the very act of making progress with the widow. "One would think that
      he had given it himself; wouldn't you?" he said to Maria's mother, who sat at his right
      hand.
The lady did not in the least understand him. "Given what?" said she.
"Why, the music and the wine and all the rest of it. There are some people full of that kind
      of impudence. How they manage to carry it on without ever paying a shilling, I never could
      tell. I know I have to pay my way, and something over and beyond generally."
Maria's mother said, "Yes, indeed." She had other daughters there besides Maria, and was
      looking down the table to see whether they were judiciously placed. Her beauty, her youngest
      one, Ophelia, was sitting next to that ne'er-do-well Joe Fairstairs, and this made her
      unhappy. "Ophelia, my dear, you are dreadfully in the draught; there's a seat up here, just
      opposite, where you'll be more comfortable."
"There's no draught here, mamma," said Ophelia, without the slightest sign of moving.
      Perhaps Ophelia liked the society of that lanky, idle, useless young man.
The mirth of the table certainly came from Mrs. Greenow's end. The widow had hardly taken
      her place before she got up again and changed with the captain. It was found that the captain
      could better carve the great grouse pie from the end than from the side. Cheesacre, when he
      saw this, absolutely threw down his knife and fork violently upon the table. "Is anything the
      matter?" said Maria's mother.
"Matter!" said he. Then he shook his head in grief of heart and vexation of spirit, and
      resumed his knife and fork. Kate watched it all, and was greatly amused. "I never saw a man so
      nearly broken-hearted," she said, in her letter to Alice the next day. "Eleven, thirteen,
      eighteen, twenty-one," said Cheesacre to himself, reckoning up in his misery the number of
      pounds sterling which he would have to pay for being ill-treated in this way.
"Ladies and gentlemen," said Captain Bellfield, as soon as the eating was over, "if I may be
      permitted to get upon my legs for two minutes, I am going to propose a toast to you." The real
      patron of the feast had actually not yet swallowed his last bit of cheese. The thing was
      indecent in the violence of its injustice.

"If you please, Captain Bellfield," said the patron, indifferent to the cheese in his
      throat, "I'll propose the toast."
"Nothing on earth could be better, my dear fellow," said the captain, "and I'm sure I should
      be the last man in the world to take the job out of the hands of one who would do it so much
      better than I can; but as it's your health that we're going to drink, I really don't see how
      you are to do it."
Cheesacre grunted and sat down. He certainly could not propose his own health, nor did he
      complain of the honour that was to be done him. It was very proper that his health should be
      drunk, and he had now to think of the words in which he would return thanks. But the extent of
      his horror may be imagined when Bellfield got up and made a most brilliant speech in praise of
      Mrs. Greenow. For full five minutes he went on without mentioning the name of Cheesacre.
      Yarmouth, he said, had never in his days been so blessed as it had been this year by the
      presence of the lady who was now with them. She had come among them, he declared, forgetful of
      herself and of her great sorrows, with the sole desire of adding something to the happiness of
      others. Then Mrs. Greenow had taken out her pocket-handkerchief, sweeping back the broad
      ribbons of her cap over her shoulders. Altogether the scene was very affecting, and Cheesacre
      was driven to madness. They were the very words that he had intended to speak himself.
"I hate all this kind of thing," he said to Kate. "It's so fulsome."
"After-dinner speeches never mean anything," said Kate.
At last, when Bellfield had come to an end of praising Mrs. Greenow, he told the guests that
      he wished to join his friend Mr. Cheesacre in the toast, the more so as it could hardly be
      hoped that Mrs. Greenow would herself rise to return thanks. There was no better fellow than
      his friend Cheesacre, whom he had known for he would not say how many years. He was quite sure
      they would all have the most sincere pleasure in joining the health of Mr. Cheesacre with that
      of Mrs. Greenow. Then there was a clattering of glasses and a murmuring of healths, and Mr.
      Cheesacre slowly got upon his legs.
"I'm very much obliged to this company," said he, "and to my friend Bellfield, who really
      is,—but perhaps that doesn't signify now. I've had the greatest pleasure in getting up this
      little thing, and I'd made up my mind to propose Mrs. Greenow's health; but, h'm, ha, no doubt
      it has been in better hands. Perhaps, considering all things, Bellfield might have
      waited."
"With such a subject on my hands, I couldn't wait a moment."
"I didn't interrupt you, Captain Bellfield, and perhaps you'll let me go on without
      interrupting me. We've all drunk Mrs. Greenow's health, and I'm sure she's very much obliged.
      So am I for the honour you've done me. I have taken some trouble in getting up this little
      thing, and I hope you like it. I think somebody said something about liberality. I beg to
      assure you that I don't think of that for a moment. Somebody must pay for these sort of
      things, and I'm always very glad to take my turn. I dare say Bellfield will give us the next
      picnic, and if he'll appoint a day before the end of the month, I shall be happy to be one of
      the party." Then he sat down with some inward satisfaction, fully convinced that he had given
      his enemy a fatal blow.
"Nothing on earth would give me so much pleasure," said Bellfield. After that he turned
      again to Mrs. Greenow and went on with his private conversation.
There was no more speaking, nor was there much time for other after-dinner ceremonies. The
      three horns, the cymbals, the triangle, and the drum were soon heard tuning-up behind the
      banqueting-hall, and the ladies went to the further end of the old boat to make their
      preparations for the dance. Then it was that the thoughtful care of Mrs. Greenow, in having
      sent Jeannette with brushes, combs, clean handkerchiefs, and other little knick-knackeries,
      became so apparent. It was said that the widow herself actually changed her cap,—which was
      considered by some to be very unfair, as there had been an understanding that there should be
      no dressing. On such occasions ladies are generally willing to forego the advantage of
      dressing on the condition that other ladies shall forego the same advantage; but when this
      compact is broken by any special lady, the treason is thought to be very treacherous. It is as
      though a fencer should remove the button from the end of his foil. But Mrs. Greenow was so
      good-natured in tendering the services of Jeannette to all the young ladies, and was so
      willing to share with others those good things of the toilet which her care had provided, that
      her cap was forgiven her by the most of those present.
When ladies have made up their minds to dance they will dance let the circumstances of the
      moment be ever so antagonistic to that exercise. A ploughed field in February would not be too
      wet, nor the side of a house too uneven. In honest truth the sands of the seashore are not
      adapted for the exercise. It was all very well for Venus to make the promise, but when making
      it she knew that Adonis would not keep her to her word. Let any lightest-limbed nymph try it,
      and she will find that she leaves most palpable footing. The sands in question were doubtless
      compact, firm, and sufficiently moist to make walking on them comfortable; but they ruffled
      themselves most uncomfortably under the unwonted pressure to which they were subjected.
      Nevertheless our friends did dance on the sands; finding, however, that quadrilles and Sir
      Roger de Coverley suited them better than polkas and waltzes.
"No, my friend, no," Mrs. Greenow said to Mr. Cheesacre when that gentleman endeavoured to
      persuade her to stand up; "Kate will be delighted I am sure to join you,—but as for me, you
      must excuse me."
But Mr. Cheesacre was not inclined at that moment to ask Kate Vavasor to dance with him. He
      was possessed by an undefined idea that Kate had snubbed him, and as Kate's fortune was, as he
      said, literally nothing, he was not at all disposed to court her favour at the expense of such
      suffering to himself.
"I'm not quite sure that I'll dance myself," said he, seating himself in a corner of the
      tent by Mrs. Greenow's side. Captain Bellfield at that moment was seen leading Miss Vavasor
      away to a new place on the sands, whither he was followed by a score of dancers; and Mr.
      Cheesacre saw that now at last he might reap the reward for which he had laboured. He was
      alone with the widow, and having been made bold by wine, had an opportunity of fighting his
      battle, than which none better could ever be found. He was himself by no means a poor man, and
      he despised poverty in others. It was well that there should be poor gentry, in order that
      they might act as satellites to those who, like himself, had money. As to Mrs. Greenow's
      money, there was no doubt. He knew it all to a fraction. She had spread for herself, or some
      one else had spread for her, a report that her wealth was almost unlimited; but the forty
      thousand pounds was a fact, and any such innocent fault as that little fiction might well be
      forgiven to a woman endorsed with such substantial virtues. And she was handsome too. Mr.
      Cheesacre, as he regarded her matured charms, sometimes felt that he should have been smitten
      even without the forty thousand pounds. "By George! there's flesh and blood," he had once said
      to his friend Bellfield before he had begun to suspect that man's treachery. His admiration
      must then have been sincere, for at that time the forty thousand pounds was not an ascertained
      fact. Looking at the matter in all its bearings Mr. Cheesacre thought that he couldn't do
      better. His wooing should be fair, honest, and above board. He was a thriving man, and what
      might not they two do in Norfolk if they put their wealth together?
"Oh, Mr. Cheesacre, you should join them," said Mrs. Greenow; "they'll not half enjoy
      themselves without you. Kate will think that you mean to neglect her."
"I shan't dance, Mrs. Greenow, unless you like to stand up for a set."
"No, my friend, no; I shall not do that. I fear you forget how recent has been my
      bereavement. Your asking me is the bitterest reproach to me for having ventured to join your
      festive board."
"Upon my honour I didn't mean it, Mrs. Greenow. I didn't mean it, indeed."
"I do not suspect you. It would have been unmanly."
"And nobody can say that of me. There isn't a man or woman in Norfolk that wouldn't say I
      was manly."
"I'm quite sure of that."
"I have my faults, I'm aware."
"And what are your faults, Mr. Cheesacre?"
"Well; perhaps I'm extravagant. But it's only in these kind of things you know, when I spend
      a little money for the sake of making my friends happy. When I'm about, on the lands at home,
      I ain't extravagant, I can tell you."
"Extravagance is a great vice."
"Oh, I ain't extravagant in that sense;—not a bit in the world. But when a man's enamoured,
      and perhaps looking out for a wife, he does like to be a little free, you know."
"And are you looking out for a wife, Mr. Cheesacre?"
"If I told you I suppose you'd only laugh at me."
"No; indeed I would not. I am not given to joking when any one that I regard speaks to me
      seriously."
"Ain't you though? I'm so glad of that. When one has really got a serious thing to say, one
      doesn't like to have fun poked at one."
"And, besides, how could I laugh at marriages, seeing how happy I have been in that
      condition?—so—very—happy," and Mrs. Greenow put up her handkerchief to her eyes.
"So happy that you'll try it again some day; won't you?"
"Never, Mr. Cheesacre; never. Is that the way you talk of serious things without joking?
      Anything like love—love of that sort—is over for me. It lies buried under the sod with my poor
      dear departed saint."
"But, Mrs. Greenow,"—and Cheesacre, as he prepared to argue the question with her, got
      nearer to her in the corner behind the table,—"But, Mrs. Greenow, care killed a cat, you
      know."
"And sometimes I think that care will kill me."
"No, by George; not if I can prevent it."
"You're very kind, Mr. Cheesacre; but there's no preventing such care as mine."
"Isn't there though? I'll tell you what, Mrs. Greenow; I'm in earnest, I am indeed. If
      you'll inquire, you'll find there isn't a fellow in Norfolk pays his way better than I do, or
      is better able to do it. I don't pay a sixpence of rent, and I sit upon seven hundred acres of
      as good land as there is in the county. There's not an acre that won't do me a bullock and a
      half. Just put that and that together, and see what it comes to. And, mind you, some of these
      fellows that farm their own land are worse off than if they'd rent to pay. They've borrowed so
      much to carry on with, that the interest is more than rent. I don't owe a sixpence to ere a
      man or ere a company in the world. I can walk into every bank in Norwich without seeing my
      master. There ain't any of my paper flying about, Mrs. Greenow. I'm Samuel Cheesacre of
      Oileymead, and it's all my own." Mr. Cheesacre, as he thus spoke of his good fortunes and firm
      standing in the world, became impetuous in the energy of the moment, and brought down his fist
      powerfully on the slight table before them. The whole fabric rattled, and the boat resounded,
      but the noise he had made seemed to assist him. "It's all my own, Mrs. Greenow, and the half
      of it shall be yours if you'll please to take it;" then he stretched out his hand to her, not
      as though he intended to grasp hers in a grasp of love, but as if he expected some hand-pledge
      from her as a token that she accepted the bargain.
"If you'd known Greenow, Mr. Cheesacre—"
"I've no doubt he was a very good sort of man."
"If you'd known him, you would not have addressed me in this way."
"What difference would that make? My idea is that care killed a cat, as I said before. I
      never knew what was the good of being unhappy. If I find early mangels don't do on a bit of
      land, then I sow late turnips; and never cry after spilt milk. Greenow was the early mangels;
      I'll be the late turnips. Come then, say the word. There ain't a bedroom in my house,—not one
      of the front ones,—that isn't mahogany furnished!"
"What's furniture to me?" said Mrs. Greenow, with her handkerchief to her eyes.
Just at this moment Maria's mother stepped in under the canvas. It was most inopportune. Mr.
      Cheesacre felt that he was progressing well, and was conscious that he had got safely over
      those fences in the race which his bashfulness would naturally make difficult to him. He knew
      that he had done this under the influence of the champagne, and was aware that it might not be
      easy to procure again a combination of circumstances that would be so beneficial to him. But
      now he was interrupted just as he was expecting success. He was interrupted, and felt himself
      to be looking like a guilty creature under the eye of the strange lady. He had not a word to
      say; but drawing himself suddenly a foot and half away from the widow's side, sat there
      confessing his guilt in his face.
Mrs. Greenow felt no guilt, and was afraid of no strange eyes. "Mr. Cheesacre and I are
      talking about farming," she said.
"Oh; farming!" answered Maria's mother.
"Mr. Cheesacre thinks that turnips are better than early mangels," said Mrs. Greenow.
"Yes, I do," said Cheesacre,
"I prefer the early mangels," said Mrs. Greenow. "I don't think nature ever intended those
      late crops. What do you say, Mrs. Walker?"
"I daresay Mr. Cheesacre understands what he's about when he's at home," said the lady.
"I know what a bit of land can do as well as any man in Norfolk," said the gentleman.
"It may be very well in Norfolk," said Mrs. Greenow, rising from her seat; "but the practice
      isn't thought much of in the other counties with which I am better acquainted."
"I'd just come in to say that I thought we might be getting to the boats," said Mrs. Walker.
      "My Ophelia is so delicate." At this moment the delicate Ophelia was to be seen, under the
      influence of the music, taking a distant range upon the sands with Joe Fairstairs' arm round
      her waist. The attitude was justified by the tune that was in progress, and there is no reason
      why a galop on the sands should have any special termination in distance, as it must have in a
      room. But, under such circumstances, Mrs. Walker's solicitude was not unreasonable.
The erratic steps of the distant dancers were recalled and preparations were made for the
      return journey. Others had strayed besides the delicate Ophelia and the idle Joe, and some
      little time was taken up in collecting the party. The boats had to be drawn down, and the
      boatmen fetched from their cans and tobacco-pipes. "I hope they're sober," said Mrs. Walker,
      with a look of great dismay.
"Sober as judges," said Bellfield, who had himself been looking after the remains of Mr.
      Cheesacre's hampers, while that gentleman had been so much better engaged in the tent.
"Because," continued Mrs. Walker, "I know that they play all manner of tricks when
      they're—in liquor. They'd think nothing of taking us out to sea, Mrs. Greenow."
"Oh, I do wish they would," said Ophelia.
"Ophelia, mind you come in the boat with me," said her mother, and she looked very savage
      when she gave the order. It was Mrs. Walker's intention that that boat should not carry Joe
      Fairstairs. But Joe and her daughter together were too clever for her. When the boats went off
      she found herself to be in that one over which Mr. Cheesacre presided, while the sinning
      Ophelia with her good-for-nothing admirer were under the more mirthful protection of Captain
      Bellfield.
"Mamma will be so angry," said Ophelia, "and it was all your fault. I did mean to go into
      the other boat. Don't, Mr. Fairstairs." Then they got settled down in their seats, to the
      satisfaction, let us hope, of them both.
Mr. Cheesacre had vainly endeavoured to arrange that Mrs. Greenow should return with him.
      But not only was Captain Bellfield opposed to such a change in their positions, but so also
      was Mrs. Greenow. "I think we'd better go back as we came," she said, giving her hand to the
      Captain.
"Oh, certainly," said Captain Bellfield. "Why should there be any change? Cheesacre, old
      fellow, mind you look after Mrs. Walker. Come along, my hearty." It really almost appeared
      that Captain Bellfield was addressing Mrs. Greenow as "his hearty," but it must be presumed
      that the term of genial endearment was intended for the whole boat's load. Mrs. Greenow took
      her place on the comfortable broad bench in the stern, and Bellfield seated himself beside
      her, with the tiller in his hand.
"If you're going to steer, Captain Bellfield, I beg that you'll be careful."
"Careful,—and with you on board!" said the Captain. "Don't you know that I would sooner
      perish beneath the waves than that a drop of water should touch you roughly?"
"But you see, we might perish beneath the waves together."
"Together! What a sweet word that is;—perish together! If it were not that there might be
      something better even than that, I would wish to perish in such company."
"But I should not wish anything of the kind, Captain Bellfield, and therefore pray be
      careful."
There was no perishing by water on that occasion. Mr. Cheesacre's boat reached the pier at
      Yarmouth first, and gave up its load without accident. Very shortly afterwards Captain
      Bellfield's crew reached the same place in the same state of preservation. "There," said he,
      as he handed out Mrs. Greenow. "I have brought you to no harm, at any rate as yet."
"And, as I hope, will not do so hereafter."
"May the heavens forbid it, Mrs. Greenow! Whatever may be our lots hereafter,—yours I mean
      and mine,—I trust that yours may be free from all disaster. Oh, that I might venture to hope
      that, at some future day, the privilege might be mine of protecting you from all danger!"
"I can protect myself very well, I can assure you. Good night, Captain Bellfield. We won't
      take you and Mr. Cheesacre out of your way;—will we, Kate? We have had a most pleasant
      day."
They were now upon the esplanade, and Mrs. Greenow's house was to the right, whereas the
      lodgings of both the gentlemen were to the left. Each of them fought hard for the privilege of
      accompanying the widow to her door; but Mrs. Greenow was self-willed, and upon this occasion
      would have neither of them. "Mr. Joe Fairstairs must pass the house," said she, "and he will
      see us home. Mr. Cheesacre, good night. Indeed you shall not;—not a step." There was that in
      her voice which induced Mr. Cheesacre to obey her, and which made Captain Bellfield aware that
      he would only injure his cause if he endeavoured to make further progress in it on the present
      occasion.
"Well, Kate, what do you think of the day?" the aunt said when she was alone with her
      niece.
"I never think much about such days, aunt. It was all very well, but I fear I have not the
      temperament fitted for enjoying the fun. I envied Ophelia Walker because she made herself
      thoroughly happy."
"I do like to see girls enjoy themselves," said Mrs. Greenow, "I do, indeed;—and young men
      too. It seems so natural; why shouldn't young people flirt?"
"Or old people either for the matter of that?"
"Or old people either,—if they don't do any harm to anybody. I'll tell you what it is, Kate;
      people have become so very virtuous, that they're driven into all manner of abominable
      resources for amusement and occupation. If I had sons and daughters I should think a little
      flirting the very best thing for them as a safety valve. When people get to be old, there's a
      difficulty. They want to flirt with the young people and the young people don't want them. If
      the old people would be content to flirt together, I don't see why they should ever give it
      up;—till they're obliged to give up every thing, and go away."
That was Mrs. Greenow's doctrine on the subject of flirtation.
</div></body></text></TEI>