<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Can You Forgive Her?</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1865</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">
CHAPTER XXXV. Passion versus Prudence.  
It had not occurred to Alice that her accepted lover would come to her so soon. She had not
      told him expressly of the day on which she would return, and had not reflected that Kate would
      certainly inform him. She had been thinking so much of the distant perils of this engagement,
      that this peril, so sure to come upon her before many days or hours could pass by, had been
      forgotten. When the name struck her ear, and George's step was heard outside on the
      landing-place, she felt the blood rush violently to her heart, and she jumped up from her seat
      panic-stricken and in utter dismay. How should she receive him? And then again, with what form
      of affection would she be accosted by him? But he was there in the room with her before she
      had had a moment allowed to her for thought.
She hardly ventured to look up at him; but, nevertheless, she became aware that there was
      something in his appearance and dress brighter, more lover-like, perhaps newer, than was usual
      with him. This in itself was an affliction to her. He ought to have understood that such an
      engagement as theirs not only did not require, but absolutely forbade, any such symptom of
      young love as this. Even when their marriage came, if it must come, it should come without any
      customary sign of smartness, without any outward mark of exaltation. It would have been very
      good in him to have remained away from her for weeks and months; but to come upon her thus, on
      the first morning of her return, was a cruelty not to be forgiven. These were the feelings
      with which Alice regarded her betrothed when he came to see her.
"Alice," said he, coming up to her with his extended hand,—"Dearest Alice!"
She gave him her hand, and muttered some word which was inaudible even to him; she gave him
      her hand, and immediately endeavoured to resume it, but he held it clenched within his own,
      and she felt that she was his prisoner. He was standing close to her now, and she could not
      escape from him. She was trembling with fear lest worse might betide her even than this. She
      had promised to marry him, and now she was covered with dismay as she felt rather than thought
      how very far she was from loving the man to whom she had given this promise.
"Alice," he said, "I am a man once again. It is only now that I can tell you what I have
      suffered during these last few years." He still held her hand, but he had not as yet attempted
      any closer embrace. She knew that she was standing away from him awkwardly, almost showing her
      repugnance to him; but it was altogether beyond her power to assume an attitude of ordinary
      ease. "Alice," he continued, "I feel that I am a strong man again, armed to meet the world at
      all points. Will you not let me thank you for what you have done for me?"
She must speak to him! Though the doing so should be ever so painful to her, she must say
      some word to him which should have in it a sound of kindness. After all, it was his undoubted
      right to come to her, and the footing on which he assumed to stand was simply that which she
      herself had given to him. It was not his fault if at this moment he inspired her with disgust
      rather than with love.
"I have done nothing for you, George," she said, "nothing at all." Then she got her hand
      away from him, and retreated back to a sofa where she seated herself, leaving him still
      standing in the space before the fire. "That you may do much for yourself is my greatest hope.
      If I can help you, I will do so most heartily." Then she became thoroughly ashamed of her
      words, feeling that she was at once offering to him the use of her purse.
"Of course you will help me," he said. "I am full of plans, all of which you must share with
      me. But now, at this moment, my one great plan is that in which you have already consented to
      be my partner. Alice, you are my wife now. Tell me that it will make you happy to call me your
      husband."
Not for worlds could she have said so at this moment. It was ill-judged in him to press her
      thus. He should already have seen, with half an eye, that no such triumph as that which he now
      demanded could be his on this occasion. He had had his triumph when, in the solitude of his
      own room, with quiet sarcasm he had thrown on one side of him the letter in which she had
      accepted him, as though the matter had been one almost indifferent to him. He had no right to
      expect the double triumph. Then he had frankly told himself that her money would be useful to
      him. He should have been contented with that conviction, and not have required her also to
      speak to him soft winning words of love.
"That must be still distant, George," she said. "I have suffered so much!"
"And it has been my fault that you have suffered; I know that. These years of misery have
      been my doing." It was, however, the year of coming misery that was the most to be
      dreaded.
"I do not say that," she replied, "nor have I ever thought it. I have myself and myself only
      to blame." Here he altogether misunderstood her, believing her to mean that the fault for
      which she blamed herself had been committed in separating herself from him on that former
      occasion.
"Alice, dear, let bygones be bygones."
"Bygones will not be bygones. It may be well for people to say so, but it is never true. One
      might as well say so to one's body as to one's heart. But the hairs will grow grey, and the
      heart will grow cold."
"I do not see that one follows upon the other," said George. "My hair is growing very
      grey;"—and to show that it was so, he lifted the dark lock from the side of his forehead, and
      displayed the incipient grizzling of the hair from behind. "If grey hairs make an old man,
      Alice, you will marry an old husband; but even you shall not be allowed to say that my heart
      is old."
That word "husband," which her cousin had twice used, was painful to Alice's ear. She shrunk
      from it with palpable bodily suffering. Marry an old husband! His age was nothing to the
      purpose, though he had been as old as Enoch. But she was again obliged to answer him. "I spoke
      of my own heart," said she: "I sometimes feel that it has grown very old."
"Alice, that is hardly cheering to me."
"You have come to me too quickly, George, and do not reflect how much there is that I must
      remember. You have said that bygones should be bygones. Let them be so, at any rate as far as
      words are concerned. Give me a few months in which I may learn,—not to forget them, for that
      will be impossible,—but to abstain from speaking of them."
There was something in her look as she spoke, and in the tone of her voice that was very
      sad. It struck him forcibly, but it struck him with anger rather than with sadness. Doubtless
      her money had been his chief object when he offered to renew his engagement with her.
      Doubtless he would have made no such offer had she been penniless, or even had his own need
      been less pressing. But, nevertheless, he desired something more than money. The triumph of
      being preferred to John Grey,—of having John Grey sent altogether adrift, in order that his
      old love might be recovered, would have been too costly a luxury for him to seek, had he not
      in seeking it been able to combine prudence with the luxury. But though his prudence had been
      undoubted, he desired the luxury also. It was on a calculation of the combined advantage that
      he had made his second offer to his cousin. As he would by no means have consented to proceed
      with the arrangement without the benefit of his cousin's money, so also did he feel unwilling
      to dispense with some expression of her love for him, which would be to him triumphant.
      Hitherto in their present interview there had certainly been no expression of her love.
"Alice," he said, "your greeting to me is hardly all that I had hoped."
"Is it not?" said she. "Indeed, George, I am sorry that you should be disappointed; but what
      can I say? You would not have me affect a lightness of spirit which I do not feel?"
"If you wish," said he, very slowly,—"if you wish to retract your letter to me, you now have
      my leave to do so."
What an opportunity was this of escape! But she had not the courage to accept it. What girl,
      under such circumstances, would have had such courage? How often are offers made to us which
      we would almost give our eyes to accept, but dare not accept because we fear the countenance
      of the offerer? "I do not wish to retract my letter," said she, speaking as slowly as he had
      spoken; "but I wish to be left awhile, that I may recover my strength of mind. Have you not
      heard doctors say, that muscles which have been strained, should be allowed rest, or they will
      never entirely renew their tension? It is so with me now; if I could be quiet for a few
      months, I think I could learn to face the future with a better courage."
"And is that all you can say to me, Alice?"
"What would you have me say?"
"I would fain hear one word of love from you; is that unreasonable? I would wish to know
      from your own lips that you have satisfaction in the renewed prospect of our union; is that
      too ambitious? It might have been that I was over-bold in pressing my suit upon you again; but
      as you accepted it, have I not a right to expect that you should show me that you have been
      happy in accepting it?"
But she had not been happy in accepting it. She was not happy now that she had accepted it.
      She could not show to him any sign of such joy as that which he desired to see. And now, at
      this moment, she feared with an excessive fear that there would come some demand for an
      outward demonstration of love, such as he in his position might have a right to make. She
      seemed to be aware that this might be prevented only by such demeanour on her part as that
      which she had practised, and she could not, therefore, be stirred to the expression of any
      word of affection. She listened to his appeal, and when it was finished she made no reply. If
      he chose to take her in dudgeon, he must do so. She would make for him any sacrifice that was
      possible to her, but this sacrifice was not possible.
"And you have not a word to say to me?" he asked. She looked up at him, and saw that the
      cicature on his face was becoming ominous; his eyes were bent upon her with all their
      forbidding brilliance, and he was assuming that look of angry audacity which was so peculiar
      to him, and which had so often cowed those with whom he was brought in contact.
"No other word, at present, George; I have told you that I am not at ease. Why do you press
      me now?"
He had her letter to him in the breast-pocket of his coat, and his hand was on it, that he
      might fling it back to her, and tell her that he would not hold her to be his promised wife
      under such circumstances as these. The anger which would have induced him to do so was the
      better part of his nature. Three or four years since, this better part would have prevailed,
      and he would have given way to his rage. But now, as his fingers played upon the paper, he
      remembered that her money was absolutely essential to him,—that some of it was needed by him
      almost instantly,—that on this very morning he was bound to go where money would be demanded
      from him, and that his hopes with regard to Chelsea could not be maintained unless he was able
      to make some substantial promise of providing funds. His sister Kate's fortune was just two
      thousand pounds. That, and no more, was now the capital at his command, if he should abandon
      this other source of aid. Even that must go, if all other sources should fail him; but he
      would fain have that untouched, if it were possible. Oh, that that old man in Westmoreland
      would die and be gathered to his fathers, now that he was full of years and ripe for the
      sickle! But there was no sign of death about the old man. So his fingers released their hold
      on the letter, and he stood looking at her in his anger.
"You wish me then to go from you?" he said.
"Do not be angry with me, George!"
"Angry! I have no right to be angry. But, by heaven, I am wrong there. I have the right, and
      I am angry. I think you owed it me to give me some warmer welcome. Is it to be thus with us
      always for the next accursed year?"
"Oh, George!"
"To me it will be accursed. But is it to be thus between us always? Alice, I have loved you
      above all women. I may say that I have never loved any woman but you; and yet I am sometimes
      driven to doubt whether you have a heart in you capable of love. After all that has passed,
      all your old protestations, all my repentance, and your proffer of forgiveness, you should
      have received me with open arms. I suppose I may go now, and feel that I have been kicked out
      of your house like a dog."
"If you speak to me like that, and look at me like that, how can I answer you?"
"I want no answer. I wanted you to put your hand in mine, to kiss me, and to tell me that
      you are once more my own. Alice, think better of it; kiss me, and let me feel my arm once more
      round your waist."
She shuddered as she sat, still silent, on her seat, and he saw that she shuddered. With all
      his desire for her money,—his instant need of it,—this was too much for him; and he turned
      upon his heel, and left the room without another word. She heard his quick step as he hurried
      down the stairs, but she did not rise to arrest him. She heard the door slam as he left the
      house, but still she did not move from her seat. Her immediate desire had been that he should
      go,—and now he was gone. There was in that a relief which almost comforted her. And this was
      the man from whom, within the last few days, she had accepted an offer of marriage.
George, when he left the house, walked hurriedly into Cavendish Square, and down along the
      east side, till he made his way out along Princes Street, into the Circus in Oxford Street.
      Close to him there, in Great Marlborough Street, was the house of his parliamentary attorney,
      Mr. Scruby, on whom he was bound to call on that morning. As he had walked away from Queen
      Anne Street, he had thought of nothing but that too visible shudder which his cousin Alice had
      been unable to repress. He had been feeding on his anger, and indulging it, telling himself at
      one moment that he would let her and her money go from him whither they list,—and making
      inward threats in the next that the time should come in which he would punish her for this
      ill-usage. But there was the necessity of resolving what he would say to Mr. Scruby. To Mr.
      Scruby was still due some trifle on the cost of the last election; but even if this were paid,
      Mr. Scruby would make no heavy advance towards the expense of the next election. Whoever might
      come out at the end of such affairs without a satisfactory settlement of his little bill, as
      had for a while been the case with Mr. Grimes, from the "Handsome Man,"—and as, indeed, still
      was the case with him, as that note of hand at three months' date was not yet paid,—Mr. Scruby
      seldom allowed himself to suffer. It was true that the election would not take place till the
      summer; but there were preliminary expenses which needed ready money. Metropolitan voters, as
      Mr. Scruby often declared, required to be kept in good humour,—so that Mr. Scruby wanted the
      present payment of some five hundred pounds, and a well-grounded assurance that he would be
      put in full funds by the beginning of next June. Even Mr. Scruby might not be true as perfect
      steel, if he thought that his candidate at the last moment would not come forth properly
      prepared. Other candidates, with money in their pockets, might find their way into Mr.
      Scruby's offices. As George Vavasor crossed Regent Street, he gulped down his anger, and
      applied his mind to business. Should he prepare himself to give orders that Kate's little
      property should be sold out, or would he resolve to use his cousin's money? That his cousin's
      money would still be at his disposal, in spite of the stormy mood in which he had retreated
      from her presence, he felt sure; but the asking for it on his part would be unpleasant. That
      duty he must entrust to Kate. But as he reached Mr. Scruby's door, he had decided that for
      such purposes as those now in hand, it was preferable that he should use his wife's fortune.
      It was thus that in his own mind he worded the phrase, and made for himself an excuse. Yes;—he
      would use his wife's fortune, and explain to Mr. Scruby that he would be justified in doing so
      by the fact that his own heritage would be settled on her at her marriage. I do not suppose
      that he altogether liked it. He was not, at any rate as yet, an altogether heartless swindler.
      He could not take his cousin's money without meaning,—without thinking that he meant, to repay
      her in full all that he took. Her behaviour to him this very morning had no doubt made the
      affair more difficult to his mind, and more unpleasant than it would have been had she smiled
      on him; but even as it was, he managed to assure himself that he was doing her no wrong, and
      with this self-assurance he entered Mr. Scruby's office.
The clerks in the outer office were very civil to him, and undertook to promise him that he
      should not be kept waiting an instant. There were four gentlemen in the little parlour, they
      said, waiting to see Mr. Scruby, but there they should remain till Mr. Vavasor's interview was
      over. One gentleman, as it seemed, was even turned out to make way for him; for as George was
      ushered into the lawyer's room, a little man, looking very meek, was hurried away from it.
"You can wait, Smithers," said Mr. Scruby, speaking from within. "I shan't be very long."
      Vavasor apologized to his agent for the injury he was doing Smithers; but Mr. Scruby explained
      that he was only a poor devil of a printer, looking for payment of his little account. He had
      printed and posted 30,000 placards for one of the late Marylebone candidates, and found some
      difficulty in getting his money. "You see, when they're in a small way of business, it ruins
      them," said Scruby. "Now that poor devil,—he hasn't had a shilling of his money yet, and the
      greater part has been paid out of his pocket to the posters. It is hard."
It comforted Vavasor when he thus heard that there were others who were more backward in
      their payments, even than himself, and made him reflect that a longer credit than had yet been
      achieved by him, might perhaps be within his reach. "It is astonishing how much a man may get
      done for him," said he, "without paying anything for years."
"Yes; that's true. So he may, if he knows how to go about it. But when he does pay, Mr.
      Vavasor, he does it through the nose;—cent. per cent., and worse, for all his former
      shortcomings."
"How many there are who never pay at all," said George.
"Yes, Mr. Vavasor;—that's true, too. But see what a life they lead. It isn't a pleasant
      thing to be afraid of coming into your agent's office; not what you would like, Mr.
      Vavasor;—not if I know you."
"I never was afraid of meeting anyone yet," said Vavasor; "but I don't know what I may come
      to."
"Nor never will, I'll go bail. But, Lord love you, I could tell you such tales! I've had
      Members of Parliament, past, present, and future, almost down on their knees to me in this
      little room. It's about a month or six weeks before the elections come on when they're at
      their worst. There is so much you see, Mr. Vavasor, for which a gentleman must pay ready
      money. It isn't like a business in which a lawyer is supposed to find the capital. If I had
      money enough to pay out of my own pocket all the cost of all the metropolitan gentlemen for
      whom I act, why, I could live on the interest without any trouble, and go into Parliament
      myself like a man."
George Vavasor perfectly understood that Mr. Scruby was explaining to him, with what best
      attempt at delicacy he could make, that funds for the expense of the Chelsea election were not
      to be forthcoming from the Great Marlborough Street establishment.
"I suppose so," said he. "But you do do it sometimes."
"Never, Mr. Vavasor," said Mr. Scruby, very solemnly. "As a rule, never. I may advance the
      money, on interest, of course, when I receive a guarantee from the candidate's father, or from
      six or seven among the committee, who must all be very substantial,—very substantial indeed.
      But in a general way I don't do it. It isn't my place."
"I thought you did;—but at any rate I don't want you to do it for me."
"I'm quite sure you don't," said Mr. Scruby, with a brighter tone of voice than that he had
      just been using. "I never thought you did, Mr. Vavasor. Lord bless you, Mr. Vavasor, I know
      the difference between gentlemen as soon as I see them."
Then they went to business, and Vavasor became aware that it would be thought convenient
      that he should lodge with Mr. Scruby, to his own account, a sum not less than six hundred
      pounds within the next week, and it would be also necessary that he should provide for taking
      up that bill, amounting to ninety-two pounds, which he had given to the landlord of the
      "Handsome Man." In short, it would be well that he should borrow a thousand pounds from Alice,
      and as he did not wish that the family attorney of the Vavasors should be employed to raise
      it, he communicated to Mr. Scruby as much of his plans as was necessary,—feeling more
      hesitation in doing it than might have been expected from him. When he had done so, he was
      very intent on explaining also that the money taken from his cousin, and future bride, would
      be repaid to her out of the property in Westmoreland, which was,—did he say settled on
      himself? I am afraid he did.
"Yes, yes;—a family arrangement," said Mr. Scruby, as he congratulated him on his proposed
      marriage. Mr. Scruby did not care a straw from what source the necessary funds might be
      drawn.
</div></body></text></TEI>