<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Can You Forgive Her?</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1865</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER XVI. The Roebury Club.  
It has been said that George Vavasor had a little establishment at Roebury, down in
      Oxfordshire, and thither he betook himself about the middle of November. He had been long
      known in this county, and whether or no men spoke well of him as a man of business in London,
      men spoke well of him down there, as one who knew how to ride to hounds. Not that Vavasor was
      popular among fellow-sportsmen. It was quite otherwise. He was not a man that made himself
      really popular in any social meetings of men. He did not himself care for the loose little
      talkings, half flat and half sharp, of men when they meet together in idleness. He was not
      open enough in his nature for such popularity. Some men were afraid of him, and some suspected
      him. There were others who made up to him, seeking his intimacy, but these he usually snubbed,
      and always kept at a distance. Though he had indulged in all the ordinary pleasures of young
      men, he had never been a jovial man. In his conversations with men he always seemed to think
      that he should use his time towards serving some purpose of business. With women he was quite
      the reverse. With women he could be happy. With women he could really associate. A woman he
      could really love;—but I doubt whether for all that he could treat a woman well.
But he was known in the Oxfordshire country as a man who knew what he was about, and such
      men are always welcome. It is the man who does not know how to ride that is made uncomfortable
      in the hunting field by cold looks or expressed censure. And yet it is very rarely that such
      men do any real harm. Such a one may now and then get among the hounds or override the hunt,
      but it is not often so. Many such complaints are made; but in truth the too forward man, who
      presses the dogs, is generally one who can ride, but is too eager or too selfish to keep in
      his proper place. The bad rider, like the bad whist player, pays highly for what he does not
      enjoy, and should be thanked. But at both games he gets cruelly snubbed. At both games George
      Vavasor was great and he never got snubbed.
There were men who lived together at Roebury in a kind of club,—four or five of them, who
      came thither from London, running backwards and forwards as hunting arrangements enabled them
      to do so,—a brewer or two and a banker, with a would-be fast attorney, a sporting literary
      gentleman, and a young unmarried Member of Parliament who had no particular home of his own in
      the country. These men formed the Roebury Club, and a jolly life they had of it. They had
      their own wine closet at the King's Head,—or Roebury Inn as the house had come to be popularly
      called,—and supplied their own game. The landlord found everything else; and as they were not
      very particular about their bills, they were allowed to do pretty much as they liked in the
      house. They were rather imperious, very late in their hours, sometimes, though not often,
      noisy, and once there had been a hasty quarrel which had made the landlord in his anger say
      that the club should be turned out of his house. But they paid well, chaffed the servants much
      oftener than they bullied them, and on the whole were very popular.
To this club Vavasor did not belong, alleging that he could not afford to live at their
      pace, and alleging, also, that his stays at Roebury were not long enough to make him a
      desirable member. The invitation to him was not repeated and he lodged elsewhere in the little
      town. But he occasionally went in of an evening, and would make up with the members a table at
      whist.
He had come down to Roebury by mail train, ready for hunting the next morning, and walked
      into the club-room just at midnight. There he found Maxwell the banker, Grindley the would-be
      fast attorney, and Calder Jones the Member of Parliament, playing dummy. Neither of the
      brewers were there, nor was the sporting literary gentleman.
"Here's Vavasor," said Maxwell, "and now we won't play this blackguard game any longer.
      Somebody told me, Vavasor, that you were gone away."
"Gone away;—what, like a fox?"
"I don't know what it was; that something had happened to you since last season; that you
      were married, or dead, or gone abroad. By George, I've lost the trick after all! I hate dummy
      like the devil. I never hold a card in dummy's hand. Yes, I know; that's seven points on each
      side. Vavasor, come and cut. Upon my word if any one had asked me, I should have said you were
      dead."
"But you see, nobody ever does think of asking you anything."
"What you probably mean," said Grindley, "is that Vavasor was not returned for Chelsea last
      February; but you've seen him since that. Are you going to try it again, Vavasor?"
"If you'll lend me the money I will."
"I don't see what on earth a man gains by going into the house," said Calder Jones. "I
      couldn't help myself as it happened, but, upon my word it's a deuce of a bore. A fellow thinks
      he can do as he likes about going,—but he can't. It wouldn't do for me to give it up,
       because—"
"Oh no, of course not; where should we all be?" said Vavasor.
"It's you and me, Grindems," said Maxwell. "D–––– parliament, and now let's have a
      rubber."
They played till three and Mr. Calder Jones lost a good deal of money,—a good deal of money
      in a little way, for they never played above ten-shilling points, and no bet was made for more
      than a pound or two. But Vavasor was the winner, and when he left the room he became the
      subject of some ill-natured remarks.
"I wonder he likes coming in here," said Grindley, who had himself been the man to invite
      him to belong to the club, and who had at one time indulged the ambition of an intimacy with
      George Vavasor.
"I can't understand it," said Calder Jones, who was a little bitter about his money. "Last
      year he seemed to walk in just when he liked, as though he were one of us."
"He's a bad sort of fellow," said Grindley; "he's so uncommonly dark. I don't know where on
      earth he gets his money from, He was heir to some small property in the north, but he lost
      every shilling of that when he was in the wine trade."
"You're wrong there, Grindems," said Maxwell,—making use of a playful nickname which he had
      invented for his friend. "He made a pot of money at the wine business, and had he stuck to it
      he would have been a rich man."
"He's lost it all since then, and that place in the north into the bargain."
"Wrong again, Grindems, my boy. If old Vavasor were to die to-morrow, Vavasor Hall would go
      just as he might choose to leave it. George may be a ruined man for aught I
      know—"
"There's no doubt about that, I believe," said Grindley.
"Perhaps not, Grindems; but he can't have lost Vavasor Hall because he has never as yet had
      an interest in it. He's the natural heir, and will probably get it some day."
"All the same," said Calder Jones, "isn't it rather odd he should come in here?"
"We've asked him often enough," said Maxwell; "not because we like him, but because we want
      him so often to make up a rubber. I don't like George Vavasor, and I don't know who does; but
      I like him better than dummy. And I'd sooner play whist with men I don't like, Grindems, than
      I'd not play at all." A bystander might have thought from the tone of Mr. Maxwell's voice that
      he was alluding to Mr. Grindley himself, but Mr. Grindley didn't seem to take it in that
      light.
"That's true, of course," said he. "We can't pick men just as we please. But I certainly
      didn't think that he'd make it out for another season."
The club breakfasted the next morning at nine o'clock, in order that they might start at
      half-past for the meet at Edgehill. Edgehill is twelve miles from Roebury, and the hacks would
      do it in an hour and a half,—or perhaps a little less. "Does anybody know anything about that
      brown horse of Vavasor's?" said Maxwell. "I saw him coming into the yard yesterday with that
      old groom of his."
"He had a brown horse last season," said Grindley;—"a little thing that went very fast, but
      wasn't quite sound on the road."
"That was a mare," said Maxwell, "and he sold her to Cinquebars."*  
"For a hundred and fifty," said Calder Jones, "and she wasn't worth the odd fifty."
"He won seventy with her at Leamington," said Maxwell, "and I doubt whether he'd take his
      money now."
"Is Cinquebars coming down here this year?"
"I don't know," said Maxwell. "I hope not. He's the best fellow in the world, but he can't
      ride, and he don't care for hunting, and he makes more row than any fellow I ever met. I wish
      some fellow could tell me something about that fellow's brown horse."
"I'd never buy a horse of Vavasor's if I were you," said Grindley. "He never has anything
      that's all right all round."
"And who has?" said Maxwell, as he took into his plate a second mutton chop, which had just
      been brought up hot into the room especially for him. "That's the mistake men make about
      horses, and that's why there's so much cheating. I never ask for a warranty with a horse, and
      don't very often have a horse examined. Yet I do as well as others. You can't have perfect
      horses any more than you can perfect men, or perfect women. You put up with red hair, or bad
      teeth, or big feet,—or sometimes with the devil of a voice. But a man when he wants a horse
      won't put up with anything! Therefore those who've got horses to sell must lie. When I go into
      the market with three hundred pounds I expect a perfect animal. As I never do that now I never
      expect a perfect animal. I like 'em to see; I like 'em to have four legs; and I like 'em to
      have a little wind. I don't much mind anything else."
"By Jove you're about right," said Calder Jones. The reader will therefore readily see that
      Mr. Maxwell the banker reigned as king in that club.
Vavasor had sent two horses on in charge of Bat Smithers, and followed on a pony about
      fourteen hands high, which he had ridden as a cover hack for the last four years. He did not
      start till near ten, but he was able to catch Bat with his two horses about a mile and a half
      on that side of Edgehill. "Have you managed to come along pretty clean?" the master asked as
      he came up with his servant.
"They be the most beastly roads in all England," said Bat, who always found fault with any
      county in which he happened to be located. "But I'll warrant I'm cleaner than most on 'em.
      What for any county should make such roads as them I never could tell."
"The roads about there are bad, certainly;—very bad. But I suppose they would have been
      better had Providence sent better materials. And what do you think of the brown horse,
      Bat?"
"Well, sir." He said no more, and that he said with a drawl.
"He's as fine an animal to look at as ever I put my eye on," said George.
"He's all that," said Bat.
"He's got lots of pace too."
"I'm sure he has, sir."
"And they tell me you can't beat him at jumping."
"They can mostly do that, sir, if they're well handled."
"You see he's a deal over my weight."
"Yes, he is, Mr. Vavasor. He is a fourteen stoner."
"Or fifteen," said Vavasor.
"Perhaps he may, sir. There's no knowing what a 'orse can carry till he's tried."
George asked his groom no more questions, but felt sure that he had better sell his brown
      horse if he could. Now I here protest that there was nothing specially amiss with the brown
      horse. Towards the end of the preceding season he had overreached himself and had been lame,
      and had been sold by some owner with more money than brains who had not cared to wait for a
      cure. Then there had gone with him a bad character, and a vague suspicion had attached itself
      to him, as there does to hundreds of horses which are very good animals in their way. He had
      come thus to Tattersall's, and Vavasor had bought him cheap, thinking that he might make money
      of him, from his form and action. He had found nothing amiss with him,—nor, indeed, had Bat
      Smithers. But his character went with him, and therefore Bat Smithers thought it well to be
      knowing. George Vavasor knew as much of horses as most men can,—as, perhaps, as any man can
      who is not a dealer, or a veterinary surgeon; but he, like all men, doubted his own knowledge,
      though on that subject he would never admit that he doubted it. Therefore he took Bat's word
      and felt sure that the horse was wrong.
"We shall have a run from the big wood," said George.
"If they make un break, you will, sir," said Bat.
"At any rate I'll ride the brown horse," said George. Then, as soon as that was settled
      between them, the Roebury Club overtook them.
There was now a rush of horses on the road altogether, and they were within a quarter of a
      mile of Edgehill church, close to which was the meet. Bat with his two hunters fell a little
      behind, and the others trotted on together. The other grooms with their animals were on in
      advance, and were by this time employed in combing out forelocks, and rubbing stirrup leathers
      and horses' legs free from the dirt of the roads;—but Bat Smithers was like his master, and
      did not congregate much with other men, and Vavasor was sure to give orders to his servant
      different from the orders given by others.
"Are you well mounted this year?" Maxwell asked of George Vavasor.
"No, indeed; I never was what I call well mounted yet. I generally have one horse and three
      or four cripples. That brown horse behind there is pretty good, I believe."
"I see your man has got the old chestnut mare with him."
"She's one of the cripples,—not but what she's as sound as a bell, and as good a hunter as
      ever I wish to ride; but she makes a little noise when she's going."
"So that you can hear her three fields off," said Grindley.
"Five if the fields are small enough and your ears are sharp enough," said Vavasor. "All the
      same I wouldn't change her for the best horse I ever saw under you."
"Had you there, Grindems," said Maxwell.
"No, he didn't," said Grindley. "He didn't have me at all."
"Your horses, Grindley, are always up to all the work they have to do," said George; "and I
      don't know what any man wants more than that."
"Had you again, Grindems," said Maxwell.
"I can ride against him any day," said Grindley.
"Yes; or against a brick wall either, if your horse didn't know any better," said
      George.
"Had you again, Grindems," said Maxwell. Whereupon Mr. Grindley trotted on, round the corner
      by the church, and into the field in which the hounds were assembled. The fire had become too
      hot for him, and he thought it best to escape. Had it been Vavasor alone he would have turned
      upon him and snarled, but he could not afford to exhibit any ill temper to the king of the
      club. Mr. Grindley was not popular, and were Maxwell to turn openly against him his sporting
      life down at Roebury would decidedly be a failure.
The lives of such men as Mr. Grindley,—men who are tolerated in the daily society of others
      who are accounted their superiors, do not seem to have many attractions. And yet how many such
      men does one see in almost every set? Why Mr. Grindley should have been inferior to Mr.
      Maxwell the banker, or to Stone, or to Prettyman who were brewers, or even to Mr. Pollock the
      heavy-weight literary gentleman, I can hardly say. An attorney by his trade is at any rate as
      good as a brewer, and there are many attorneys who hold their heads high anywhere. Grindley
      was a rich man,—or at any rate rich enough for the life he led. I don't know much about his
      birth, but I believe it was as good as Maxwell's. He was not ignorant, or a fool;—whereas I
      rather think Maxwell was a fool. Grindley had made his own way in the world, but Maxwell would
      certainly not have made himself a banker if his father had not been a banker before him; nor
      could the bank have gone on and prospered had there not been partners there who were better
      men of business than our friend. Grindley knew that he had a better intellect than Maxwell;
      and yet he allowed Maxwell to snub him, and he toadied Maxwell in return. It was not on the
      score of riding that Maxwell claimed and held his superiority, for Grindley did not want
      pluck, and every one knew that Maxwell had lived freely and that his nerves were not what they
      had been. I think it had come from the outward look of the men, from the form of each, from
      the gait and visage which in one was good and in the other insignificant. The nature of such
      dominion of man over man is very singular, but this is certain that when once obtained in
      manhood it may be easily held.
Among boys at school the same thing is even more conspicuous, because boys have less of
      conscience than men, are more addicted to tyranny, and when weak are less prone to feel the
      misery and disgrace of succumbing. Who has been through a large school and does not remember
      the Maxwells and Grindleys,—the tyrants and the slaves,—those who domineered and those who
      submitted? Nor was it, even then, personal strength, nor always superior courage, that gave
      the power of command. Nor was it intellect, or thoughtfulness, nor by any means such qualities
      as make men and boys lovable. It is said by many who have had to deal with boys, that certain
      among them claim and obtain ascendancy by the spirit within them; but I doubt whether the
      ascendancy is not rather thrust on them than claimed by them. Here again I think the outward
      gait of the boy goes far towards obtaining for him the submission of his fellows.
But the tyrant boy does not become the tyrant man, or the slave boy the slave man, because
      the outward visage, that has been noble or mean in the one, changes and becomes so often mean
      or noble in the other.
"By George, there's Pollock!" said Maxwell, as he rode into the field by the church. "I'll
      bet half a crown that he's come down from London this morning, that he was up all night last
      night, and that he tells us so three times before the hounds go out of the paddock." Mr.
      Pollock was the heavy-weight sporting literary gentleman.
</div></body></text></TEI>