<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="48">
Chapter XLVIII
It is probable that Mr Cavendish considered the indulgence above recorded all the more
     excusable in that it was Saturday night. The nomination was to take place on Monday, and if a
     man was not to be supposed to be done with his work on the Saturday evening, when could he be
     expected to have a moment of repose? He had thought as he went home—for naturally, while
     putting himself so skilfully in the way of temptation, such questions had not entered into his
     mind—that the fact of to-morrow being Sunday would effectually neutralise any harm he could
     have been supposed to have done by a visit so simple and natural, and that neither his sister
     nor his committee, the two powers of which he stood in a certain awe, could so much as hear of
     it until the election was over, and all decided for good or for evil. This had been a comfort
     to his mind, but it was the very falsest and most deceitful consolation. That intervening
     Sunday was a severer calamity for Mr Cavendish than half a dozen ordinary days. The general
     excitement had risen so high, and all the chances on both sides had been so often discussed and
     debated, that something new was as water in the desert to the thirsting constituency. The story
     was all through Grange Lane that very night, but Carlingford itself, from St Roque's to the
     wilderness of the North End, tingled with it next morning. It is true, the Rector made no
     special allusion to it in his sermon, though the tone of all his services was so sad, and his
     own fine countenance looked so melancholy, that Mr Bury's devoted followers could all see that
     he had something on his mind. But Mr Tufton at Salem Chapel was not so reticent. He was a man
     quite famous for his extempore gifts, and who rather liked to preach about any very recent
     public event, which it was evident to all his hearers could not have found place in a
     "prepared" discourse; and his sermon that morning was upon wickedness in high places, upon men
     who sought the confidence of their fellows only to betray it, and offered to the poor man a
     hand red with his sister's (metaphorical) blood.
But it would be wrong to say that this was the general tone of public opinion in Grove
     Street; most people, on the contrary, thought of Mr Cavendish not as a wolf thirsting for the
     lamb's blood, but rather himself as a kind of lamb caught in the thicket, and about to be
     offered up in sacrifice. Such was the impression of a great many influential persons who had
     been wavering hitherto, and inclining on the whole to Mr Cavendish's liberal principles and
     supposed Low-Church views. A man whose hand is red metaphorically with your sister's blood is
     no doubt a highly objectionable personage; but it is doubtful whether, under the circumstances,
     an enlightened constituency might not consider the man who had given a perfectly unstained hand
     to so thoroughly unsatisfactory a sister as more objectionable still; and the indignation of
     Grange Lane at Barbara's reappearance was nothing to the fury of George Street, and even of
     Wharfside, where the bargees began to scoff openly. Society had nothing worse to say than to
     quote Mrs Chiley, and assert that "these artist people were all adventurers"; and then Grange
     Lane in general could not forget that it "had met" Barbara, nor dismiss from its consideration
     her black eyes, her level brows, and her magnificent contralto; whereas in the other region the
     idea of the Member for Carlingford marrying "that sort!" cast all the world into temporary
     delirium. It was a still more deadly offence to the small people than to the great. And the
     exceptional standing which poor Mr Lake and his daughter Rose used to lay claim to—the "rank of
     their own" which they possessed as artists—was a pretension much more disagreeable to the
     shopkeepers than to society in general. Thus in every sense Mr Cavendish had done the very
     worst for himself by his ill-timed indulgence; and his guilt was about the same with most of
     his critics whether he meant perfectly well and innocently, or entertained the most guilty
     intentions ever conceived by man.
And all his misfortunes were increased by the fact that the intervening day was a Sunday.
     Barbara Lake herself, who did not know what people were saying, and who, if she had known,
     would not have cared, came to church, as was natural, in the morning; and under pretence that
     the family pew was full, had the assurance, as people remarked, to come to the middle aisle, in
     that same silk dress which rustled like tin, and made more demonstration than the richest
     draperies. The pew-opener disapproved of her as much as everybody else did, but she could not
     turn the intruder out; and though Barbara had a long time to wait, and was curiously inspected
     by all the eyes near her while she did so, the end was that she got a seat in her rustling silk
     not very far from where Lucilla sat in deep mourning, a model of every righteous observance. As
     for poor Barbara, she too was very exemplary in church. She meant nobody any harm, poor soul.
     She could not help the flashing of those big black eyes, to which the level line above them
     gave such a curious appearance of obliqueness—nor was it to be expected that she should deny
     herself the use of her advantages, or omit to "take the second" in all the canticles with such
     melodious liquid tones as made everybody stop and look round. She had a perfect right to do it;
     indeed it was her duty, as it is everybody's duty, to aid to the best of their ability in the
     church-music of their parish, which was what Lucilla Marjoribanks persisted in saying in answer
     to all objections. But the effect was great in the congregation, and even the Rector himself
     was seen to change colour as his eye fell upon the unlucky young woman. Mr Cavendish, for his
     part, knew her voice the moment he heard it, and gave a little start, and received such a look
     from his sister, who was standing by him, as turned him to stone. Mrs Woodburn looked at him,
     and so did her husband, and Mr Centum turned a solemnly inquiring reproachful gaze upon him
     from the other side of the aisle. "Oh, Harry, you will kill me with vexation! why, for
     goodness' sake, did you let her come?" his sister whispered when they had all sat down again.
     "Good heavens! how could I help it?" cried poor Mr Cavendish, almost loud enough to be heard.
     And then by the slight, almost imperceptible, hum around him, he felt that not only his sister
     and his committee, but the Rector and all Carlingford, had their eyes upon him, and was
     thankful to look up the lesson, poor man, and bury his face in it. It was a hard punishment for
     the indiscretion of an hour.
But perhaps of all the people concerned it was the Rector who was the most to be pitied. He
     had staked his honour upon Mr Cavendish's repentance, and here was he going back, publicly to
     wallow in the mire—and it was Sunday when such a worldly subject ought not to be permitted to
     enter a good man's mind, much less to be discussed and acted upon as it ought to be if anything
     was to be done; for there was little more than this sacred day remaining in which to undo the
     mischief which a too great confidence in human nature had wrought. And then, to tell the truth,
     the Rector did not know how to turn back. It would have been hard, very hard, to have told all
     the people who confided in him that he had never had any stronger evidence for Mr Cavendish's
     repentance than he now had for his backsliding; and to give in, and let the other side have it
     all their own way, and throw over the candidate with whom he had identified himself, was as
     painful to Mr Bury as if, instead of being very Low-Church, he had been the most muscular of
     Christians. Being in this state of mind, it may be supposed that his sister's mild wonder and
     trembling speculations at lunch, when they were alone together, were well qualified to raise
     some sparks of that old Adam, who, though well kept under, still existed in the Rector's, as in
     most other human breasts.
"But, dear Edward, I would not quite condemn him," Miss Bury said. "He has been the cause of
     a good deal of remark, you know, and the poor girl has been talked about. He may think it is
     his duty to make her amends. For anything we can tell, he may have the most honourable
     intentions——"
"Oh, bother his honourable intentions!" said the Rector. Such an exclamation from him was as
     bad as the most dreadful oath from an ordinary man, and very nearly made Miss Bury drop from
     her chair in amazement. Things must have gone very far indeed when the Rector himself
     disregarded all proprieties and the sacredness of the day in such a wildly-daring fashion. For,
     to tell the truth, in his secret heart Mr Bury was himself a little of the way of thinking of
     the people in Grove Street. Strictly speaking, if a man has done anything to make a young woman
     be talked about, every well-principled person ought to desire that he should make her amends;
     but at the same time, at such a crisis there was little consolation in the fact that the
     candidate one was supporting and doing daily battle for had honourable intentions in respect to
     Barbara Lake. If it had been Rose Lake, it would still have been a blow; but Rose was
     unspeakably respectable, and nobody could have said a syllable on the subject: while Barbara,
     who came to church in a tin gown, and rustled up the middle aisle in it, attracting all eyes,
     and took such a second in the canticles that she overwhelmed the choir itself—Barbara, who had
     made people talk at Lucilla's parties, and had been ten years away, wandering over the face of
     the earth, nobody could tell where—governessing, singing, play-acting, perhaps, for anything
     that anybody could tell! A clergyman, it is true, dared not have said such a thing, and Mr
     Bury's remorse would have been bitter could he have really believed himself capable even of
     thinking it; but still it is certain that the unconscious, unexpressed idea in his mind was,
     that the honourable intentions were the worst of it—that a candidate might be a fool, or even
     an unrepentant sinner, and after all it would be chiefly his own concern; but that so much as
     to dream of making Barbara Lake the Member's wife, was the deepest insult that could be offered
     to Carlingford. The Rector carried his burden silently all day, and scarcely opened his lips,
     as all his sympathetic following remarked; but before he went to bed he made a singular
     statement, the complete accuracy of which an impartial observer might be disposed to doubt, but
     which Mr Bury uttered with profound sincerity, and with a sigh of self-compassion.
      "Now I understand Lucilla Marjoribanks," was what the good man said, and he all but
     puffed out the candle he had just lighted, with that sigh.
Lucilla, however, in her own person took no part in it at all, one way or other. She shook
     hands very kindly with Barbara, and hoped she would come and see her, and made it clearly
     apparent that she at least bore no malice. "I am very glad I told Thomas to say
     nothing about it," she said to Aunt Jemima, who, however, did not know the circumstances, and
     was very little the wiser, as may be supposed.
And then the two ladies walked home together, and Miss Marjoribanks devoted herself to her
     good books. It was almost the first moment of repose that Lucilla had ever had in her busy
     life, and it was a repose not only permitted but enjoined. Society, which had all along
     expected so much from her, expected now that she should not find herself able for any exertion;
     and Miss Marjoribanks responded nobly, as she had always done, to the requirements of society.
     To a mind less perfectly regulated, the fact that the election which had been so interesting to
     her was now about, as may be said, to take place without her, would have been of itself a
     severe trial; and the sweet composure with which she bore it was not one of the least
     remarkable phenomena of the present crisis. But the fact was that this Sunday was on the whole
     an oppressive day. Mr Ashburton came in for a moment, it is true, between services; but he
     himself, though generally so steady, was unsettled and agitated. He had been bearing the
     excitement well until this last almost incredible accident occurred, which made it possible
     that he might not only win, but win by a large majority. "The Dissenters have all held out till
     now, and would not pledge themselves," he said to Lucilla, actually with a tremble in his
     voice; and then he told her about Mr Tufton's sermon and the wickedness in high places, and the
     hand imbrued metaphorically in his sister's blood.
"I wonder how he could say so," said Lucilla, with indignation. "It is just like those
     Dissenters. What harm was there in going to see her? I heard of it last night, but even for
     your interest I would never have spread such mere gossip as that."
"No—certainly it is mere gossip," said Mr Ashburton; "but it will do him a great deal of harm
     all the same," and then once more he got restless and abstracted. "I suppose it is of no use
     asking you if you would join Lady Richmond's party at the Blue Boar? You could have a window
     almost to yourself, you know, and would be quite quiet."
Lucilla shook her head, and the movement was more expressive than words. "I did not think you
     would," said Mr Ashburton; and then he took her hand, and his looks too became full of meaning.
     "Then I must say adieu," he said—"adieu until it is all over. I shall not have a moment that I
     can call my own—this will be an eventful week for me."
"You mean an eventful day," said Lucilla; for Mr Ashburton was not such a novice as to be
     afraid of the appearance he would have to make at the nomination. He did not contradict her,
     but he pressed her hand with a look which was equivalent to kissing it, though he was not
     romantic enough to go quite that length. When he was gone, Miss Marjoribanks could not but
     wonder a little what he could mean by looking forward to an eventful week. For her own part,
     she could not but feel that after so much excitement things would feel rather flat for the rest
     of the week, and that it was almost wrong to have an election on a Tuesday. Could it be that Mr
     Ashburton had some other contest or candidateship in store for himself which he had not told
     her about? Such a thing was quite possible; but what had Lucilla in her mourning to do with
     worldly contingencies? She went back to her seat in the corner of the sofa and her book of
     sermons, and read fifty pages before tea-time; she knew how much, because she had put a mark in
     her book when Mr Ashburton came in. Marks are very necessary things generally in sermon-books;
     and Lucilla could not but feel pleased to think that since her visitor went away she had got
     over so much ground.
To compare Carlingford to a volcano that night (and indeed all the next day, which was the
     day of nomination) would be a stale similitude; and yet in some respects it was like a volcano.
     It was not the same kind of excitement which arises in a town where politics run very high—if
     there are any towns nowadays in such a state of unsophisticated nature. Neither was it a place
     where simple corruption could carry the day; for the freemen of Wharfside were, after all, but
     a small portion of the population. It was in reality a quite ideal sort of contest—a contest
     for the best man, such as would have pleased the purest-minded philosopher. It was the man most
     fit to represent Carlingford for whom everybody was looking, not a man to be baited about
     parish-rates and Reform Bills and the Irish Church;—a man who lived in, or near the town, and
     "dealt regular" at all the best shops; a man who would not disgrace his constituency by any
     unlawful or injudicious sort of love-making—who would attend to the town's interests and
     subscribe to its charities, and take the lead in a general way. This was what Carlingford was
     looking for, as Miss Marjoribanks, with that intuitive rapidity which was characteristic of her
     genius, had at once remarked; and when everybody went home from church and chapel, though it
     was Sunday, the whole town thrilled and throbbed with this great question. People might have
     found it possible to condone a sin or wink at a mere backsliding; but there were few so bigoted
     in their faith as to believe that the man who was capable of marrying Barbara Lake could ever
     be the man for Carlingford; and thus it was that Mr Cavendish, who had been flourishing like a
     green bay-tree, withered away, as it were, in a moment, and the place that had known him knew
     him no more.
The hustings were erected at that central spot, just under the windows of the Blue Boar,
     where Grange Lane and George Street meet, the most central point in Carlingford. It was so near
     that Lucilla could hear the shouts and the music and all the divers noises of the election, but
     could not, even when she went into the very corner of the window and strained her eyes to the
     utmost, see what was going on, which was a very trying position. We will not linger upon the
     proceedings or excitement of Monday, when the nomination and the speeches were made, and when
     the show of hands was certainly thought to be in Mr Cavendish's favour. But it was the next day
     that was the real trial. Lady Richmond and her party drove past at a very early hour, and
     looked up at Miss Marjoribanks's windows, and congratulated themselves that they were so early,
     and that poor dear Lucilla would not have the additional pain of seeing them go past. But
     Lucilla did see them, though, with her usual good sense, she kept behind the blind. She never
     did anything absurd in the way of early rising on ordinary occasions; but this morning it was
     impossible to restrain a certain excitement, and though it did her no good, still she got up an
     hour earlier than usual, and listened to the music, and heard the cabs rattling about, and
     could not help it if her heart beat quicker. It was perhaps a more important crisis for Miss
     Marjoribanks than for any other person, save one, in Carlingford; for of course it would be
     foolish to attempt to assert that she did not understand by this time what Mr Ashburton meant;
     and it may be imagined how hard it was upon Lucilla to be thus, as it were, in the very outside
     row of the assembly—to hear all the distant shouts and sounds, everything that was noisy and
     inarticulate, and conveyed no meaning, and to be out of reach of all that could really inform
     her as to what was going on.
She saw from her window the cabs rushing past, now with her own violet-and-green colours, now
     with the blue-and-yellow. And sometimes it seemed to Lucilla that the blue-and-yellow
     predominated, and that the carriages which mounted the hostile standard carried voters in
     larger numbers and more enthusiastic condition. The first load of bargemen that came up Grange
     Lane from the farther end of Wharf side were all Blues; and when a spectator is thus held on
     the very edge of the event in a suspense which grows every moment more intolerable, especially
     when he or she is disposed to believe that things in general go on all the worse for his or her
     absence, it is no wonder if that spectator becomes nervous, and sees all the dangers at their
     darkest. What if, after all, old liking and friendship had prevailed over that beautiful
     optimism which Lucilla had done so much to instil into the minds of her townsfolk? What if
     something more mercenary and less elevating than the ideal search for the best man, in which
     she had hoped Carlingford was engaged, should have swayed the popular mind to the other side?
     All these painful questions went through Lucilla's mind as the day crept on; and her suspense
     was much aggravated by Aunt Jemima, who took no real interest in the election, but who kept
     saying every ten minutes—"I wonder how the poll is going on—I wonder what that is they are
     shouting—is it 'Ashburton for ever!' or 'Cavendish for ever!' Lucilla? Your ears should be
     sharper than mine; but I think it is Cavendish." Lucilla thought so too, and her heart quaked
     within her, and she went and squeezed herself into the corner of the window, to try whether it
     was not possible to catch a glimpse of the field of battle; and her perseverance was finally
     rewarded by the sight of the extremity of the wooden planks which formed the polling-booth; but
     there was little satisfaction to be got out of that. And then the continual dropping of Aunt
     Jemima's questions drove her wild. "My dear aunt," she said at last, "I can see nothing and
     hear nothing, and you know as much about what is going on as I do"—which, it will be
     acknowledged, was not an answer such as one would have expected from Lucilla's perfect temper
     and wonderful self-control.
The election went on with all its usual commotion while Miss Marjoribanks watched and waited.
     Mr Cavendish's committee brought their supporters very well up in the morning—no doubt by way
     of making sure of them, as somebody suggested on the other side; and for some time Mrs
     Woodburn's party at Masters's windows (which Masters had given rather reluctantly, by way of
     pleasing the Rector) looked in better spirits and less anxious than Lady Richmond's party,
     which was at the Blue Boar. Towards noon Mr Cavendish himself went up to his female supporters
     with the bulletin of the poll—the same bulletin which Mr Ashburton had just sent down to
     Lucilla. These were the numbers; and they made Masters's triumphant, while silence and anxiety
     fell upon the Blue Boar:—
When Miss Marjoribanks received this disastrous intelligence, she put the note in her pocket
     without saying a word to Aunt Jemima, and left her window, and went back to her worsted-work;
     but as for Mrs Woodburn, she gave her brother a hug, and laughed, and cried, and believed in
     it, like a silly woman as she was.
"It is something quite unlooked-for, and which I never could have calculated upon," she said,
     thrusting her hand into an imaginary waistcoat with Mr Ashburton's very look and tone, which
     was beyond measure amusing to all the party. They laughed so long, and were so gay, that Lady
     Richmond solemnly levelled her opera-glass at them with the air of a woman who was used to
     elections, but knew how such parvenus have their heads turned by a prominent position.
     "That woman is taking some of us off," she said, "but if it is me, I can bear it. There is
     nothing so vulgar as that sort of thing, and I hope you never encourage it in your presence, my
     dears."
Just at that moment, however, an incident occurred which took up the attention of the ladies
     at the windows, and eclipsed even the interest of the election. Poor Barbara Lake was
     interested, too, to know if her friend would win. She was not entertaining any particular hopes
     or plans about him. Years and hard experiences had humbled Barbara. The Brussels veil which she
     used to dream of had faded as much from her memory as poor Rose's Honiton design, for which she
     had got the prize. At the present moment, instead of nourishing the ambitious designs which
     everybody laid to her charge, she would have been content with the very innocent privilege of
     talking a little to her next employers about Mr Cavendish, the member for Carlingford, and his
     visits to her father's house. But at the same time, she had once been fond of him, and she took
     a great interest in him, and was very anxious that he should win. And she was in the habit,
     like so many other women, of finding out, as far as she could, what was going on, and going to
     see everything that there might be to see. She had brought one of her young brothers with her,
     whose anxiety to see the fun was quite as great as her own; and she was arrayed in the tin
     dress—her best available garment—which was made long, according to the fashion, and which, as
     Barbara scorned to tuck it up, was continually getting trodden on, and talked about, and
     reviled at, on that crowded pavement. The two parties of ladies saw, and even it might be said
     heard, the sweep of the metallic garment, which was undergoing such rough usage, and which was
     her best, poor soul. Lady Richmond had alighted from her carriage carefully tucked up, though
     there were only a few steps to make, and there was no lady in Carlingford who would
     have swept "a good gown" over the stones in such a way; but then poor Barbara was not precisely
     a lady, and thought it right to look as if it did not matter. She went up to read the numbers
     of the poll—in the sight of everybody; and she clasped her hands together with ecstatic
     satisfaction as she read; and young Carmine, her brother, dashed into the midst of the fray,
     and shouted "Cavendish for ever! hurrah for Cavendish!" and could scarcely be drawn back again
     to take his sister home. Even when she withdrew, she did not go home, but went slowly up and
     down Grange Lane with her rustling train behind her, with the intention of coming back for
     further information. Lady Richmond and Mrs Woodburn both lost all thought of the election as
     they watched; and lo! when their wandering thoughts came back again, the tide had turned.
The tide had turned. Whether it was Barbara, or whether it was fate, or whether it was the
     deadly unanimity of those Dissenters, who, after all their wavering, had at last decided for
     the man who "dealt" in George Street—no one could tell; but by two o'clock Mr Ashburton was so
     far ahead that he felt himself justified in sending another bulletin to Lucilla—so far that
     there was no reasonable hope of the opposite candidate ever making up his lost ground. Mrs
     Woodburn was not a woman to be content when reasonable hope was over—she clung to the last
     possibility desperately, with a pertinacity beyond all reason, and swore in her heart that it
     was Barbara that had done it, and cursed her with her best energies; which, however, as these
     are not melodramatic days, was a thing which did the culprit no possible harm. When Barbara
     herself came back from her promenade in Grange Lane, and saw the altered numbers, she again
     clasped her hands together for a moment, and looked as if she were going to faint; and it was
     at that moment that Mr Cavendish's eyes fell upon her, as ill fortune would have it. They were
     all looking at him as if it was his fault; and the sight of that sympathetic face was consoling
     to the defeated candidate. He took off his hat before everybody; probably, as his sister
     afterwards said, he would have gone and offered her his arm had he been near enough. How could
     anybody wonder, after that, that things had gone against him, and that, notwithstanding all his
     advantages, he was the loser in the fight?
As for Lucilla, she had gone back to her worsted-work when she got Mr Ashburton's first note,
     in which his rival's name stood above his own. She looked quite composed, and Aunt Jemima went
     on teasing with her senseless questions. But Miss Marjoribanks put up with it all; though the
     lingering progress of these hours from one o'clock to four, the sound of cabs furiously driven
     by, the distant shouts, the hum of indefinite din that filled the air, exciting every moment a
     keener curiosity, and giving no satisfaction or information, would have been enough to have
     driven a less large intelligence out of its wits. Lucilla bore it, doing as much as she could
     of her worsted-work, and saying nothing to nobody, except, indeed, an occasional word to Aunt
     Jemima, who would have an answer. She was not walking about Grange Lane repeating a kind of
     prayer for the success of her candidate, as Barbara Lake was doing; but perhaps, on the whole,
     Barbara had the easiest time of it at that moment of uncertainty. When the next report came,
     Lucilla's fingers trembled as she opened it, so great was her emotion; but after that she
     recovered herself as if by magic. She grew pale, and then gave a kind of sob, and then a kind
     of laugh, and finally put her worsted-work back into her basket, and threw Mr Ashburton's note
     into the fire.
"It is all right," said Lucilla. "Mr Ashburton is a hundred ahead, and they can never make up
     that. I am so sorry for poor Mr Cavendish. If he only had not been so imprudent on Saturday
     night!"
"I am sure I don't understand you," said Aunt Jemima. "After being so anxious about one
     candidate, how can you be so sorry for the other? I suppose you did not want them both to
     win?"
"Yes, I think that was what I wanted," said Lucilla, drying her eyes; and then she
     awoke to the practical exigencies of the position. "There will be quantities of people coming
     to have a cup of tea, and I must speak to Nancy," she said, and went downstairs with a cheerful
     heart. It might be said to be as good as decided, so far as regarded Mr Ashburton; and when it
     came for her final judgment, what was it that she ought to say?
It was very well that Miss Marjoribanks's unfailing foresight led her to speak to Nancy; for
     the fact was, that after four o'clock, when the polling was over, everybody came in to tea. All
     Lady Richmond's party came, as a matter of course, and Mr Ashburton himself, for a few minutes,
     bearing meekly his new honours; and so many more people besides, that but for knowing it was a
     special occasion, and that "our gentleman" was elected, Nancy's mind never could have borne the
     strain. And the tea that was used was something frightful. As for Aunt Jemima, who had just
     then a good many thoughts of her own to occupy her, and did not care so much as the rest for
     all the chatter that was going on, nor for all those details about poor Barbara and Mr
     Cavendish's looks, which Lucilla received with such interest, she could not but make a
     calculation in passing as to this new item of fashionable expenditure into which her niece was
     plunging so wildly. To be sure, it was an occasion that never might occur again, and everybody
     was so excited as to forget even that Lucilla was in mourning, and that such a number of people
     in the house so soon might be more than she could bear. And she was excited herself, and forgot
     that she was not able for it. But still Aunt Jemima, sitting by, could not help thinking, that
     even five-o'clock teas of good quality and unlimited amount would very soon prove to be
     impracticable upon two hundred a year.
</div></body></text></TEI>