<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="39">
Chapter XXXIX
It was a very good thing for Lucilla that Mrs John was so much of an invalid, notwithstanding
     that the Doctor made little of her complaints. All that Dr Marjoribanks said was—with that
     remnant of Scotch which was often perceptible in his speech—that her illnesses were a fine
     thing to occupy her, and he did not know what she would do without them—a manner of speaking
     which naturally lessened his daughter's anxiety, though her sympathetic care and solicitude
     were undiminished. And no doubt, when she had been once assured that there was nothing
     dangerous in her aunt's case, it was a relief to Miss Marjoribanks at the present juncture that
     Mrs John got up late and always breakfasted in her own room. Lucilla went into that sanctuary
     after she had given her father his breakfast, and heard all about the palpitation and the bad
     night Aunt Jemima had passed; and then when she had consoled her suffering relative by the
     reflection that one never sleeps well the first night or two, Miss Marjoribanks was at liberty
     to go forth and attend a little to her own affairs, which stood so much in need of being
     attended to. She had had no further talk with the Doctor on the subject, but she had read over
     Mr Cavendish's address, and could not help seeing that it went dead against her candidate;
     neither could Lucilla remain altogether unaffected by the expression of feeling in respect to
     "a place in which I have spent so many pleasant years, and which has so many claims on my
     affections," and the touching haste with which the exile had rushed back as soon as he heard of
     the old member's death. If it touched Miss Marjoribanks, who was already pledged to support
     another interest, what might it not do to the gentlemen in Grange Lane who were not pledged,
     and who had a friendship for Mr Cavendish? This was the alarming thought that had disturbed her
     sleep all night, and returned to her mind with her first awakening; and when she had really her
     time to herself, and the fresh morning hours before her, Lucilla began, as everybody ought to
     do, by going to the very root and foundation, and asking herself what, beyond all secondary
     considerations, it was right to do. To change from one side to the other and go back
     from her word was a thing abhorrent to her; but still Miss Marjoribanks was aware that there
     are certain circumstances in which honesty and truth themselves demand what in most cases is
     considered an untruthful and dishonest proceeding.
Thus in order to come to a right decision, and with a sense of the duty she owed to her
     country which would have shamed half the electors in England, not to say Carlingford, Lucilla,
     who naturally had no vote, read the two addresses of the two candidates, and addressed herself
     candidly and impartially to the rights of the subject. Mr Cavendish was disposed, as we have
     said, to be pathetic and sentimental, and to speak of the claims the borough had upon his
     affections, and the eagerness with which he had rushed home at the earliest possible moment to
     present himself to them. If poor old Mr Chiltern had been King Bomba, or a gloomy Oriental
     tyrant, keeping all possible reformers and successors banished from his dominions, the new
     candidate could not have spoken with more pathos. It was a sort of thing which tells among the
     imaginative part of the community, or so, at least, most people think; and Miss Marjoribanks
     was moved by it for the first moment; but then her enlightened mind asserted its rights. She
     said to herself that Mr Cavendish might have come home at any hour, by any steamboat; that
     Calais and Boulogne, and even Dieppe, were as open to him as if he had been an actual refugee,
     and that consequently there was nothing particular to be pathetic about. And then, if the town
     had such claims on his affections, why had he stayed so long away? These two rationalistic
     questions dispersed the first attendrissement which had begun to steal over Lucilla's
     mind. When she came to this conclusion, her difficulties cleared away. She had no reason to go
     back from her engagements and reject that intimation which had so impressed it on her, that Mr
     Ashburton was the man. It was a sacrifice which ancient truth and friendship did not demand,
     for verity was not in the document she had just been reading, and that appeal to sentiment was
     nothing more than what is generally called humbug. "He might have been living here all the
     time," Lucilla said to herself; "he might have had much stronger claims upon our affections; if
     he had wanted, he might have come back ages ago, and not let people struggle on alone." When
     this view of the subject occurred to her, Lucilla felt more indignation than sympathy. And
     then, as Dr Marjoribanks had done, she turned to the calm utterance of her own candidate—the
     man who was the only man for Carlingford—and that sweet sense of having given sound counsel,
     and of having at last met with some one capable of carrying it out, which makes up for so many
     failures, came like balm to Lucilla's bosom. There was nothing more necessary; the commotion in
     her mind calmed down, and the tranquillity of undisturbed conviction came in its place. And it
     was with this sense of certainty that she put on her bonnet and issued forth, though it snowed
     a little, and was a very wintry day, on Mr Ashburton's behalf, to try her fortune in Grange
     Lane.
She went to Mrs Chiley's, who was now very old, poor old lady! and feeble, and did not like
     to leave her sofa. Not but what she could leave the sofa, she said to her friends, but at that
     time of the year, and at her time of life, it was comfortable. The sofa was wheeled to the side
     of the fire, and Mrs Chiley reclined upon it, covered with knitted rugs of the brightest
     colours, which her young friends all worked for her. The last one arrived was what used to be
     called an Afghanistan blanket, done in stripes of all sorts of pretty tints, which was a
     present from Mrs Beverley. "Her work, she says, Lucilla," said the old lady; "but we know what
     sort of soft dawdling woman she is, and it must have been the Archdeacon's nieces, you know."
     But still it had the place of honour at present, covering Mrs Chiley's feet, and affording
     something to talk about when any one came in. And by her side was a little table, upon which
     stood one China rose, in a glass of water—a pale rose, almost as pale as her soft old cheeks,
     and chilled like them by the approaching frost. And the fire burned with an officious
     cheerfulness at her elbow, as if it thought nothing of such accidental circumstances as winter
     and old age. To be sure this was a reflection which never came into Mrs Chiley's head, who was,
     on the contrary, very thankful for the fire, and said it was like a companion. "And I often
     think, my dear, how do the poor people get on, especially if they are old and sick, they have
     no fires to keep them cheerful in this dreadful weather," the kind old lady would say. She did
     say so now when Lucilla came in, glowing with cold and her rapid walk, and with a flake or two
     of snow slowly melting on her sealskin cloak. Perhaps it was not a sentiment the Colonel agreed
     with, for he gave a humph and a little hoist of his shoulders, as if in protest, being himself
     a good deal limited in his movements, and not liking to own it, by the wintry torpor within his
     big old frame, and the wintry weather outside.
"Come and tell us all the news, Lucilla, my darling," Mrs Chiley said, as she drew down her
     young friend's glowing face to her own, and gave her one of her lingering kisses; "I felt sure
     you would come and tell us everything. I said it would not be like Lucilla if she didn't. We
     know nothing but the fact, you know—not another word. Make haste and tell us
     everything, my dear."
"But I don't know anything," said Miss Marjoribanks. "Of course you mean about Mr Cavendish.
     I saw it in the papers, like everybody else, but I don't know anything more."
And then Mrs Chiley's countenance fell. She was not very strong, poor old lady, and she could
     have cried, as she said afterwards. "Ah, well, I suppose there is not time," she said, after a
     little pause; "I suppose he has not got here from Dover yet—one always forgets the distance. I
     calculated it all over last night, and I thought he would get home by the eleven train; but
     these trains are never to be calculated upon, you know, my dear. I am a little
     disappointed, Lucilla. Poor dear! to think how he must have rushed home the first moment—I
     could have cried when I read that address."
"I don't see why any one should cry," said Lucilla. "I think he makes a great deal too much
     of that; he might have come ever so many years ago if he had liked. Poor Mr Chiltern did not
     banish him, poor old man!—he might have been here for years."
Upon which the Colonel himself drew a little nearer, and poked the fire. "I am glad to see
     you are so sensible, Lucilla," he said. "It's the first rational word I have heard on the
     subject. She thinks he's a kind of saint and martyr; a silly young fellow that runs
     off among a set of Frenchmen because he can't get everything his own way—and then he expects
     that we are all to go into transports of joy, and give him our votes," Colonel Chiley added,
     smashing a great piece of coal with the poker, with a blow full of energy, yet showing a slight
     unsteadiness in it, which sent a host of blazing splinters into the hearth. He was a man who
     wore very well, but he was not so steady as he once was, and nowadays was apt, by some
     tremulous movement, to neutralise the strength which he had left.
Mrs Chiley, for her part, was apt to be made very nervous by her husband's proceedings. She
     was possessed by a terror that the splinters some day would jump out of the hearth on to the
     carpet and fly into the corners, "and perhaps burn us all up in our beds," as she said. She
     gave a little start among her cushions, and stooped down to look over the floor. "He will never
     learn that he is old," she said in Lucilla's ear, who instantly came to her side to see what
     she wanted; and thus the two old people kept watch upon each other, and noted, with a curious
     mixture of vexation and sympathy, each other's declining strength.
"For my part, I would give him all my votes, if I had a hundred," said Mrs Chiley, "and so
     will you, too, when you hear the rights of it. Lucilla, my dear, tell him—I hope you
     are not going to forsake old friends."
"No," said Miss Marjoribanks—but she spoke with a gravity and hesitation which did not fail
     to reach Mrs Chiley's ear—"I hope I shall never desert my old friends; but I think all the same
     that it is Mr Ashburton who is the right man for Carlingford," she said slowly. She said it
     with reluctance, for she knew it would shock her audience, but, at the same time, she did not
     shrink from her duty; and the moment had now arrived when Lucilla felt concealment was
     impossible, and that the truth must be said.
As for Mrs Chiley, she was so distressed that the tears came to her eyes; and even the
     Colonel laughed, and did not understand it. Colonel Chiley, though he was by no means as yet on
     Mr Cavendish's side, was not any more capable than his neighbours of understanding Miss
     Marjoribanks's single-minded devotion to what was just and right; and why she should transfer
     her support to Ashburton, who was not a ladies' man, nor, in the Colonel's opinion, a marrying
     man, nor anything at all attractive, now that the other had come back romantic and repentant to
     throw his honours at her feet, was beyond his power of explanation. He contented himself with
     saying "humph"; but his wife was not so easily satisfied. She took Lucilla by the hand and
     poured forth a flood of remonstrances and prayers.
"I do not understand you, Lucilla," said Mrs Chiley. "He whom we know so little about—whom, I
     am sure, you have no reason to care for. And where could you find anybody nicer than Mr
     Cavendish?—and he to have such faith in us, and to come rushing back as soon as he was able. I
     am sure you have not taken everything into consideration, Lucilla. He might not perhaps do
     exactly as could have been wished before he went away; but he was young and he was led astray;
     and I do think you were a little hard upon him, my dear; but I have always said I never knew
     anybody nicer than Mr Cavendish. And what possible reason you can have to care about that other
     man——"
"It was like a special Intimation," said Lucilla, with solemnity. "I don't see how I could
     neglect it, for my part. The day the news came about poor old Mr Chiltern's death I was out,
     you know, and heard it; and just at one spot upon the pavement, opposite Mr Holden's, it came
     into my mind like a flash of lightning that Mr Ashburton was the man. I don't care in the least
     for him, and I had not been thinking of him, or anything. It came into my head all in a moment.
     If I had been very intimate with poor dear old Mr Chiltern, or if I believed in spirit-rapping,
     I should think it was a message from him."
Lucilla spoke with great gravity, but she did not impress her audience, who were people of
     sceptical minds. Mrs Chiley, for her part, was almost angry, and could scarcely forgive Lucilla
     for having made her give grave attention to such a piece of nonsense. "If it had been
     him," she said, with some wrath, "I don't see how having been dead for a few hours should make
     his advice worth having. It never was good for anything when he was alive. And you don't
     believe in spirit-rapping, I hope. I wonder how you can talk such nonsense," the old
     lady said severely. And Colonel Chiley, who had been a little curious too, laughed and coughed
     over the joke; for the two old people were of the old school, and of a very unbelieving frame
     of mind.
"I knew you would laugh," said Miss Marjoribanks, "but I cannot help it. If it had been
     impressed upon your mind like that, you would have been different. And, of course, I
     like Mr Cavendish much the best. I am so glad I have no vote," said Lucilla; "it does not
     matter to anybody what I think; but if I had anything to do with it, you know I could not stand
     up for Mr Cavendish, even though I am fond of him, when I felt sure that Mr Ashburton is the
     man for Carlingford—nobody could ask me to do that."
There followed a pause upon this declaration; for Miss Marjoribanks, though she had no vote,
     was a person of undoubted influence, and such a conviction on her part was not to be laughed
     at. Even Colonel Chiley, who was undecided in his own mind, was moved by it a little. "What
     does the Doctor think?" he asked. "Ashburton doesn't say a word about his principles that I can
     see; and the other, you know——"
"Dear Colonel Chiley," cried Lucilla, "he is not going to be Prime Minister; and I have
     always heard you say, as long as I can remember, that it was not opinions, you know, but a good
      man that people wanted. I have heard people talking politics for hours, and I always
     remember you saying that, and thinking it was the only sensible thing that was said; but, of
     course, I don't understand politics," Lucilla added, with humility. As for the Colonel, he took
     up the poker, perhaps to hide a little pleasant confusion, and again drew near the fire.
"By George! I believe Lucilla is in the right," he said, with a certain agreeable
     consciousness. Perhaps he did not quite recollect at what moment of his life he had originated
     that sentiment, but he thought he could recollect having said it; and it was with the view of
     carrying off the bashfulness of genius, and not because the coals had any need of it, that he
     took up the poker—a proceeding which was always regarded with alarm and suspicion by his
     wife.
"The fire is very nice," said Mrs Chiley. "I hate to have the fire poked when it does not
     want it. Lucilla, if you make him go over to that Mr Ashburton's side, you will have a
     great deal to answer for, and I will never forgive you. My dear, you must be dreaming—a man
     that is as dry as a stick, and not one-hundredth nor one-thousandth part so nice——"
"I shan't say another word," said Lucilla; "I shan't stay any longer, for I can't help it,
     and you would be angry with me. People can't help what they believe, you know. There is poor
     little Oswald Brown, who has doubts, and can't go into the Church, and will ruin all his
     prospects, and nobody can help it——"
"If I were his mother I should help it!" cried Mrs Chiley. "I promise you he should not talk
     of his doubts to me! A bit of a lad; and what is good enough for all the bishops, and everybody
     in their senses, is not good enough for him! If that is the kind of example you are going to
     follow, Lucilla——"
"Dear Mrs Chiley," said Miss Marjoribanks, "everybody knows what my Church principles are;
     and perhaps you will come round to think with me; but I am not going to say any more about it
     now. I am so glad your rheumatism is better this morning; but you must wrap up well, for it is
     so cold, oh, so cold, out of doors!"
When Lucilla had thus dismissed the subject, she came to her old friend's side and bent over
     her in her sealskin cloak, to say good-bye. Mrs Chiley took her by both hands as she thus stood
     with her back to the old Colonel, and drew her down close, and looked searchingly into her
     eyes. "If you have any particular reason, Lucilla, you ought to tell me—that would
     make such a difference," said the old lady. "I always tell you everything," said Miss
     Marjoribanks, with evasive fondness, as she kissed the soft old withered cheek; and naturally,
     with the Colonel behind, who was standing up before the fire shadowing over them both, and
     quite unaware of this little whispered episode, it would have been impossible to say more had
     there been ever so much to say. But it had been a close encounter in its way, and Lucilla was
     rather glad to get off without any further damage. She did not feel quite successful as she
     went out; but still she had left a very wholesome commotion behind her; for Colonel Chiley
     could not but feel that the sentiment which she had quoted from himself was a very just
     sentiment. "By George! Lucilla was in the right of it," he said again, after she was gone; and
     in fact went through a process very similar to that which had modified the sentiments of Dr
     Marjoribanks on the previous night. Mr Cavendish was a young fellow who had rushed off among a
     set of Frenchmen, because Lucilla Marjoribanks would not have him, or because he could not
     marry Barbara Lake in addition, or at least somehow because he failed of having his own way. It
     was all very well for him to come back and make a commotion, and be sentimental about it. But
     what if, after all, Ashburton, who had the Firs, and lived there, and spent his money like a
     Christian, was the man for Carlingford? The Colonel's mind still wavered and veered about; yet
     it had received an impulse which was by no means unworthy of consideration.
As for Mrs Chiley, she laid back her head upon her pillows and painfully questioned with
     herself whether Lucilla could have any particular reason for taking Mr Ashburton's
     part so warmly. She thought with justice that Miss Marjoribanks was looking brighter and
     better, and had more of her old animation than she had shown for a long time—which arose from
     the simple fact that she had something in hand, though the old lady thought it might have a
     more touching and delicate motive. If that was the case, it would make a great
     difference. Mrs Chiley was no longer able to go out in the evening, and had to be dependent on
     other people's observation for a knowledge of what happened—and she was wounded by a sense that
     her young friend had not been appreciated as her worth deserved. If Mr Ashburton had the sense
     to see what was for his own advantage, it would be a frightful thing, as Mrs Chiley said to
     herself, if Lucilla's friends should fly in his face. And though it was a hard trial to give up
     Mr Cavendish, still if anything of the kind had happened——Thus it will be evident that
     Lucilla's visit, though it was not a long one, nor the least in the world an argumentative
     visit, was not without its fruit.
She went up Grange Lane again cheerful and warm in her sealskin coat. It was a thing that
     suited her remarkably well, and corresponded with her character, and everybody knows how
     comfortable they are. The snowflakes fell softly, one at a time, and melted away to nothing
     upon her sleeves and her shoulders without leaving any trace—and Lucilla, with the chill air
     blowing in her face, and those feathery messengers in the air, could not but feel that her walk
     and the general readiness which she felt to face all kinds of objections and difficulties, and
     to make a sacrifice of her own feelings, had in them a certain magnanimous and heroic element.
     For after all she had no particular reason, as Mrs Chiley said. Mr Ashburton was a dry
     man, and of very little use in a social point of view, and had never paid her any attention to
     speak of, nor at all put himself forth as a candidate for her favour. If he had done so, she
     would not have felt that thrill of utter disinterestedness which kept her as warm within as her
     sealskin did without.
There was not a soul to be seen in Grange Lane at that moment in the snow, which came on
     faster and faster, but one of Mr Wentworth's (who at that time was new in St Roque's) gray
     sisters, and another lady who was coming down, as quickly as Lucilla was going up, by the long
     line of garden walls. The gentlemen were either at business or at their club, or keeping
     themselves snug indoors; and it was only these devoted women who braved the elements outside.
     The figure in the gray cloak was occupied simply with the poor people, and that is not our
     present business; but the other two were otherwise inspired. Mr Cavendish, who had lately
     arrived, had not been able to make up his mind to face the weather; but his sister was of a
     different way of thinking. She was not of half the capacity of Lucilla, but still she felt that
     something ought to be done, and that there was not a moment to be lost. When she saw it was
     Miss Marjoribanks that was advancing to meet her, a momentary chill came over Mrs Woodburn. She
     was thinking so much of her own errand that she could not but jump at the idea that nothing
     less important could have induced Lucilla to be out of doors on such a day; and her heart beat
     loud as the two drew near each other. Was it an unexpected and generous auxiliary, or was it a
     foe accomplished and formidable? For one thing, she was not coming out of Mr Centum's, where
     Mrs Woodburn herself was going, which at least was a relief. As they came nearer the two ladies
     instinctively looked to their weapons. They had met already in many a little passage of arms,
     but nothing like this had ever occurred to them before. If they were to work in union, Mrs
     Woodburn felt that they would carry all before them; and if not, then it must be a struggle
     unto the death.
"Is it really you, Lucilla?" she said; "I could not believe my eyes. What can have brought
     you out of doors on such a day? You that have everything your own way, and no call to exert
     yourself——"
"I have been to see Mrs Chiley," said Lucilla sweetly; "when the weather is bad she sees
     nobody, and she is always so pleased to have me. Her rheumatism is not so bad, thank you—though
     I am sure if this weather should last——"
"You would see Mrs Beverley's blanket," said Mrs Woodburn, who was a little nervous, though
     perhaps that might only be the cold; "but we know what sort of woman she is, and it must have
     been the Archdeacon's nieces, my dear. Do turn back with me a moment, Lucilla; or I shall go
     with you. I want to speak to you. Of course you have heard of Harry's coming home?"
"I saw it in the papers," said Miss Marjoribanks, whose perfect serenity offered a curious
     contrast to her companion's agitation. "I am sure I shall be very glad to see him again. I hope
     he will come to dinner on Thursday as he used to do. It will be quite nice to see him in his
     old place."
"Yes," said Mrs Woodburn; "but that was not what I was thinking of. You know you used always
     to say he ought to be in Parliament; and he has always kept thinking of it since he went
     away—and thinking, I am sure, that it would please you," said the poor woman, faltering; for
     Lucilla listened with a smile that was quite unresponsive, and did not change countenance in
     the least, even at this tender suggestion. "He has come home with that object now, you know,
     now that poor old Mr Chiltern is dead; and I hope you are going to help us, Lucilla," said Mrs
     Woodburn. Her voice quite vibrated with agitation as she made this hurried, perhaps
     injudicious, appeal, thinking within herself at the same moment what would Harry say if he knew
     that she was thus committing him. As for Lucilla, she received it all with the same
     tranquillity, as if she expected it, and was quite prepared for everything that her assailant
     had to say.
"I am sure I wish I had a vote," said Lucilla; "but I have no vote, and what can a girl do? I
     am so sorry I don't understand politics. If we were going in for that sort of thing, I don't
     know what there would be left for the gentlemen to do."
"You have influence, which is a great deal better than a vote," said Mrs Woodburn; "and they
     all say there is nobody like a lady for electioneering—and a young lady above all; and then you
     know Harry so well, and can always draw him out to the best advantage. I never thought he
     looked so nice, or showed his talents so much, as when he was with you," said the eager
     advocate. She was only wrapped in a shawl herself, and when she looked at Lucilla's sealskin
     coat, and saw how rosy and comfortable she looked, and how serene and immovable, poor Mrs
     Woodburn was struck with a pang of envy. If Miss Marjoribanks had married ten years ago, it
     might have been she now who would have had to stand trembling with anxiety and eagerness among
     the falling snow, knowing sundry reasons why Mr Cavendish should be disposed to go into
     Parliament more substantial than that of gratifying a young lady, and feeling how much depended
     on her ability to secure support for him. This, as it happened, had fallen to his sister's
     share instead, and Lucilla stood opposite to her looking at her, attentive and polite, and
     unresponsive. If Harry had only not been such a fool ten years ago! for Mrs Woodburn began to
     think now with Aunt Jemima, that Lucilla did not marry because she was too comfortable, and,
     without any of the bother, could have everything her own way.
"It is so cold," said Miss Marjoribanks, "and I do think it is coming on to snow very fast. I
     don't think it is good to stand talking. Do come in to lunch, and then we can have a long chat;
     for I am sure nobody else will venture out to-day."
"I wish I could come," said Mrs Woodburn, "but I have to go down to Mary Centum's, and hear
     all about her last new housemaid, you know. I don't know what servants are made of for my part.
     They will go out in their caps and talk to the young men, you know, in a night that is enough
     to give any one their death," the mimic added, with a feeble exercise of her gift which it was
     sad to see. "But Harry will be sure to come to call the first time he goes out, and you
      will not forget what I have said to you, Lucilla?" and with this Mrs Woodburn took
     her young friend's hand and looked in her face with a pathetic emphasis which it would be
     impossible to describe.
"Oh, no, certainly not," said Miss Marjoribanks, with cheerful certainty; and then they
     kissed each other in the midst of the falling snow. Mrs Woodburn's face was cold, but Lucilla's
     cheek was warm and blooming as only a clear conscience and a sealskin cloak could have made it;
     and then they went their several ways through the wintry solitude. Ah, if Harry had only not
     been such a fool ten years ago! Mrs Woodburn was not an enthusiastic young wife, but knew very
     well that marriage had its drawbacks, and had come to an age at which she could appreciate the
     comfort of having her own way without any of the bother. She gave a furtive glance after
     Lucilla, and could not but acknowledge to herself that it would be very foolish of Miss
     Marjoribanks to marry, and forfeit all her advantages, and take somebody else's anxieties upon
     her shoulders, and never have any money except what she asked from her husband. Mrs Chiley, to
     be sure, who was more experienced than Mrs Woodburn, and might have been her grandmother, took
     a different view of the subject; but this was what the middle-aged married woman felt, who had,
     as may be said, two men to carry on her shoulders, as she went anxiously down Grange Lane to
     conciliate Mrs Centum, wrapping her shawl about her, and feeling the light snow melt beneath
     her feet, and the cold and discomfort go to her heart. She had her husband to keep in good
     humour, and her brother to keep up and keep to the mark, and to do what she could to remedy in
     public the effects of his indolent Continental habits, and carry, if it was possible, the
     election for him—all with the horrid sense upon her mind that if at any time the dinner should
     be a little less cared for than usual, or the children more noisy, Woodburn would go on like a
     savage. Under such circumstances, the poor woman, amid her cares, may be excused if she looked
     back a little wistfully at Lucilla going home all comfortable and independent and
     light-hearted, with no cares, nor anybody to go on at her, in her sealskin coat.
This was how Lucilla commenced that effective but decorous advocacy which did Mr Ashburton so
     much good in Carlingford. She did not pretend to understand about politics, or to care
     particularly about Reform or the Income-tax; but she expressed with quiet solemnity her
     conviction that it was not opinions but a good man that was wanted; that it was not a prime
     minister they were going to elect, and that Mr Ashburton was the man for Carlingford. "By
     George! Lucilla is in the right of it!" Colonel Chiley said; "that was always my opinion;" and
     the people in Grange Lane soon began to echo the Colonel's sentiments, which were so sound and
     so just.
As for Miss Marjoribanks, nobody had any occasion to "go on" about any neglect on her part of
     her household duties. Dr Marjoribanks's dinners were always excellent, and it was now, as ever,
     a privilege to be admitted to his table; and nothing could be more exemplary than the care
     Lucilla took of Aunt Jemima, who had always such bad nights. Even on this snowy afternoon she
     went in from her more important cares, with a complexion freshened by the cold, and coaxed Mrs
     John into eating something, and made her as comfortable as possible at the drawing-room
     fireside.
"Now, tell me all about Tom," Lucilla said, when she had got her work and settled herself
     comfortably for a quiet afternoon—for the snow had come on heavier than ever, and unless it
     might be a sister of charity, or such another sister not of charity, as Lucilla had already
     encountered, nobody was like to stir abroad or to disturb the two ladies in their work and
     their talk. Lucilla had some very interesting worsted-work in hand; and the drawing-room never
     looked more cosy, with somebody to talk to inside, and the wintry world and driving snow
     without. And such an invitation as Miss Marjoribanks had just given lifted Aunt Jemima into a
     paradise of content. She took Lucilla at her word, and told her, as may be supposed,
      all about Tom, including many things which she was quite acquainted with and knew by
     heart; and at the same time there was something implied all through, but never obtrusively set
     forth, which was not displeasing to the auditor. Miss Marjoribanks listened with affectionate
     satisfaction, and asked a great many questions, and supplied a great many reminiscences, and
     entered quite into the spirit of the conversation, and the two spent a very pleasant afternoon
     together,—so pleasant that Mrs John felt quite annoyed at the reflection that it must come to
     an end like everything else that is good, and that she must get herself once more into her
     velvet gown and dine with her brother-in-law. If Providence had only given her the girl instead
     of the Doctor, who would no doubt have got on quite well without any children! but then, to be
     sure, if Lucilla had been hers to start with, she never could have married Tom.
For this was the extravagant hope which had already begun to blossom in his mother's breast.
     To be sure a woman might marry Tom, who was too comfortable at home to think of marrying just
     anybody who might make her an offer. But it was not easy to tell how Lucilla herself felt on
     this subject. Her complexion was so bright with her walk, her sensations so agreeable after
     that warm, cheerful, pleasant afternoon, her position so entirely everything that was to be
     desired, and her mind so nobly conscious of being useful to her kind and country, that, even
     without any additional argument, Miss Marjoribanks had her reward, and was happy. Perhaps a
     touch more exquisite might still come in to round the full proportions of content. But, to tell
     the truth, Lucilla was so well off that it was not necessary to invent any romantic source of
     happiness to account for the light of well-being and satisfaction that shone in her eyes.
</div></body></text></TEI>