<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">
Chapter XXXI
Lucilla waited till twelve o'clock, as she had said, for Mr Cavendish's visit; and so mingled
     are human sentiments, even in the mind of a person of genius, that there is no doubt she was at
     once a little disappointed, and that Mr Cavendish gained largely in her estimation by not
     coming. Her pity began to be mingled by a certain respect, of which, to tell the truth, he was
     not worthy; but then Miss Marjoribanks did not know that it was circumstances, and not
     self-regard, or any sense of dignity, that had kept him back. With the truest consideration, it
     was in the dining-room that Lucilla had placed herself to await his visit; for she had made up
     her mind that he should not be disturbed this time by any untimely morning caller. But
     as she sat at the window and looked out upon the garden, and was tantalised by fifty successive
     ringings of the bell, none of which heralded her expected visitor, a gentler sentiment
     gradually grew in Lucilla's mind. Perhaps it would not be just to call it positively regret;
     but yet she could not help a kind of impression that if the Archdeacon had never come to
     Carlingford, and if Mr Cavendish had never been so weak as to be drawn aside by Barbara Lake,
     and if everything had gone as might have been expected from first appearances—that, on the
     whole, it might have been well. After all, he had a great many good qualities. He had yielded
     to panic for the moment, but (so far as Lucilla knew) he was now girding up his loins to meet
     the emergency in a creditable way; and if, as has been just said, nothing had come in the
     way—if there had been no Archdeacon, no Mrs Mortimer, no Barbara—if Mr Chiltern had died, as
     was to have been expected, and Mr Cavendish been elected for Carlingford—then Lucilla could not
     help a momentary sense that the arrangement altogether might have been a not undesirable one.
     Now, of course, all that was at an end. By dexterous management the crisis might be tided over,
     and the worst avoided; but Lucilla became regretfully conscious that now no fate higher than
     Barbara was possible for the unfortunate man who might once, and with hope, have aspired to
     herself. It was very sad, but there was no help for it. A certain tenderness of compassion
     entered Miss Marjoribanks's bosom as she realised this change. It would be hard if a woman did
     not pity a man thus shut out by hard fate from any possibility of ever becoming the companion
     of her existence—a man who, on the whole, had many capabilities, yet whose highest fortune in
     life could not mount above Barbara Lake!
This thought filled Lucilla's heart with gentle regret. It was sad, but it was inevitable;
     and when Mr Cavendish's note was brought to her, in which he said simply, and very briefly,
     that though not sure whether he understood the meaning of her letter, he should certainly do
     himself the pleasure of accepting as usual her kind invitation, Miss Marjoribanks's regret grew
     more and more profound. Such a man, who had been capable of appreciating herself, to think
     that, having known her, he should decline upon Barbara! The pity was entirely disinterested,
     for nobody knew better than Lucilla that, under the circumstances, no other arrangement was
     possible. He might marry the drawing-master's daughter, but Miss Marjoribanks was too well
     aware of her duty to her friends, and to her position in society, to have given her consent to
     his marriage with anybody's daughter in Grange Lane. But still it was a pity—nobody could say
     that it was not a pity—a man so visibly capable of better things.
Lucilla, however, could not afford to waste her morning in unprofitable regrets. An evening
     so critical and conclusive had to be provided for in many different ways. Among other things,
     she had to invite, or rather command, the presence of a guest whom, to tell the truth, she had
     no particular desire to see. The Archdeacon was only a man when all was said, and might change
     his mind like other men; and to bring Mrs Mortimer to Grange Lane in the evening, looking
     interesting, as, to be sure, she could look by times, after that unpleasant exhibition of Dr
     Marjoribanks's feelings, was naturally a trial to Lucilla. Mr Beverley had drawn back once
     before, and that when Mrs Mortimer was young, and no doubt a great deal more attractive than at
     present; and now that she was a widow, forlorn and faded, it would be no wonder if he were to
     draw back, especially, as Lucilla acknowledged to herself, when he saw the ancient object of
     his affections in her own society, and among all the fresh young faces of Grange Lane: and if
     the Archdeacon should draw back, and leave the field open, and perhaps the Doctor, who ought to
     know better, should step in—when she had got so far, Lucilla rose up and shook out her
     draperies, as if by way of shaking off the disagreeable idea. "At all events I have to do my
     duty," she said to herself. And thus it was with that last and most exquisite refinement of
     well-doing, the thought that she might possibly be going to harm herself in benefiting others,
     that Miss Marjoribanks heroically put on her hat, and issued forth in the dinner-hour of the
     little pupils, to invite her last and most important guest.
This period of suspense had not been by any means a happy or comfortable period for Mrs
     Mortimer. The poor widow was living in a constant expectation of something happening, whereas
     her only true policy was to have made up her mind that nothing would ever happen, and shaped
     herself accordingly to her life. Instead of eating her dinner as she ought to have done at that
     hour of leisure, and fortifying herself for the weary afternoon's work, she was sitting as
     usual at the window when Miss Marjoribanks came to the door. And if it was a tedious business
     looking out of the window when the rain was drenching the four walls of the garden and breaking
     down the flowers, and reducing all the poor little shrubs to abject misery, it could not be
     said to be much more cheerful in the sunshine, when pleasant sounds came in over that
     enclosure—voices and footsteps of people who might be called alive, while this solitary woman
     was buried, and had nothing to do with life. Such a fate may be accepted when people make up
     their minds to it; but when, so far from making up one's mind, one fixes one's thoughts upon
     the life outside, and fancies that every moment the call may come, and one may find one's place
     again in the active world, the tedium grows more and more insupportable. As for Lucilla,
     naturally she could not see any reason why Mrs Mortimer should sit at the window—why she could
     not content herself, and eat her dinner instead.
"There are a great many people in Carlingford who have not nearly such a pleasant lookout,"
     Lucilla said; "for my part, I think it is a very pretty garden. The wistaria has grown quite
     nice, and there is a little of everything," said Miss Marjoribanks; and, so far as that went,
     she was no doubt the best judge, having done it all herself.
"Oh, yes, it is very pretty; and I am sure I am very grateful to Providence for giving me
     such a home," said the widow; but she sighed, poor soul, as she said it: for, to tell the
     truth, though she was not so young as she once was, it takes some people a long time to find
     out that they themselves are growing old, and have done with life. And then outside, in that
     existence which she could hear but could not see, there was one figure which was wonderfully
     interesting to poor Mrs Mortimer; which is a complication which has a remarkable effect on the
     question of content or discontent.
"You ought to take a walk every day," said Miss Marjoribanks, "that is what is the matter
     with you; but, in the meantime, there is something else I want you to do. This is Thursday, you
     know, and I have always some people on Thursday. It is not a party—it is only an Evening—and no
     dress to speak of. Your black silk will look quite nice, and be all that is necessary. Black is
     very becoming to some people," said Lucilla reflectively. She looked at Mrs Mortimer with her
     head a little on one side, and saw in a moment, with the rapid glance of genius, just what she
     wanted. "And some lace for your head," Miss Marjoribanks added. "I don't think you have gone
     off at all, and I am sure you will look very nice. It is at nine o'clock."
"This evening, Lucilla!" said Mrs Mortimer, faintly: "but you know I never go out—I am not
     fit for society. Oh, don't ask me, please! Since poor Edward died——'
"Yes," said Lucilla, "it must have been a great loss, I am sure; though I can't say I mind
     going into a room alone, as some people do; but you know you can avoid that, if you like, by
     coming early. Come at eight, and there will be nobody in the drawing-room, and you can choose
     your own corner. Put it quite back—at the back of your head," said Miss Marjoribanks, with a
     little anxiety. "I could show you how if I had the lace. I do so want you to look nice. Oh,
     never mind the fashion. When one has a style of one's own, it is always twenty times better.
     Put it as you used to wear it before you were married; and then, with that nice black
     silk——"
"Oh, Lucilla, don't ask me," said the widow. "I shall not know how to talk, nor look, nor
     anything; and then I know nobody; and then——"
"My dear, you have always me," said Lucilla, with tender reproach. "I am so sorry I
     can't stop any longer. I leave it quite to your own taste about the lace. And you will find
     people you know, you may be quite sure of that. Remember, not later than nine o'clock; and come
     at eight if you don't like to come into the room by yourself. Good-bye now. I want you to look
     very nice to-night," Miss Marjoribanks added, giving her friend an affectionate kiss; "you
     must, for my sake."
"But, Lucilla——" cried Mrs Mortimer.
It was vain to make any further protest, however, for Lucilla was gone, having, in the first
     place, communicated her requirements to Mary Jane, who was not likely to forget, nor to let her
     mistress be late. "And mind she is nice," said Miss Marjoribanks emphatically, as she
     went out at the door. It was necessary she should be nice; without that the intended
      situation which Lucilla was preparing—the grand finale of her exertions—would fall
     flat, and probably fail of its effect. For this it was necessary that the widow should look not
     only pretty, but interesting, and a little pathetic, and all that a widow should look when
     first dragged back into society. Miss Marjoribanks gave a momentary sigh as she emerged from
     the garden door, and could not but feel conscious that in all this she might be preparing the
     most dread discomfiture and downfall for herself. Even if it passed over as it ought to do, and
     nobody was charmed but the Archdeacon, who was the right person to be charmed, Lucilla felt
     that after this she never could have that entire confidence in her father which she had had up
     to this moment. The incipient sentiment Dr Marjoribanks had exhibited was one that struck at
     the roots of all faith in him as a father; and every person of sensibility will at once
     perceive how painful such a suggestion must have been to the mind of a young woman so entirely
     devoted as was Miss Marjoribanks to the consolation and comfort of her dear papa.
Lucilla was not allowed to spend the rest of this momentous afternoon in maturing her plans,
     as might have been necessary to a lesser intelligence; and when the refreshing moment came at
     which she could have her cup of tea before preparing for the fatigues of the evening, it was
     Mrs Chiley who came to assist at that ceremony. The old lady came in with an important air, and
     gave Lucilla a long, lingering kiss, as old ladies sometimes do when they particularly mean it.
     "My dear, I am not going to stay a moment, but I thought you might have something to tell me,"
     the kind old woman said, arranging herself in her chair with the satisfaction of a listener who
     expects to be confided in. As for Lucilla, who had no clue to Mrs Chiley's special curiosity,
     and who had a good many things on her mind just at that moment which she rather preferred not
     to talk about, she was for once struck with veritable astonishment, and did not know what to
     say.
"Dear Mrs Chiley, what should I have to tell you?" said Miss Marjoribanks. "You know very
     well where I should go the very first moment if anything happened;" and by way of staving off
     more particular questions, she took her old friend a cup of tea.
"Yes, my dear, I hope so," said Mrs Chiley, but at the same time her disappointment was
     evident. "It is very nice, thank you—your tea is always nice, Lucilla—but it was not that I was
     thinking of. I can't understand how it is, I am sure. I saw him to-day with my own eyes, and
     could not help seeing how anxious he was looking! I hope, I do hope, you have not been so cruel
     as to refuse him, Lucilla—and all for something that is not his fault, poor fellow, or that
     could be explained, you may be sure."
Miss Marjoribanks grew more and more surprised as she listened. She put away the kettle
     without filling the teapot, and left her own cup standing untasted, and went and sat down on
     the stool by Mrs Chiley's feet. "Tell me whom I have refused this time, for I don't know
     anything about it," said Lucilla; and then her visitor burst forth.
"It must be all that creature's fault! He told me he was coming here; and to tell the truth,
     I stood and watched him, for you know how interested I am, my dear; and then a little while
     after he met that Barbara. Oh, Lucilla, why were you ever so foolish as to have her
     here? I told you how it would end when you brought those artist people about your house. They
     are all a set of adventurers!" cried Mrs Chiley. "I saw them meet, and I was so disgusted that
     I did not know what I was doing; but he passed her as nicely as possible. Just a civil word,
     you know, and then he was past. Just as I would have done myself; for it is always best not to
     be uncivil to anybody. I could see her standing as if she had been struck with lightning; and
     naturally, Lucilla, I never thought anything else than that he had come here, and that all was
     right between you. Oh, my dear, I hope you are sure you have not refused him," Mrs Chiley said,
     piteously; "anyhow, Lucilla, you need not mind telling me. I may be sorry, but I will
     not blame you, my dear."
"I have not refused anybody," said Lucilla, with a modest innocence that it was a pleasure to
     see; "but, dear Mrs Chiley," she continued, raising her drooping eyelids, "I think you make a
     mistake about Mr Cavendish. My own opinion is that Barbara would make him a very nice wife. Oh,
     please, don't be angry! I don't mean to say, you know, that I think her quite what one would
     call nice—for oneself. But then the gentlemen have such strange ways of thinking. Many
     a girl whom we could not put up with is quite popular with Them," said Miss Marjoribanks, with
     a certain mild wonder at the inexplicable creatures whom she thus condescended to discuss. "I
     suppose they have a different standard, you know; and for my part, I would advise Mr Cavendish
     to marry Barbara. I think it is the best thing he could do."
"Lucilla!" cried Mrs Chiley, almost with a shriek of horror. She thought, as was perhaps
     natural, that there was some pique in what her young companion said; not doing Miss
     Marjoribanks justice—as indeed few people did—for that perfect truthfulness which it was
     Lucilla's luck always to be able to maintain. Mrs Chiley thought it was her young friend's
     maidenly pride and determination not to take up the part of a woman slighted or jilted. "You
     may refuse him, my dear, if your heart is not with him," said the old lady; "but I would not be
     so hard upon him as that, poor fellow. You may say what you please, but I always will think him
     nice, Lucilla. I know I ought to be on the Archdeacon's side," said Mrs Chiley, putting her
     handkerchief to her eyes; "but I am an old woman, and I like my old friends best. Oh, Lucilla,
     it is not kind of you to keep up appearances with me. I wish you would give way a little. It
     would do you good, my darling; and you know I might be both your grandmothers, Lucilla," she
     cried, putting her arm round her favourite. As for Miss Marjoribanks, she gave her old friend a
     close embrace, which was the only thing that even her genius could suggest to do.
"I have always you," said Lucilla, with touching eloquence; and then she freed
     herself a little from Mrs Chiley's arms. "I don't say, perhaps, that everybody will receive
     her; but I mean to make an effort, for my part; and I shall certainly tell Mr Cavendish so if
     he ever speaks of it to me. As for Mr Beverley, he is going to be married too. Did not you
     hear? He told me all about it himself one day," said Miss Marjoribanks; "and I will ask him
     to-night if I may not tell you who the lady is. It is quite a little romance, and I hope we
     shall have two marriages, and it will make it quite gay for the winter. When you know all about
     it," Lucilla added tenderly, by way of breaking the shock, "I am sure you will be pleased."
But instead of being pleased, Mrs Chiley was speechless for the moment. Her fresh old cheeks
     grew ashy with dismay and horror. "The Archdeacon too!" she cried, gasping for breath. "Oh,
     Lucilla, my dear?—and you?" Then the kind old lady held Miss Marjoribanks fast, and sobbed over
     her in the despair of the moment. To think, after all the pains that had been taken, and all
     the hopes and all the speculations, that neither the one nor the other was coming to anything!
     "If it should be that General, after all—and I cannot abide him," sobbed Lucilla's anxious
     friend. But Miss Marjoribanks's genius carried her through this trial, as well as through all
     the others which she had yet encountered on her way.
"Dear Mrs Chiley!" said Lucilla, "it is so good of you to care; but if it had been
      that I was thinking of, I need never have come home at all, you know; and my object
     in life is just what it has always been, to be a comfort to papa."
Upon which Mrs Chiley kissed her young friend once more with lingering meaning. "My dear, I
     don't know what They mean," she said, with indignation; "everybody knows men are great fools
     where women are concerned—but I never knew what idiots they were till now; and you are too good
     for them, my darling!" said Mrs Chiley, with indignant tenderness. Perhaps Miss Marjoribanks
     was in some respects of the same way of thinking. She conducted her sympathetic friend to the
     garden door, when it came to be time for everybody to go and dress, with a certain pathetic
     elevation in her own person, which was not out of accord with Mrs Chiley's virtuous wrath. To
     have Mrs Mortimer and Barbara Lake preferred to her did not wound Lucilla's pride—one can be
     wounded in that way only by one's equals. She thought of it with a certain mild pity and
     charitable contempt. Both these two men had had the chance of having her, and this was
     how they had chosen! And there can be little wonder if Miss Marjoribanks's compassion for them
     was mingled with a little friendly and condescending disdain.
It was, however, an ease to Lucilla's mind that she had let Mrs Chiley know, and was so far
     free to work out her plans without any fear of misconception. And on the whole, her old
     friend's tender indignation was not disagreeable to her. Thus it was, without any interval of
     repose to speak of, that her lofty energies went on unwearied to overrule and guide the crisis
     which was to decide so many people's fate.
</div></body></text></TEI>