<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
Chapter XVIII
But the anticipations of Rose Lake were trifling matters in comparison with the universal
     interest and even excitement which attended the Archdeacon's first appearance in Carlingford.
     What might be called his first public appearance took place at Dr Marjoribanks's table,
     although he had previously dined at the Rectory, and also at Sir John Richmond's, besides that
     there had been somebody to dinner at Colonel Chiley's almost every day; but then there were
     only county people at Sir John's, and Mr Bury's guests naturally counted for very little in
     Grange Lane;—indeed, it was confidently reported that the Rector had invited Mr Tufton of Salem
     Chapel to meet the Archdeacon, and that, but for the Dissenting minister having more sense and
     knowing his place, that unseemly conjunction would have taken place, to the horror of all
     right-thinking people. So that Dr Marjoribanks's was in reality the first house where he had
     any chance of seeing society. It would perhaps be using too strong a word to say that Miss
     Marjoribanks was anxious about the success of her arrangements for this particular evening;
     but, at the same time, it must be admitted that the circumstances were such as to justify a
     little anxiety. Mr Cavendish was gone, who, to do him justice, was always agreeable, and his
     departure disturbed the habitual party; and Mrs Woodburn had lost all her powers, as it seemed,
     and sat at Dr Marjoribanks's left hand, looking just like other people, and evidently not to be
     in the least depended on; and Lucilla was aware that Barbara was not coming, which made, if
     nothing else, a change in the programme. No music, nobody to do the flirting, nor to supply the
     dramatic by-play to which Grange Lane had become accustomed; and a new man to be made use of,
     and to be done honour to, and introduced in society. A young woman of powers inferior to those
     of Miss Marjoribanks would have sunk under such a weight of responsibility, and there was no
     doubt that Lucilla was a little excited. She felt that everything depended upon her courage and
     self-possession. If she but lost her head for a moment and lost command of affairs, everything
     might have been lost; but then fortunately she knew herself and what she could do, and had a
     modest confidence that she would not lose her head; and thus she could still eat her dinner
     with the composure of genius, though it would be wrong to deny that Lucilla was a little
     pale.
And then, as if all these things had not been enough to discourage the lady of the house,
     another discordant element was added by the presence of Mr Bury and his sister, whom it had
     been necessary to ask to meet the Archdeacon. The Rector, though he was very Low-Church, has no
     particular objections to a good dinner—but he made a principle of talking of that important
     daily necessity in a disparaging, or at best in a patronising way, which roused Dr
     Marjoribanks's temper; and sometimes the Doctor would launch a shaft of medical wit at his
     spiritual guide, which Mr Bury had no means of parrying. Nor was this the only danger to which
     the peace of the party was exposed. For the Rector, at the same time, regarded Mr Beverley with
     a certain critical suspiciousness, such as is seldom to be encountered except among clergymen.
     He did not know much about his clerical superior, who had only recently been appointed to his
     archdeaconry; but there was something in his air, his looks, and demeanour, which indicated
     what Mr Bury considered a loose way of thinking. When the Archdeacon made any remark the Rector
     would pause and look up from his plate to listen to it, with his fork suspended in the air the
     while—and then he would exchange glances with his sister, who was on the other side of the
     table. All this, it may be supposed, was a little discomposing for Lucilla, who had the
     responsibility of everything, and who could now look for no assistance among the ordinary
     members of her father's party, who were, as a general rule, much more occupied with the dinner
     than with anything else that was going on. In such a state of affairs, it was a great relief to
     Miss Marjoribanks when the Archdeacon, who occupied the post of honour by her side, made a
     lively new beginning in the conversation. It had not to call flagged before—not
     precisely flagged—but still there were indications of approaching exhaustion, such as can
     always be perceived half a mile off by anybody who has any experience in society, and when the
     Archdeacon took up the ball with all the liveliness of a man who is interested in a special
     question, it will not be difficult to any lady who has ever been in such circumstances to
     realise to herself Miss Marjoribanks's sense of gratitude and relief.
"By the bye," said Mr Beverley, "I meant to ask if any one knew a man whom I am sure I caught
     a glimpse of the first day I was in Carlingford. Perhaps it was in the morning after I arrived,
     to be precise. I can't recollect exactly. If he lives about here, he ought to be known, for he
     is a clever amusing sort of fellow. I don't know if Carlingford is more blessed than other
     country towns with people of that complexion," said the Archdeacon, turning to Lucilla with a
     smile. His smile, as he paused and turned to Miss Marjoribanks, was such as conveys a kind of
     challenge when it is addressed to a young lady, and meant to lead to a lively little combat by
     the way; and yet there was something of keen personal anxiety and animosity in it. As for
     Lucilla, she was conscious of an immediate thrill of curiosity, but still it was curiosity
     unmingled with any excitement, and she had no particular objection to respond.
"Everybody is nice in Carlingford," said Miss Marjoribanks; "some people are always finding
     fault with their neighbours, but I always get on so well with everybody—I suppose it is my
     luck." This was not precisely an answer to the Archdeacon's question; and there was somebody at
     the table who could have fallen upon Lucilla and beaten her for putting off the revelation
     which trembled on the lips of Mr Beverley, and yet would have given anything in the world to
     silence the Archdeacon, and felt capable of rushing at him like a fury and tearing his tongue
     out, or suffocating him, to stop the next words that he was going to say. But nobody knew
     anything about this, or could see into the one heart that had begun to flutter and throb with
     alarm; for outwardly, all the well-dressed, cheerful people at Dr Marjoribanks's table sat
     eating their dinner, one precisely like another, as if there had been no such thing as mystery
     or terror in the world.
"You must not expect me to believe in the perfection of human society," said the Archdeacon,
     going on in the same strain; "I would much rather pin my faith to the amiable dispositions of
     one young lady who always finds her neighbours agreeable—and I hope she makes no exception to
     the rule," said the Broad-Churchman in a parenthesis, with a smile and a bow—and then he raised
     his voice a little: "The man I speak of is really a very amusing fellow, and very well got up,
     and calculated to impose upon ordinary observers. It is quite a curious story; he was a son of
     a trainer or something of that sort about Newmarket. Old Lord Monmouth took an extraordinary
     fancy to him, and had him constantly about his place—at one time, indeed, he half brought him
     up along with his grandson, you know. He always was a handsome fellow, and picked up a little
     polish; and really, for people not quite used to the real thing, was as nearly like a
     gentleman——"
"Come, now, I don't put any faith in that," said Mr Woodburn. "I don't pretend to be much of
     a one for fine company myself, but I know a gentleman when I see him; a snob always overdoes
     it, you know——"
"I never said this man was a snob," said the Archdeacon, with a refined expression of disgust
     at the interruption flitting over his features; "on the contrary, if he had only been honest,
     he would have been really a very nice fellow——"
"My dear sir," said Mr Bury, "excuse me for breaking in—perhaps I am old-fashioned, but don't
     you think it's a pity to treat the question of honesty so lightly? A dishonest person has a
     precious soul to be saved, and may be a most deeply interesting character; but to speak of him
     as a very nice fellow, is—pardon me—I think it's a pity; especially in mixed society, where it
     is so important for a clergyman to be guarded in his expressions," said the Rector. When Mr
     Bury began to speak, everybody else at table ceased talking, and gave serious attention to what
     was going on, for the prospect of a passage of arms between the two clergymen was an
     opportunity too captivating to be lost.
"I hope Mr Bury's dishonest friends will pardon me," said the Archdeacon; "I mean no harm to
     their superior claims. Does anybody know the man here, I wonder? He had changed his name when I
     knew him, and there is no telling what he may call himself now. I assure you he was a very
     good-looking fellow—dark, good features, nearly six feet high——"
"Oh, please don't say any more," said Miss Marjoribanks, and she could not quite have
     explained why she interrupted these personal details; "if you tell me what he is like, I shall
     fancy everybody I meet is him; Mr Centum is dark, and has good features, and is nearly six feet
     high. Never mind what he is like; you gentlemen can never describe anybody—you always keep to
      generals; tell us what he has done."
Somebody drew a long breath at the table when the Archdeacon obeyed Miss Marjoribanks's
     injunction. More than one person caught the sound, but even Lucilla's keen eyes could not make
     out beyond controversy from whom it proceeded. To be sure, Lucilla's mind was in a most curious
     state of tumult and confusion. She was not one of the people who take a long time to form their
     conclusions; but the natural conclusion to which she felt inclined to jump in this case was one
     so monstrous and incredible that Miss Marjoribanks felt her only safeguard in the whirl of
     possibilities was to reject it altogether, and make up her mind that it was impossible; and
     then all the correspondences and apparent corroborations began to dance and whirl about her in
     a bewildering ring till her own brain seemed to spin with them. She was as much afraid lest the
     Archdeacon by some chance should fall upon a really individual feature which the world in
     general could identify, as if she had had any real concern in the matter. But then,
     fortunately, there was not much chance of that; for it was one of Lucilla's principles that men
     never can describe each other. She listened, however, with such a curious commotion in her
     mind, that she did not quite make out what he was saying, and only pieced it up in little bits
     from memory afterwards. Not that it was a very dreadful story. It was not a narrative of
     robbery or murder, or anything very alarming; but if it could by any possibility turn out that
     the man of whom Mr Beverley was speaking had ever been received in society in Carlingford, then
     it would be a dreadful blow to the community, and destroy public confidence for ever in the
     social leaders. This was what Lucilla was thinking in her sudden turmoil of amazement and
     apprehension. And all this time there was another person at table who knew all about it twenty
     times better than Lucilla, and knew what was coming, and had a still more intense terror lest
     some personal detail might drop from the Archdeacon's lips which the public in general would
     recognise. Mr Beverley went on with his story with a curious sort of personal keenness in his
     way of telling it, but never dreaming for a moment that anybody that heard him was disturbed or
     excited by it. "He has a mark on his face," the Archdeacon said—but here Miss Marjoribanks gave
     a little cry, and held up both her hands in dismay.
"Don't tell us what marks he has on his face," said Lucilla. "I know that I shall think every
     man who is dark, and has good features, and is six feet, must be him. I wonder if it could be
     my cousin Tom; he has a little mark on his face—and it would be just like his dreadful
     luck, poor fellow. Would it be right to give up one's own cousin if it should turn out to be
     Tom?" said Miss Marjoribanks. The people who were sitting at her end of the table laughed, but
     there was no laughing in Lucilla's mind. And this fright and panic were poor preparatives for
     the evening, which had to be got through creditably with so few resources, and with such a
     total reversal of the ordinary programme. Miss Marjoribanks was still tingling with curiosity
     and alarm when she rose from the table. If it should really come to pass that an adventurer had
     been received into the best society of Carlingford, and that the best judges had not been able
     to discriminate between the false and true, how could any one expect that Grange Lane would
     continue to confide its most important arrangements to such incompetent hands?
Such was the dreadful question that occupied all Lucilla's thoughts. So far as the adventurer
     himself was concerned, no doubt he deserved anything that might come upon him; but the judgment
     which might overtake the careless shepherds who had admitted the wolf into the fold was much
     more in Miss Marjoribanks's mind than any question of abstract justice. So that it was not
     entirely with a philanthropical intention that she stopped Mr Beverley and put an end to his
     dangerous details. Now she came to think of it, she began to remember that nobody of her
      acquaintance had any mark on his face; but still it was best not to inquire too closely.
     It was thus with a preoccupied mind that she went up to the drawing-room, feeling less in
     spirits for her work than on any previous occasion. It was the first of the unlucky nights,
     which every woman of Lucilla's large and public-spirited views must calculate upon as
     inevitable now and then. There was no moon, and the Richmonds naturally were absent, and so
     were the Miss Browns, who were staying there on a visit—for it was after the engagement between
      Lydia[1] and John; and Mr Cavendish was away (though perhaps
     under the circumstances that was no disadvantage); and Mrs Woodburn was silenced; and even
     Barbara Lake had failed her patroness.
"You are not in spirits to-night, Lucilla, my poor dear," said Mrs Chiley, as they went
     upstairs; and the kind old lady cast a fierce glance at Mrs Woodburn, who was going before them
     with Miss Bury, as if it could be her fault.
"Dear Mrs Chiley," said Miss Marjoribanks, "I am in perfect spirits; it is only the
     responsibility, you know. Poor Barbara is ill, and we can't have any music, and what if people
     should be bored? When one has real friends to stand by one it is different," said Lucilla, with
     an intonation that was not intended for Mrs Chiley, "and I always stand by my
     friends."
This was the spirit with which Miss Marjoribanks went upstairs. It was a sentiment which
     pervaded her whole life. Even when she had occasion to be sufficiently displeased with the
     people who surrounded her, and to feel that her own loyal friendship met with no adequate
     response, this was the unfailing inspiration of her heart. She did not rush into opposition
     because any misguided man or woman failed for the moment to appreciate her efforts, and return,
     as they ought to have been glad to do, her sentiments of kindness. On the contrary, nothing
     could have been more long-suffering and tolerant and benign than the feelings with which
     Lucilla regarded the unfortunate persons who mistook or did not appreciate her. She knew
     herself, which, however superior they might be, was something they could not know; and she
     could afford to be sorry (for their own sakes) for their want of discrimination. If there
     should happen to be somebody in Grange Lane who had gained admittance into society under false
     pretences, not even such an offence, grievous as it was, could induce Miss Marjoribanks to
     condemn the culprit unheard. It was at once her settled resolution, and a peculiarity of her
     character, to stand by her friends; and whatever might be the thoughts in her own mind, her
     immediate decision was to shut her ears to every indication of the culprit's personality, and
     to be blind to every suggestion that could identify him. People who like to discover the alloy
     which blends with all human motives, may suppose that Lucilla felt her own credit as the leader
     of society at stake, and would not admit that she had been duped. But this had in reality but a
     very small share in the matter. Her instinct, even when reason suggested that she should be
     doubtful of them, was always to side with her own friends; and though there might be persons
     included in that sacred number who were scarcely worthy of the character, yet Lucilla, like
     every lofty character, could act but according to her own nature, and could not forsake any one
     whom she supposed to be thus mysteriously and darkly assailed.
And she had her reward. There are virtues in this world which go without any recompense, but
     there are other virtues upon which a prompt guerdon is bestowed; and Lucilla possessed this
     happier development. Whether it was that little speech of hers which touched the mimic's heart,
     or whether the effect was produced by some other secret influence, it is certain that this was
     the night on which Mrs Woodburn's talent came to what may be called a sort of apotheosis. She
     shook off her languor as by a sudden inspiration, and gave such a sketch of the Archdeacon as
     up to this day is remembered more clearly in Carlingford than the man himself. She took him off
     to his very face, and he never found it out, though everybody else did, and the house shook
     with restrained laughter. And as if this was not enough, Rose Lake had come with her portfolio,
     with some sketches of her brother's (who afterwards became so celebrated) in it, which
     electrified all the people who were fond of art; and by the side of the young Preraphaelite was
     Barbara, who had come "to spite Lucilla," and who remained unwittingly to grace her triumph.
     She stood by herself, all wan and crumpled, all the night, showing her disappointment and rage
     and jilted state so clearly in her face, as to afford to all the mammas in her neighbourhood a
     most startling example of the danger of showing your feelings, with which to point a moral to
     the other young people about. She had come because Rose was coming, and she would not be
     eclipsed by her younger sister. But nobody took any notice of Barbara on this miserable
     evening; nobody asked her to sing, or offered her a seat, or even spoke to her, except Lucilla,
     who in her magnanimity found time to say a word as she passed. She was carelessly dressed, and
     her hair was hastily arranged, and her eyes were red. She had no desire to look as if she had
     not been jilted, and had no proper pride, as Rose said; and Mrs Chiley, who was Lucilla's
     partisan and champion, and who thought poor Barbara deserved it all, seized the opportunity,
     and delivered a little lecture on the subject to the first group of girls who came in her
     way.
"A disappointment may happen to any one," said Mrs Chiley; "and so long as they had done
     nothing unbecoming, nobody could blame them; but, my dears, whatever you do, don't show it like
     that! It makes me ashamed of my sex. And only look at Lucilla!" said the old lady. Lucilla had
     the best of it now. Instead of a failure, such as for a moment seemed likely, she had a
     triumphant success. She, and she only, said a word of kindness to her formerly triumphant
     rival. She drove her chariot over Barbara, and drew an advantage even from her sullen looks and
     red eyes. And the only thing that dissatisfied Mrs Chiley in the entire course of the evening
     was the trustful confidence with which Miss Marjoribanks left the Archdeacon, the (possible)
     new candidate for her favour, beside the Lakes and their portfolio of drawings. In this, as in
     all other things, Lucilla could not but follow the dictates of her magnanimous nature. And even
     her own prospects, as her old friend lamented, were as nothing to her in comparison with the
     good of society. Experience ought to have taught her better; but then experience rarely does
     that amount of practical good which is generally attributed to it in the world. Lucilla gave
     little Rose the fullest opportunity of showing her drawings to the Archdeacon and awakening his
     curiosity, and even securing his affections, as the jealous observer thought; and everybody
     knows how little is necessary, if a young woman likes to exert herself, to lead a poor man to
     his undoing; and Mr Beverley, though an archdeacon, was most probably, in this respect at
     least, no wiser than other men. This was the painful aspect of the case which Mrs Chiley
     discussed with her husband when they got home.
"He is not like what clergymen were in our day," said the old lady, "but still he is very
     nice, and has a nice position, and it would just suit Lucilla; but to think of her going and
     leaving him with these Lake girls, notwithstanding the lesson she has had! and I have no doubt
     the little one is just as designing and nasty as the other. If it should come to anything, she
     has only herself to blame," said Mrs Chiley. As for the Colonel, he took it more calmly, as a
     gentleman might be expected to do.
"You may trust a parson for that," said the old soldier. "He knows what he is about. You will
     never find him make such an ass of himself as young Cavendish did." But this only made Mrs
     Chiley sigh the more.
"Poor Mr Cavendish!" said the old lady. "I will never blame him, poor fellow. It was all that
     deceitful thing laying her snares for him. For my part I never like to have anything to do with
     those artist kind of people—they are all adventurers," said the Colonel's wife; and she went to
     bed with this unchristian persuasion in her mind.
While every one else regarded the matter with, to some extent, a personal bias, the only
     person who looked at it abstractly, and contemplated not the accidents of an evening, but the
     work itself, which was progressing in the face of all kinds of social difficulties, was the
     master-mind which first conceived the grand design of turning the chaotic elements of society
     in Carlingford into one grand unity. Lucilla was not blind to the dangers that surrounded her,
     nor indifferent to the partial disappointment she had undergone; but she saw that, in spite of
     all, her great work was making progress. And when we announce that Miss Marjoribanks herself
     was satisfied, there remains little more to say.
As for the Archdeacon, he, as was natural, knew nothing about the matter. He said again, with
     the natural obtuseness which is so general among the gentlemen, that it had been a very
     pleasant party. "She has a fine clear candid nature," said Mr Beverley, which certainly was
     better than pronouncing solemnly that she was a good woman, which was what he said of Mrs
     Chiley and Lady Richmond, in the lump, as it were, without considering how unlike they were to
     each other. That was all he, being only a man, knew about it. But though Lucilla was satisfied
     with the events of the evening, it would be vain to deny that there were perturbations in her
     mind as she laid her head upon her maiden pillow. She said to herself again with profounder
     fervour, that fortunately her affections had not been engaged; but there were more things than
     affections to be taken into consideration. Could it be possible that mystery, and perhaps
     imposture, of one kind or another, had crossed the sacred threshold of Grange Lane; and that
     people might find out and cast in Lucilla's face the dreadful discovery that a man had been
     received in her house who was not what he appeared to be? When such an idea crossed
     her mind, Miss Marjoribanks shivered under her satin quilt. Of course she could not change the
     nature of the fact one way or another; but, at least, it was her duty to act with great
     circumspection, so that if possible it might not be found out—for Lucilla appreciated fully the
     difference that exists between wrong and discovery. If any man was imposing upon his neighbours
     and telling lies about himself, it was his own fault; but if a leader of society were to betray
     the fact of having received and petted such a person, then the responsibility was on
      her shoulders. And softer thoughts mingled with these prudential considerations—that
     sweet yet stern resolution to stand by her friends which Miss Marjoribanks had this evening
     expressed, and that sense of pity for everybody who is unfortunate which asserts itself even in
     the strongest of female intelligences. On the whole, it was clear that prudence was the great
     thing required, and a determination not to give too hasty heed to anything, nor to put herself
     in the wrong by any alarmist policy. Fortunately the respectability of Dr Marjoribanks's house
     was enough to cover its guests with a shining buckler. Thus Lucilla calmed down her own
     apprehensions, and succeeded in convincing herself that if the impostor whom the Archdeacon had
     seen had been really received in Grange Lane, it was so much the worse for the impostor; but
     that, in the meantime, in the lack of evidence it was much the best thing to take no notice. If
     there was any one else in Carlingford who regarded that past danger with a livelier horror and
     a more distinct fear, certainly Miss Marjoribanks had no way of knowing of it; and nobody had
     been remarked as being in a despondent condition, or, indeed, in anything but the highest
     spirits, in the course of this Thursday, except the ungrateful creature who had begun all the
     mischief; and tolerant as Lucilla was, it would have been going beyond the limits of nature to
     have expected that she could have been profoundly sorry for Barbara Lake.
At the same time, poor Barbara, though she was not an elevated character, had gone home in a
     very sad state of mind. She had taken courage to ask Mrs Woodburn about her brother, and Mrs
     Woodburn had made the very briefest and rudest response to her question, and had "taken off"
     her woe-begone looks almost to her very face. And no one had shown the least sympathy for the
     forsaken one. She had not even been called from her solitude to sing, which might have been
     something, and it was Rose, as she said to herself, who had attracted all the attention; for,
     like most selfish people, Barbara, though keenly aware of her own wrongs, had no eyes to
     perceive that Rose, who had a proud little spirit, was anything but satisfied with the
     evening's entertainment, to which she had herself so largely contributed. "I feel as if I
     should never see him more," Barbara said, quite subdued and broken down, with a burst of tears,
     as the two went home; and poor little Rose, who was soft-hearted, forgot all her disapprobation
     in sympathy. "Never mind them, dear; they have no feeling. We must cling together all the
     closer, and try to be everything to each other," Rose said, with eyes which were full, but
     which would not shed any tears. What was passing through her own mind was, that it was not for
     herself, but for her portfolio and the talk that arose over it, that Lucilla had asked her;
     but, at the same time, she said to herself, that all that was nothing in comparison to the
     wound of the heart under which Barbara was suffering. "Dear, never mind, we will be everything
     to each other," said poor little romantic Rose; and the elder sister, even in the depths of her
     dejection, could have given her a good shake for uttering such an absurd sentiment; for a great
     deal of good it would do to be everything to each other—as if that could ever replace the
     orange blossoms and the wedding tour, and the carriage and handsome house, which were included
     in the name of Cavendish! "And he was such a dear!" she said to herself in her own mind, and
     wept, and made her eyes redder and redder. If Mr Cavendish had known all that was going on in
     Carlingford that night, the chances are that he would have been most flattered by those tears
     which Barbara shed for him under the lamps in Grove Street; but then it is to be hoped he would
     not have been insensible either to the just reticence and self-restraint which, mingling with
     Miss Marjoribanks's suspicions, prevented her, as she herself said, even in the deepest
     seclusion of her own thoughts, from naming any name.
</div></body></text></TEI>