<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Felix Holt, the Radical</title><author>Eliot, George [pseud.] (1819-1880)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">
CHAPTER XXX.

His nature is too noble for the world: 
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, 
Or Jove for his power to thunder. His heart's his mouth: 
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent; 
And, being angry, doth forget that ever 
He heard the name of death---
Coriolanus.
Christian and Johnson did meet, however, by means that were quite incalculable. The
      incident which brought them into communication was due to Felix Holt, who of all men in the
      world had the least affinity either for the industrious or the idle parasite.
Mr Lyon had urged Felix to go to Duffield on the 15th of December, to witness the nomination
      of the candidates for North Loamshire. The minister wished to hear what took place; and the
      pleasure of gratifying him helped to outweigh some opposing reasons.
"I shall get into a rage of something or other," Felix had said. "I've told you one of my
      weak
       points. Where I have any particular business, I must incur the risks my nature
      brings. But I've no particular business at Duffield. However, I'll make a holiday and go. By
      dint of seeing folly, I shall get lessons in patience."
The weak point to which Felix referred was his liability to be carried completely out of his
      own mastery by indignant anger. His strong health, his renunciation of selfish claims, his
      habitual pre-occupation with large thoughts and with purposes independent of everyday
      casualities, secured him a fine and even temper, free from moodiness or irritability. He was
      full of long-suffering towards his unwise mother, who "pressed him daily with her words and
      urged him, so that his soul was vexed;" he had chosen to fill his days in a way that required
      the utmost exertion of patience, that required those little rill-like out-flowings of goodness
      which in minds of great energy must be fed from deep sources of thought and passionate
      devotedness. In this way his energies served to make him gentle; and now, in this twenty-sixth
      year of his life, they had ceased to make him angry, except in the presence of something that
      roused his deep indignation. When once exasperated, the passionateness of his nature threw off
      the yoke of a long-trained consciousness
       in which thought and emotion had been more and more completely mingled, and
      concentrated itself in a rage as ungovernable as that of boyhood. He was thoroughly aware of
      the liability, and knew that in such circumstances he could not answer for himself. Sensitive
      people with feeble frames have often the same sort of fury within them; but they are
      themselves shattered, and shatter nothing. Felix had a terrible arm: he knew that he was
      dangerous; and he avoided the conditions that might cause him exasperation, as he would have
      avoided intoxicating drinks if he had been in danger of intemperance.
The nomination-day was a great epoch of successful trickery, or, to speak in a more
      parliamentary manner, of war-stratagem, on the part of skilful agents. And Mr Johnson had his
      share of inward chuckling and self-approval, as one who might justly expect increasing renown,
      and be some day in as general request as the great Putty himself. To have the pleasure and the
      praise of electioneering ingenuity, and also to get paid for it, without too much anxiety
      whether the ingenuity will achieve its ultimate end, perhaps gives to some select persons a
      sort of satisfaction in their superiority to their more agitated fellow-men that is worthy to
      be
       classed with those generous enjoyments of having the truth chiefly to yourself,
      and of seeing others in danger of drowning while you are high and dry, which seem to have been
      regarded as unmixed privileges by Lucretius and Lord Bacon.
One of Mr Johnson's great successes was this. Spratt, the hated manager of the Sproxton
      Colliery, in careless confidence that the colliers and other labourers under him would follow
      his orders, had provided carts to carry some loads of voteless enthusiasm to Duffield on
      behalf of Garstin; enthusiasm which, being already paid for by the recognised benefit of
      Garstin's existence as a capitalist with a share in the Sproxton mines, was not to cost much
      in the form of treating. A capitalist was held worthy of pious honour as the cause why working
      men existed. But Mr Spratt did not sufficiently consider that a cause which has to be proved
      by argument or testimony is not an object of passionate devotion to colliers: a visible cause
      of beer acts of them much more strongly. And even if there had been any love of the far-off
      Garstin, hatred of the too-immediate Spratt would have been the stronger motive. Hence
      Johnson's calculations, made long ago with Chubb, the remarkable publican, had been well
      founded, and there had been diligent care
       to supply treating at Duffield in the name of Transome. After the election was
      over, it was not improbable that there would be much friendly joking between Putty and Johnson
      as to the success of this trick against Putty's employer, and Johnson would be conscious of
      rising in the opinion of his celebrated senior.
For the show of hands and the cheering, the hustling and the pelting, the roaring and the
      hissing, the hard hits with small missiles, and the soft hits with small jokes, were strong
      enough on the side of Transome to balance the similar "demonstrations" for Garstin, even with
      the Debarry interest in his favour. And the inconvenient presence of Spratt was early got rid
      of by a dexterously managed accident, which sent him bruised and limping from the scene of
      action. Mr Chubb had never before felt so thoroughly that the occasion was up to a level with
      his talents, while the clear daylight in which his virtue would appear when at the election he
      voted, as his duty to himself bound him, for Garstin only, gave him thorough repose of
      conscience.
Felix Holt was the only person looking on at the senseless exhibitions of this
      nomination-day, who knew from the beginning the history of the trick with the Sproxton men. He
      had been aware all
       along that the treating at Chubb's had been continued, and that so far Harold
      Transome's promise had produced no good fruits; and what he was observing to-day, as he
      watched the uproarious crowd, convinced him that the whole scheme would be carried out just as
      if he had never spoken about it. He could be fair enough to Transome to allow that he might
      have wished, and yet have been unable, with his notions of success, to keep his promise; and
      his bitterness towards the candidate only took the form of contemptuous pity; for Felix was
      not sparing in his contempt for men who put their inward honour in pawn by seeking the prizes
      of the world. His scorn fell too readily on the fortunate. But when he saw Johnson passing to
      and fro, and speaking to Jermyn on the hustings, he felt himself getting angry, and jumped off
      the wheel of the stationary cart on which he was mounted, that he might no longer be in sight
      of this man, whose vitiating cant had made his blood hot and his fingers tingle on the first
      day of encountering him at Sproxton. It was a little too exasperating to look at this
      pink-faced rotund specimen of prosperity, to witness the power for evil that lay in his vulgar
      cant, backed by another man's money, and to know that such stupid iniquity
       flourished the flags of Reform, and Liberalism, and justice to the needy. While
      the roaring and the scuffling were still going on, Felix, with his thick stick in his hand,
      made his way through the crowd, and walked on through the Duffield streets till he came out on
      a grassy suburb, where the houses surrounded a small common. Here he walked about in the
      breezy air, and ate his bread and apples, telling himself that this angry haste of his about
      evils that could only be remedied slowly, could be nothing else than obstructive, and might
      some day—he saw it so clearly that the thought seemed like a presentiment—be obstructive of
      his own work.
"Not to waste energy, to apply force where it would tell, to do small work close at hand,
      not waiting for speculative chances of heroism, but preparing for them"—these were the rules
      he had been constantly urging on himself. But what could be a greater waste than to beat a
      scoundrel who had law and opodeldoc at command? After this meditation, Felix felt cool and
      wise enough to return into the town, not, however, intending to deny himself the satisfaction
      of a few pungent words wherever there was place for them. Blows are sarcasms turned stupid:
      wit is a form of force that leaves the limbs at rest.

Anything that could be called a crowd was no longer to be seen. The show of hands having
      been pronounced to be in favour of Debarry and Transome, and a poll having been demanded for
      Garstin, the business of the day might be considered at an end. But in the street where the
      hustings were erected, and where the great hotels stood, there were many groups, as well as
      strollers and steady walkers to and fro. Men in superior greatcoats and well-brushed hats were
      awaiting with more or less impatience an important dinner, either at the Crown, which was
      Debarry's house, or at the Three Cranes, which was Garstin's, or at the Fox and Hounds, which
      was Transome's. Knots of sober retailers, who had already dined, were to be seen at some
      shop-doors; men in very shabby coats and miscellaneous head-coverings, inhabitants of Duffield
      and not county voters, were lounging about in dull silence, or listening, some to a grimy man
      in a flannel shirt, hatless and with turbid red hair, who was insisting on political points
      with much more ease than had seemed to belong to the gentlemen speakers on the hustings, and
      others to a Scotch vendor of articles useful to sell, whose unfamiliar accent seemed to have a
      guarantee of truth in it wanting as an association
       with everyday English. Some rough-looking pipe-smokers, or distinguished
      cigar-smokers, chose to walk up and down in isolation and silence. But the majority of those
      who had shówn a burning interest in the nomination had disappeared, and cockades no longer
      studded a close-pressed crowd, like, and also very unlike, meadow flowers among the grass. The
      street pavement was strangely painted with fragments of perishable missiles ground flat under
      heavy feet: but the workers were resting from their toil, and the buzz and tread and the
      fitfully discernible voices seemed like stillness to Felix after the roar with which the wide
      space had been filled when he left it.
The group round the speaker in the flannel shirt stood at the corner of a side-street, and
      the speaker himself was elevated by the head and shoulders above his hearers, not because he
      was tall, but because he stood on a projecting stone. At the opposite corner of the turning
      was the great inn of the Fox and Hounds, and this was the ultra-Liberal quarter of the High
      Street. Felix was at once attracted by this group; he liked the look of the speaker, whose
      bare arms were powerfully muscular, though he had the pallid complexion of a man who lives
      chiefly amidst the heat of furnaces. He was leaning
       against the dark stone building behind him with folded arms, the grimy paleness
      of his shirt and skin standing out in high relief against the dark stone building behind him.
      He lifted up one fore-finger, and marked his emphasis with it as he spoke. His voice was high
      and not strong, but Felix recognised the fluency and the method of a habitual preacher or
      lecturer.
"It's the fallacy of all monopolists," he was saying. "We know what monopolists are: men who
      want to keep a trade all to themselves, under the pretence that they'll furnish the public
      with a better article. We know what that comes to: in some countries a poor man can't afford
      to buy a spoonful of salt, and yet there's salt enough in the world to pickle every living
      thing in it. That's the sort of benefit monopolists do to mankind. And these are the man who
      tell us we're to let politics alone; they'll govern us better without our knowing anything
      about it. We must mind our business; we are ignorant; we've no time to study great questions.
      But I tell them this: the greatest question in the world is, how to give every man a man's
      share in what goes on in life—"
"Hear, hear!" said Felix, in his sonorous voice, which seemed to give a new impressiveness
      to what the speaker had said. Every one looked at him:
       the well-washed face and its educated expression along with a dress more
      careless than that of most well-to-do workmen on a holiday, made his appearance strangely
      arresting.
"Not a pig's share," the speaker went on, "not a horse's share, not the share of a machine
      fed with oil only to make it work and nothing else. It isn't a man's share just to mind your
      pin-making, or your glass-blowing, and higgle about your own wages, and bring up your family
      to be ignorant sons of ignorant fathers, and no better prospect; that's a slave's share; we
      want a freeman's share, and that is to think and speak and act about what concerns us all, and
      see whether these fine gentlemen who undertake to govern us are doing the best they can for
      us. They've got the knowledge, say they. Very well, we've got the wants. There's many a one
      would be idle if hunger didn't pinch him; but the stomach sets us to work. There's a fable
      told where the nobles are the belly and the people the members. But I make, another sort of
      fable. I say, we are the belly that feels the pinches, and we'll set these aristocrats, these
      great people who call themselves our brains, to work at some way of satisfying us a bit
      better. The aristocrats are pretty sure to try and govern for their own
       benefit; but how are we to be sure they'll try and govern for ours? They must be
      looked after, I think, like other workmen. We must have what we call inspectors, to see
      whether the work's well done for us. We want to send our inspectors to Parliament. Well, they
      say—you've got the Reform Bill; what more can you want? Send your inspectors. But I say, the
      Reform Bill is a trick—it's nothing but swearing-in special constables to keep the aristocrats
      safe in their monopoly; it's bribing some of the people with votes to make them hold their
      tongues about giving votes to the rest. I say, if a man doesn't beg or steal, but works for
      his bread, the poorer and the more miserable he is, the more he'd need have a vote to send an
      inspector to Parliament—else the man who is worst off is likely to be forgotten; and I say,
      he's the man who ought to be first remembered. Else what does their religion mean? Why do they
      build churches and endow them that their sons may get paid well for preaching a Saviour, and
      making themselves as little like Him as can be? If I want to believe in Jesus Christ, I must
      shut my eyes for fear I should see a parson. And what's a bishop? A bishop's a parson dressed
      up, who sits in the House of Lords to help and throw out Reform Bills. And because it's hard
       to get anything in the shape of a man to dress himself up like that, and do such
      work, they give him a palace for it, and plenty of thousands a-year. And then they cry
      out—'The Church is in danger,'—'the poor man's Church.' And why is it the poor man's Church?
      Because he can have a seat for nothing. I think it is for nothing; for it would be
      hard to tell what he gets by it. If the poor man had a vote in the matter, I think he'd choose
      a different sort of a Church to what that is. But do you think the aristocrats will ever alter
      it, if the belly doesn't pinch them? Not they. It's part of their monopoly. They'll supply us
      with our religion like everything else, and get a profit on it. They'll give us plenty of
      heaven. We may have land there . That's the sort of religion they like—a religion
      that gives us working men heaven, and nothing else. But we'll offer to change with 'em. We'll
      give them back some of their heaven, and take it out in something for us and our children in
      this world. They don't seem to care so much about heaven themselves till they feel the gout
      very bad; but you won't get them to give up anything else, if you don't pinch 'em for it. And
      to pinch them enough, we must get the suffrage, we must get votes, that we may send the men to
      Parliament who will do our
       work for us; and we must have Parliament dissolved every year, that we may
      change our man if he doesn't do what we want him to do; and we must have the country divided
      so that the little kings of the counties can't do as they like, but must be shaken up in one
      bag with us. I say, if we working men are ever to get a man's share, we must have universal
      suffrage, and annual Parliaments, and the vote by ballot, and electoral districts."
"No!—something else before all that," said Felix, again startling the audience into looking
      at him. But the speaker glanced coldly at him and went on.
"That's what Sir Francis Burdett went in for fifteen years ago; and it's the right thing for
      us, if it was Tomfool who went in for it. You must lay hold of such handles as you can. I
      don't believe much in Liberal aristocrats; but if there's any fine carved gold-headed stick of
      an aristocrat will make a broomstick of himself, I'll lose no time but I'll sweep with him.
      And that's what I think about Transome. And if any of you have acquaintance among county
      voters, give 'em a hint that you wish 'em to vote for Transome."
At the last word, the speaker stepped down from his slight eminence, and walked away
      rapidly, like a man whose leisure was exhausted, and who must
       go about his business. But he had left an appetite in his audience for further
      oratory, and one of them seemed to express a general sentiment as he turned immediately to
      Felix, and said, "Come, sir, what do you say?"
Felix did at once what he would very likely have done without being asked—he stepped on to
      the stone, and took off his cap by an instinctive prompting that always led him to speak
      uncovered. The effect of his figure in relief against the stone background was unlike that of
      the previous speaker. He was considerably taller, his head and neck were more massive, and the
      expression of his mouth and eyes was something very different from the mere acuteness and
      rather hard-lipped antagonism of the trades-union man. Felix Holt's face had the look of
      habitual meditative abstraction from objects of mere personal vanity or desire, which is the
      peculiar stamp of culture, and makes a very roughly-cut face worthy to be called "the human
      face divine." Even lions and dogs know a distinction between men's glances; and doubtless
      those Duffield men, in the expectation with which they looked up at Felix, were unconsciously
      influenced by the grandeur of his full yet firm mouth, and the calm clearness of his grey
      eyes, which were somehow
       unlike what they were accustomed to see along with an old brown velveteen coat,
      and an absence of chin-propping. When he began to speak, the contrast of voice was still
      stronger than that of appearance. The man in the flannel shirt had not been heard—had probably
      not cared to be heard—beyond the immediate group of listeners. But Felix at once drew the
      attention of persons comparatively at a distance.
"In my opinion," he said, almost the moment after he was addressed, "that was a true word
      spoken by your friend when he said the great question was how to give every man a man's share
      in life. But I think he expects voting to do more towards it than I do. I want the working men
      to have power. I'm a working man myself, and I don't want to be anything else. But there are
      two sorts of power. There's a power to do mischief—to undo what has been done with great
      expense and labour, to waste and destroy, to be cruel to the weak, to lie and quarrel, and to
      talk poisonous nonsense. That's the sort of power that ignorant numbers have. It never made a
      joint stool or planted a potato. Do you think it's likely to do much towards governing a great
      country, and making wise laws, and giving shelter, food, and clothes to millions of men?
      Ignorant power comes in the end to the same thing as wicked
       power; it makes misery. It's another sort of power that I want us working men to
      have, and I can see plainly enough that our all having votes will do little towards it at
      present. I hope we, or the children that come after us, will get plenty of political power
      some time. I tell everybody plainly, I hope there will be great changes, and that some time,
      whether we live to see it or not, men will have come to be ashamed of things they're proud of
      now. But I should like to convince you that votes would never give you political power worth
      having while things are as they are now, and that if you go the right way to work you may get
      power sooner without votes. Perhaps all you who hear me are sober men, who try to learn as
      much of the nature of things as you can, and to be as little like fools as possible. A fool or
      idiot is one who expects things to happen that never can happen; he pours milk into a can
      without a bottom, and expects the milk to stay there. The more of such vain expectations a man
      has, the more he is of a fool or idiot. And if any working man expects a vote to do for him
      what it never can do, he's foolish to that amount, if no more. I think that's clear enough,
      eh?"
"Hear, hear," said several voices, but they were not those of the original group; they
      belonged to
       some strollers who had been attracted by Felix Holt's vibrating voice, and were
      Tories from the Crown. Among them was Christian, who was smoking a cigar with a pleasure he
      always felt in being among people who did not know him, and doubtless took him to be something
      higher than he really was. Hearers from the Fox and Hounds also were slowly adding themselves
      to the nucleus. Felix, accessible to the pleasure of being listened to, went on with more and
      more animation:
"The way to get rid of folly is to get rid of vain expectations, and of thoughts that don't
      agree with the nature of things. The men who have had true thoughts about water, and what it
      will do when it is turned into steam and under all sorts of circumstances, have made
      themselves a great power in the world: they are turning the wheels of engines that will help
      to change most things. But no engines would have done, if there had been false notions about
      the way water would act. Now, all the schemes about voting, and districts, and annual
      Parliaments, and the rest, are engines, and the water or steam—the force that is to work
      them—must come out of human nature—out of men's passions, feelings, desires. Whether the
      engines will do good work or bad depends on these feelings;
       and if we have false expectations about men's characters, we are very much like
      the idiot who thinks he'll carry milk in a can without a bottom. In my opinion, the notions
      about what mere voting will do are very much of that sort."
"That's very fine," said a man in dirty fustian, with a scornful laugh. "But how are we to
      get the power without votes?"
"I'll tell you what's the greatest power under heaven," said Felix, "and that is public
      opinion—the ruling belief in society about what is right and what is wrong, what is honourable
      and what is shameful. That's the steam that is to work the engines. How can political freedom
      make us better, any more than a religion we don't believe in, if people laugh and wink when
      they see men abuse and defile it? And while public opinion is what it is—while men have no
      better beliefs about public duty—while corruption is not felt to be a damning disgrace—while
      men are not ashamed in Parliament and out of it to make public questions which concern the
      welfare of millions a mere screen for their own petty private ends,—I say, no fresh scheme of
      voting will much mend our condition. For, take us working men of all sorts. Suppose out of
      every hundred who had a vote there were thirty who had
       some soberness, some sense to choose with, some good feeling to make them wish
      the right thing for all. And suppose there were seventy out of the hundred who were, half of
      them, not sober, who had no sense to choose one thing in politics more than another, and who
      had so little good feeling in them that they wasted on their own drinking the money that
      should have helped to feed and clothe their wives and children; and another half of them who,
      if they didn't drink, were too ignorant or mean or stupid to see any good for themselves
      better than pocketing a five-shilling piece when it was offered them. Where would be the
      political power of the thirty sober men? The power would lie with the seventy drunken and
      stupid votes; and I'll tell you what sort of men would get the power—what sort of men would
      end by returning whom they pleased to Parliament."
Felix had seen every face around him, and had particularly noticed a recent addition to his
      audience; but now he looked before him without appearing to fix his glance on any one. In
      spite of his cooling meditations an hour ago, his pulse was getting quickened by indignation,
      and the desire to crush what he hated was likely to vent itself in articulation. His tone
      became more biting.

"They would be men who would undertake to do the business for a candidate, and return him:
      men who have no real opinions, but who pilfer the words of every opinion, and turn them into a
      cant which will serve their purpose at the moment; men who look out for dirty work to make
      their fortunes by, because dirty work wants little talent and no conscience; men who know all
      the ins and outs of bribery, because there is not a cranny in their own souls where a bribe
      can't enter. Such men as these will be the masters wherever there's a majority of voters who
      care more for money, more for drink, more for some mean little end which is their own and
      nobody else's, than for anything that has ever been called Right in the world. For suppose
      there's a poor voter named Jack, who has seven children, and twelve or fifteen shillings
      a-week wages, perhaps less. Jack can't read—I don't say whose fault that is—he never had the
      chance to learn; he knows so little that he perhaps thinks God made the poor-laws, and if
      anybody said the pattern of the workhouse was laid down in the Testament, he wouldn't be able
      to contradict them. What is poor Jack likely to do when he sees a smart stranger coming to
      him, who happens to be just one of those men that I say will be the
       masters till public opinion gets too hot for them? He's a middle-sized man,
      we'll say; stout, with coat upon coat of fine broadcloth, open enough to show a fine gold
      chain: none of your dark, scowling men, but one with an innocent pink-and-white skin and very
      smooth light hair—a most respectable man, who calls himself by a good, sound, well-known
      English name—as Green, or Baker, or Wilson, or, let us say, Johnson—"
Felix was interrupted by an explosion of laughter from a majority of the bystanders. Some
      eyes had been turned on Johnson, who stood on the right hand of Felix, at the very beginning
      of the description, and these were gradually followed by others, till at last every hearer's
      attention was fixed on him, and the first burst of laughter from the two or three who knew the
      attorney's name, let every one sufficiently into the secret to make the amusement common.
      Johnson, who had kept his ground till his name was mentioned, now turned away, looking
      unusually white after being unusually red, and feeling by an attorney's instinct for his
      pocket-book, as if he felt it was a case for taking down the names of witnesses.
All the well-deressed hearers turned away too, thinking they had had the cream of the speech
      in
       the joke against Johnson, which, as a thing worth telling, helped to recall them
      to the scene of dinner.
"Who is this Johnson?" said Christian to a young man who had been standing near him, and had
      been one of the first to laugh. Christian's curiosity had naturally been awakened by what
      might prove a golden opportunity.
"O—a London attorney. He acts for Transome. That tremendous fellow at the corner there is
      some red-hot Radical demagogue, and Johnson has offended him, I suppose; else he wouldn't have
      turned in that way on a man of their own party."
"I had heard there was a Johnson who was an understrapper of Jermyn's," said Christian.
"Well, so this man may have been for what I know. But he's a London man now—a very busy
      fellow—on his own legs in Bedford Row. Ha ha! It's capital, though, when these Liberals get a
      slap in the face from the working men they're so very fond of."
Another turn along the street enabled Christian to come to a resolution. Having seen Jermyn
      drive away an hour before, he was in no fear: he walked at once to the Fox and Hounds and
      asked to speak to Mr Johnson. A brief interview, in which Christian
       ascertained that he had before him the Johnson mentioned by the bill-sticker,
      issued in the appointment of a longer one at a later hour; and before they left Duffield they
      had come not exactly to a mutual understanding, but to an exchange of information mutually
      welcome.
Christian had been very cautious in the commencement, only intimating that he knew something
      important which some chance hints had induced him to think might be interesting to Mr Johnson,
      but that this entirely depended on how far he had a common interest with Mr Jermyn. Johnson
      replied that he had much business in which that gentleman was not concerned, but that to a
      certain extent they had a common interest. Probably then, Christian observed, the affairs of
      the Transome estate were part of the business in which Mr Jermyn and Mr Johnson might be
      understood to represent each other—in which case he need not detain Mr Johnson? At this hint
      Johnson could not conceal that he was becoming eager. He had no idea what Christian's
      information was, but there were many grounds on which Johnson desired to know as much as he
      could about the Transome affairs independently of Jermyn. By little and little an
      understanding was arrived at. Christian told of his interview with
       Tommy Trounsem, and stated that if Johnson could show him whether the knowledge
      could have any legal value, he could bring evidence that a legitimate child of Bycliffe's
      existed: he felt certain of his fact, and of his proof. Johnson explained, that in this case
      the death of the old bill-sticker would give the child the first valid claim to the Bycliffe
      heirship; that for his own part he should be glad to further a true claim, but that caution
      must be observed. How did Christian know that Jermyn was informed on this subject? Christian,
      more and more convinced that Johnson would be glad to counteract Jermyn, at length became
      explicit about Esther, but still withheld his own real name, and the nature of his relations
      with Bycliffe. He said he would bring the rest of his information when Mr Johnson took the
      case up seriously, and placed it in the hands of Bycliffe's old lawyers—of course he would do
      that? Johnson replied that he would certainly do that; but that there were legal niceties
      which Mr Christian was probably not acquainted with; that Esther's claim had not yet accrued;
      and that hurry was useless.
The two men parted, each in distrust of the other, but each well pleased to have learned
      something. Johnson was not at all sure how he should act, but
       thought it likely that events would soon guide him. Christian was beginning to
      meditate a way of securing his own ends without depending in the least on Johnson's procedure.
      It was enough for him that he was now assured of Esther's legal claim on the Transome
      estates.

</div></body></text></TEI>