<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">
Chapter XXIII
Miss Marjoribanks was naturally the first to recover her senses in this emergency. Even she,
     self-possessed as she was, felt the natural giddiness inseparable from such a strange reversal
     of the position. But she did not lose her head like the others. She looked at the widow
     standing white and tremulous in the shadow of the little porch, and on the Archdeacon, whose
     manly countenance had paled to a corresponding colour. A man does not seize a woman by the
     sleeve and ask, "Is it you?" without some reason for an address so destitute of
     ordinary courtesy; and Lucilla was sufficiently versed in such matters to know that so rude and
     startling an accost could be only addressed to some one whose presence set the speaker's heart
     beating, and quickened the blood in his veins. It was odd, to say the least, after the way in
     which he had just been speaking to herself; but Miss Marjoribanks, as has been already said,
     was not the woman to lose her head. She recovered herself with the second breath she drew, and
     took her natural place. "I can see that you have something to say to each other," said Lucilla.
     "Mrs Mortimer, ask Mr Beverley to walk in. Never mind me. I want to speak to the little Lakes.
     I shall come back presently," Miss Marjoribanks added, nodding pleasantly to the Archdeacon—and
     she went away to the other end of the garden, calling to the children with that self-possession
     which is the gift only of great minds. But when Lucilla found herself at a safe distance, and
     saw the Archdeacon stoop to go in under the porch, it cannot be denied that her mind was moved
     by the sight. It was she who had seen after the putting-up of that trellis round that porch,
     and the arrangement of the wistaria, which had been sprawling all over the front of the house
     uncared for. If there was any place in the world where she should have been free from such a
     shock, it certainly should have been here, in this spot, which she had, so to speak, created.
     Naturally the unfitness of these surroundings to witness a revolution so unlooked-for and
     disagreeable struck Lucilla. If she had to be again humiliated, and to submit once more to see
     another preferred to herself, it certainly should have been under other circumstances. When we
     admit that such a thought did pass through the mind of Miss Marjoribanks, it will prove to all
     who know her that Lucilla found her position sufficiently aggravating. She had exerted herself
     for Mrs Mortimer as nobody else in Carlingford would have exerted themselves. She had not only
     found pupils and a means of living for the widow, which, perhaps, a committee of ladies might
     have done at the end of a year, had it been put into their hands; but Miss Marjoribanks had
     done it at once, and had taken charge of that timid and maladroit individual herself, and set
     her up, and done everything for her. It was Dr Marjoribanks's gardener, under Lucilla's orders,
     who had arranged and planted the garden, and trained the embowering foliage which had just
     brushed the Archdeacon's clerical hat as he went in; and in the act of refurnishing her
     drawing-room, Miss Marjoribanks had managed to procure, without costing anybody anything except
     a little trouble, as she herself said, many accessories, which gave an air of comfort to the
     little parlour, in which, no doubt, at that moment, Mr Beverley and Mrs Mortimer were
     explaining themselves. Lucilla had a great deal too much good sense to upbraid anybody with
     ingratitude, or even to make any claim upon that slippery quality; but she knew at the same
     time that the widow was the very last person from whom a new discomfiture should come, and that
     to enter in under that trellis when he left her was, on the Archdeacon's part, an aggravation
     of the change in his sentiments which it was difficult to bear.
She walked along the garden path very briskly under the influence of these thoughts, and it
     was not in nature to do otherwise than snub the children when she joined them. Lucilla was a
     woman of genius, but she was not faultless; and when she found Ethelinda and Ethelfreda Lake,
     the two twins, the one with her clean frock all muddy and stained, the other with the front
     breadth torn right up the middle, it is scarcely to be wondered at if she lost her patience.
     "You little nasty untidy things!" she said, "I should like to know who you expect is to go
     mending up and washing every day for you? It will not be Barbara, I am sure," Miss Marjoribanks
     added, with a fine intonation of scorn, of which the culprits were insensible; and she gave
     Ethelinda a shake, who was sitting on the wet ground, all muddy with recent watering, and who,
     besides, was the one who most resembled Barbara. When this temporary ebullition had taken
     place, Lucilla began gradually to right herself. It was a grand sight, if anybody had been
     there to witness it, or if anybody could have seen into Miss Marjoribanks's maiden bosom; but
     the spectacle of a great mind thus recovering its balance is one which can rarely be visible
     except in its results. While she set the children to rights, and represented to Mrs Mortimer's
     little servant, who was in the garden furtively on a pretence of cabbages, the extreme folly,
     and indeed idiocy, of letting them get to the water and make a mess of themselves, Lucilla was
     in reality coming to herself. Perhaps she spoke with a little more energy than usual; but the
     offenders were so well aware of their guilt, and so thoroughly satisfied of the justice of the
     reproof addressed to them, that no other explanation was necessary; and, little by little, Miss
     Marjoribanks felt herself restored to her natural calm.
"You know I don't like to scold you," she said; "but what would anybody say?—nice clean
     frocks, that I am sure were put on fresh this morning—and you, Mary Jane——"
"Please, Miss, it was only for a young cabbage. Missis is fond of a bit of vegetable," said
     the little maid. "I knew she'd not say nothing;—and just as I had told 'em all to have
     done and be good—and nobody knew as you was here," said Mary Jane. There was something
     even in that small and humble testimony to Lucilla's sovereignty which helped on the process
     which was operating in her mind. She regained bit by bit that serene self-consciousness which
     places the spirit above the passing vexations of the world. What did it matter what other
     people might be doing or saying? Was not she still Lucilla Marjoribanks? and when one had said
     that, one had said all.
"It is time you were all going home to your dinners," said Lucilla; "and I have asked Mrs
     Mortimer to give you a half-holiday. As for you, you little Linda, you are not fit to be seen;
     and I am sure if I were your sister I should send you off to bed. Now get all your hats and
     things and run away; and if you are not awfully good to-morrow, I shall never ask for another
     half-holiday again."
Saying which, Miss Marjoribanks herself saw the hats brought out, and the little scholars
     sent away. She took matters into her own hand with the confidence of a superior nature. "After
     all the long talk they are having she will not be able for her scholars to-day," Lucilla said
     magnanimously to herself; and she again made the tour of the garden, inspecting everything, to
     see that all was in order. With every step that she took, Miss Marjoribanks became more and
     more herself. As we have already said, it was a grand and inspiring sight; but then, to be
     sure, as in the former case, her affections, fortunately, were not engaged. She was not in love
     with the Archdeacon, any more than she had been in love with Mr Cavendish;—though it is true,
     love is not everything. And to think how he had been looking and talking not much more than
     half an hour ago, and to reflect that now he had most likely forgotten her very existence, and
     was explaining himself, and placing that position which would have just suited Lucilla at the
     feet of the object of her bounty, was enough to have driven a young woman of ordinary mind half
     out of her senses with disgust and indignation. But, fortunately, Lucilla's mind was not an
     ordinary one; and every step she took round the garden restored her more and more entirely to
     herself. Instead of conceiving any jealous dislike to Mrs Mortimer, she had already, as has
     been stated, exerted herself with her usual benevolence to leave the widow free for the rest of
     the day. "After all, it is not her fault if she knew him before, or if he was in love with
     her," Lucilla said to herself. And when she had arrived at this perfectly true and profoundly
     philosophical conclusion, it may be said that the crisis was at an end.
But then where personal offence and indignation (if the natural shock to Miss Marjoribanks's
     feelings could be called by such hard names) ended, bewilderment and curiosity began. Who could
     this Archdeacon be who had frightened the most popular man in Carlingford out of the place, and
     whose unlooked-for appearance had driven Mrs Mortimer back out of her recovered good looks and
     cheerfulness into pallor and trembling? It is true that Lucilla knew quite well who he was—the
     second son of Mr Beverley of Trent Valley, a family as well known as any family in England.
     Everybody knew all about the Archdeacon: his career from his youth up was as clearly traceable
     as if he had been killed in a railway accident and had had his memoir published in the
      Times. There was nothing in the smallest degree secret or mysterious about him; and
     yet how could it come about that the sight of him should frighten Mr Cavendish out of his
     senses, and make Mrs Mortimer, who was utterly unconnected with Mr Cavendish, all but faint, as
     she had done on a former occasion? Was it his mission to go about the world driving people into
     fits of terror or agitation? To be sure, he was a Broad-Churchman, and not the type of
     clergyman to which Lucilla in her heart inclined; but still a man may be Broad Church, and
     speak a little freely on religious matters, without being a basilisk. As these thoughts went
     through her mind, Miss Marjoribanks could not help observing that the branches of the
     pear-tree, which was all that the garden contained in the shape of fruit, had come loose from
     the wall, and were swaying about greatly to the damage of the half-grown pears,—not to say that
     it gave a very untidy look to that corner. "I must send Crawford down this evening to fasten it
     up," Lucilla said to herself, and then went on with what she was thinking; and she made one or
     two other remarks of the same description in a parenthesis as she made her tour. After all, it
     is astonishing how many little things go wrong when the man or woman with a hundred eyes is
     absent for a few days from the helm of affairs. It was nearly a week since Miss Marjoribanks
     had been round Mrs Mortimer's garden, and in that time the espalier had got detached, some of
     the verbenas were dead in the borders, and the half of the sticks that propped up the dahlias
     had fallen, leaving the plants in miserable confusion. Lucilla shook her head over this, as she
     asked herself what mysterious influence there could be in the Archdeacon. For her own part, she
     was not in the slightest degree afraid of him, nor could she confess to having felt agitated
     even when he walked with her into this fated garden; but there could be no doubt of the
     seriousness of the effect produced by his appearance on the two others. "They have broken half
     of the props, the little nuisances," Lucilla said to herself, as she pursued her musings. For
     her large mind was incapable, now that its perfect serenity was happily regained, of confining
     itself, unless with a very good reason, to one sole subject.
When she had finished her inspection, and saw that nobody had yet appeared at the door, Miss
     Marjoribanks collected the books which the children had left lying in the summer-house, and put
     them under cover—for, to tell the truth, it looked a little like rain; and having done this,
     and looked all round her to see if anything else required her immediate care, Lucilla carried
     philosophy to its highest practical point by going away, which is, perhaps, a height of good
     sense which may be thought too much for humanity. It was not too much for Miss Marjoribanks's
     legislative soul and knowledge of human nature;—and in thus denying herself she was perfectly
     aware of her advantages, and of the inevitable result. She knew, just as well as if she had
     already received it, that Mrs Mortimer would write her a little three-cornered note, marked
      Private, as soon as the Archdeacon was gone; and she thought it was highly probable
     that Mr Beverley himself would come to give some explanation. With this tranquil assurance in
     her mind, Lucilla turned her face towards Grange Lane. She began to have a kind of conviction
     too, since this had happened, either that Carlingford would not be raised into a bishopric, or
     that the Archdeacon at least would not be the first bishop. It was difficult to give any ground
     for the idea, but it came into her mind with a kind of quiet certainty; and with this
     conviction, in which she recognised that beautiful self-adjusting balance of compensations
     which keeps everything right in the world, Lucilla, quite recovered from her shock, had on the
     whole a pleasant walk home.
As for the two who were shut up together in Mrs Mortimer's parlour, their state of mind was
     far from partaking of the virtuous peace and serenity which filled Miss Marjoribanks's bosom.
     It was more than an hour before the Archdeacon went away; and when Mrs Mortimer had a little
     collected her faculties, the result arrived which had been foreseen by Lucilla. In the first
     place, terror seized the widow as to what had become of her pupils, whom all this time she had
     forgotten, and deep was her gratitude when she had ascertained that her protecting genius had
     sent them away. But with that gratitude came a sudden recollection of the manner in which Mr
     Beverley and Miss Marjoribanks had been coming together up the garden path, before the mistress
     of the house showed herself. Mrs Mortimer wrung her hands when she recollected the looks and
     attitude of the two, and the rumour which had reached her ears that the Archdeacon was paying
     attention to Miss Marjoribanks. What was she to do?—was her miserable presence here to dispel
     perhaps the youthful hopes of her benefactress, and make a revolution in Lucilla's prospects?
     The poor woman felt herself ready to sink into the earth at the thought. She went to the window
     and looked out disconsolately into the rain—for it had come on to rain, as Lucilla supposed it
     would—and felt like a creature in a cage, helpless, imprisoned, miserable, not knowing what to
     do with herself, and the cause of trouble to her best friends. A little house in a garden may
     look like a little paradise in the sunshine, and yet feel like a dungeon when a poor woman all
     alone looks out across her flowers in the rain, and sees nothing but the wall that shuts her
     in, and thinks to herself that she has no refuge nor escape from it—nobody to tell her what to
     do, nothing but her own feeble powers to support her, and the dreadful idea that she has done
     harm and can do no good to her only protector. Any reasonable creature would have said, that to
     be there in her own house, poor enough certainly, but secure, and no longer driven lonely and
     distressed about the world, was a great matter. But yet, after all, the walls that shut her in,
     the blast of white, sweeping, downright rain, which seemed to cut her off from any succour
     outside, and the burden of something on her mind which by herself she was quite unable to bear,
     was a hard combination; and wringing one's hands, and feeling one's mind ready to give way
     under a new and unexpected burden, could not advance matters in the slightest degree. She was
     not strong-minded, as has been already proved; nor, indeed, had she the ordinary amount of
     indifference to other people, or confidence in herself, which stands in the place of
     self-control with many people. After she had wrung her hands, and looked out again and again
     with a vague instinct of perhaps finding some suggestion of comfort outside, Mrs Mortimer
     relapsed by necessity into the one idea that had been a support to her for so many months past.
     All that she could do was to consult Lucilla—it might be to wound Lucilla, for anything she
     could tell; but when a poor creature is helpless and weak, and has but one friend in the world
     who is strong, what can she do but apply to her sustainer and guardian? When, after beating
     about wildly from one point to another, she arrived ultimately, as might have been predicted,
     and as Miss Marjoribanks had expected from the first, at that conclusion, there remained a
     further difficulty in respect to the means of communication. Lucilla had settled quite calmly
     in her own mind that it would be by the medium of a three-cornered note, a matter in which
     there was no difficulty whatever, for the widow was sufficiently fluent with her pen; but then
     Lucilla had not thought of Mary Jane, who was the only possible messenger. It was to this point
     now that Mrs Mortimer's ideas addressed themselves. At that moment the rain poured down fiercer
     than ever, the bricks of the uncovered wall grew black with the wet, and the wistaria crouched
     and shivered about the porch as if it wanted to be taken indoors. And then to get wet, and
     perhaps catch cold, was a thing Mary Jane conscientiously avoided, like the rest of the world;
     and it was with a sense of alarm even stronger than that excited by the possibility of injuring
     Lucilla, that Mrs Mortimer very gently and modestly rang her bell.
"I don't think it rains quite so heavily," said the timid experimentalist, feeling her heart
     beat as she made this doubtful statement. "Have you a pair of goloshes, Mary Jane?"
"No," said the little handmaiden, with precaution; "and, please, if it's for the post, it
     rains worse nor ever; and I don't think as mother would like——"
"Oh, it is not for the post," said Mrs Mortimer; "it is for Miss Marjoribanks. You can take
     mine, and then you will not get your feet wet. I go out so very little; you may have them—to
     keep—Mary Jane. And you can take the big shawl that hangs in the passage, and an umbrella. I
     don't think it is so heavy as it was."
Mary Jane regarded the rain gloomily from the window; but her reluctance was at an end from
     the moment she heard that it was to Miss Marjoribanks she was going. To be sure, the distance
     between the Serenissime Nancy and Thomas, and the other inmates of the Doctor's kitchen, and
     Mrs Mortimer's little handmaiden, was as great as that which exists between an English Duke and
     the poorest little cadet of a large family among his attendant gentry; but, correspondingly,
     the merest entrance into that higher world was as great a privilege for Mary Jane, as the
     Duke's notice would be to the Squire's youngest son. She kept up a momentary show of
     resistance, but she accepted the goloshes, and even after a moment agreed in her mistress's
     trembling assertion about the rain. And this was how the three-cornered note got conveyed to
     its destination in the heaviest of the storm, between three and four o'clock in the afternoon.
     Mrs Mortimer still sat at her window, wringing her hands from time to time, with her head
     aching and her heart beating, and a dreadful question in her mind as to what Lucilla would say,
     or whether perhaps she might reject altogether in her natural indignation the appeal made to
     her; which was an idea which filled the widow with inexpressible horror. While at the same
     moment Miss Marjoribanks sat looking for that appeal which she knew was sure to come. The rain
     had set in by this time with an evident intention of lasting, and even from the windows of
     Lucilla's drawing-room the prospect of the garden walls and glistening trees was sufficiently
     doleful. Nobody was likely to call, nothing was doing; and Lucilla, who never caught cold, had
     not the least fear of wetting her feet. And besides, her curiosity had been rising every moment
     since her return; and the widow's pathetic appeal, "Come to me, my dearest Lucilla. I have
     nobody whom I can talk to in the world but you!" had its natural effect upon a mind so feeling.
     Miss Marjoribanks got up as soon as she had read the note, and changed her dress, and put on a
     great waterproof cloak. Instead of thinking it a trouble, she was rather exhilarated by the
     necessity. "Be sure you make your mistress a nice cup of tea as soon as we get there," she said
     to Mary Jane. "She must want it, I am sure, if she has not had any dinner;" for the little maid
     had betrayed the fact that Mrs Mortimer could not eat anything, and had sent away her dinner,
     which was naturally an alarming and wonderful occurrence to Mary Jane. The widow was still
     sitting at the window when Lucilla appeared tripping across the wet garden in her waterproof
     cloak, if not a ministering angel, at least a substantial prop and support to the lonely woman
     who trusted in her, and yet in the present instance feared her. But anything more unlike a
     disappointed maiden, whose wooer had been taken away from her under her very eyes, could not
     have been seen. On the contrary, Miss Marjoribanks was radiant, with raindrops glistening on
     her hair, and what Mrs Chiley called "a lovely colour." If there was one thing in the world
     more than another which contented Lucilla, it was to be appealed to and called upon for active
     service. It did her heart good to take the management of incapable people, and arrange all
     their affairs for them, and solve all their difficulties. Such an office was more in her way
     than all the Archdeacons in the world.
"I saw you knew him the moment I looked at you," said Lucilla. "I have seen other people look
      like that when he appeared. Who is he, for goodness' sake? I know quite well, of
     course, who he is, in the ordinary way; but do tell me what has he done to make people look
     like that whenever he appears?"
Mrs Mortimer did not directly answer this question—she fixed her mind upon one part of it,
     like an unreasonable woman, and repeated "Other people?" with a kind of interrogative gasp.
"Oh, it was only a gentleman," said Lucilla, with rapid intelligence; and then there was a
     little pause. "He has been here for six weeks," Miss Marjoribanks continued; "you must have
     heard of him; indeed, you would have heard him preach if you had not gone off after these
     Dissenters. Did you really never know that he was here till to-day?"
"I did not think of him being Archdeacon—he was only a curate when I used to know him," said
     poor Mrs Mortimer, with a sigh.
"Tell me all about it," said Lucilla, with ingenuous sympathy; and she drew her chair close
     to that of her friend, and took her hand in a protecting, encouraging way. "You know, whatever
     you like to say, that it is quite safe with me."
"If you are sure you do not mind," said the poor widow. "Oh, yes, I have heard what people
     have been saying about him and—and you, Lucilla; and if I had known, I would have shut myself
     up—I would have gone away for ever and ever—I would——"
"My dear," said Miss Marjoribanks, with a little severity, "I thought you knew me better. If
     I had been thinking of that sort of thing, I never need have come home at all; and when you
     know how kind papa has been about the drawing-room and everything. Say what you were going to
     say, and never think of me."
"Ah, Lucilla, I have had my life," said the trembling woman, whose agitation was coming to a
     climax—"I have had it, and done with it; and you have been so good to me; and if, after all, I
     was to stand between you and—and—and—anybody——" But here Mrs Mortimer broke down, and could say
     no more. To be sure, she did not faint this time any more than she did on the first occasion
     when she made Miss Marjoribanks's acquaintance; but Lucilla thought it best, as then, to make
     her lie down on the sofa, and keep her quite quiet, and hasten Mary Jane with the cup of
     tea.
"You have been agitated, and you have not eaten anything," said Lucilla. "I am going to stay
     with you till half-past six, when I must run home for dinner, so we have plenty of time; and as
     for your life, I don't consider you gone off at all yet, and you are a great deal
     younger-looking than you were six months ago. I am very glad the Archdeacon did not come until
     you had got back your looks. It makes such a difference to a man," Miss Marjoribanks added,
     with that almost imperceptible tone of contempt which she was sometimes known to use when
     speaking of Their absurd peculiarities. As for Mrs Mortimer, the inference conveyed by these
     words brought the colour to her pale cheeks.
"It will never come to that," she said, "no more than it did in old days; it never can,
     Lucilla; and I don't know that it is to be wished. I couldn't help being put out a little when
     I saw him, you know; but there is one thing, that he never, never will persuade me," said the
     widow. Lucilla could not but look on in surprise and even consternation, while Mrs Mortimer
     thus expressed herself. A warm flush animated the pale and somewhat worn face—and a gleam of
     something that looked absolutely like resolution shone in the yielding woman's mild eyes. Was
     it possible that even she had one point upon which she could be firm? Miss Marjoribanks stood
     still, petrified, in the very act of pouring out the tea.
"If it is only one thing, if I were you, I would give in to him," said Lucilla, with a vague
     sense that this sort of self-assertion must be put a stop to, mingling with her surprise.
"Never," said Mrs Mortimer again, with a still more distinct gleam of resolution. "In the
     first place, I have no right whatever to anything more than my uncle gave me. He told me
     himself I was to have no more; and he was very, very kind to poor Edward. You don't
     know all the circumstances, or you would not say so," she cried, with a sob. As for Miss
     Marjoribanks, if it is possible to imagine her clear spirit altogether lost in bewilderment, it
     would have been at that moment; but she recovered as soon as she had administered her cup of
     tea.
"Now tell me all about it," said Lucilla, again sitting down by the sofa; and this time Mrs
     Mortimer, to whom her excitement had given a little spur and stimulus, did not waste any more
     time.
"He is my cousin," she said; "not my real cousin, but distant; and I will not deny that long,
     long ago—when we were both quite young, you know, Lucilla——"
"Yes, yes, I understand," said Miss Marjoribanks, pressing her hand.
"He was very nice in those days," said Mrs Mortimer, faltering; "that is, I don't mean to say
     he was not always nice, you know, but only——I never had either father or mother. I was living
     with my Uncle Garrett—my uncle on the other side; and he thought he should have made me his
     heiress; but instead of that, he left his money, you know, to him; and then he was
     dreadfully put out, and wanted me to go to law with him and change the will; but I never blamed
     him, for my part, Lucilla—he knows I never blamed him—and nothing he said would make me give in
     to go to the law with him——"
"Stop a minute," said Lucilla, "I am not quite sure that I understand. Who was it he wanted
     you to go to law with? and was it to the Archdeacon the money was left?"
"Oh, Lucilla," said the widow, with momentary exasperation, "you who are so quick and pick up
     everything, to think you should not understand me when I speak of a thing so important! Of
     course it was not to Charles Beverley the money was left: if it had been left to him, how could
     he have wanted me to go to law? It has always been the question between us," said Mrs Mortimer,
     once more lighting up with exceptional and unwonted energy. "He said I was to indict him for
     conspiracy; and I declare to you, Lucilla, that he was not to blame. Uncle Garrett might be
     foolish, but I don't say even that he was foolish: he was so good to him, like a son; and he
     had no son of his own, and I was only a girl. He never was anything to me," said Mrs Mortimer,
     wiping her eyes—"never, whatever Charles may choose to say; but if ever I was sure of anything
     in the world, I am sure that he was not to blame."
Lucilla's head began to whirl; but after her first unsuccessful essay, she was wise enough
     not to ask any more direct questions. She made all the efforts possible, with ears and eyes
     intent, to disentangle this web of pronouns, and failing, waited on in the hope that time and
     patience would throw a little light upon them. "I suppose Mr Beverley thought he was to blame?"
     she said, when the narrator paused to take breath.
"Is not that what I am saying?" said Mrs Mortimer. "It was through that it was all broke off.
     I am sure I don't know whether he has regretted it or not, Lucilla. It is not always very easy
     to understand a gentleman, you know. After I was married to poor Edward, naturally I never had
     any more correspondence with him; and to see him to-day without any warning, and to find him
     just as bent as he was upon making me prosecute, and just as full of bad feeling, and speaking
     as if there was some reason more than truth and justice why I should be so determined. No,
     Lucilla," said Mrs Mortimer, raising herself up on the sofa, "it is just the same thing as
     ever, and the same obstacle as ever, and it never will come to that."
"You are agitating yourself," said Miss Marjoribanks; "lie down—there's a dear—and keep quite
     still, and see whether we cannot make anything better of it. Tell me, what would you go to law
     with him for?" Lucilla continued, with the natural humility of imperfect comprehension. It was
     perhaps the first time in her life that such a singular chance had happened to Miss
     Marjoribanks, as to have a matter explained to her, and yet be unable to understand.
"He says he could be indicted for conspiracy, or for having too much influence over him, and
     making him do what he liked. But he was very good to him, Lucilla, and to my poor Edward; and
     when I was married to him——"
"Goodness gracious! were you married to him as well?" cried Lucilla, fairly losing the thread
     and her balance in this confusing circle. Mrs Mortimer grew pale, and rose quite up from the
     sofa, and went with the air of an insulted woman to seat herself in her usual chair.
"I don't know why you should address me so," she said. "He is nothing to me, and never was.
     It is an insult to me to think that I must have a personal reason for refusing to do a wicked
     and unjust thing. I could give up anything," said the widow, losing a little of her dignity,
     and growing again pathetic—"I would give in in a moment if it was any fancy of mine—you know I
     would; but I am sure it would be wicked and unjust——"
"I am sure I am not the person to bid you do anything unjust or wicked," said Lucilla, who,
     in the utter confusion of her faculties, began to feel offended in her turn.
"Then I beg you will never speak to me of it again!" cried Mrs Mortimer. "How is it possible
     that either he or you can know the rights of it as I do, who was in the house at the time and
     saw everything? He may say what he likes, but I know there was no conspiracy; he was just as
     much surprised as you could be, or Charles, or anybody. Of course it was for his
     advantage—nobody denies that—but you don't mean to say that a man is to reject everything that
     is for his advantage?" said the widow, turning eyes of indignant inquiry upon her visitor; and
     Miss Marjoribanks for once was so utterly perplexed that she did not know how to respond.
"But you said when you were married to him?" said Lucilla, who felt that the tables were
     turned upon her for the moment. "I am sure I beg your pardon for being so stupid; but whom were
     you married to?" This was said in the most deprecating tone in the world, but still it
     irritated Mrs Mortimer, whose mind was all unhinged, and who somehow felt that she was not
     finding in Miss Marjoribanks the help and support to which her clear and detailed explanation
     entitled her. Though her head was aching dreadfully, she sat up more upright than ever in her
     chair.
"I don't think you can mean to insult me, Miss Marjoribanks," said the widow, "after being so
     kind. Perhaps I have been trying you too much by what I have said; though I am sure I would
     have given up everything, and gone away anywhere, rather than be the cause of anything
     unpleasant. You know that it was my poor dear Edward I was married to; you know I have a—a
     horror," said Mrs Mortimer, faltering, "in general—of second marriages."
"Oh, yes," said Lucilla, "but there are always exceptions, you know; and when people have no
     children, nor anything—and you that were so young. I always make exceptions, for my part; and
     if you could only get over this one point," Miss Marjoribanks added, making a dexterous
     strategical movement. But Mrs Mortimer only shook her head.
"I don't think I am hard to get on with," she said; "but my poor Edward always said one must
     make a stand somewhere. He used to say I was so easy to be persuaded. He was glad to see I had
     a point to make a stand on, instead of being disagreeable about it, or thinking he was anything
     to me. And oh, Lucilla, he was so kind to him," said the widow, with tears in her eyes. "We met
     him quite by chance, and he was so kind. I will never forget it, if I should live a hundred
     years. And why should Charles be in such a way? He never did him any harm! If any one was
     injured, it was me, and I never felt myself injured—neither did Edward. On the contrary, he
      always did him justice, Lucilla," Mrs Mortimer continued, fixing a pathetic look upon
     her friend. What could Lucilla do? She was burning to take it all in her own hands, and arrange
     it somehow, and unite the two lovers who had been so long separated; but unless she could
     understand what the point was on which Mrs Mortimer made her stand, what could she do?
"I never could understand," said the widow, who began to feel her heart sick with the
     disappointment of that hope which she had fixed in Miss Marjoribanks, "why he should take it so
     much to heart. Poor Edward never thought of such a thing! and why he should be so set against
     poor Mr Kavan, and so——Lucilla! oh, tell me, do you see anything? what do you mean?"
"I want to know who Mr Kavan is?" said Miss Marjoribanks, much startled. She had for the
     moment forgotten the Archdeacon's discovery and her own suspicions; and the idea of connecting
     the man who had (apparently) fled from Mr Beverley's presence, with the innocent and helpless
     woman upon whom the appearance of the Broad Churchman had so overwhelming an effect, had never
     hitherto entered her imagination. But this name, which was not the name of anybody she knew,
     and yet seemed to bear an odd sort of rudimentary relationship to another name, struck her like
     a sudden blow and brought everything back to her mind. It was a bewildering sort of
     explanation, if it was an explanation; but still a confused light began to break upon Lucilla's
     understanding. If this was what it all meant then there was the widest opening for charitable
     exertions, and much to be done which only a mind like Miss Marjoribanks's could do.
"That is not his name now," said Mrs Mortimer, "I don't see, if he liked it, why he should
     not change his name. I am sure a great many people do; but his name was Kavan when he lived
     with my uncle. I don't remember what it was after, for of course he was always Mr Kavan to me;
     and Charles Beverley never could bear him. He used to think——But oh, Lucilla, forgive me—oh,
     forgive me, if it is too much for you!" she added, a moment after, as another idea struck her.
     "It was not with the idea of—of anything coming of it, you know; it will never come to that—not
     now;—I don't know if it is to be wished. I am sure he is quite free so far as I am concerned.
     It was not with that idea I asked for your advice, Lucilla," said the poor woman, in piteous
     tones. If Miss Marjoribanks had pressed her, and insisted upon knowing what was the
     idea which had moved her friend to ask her advice, Mrs Mortimer would no doubt have found it
     very hard to reply; but Lucilla had no such cruel intentions; and the widow, notwithstanding
     her piteous denial of any motive, now that her mind was cleared, and she had caught the
     comprehension of her auditor, began to regard her with a certain instinct of hope.
As for Miss Marjoribanks, this revelation at once troubled and cleared her mind. If this was
     the culprit, he was a culprit and yet he was innocent; and to heap coals of fire upon
     his head was in some respects a Christian duty. Her ideas went forward at a bound to a grand
     finale of reconciliation and universal brotherhood. She saw the tools under her hands, and her
     very fingers itched to begin. Large and varied as her experience was, she had never yet had any
     piece of social business on so important a scale to manage, and her eyes sparkled and her heart
     beat at the idea. Instead of shrinking from interference, her spirits rose at the thought. To
     vanquish the Archdeacon, to pluck out from the darkness, and rehabilitate and set at his ease
     the mysterious adventurer, whom, to be sure, she could not say she knew—for Lucilla
     was very careful, even in her own thoughts, not to commit herself on this subject—and to finish
     off by a glorious and triumphant marriage—not her own, it is true, but of her making, which was
     more to the purpose—such was the programme she made out for herself with the speed of
     lightning, the moment she had laid hold of the clue which guided or seemed to guide her through
     the labyrinth. It would be too lengthy a matter to go into all her tender cares for the widow's
     comfort during the rest of her stay, and the pains and delicacy with which she managed to
     elicit further particulars, and to make out her brief, so to speak, while she cheered up and
     encouraged the witness. Miss Marjoribanks jumped to the conclusion that "poor Edward" had been,
     after all, but a temporary tenant of the heart, which was now again free for the reception of
     the Archdeacon, if he could be got to accept the conditions. When half-past six arrived, and
     Thomas came for her with the great umbrella, she went off quite resplendent in her waterproof
     cloak, and utterly indifferent to the rain, leaving Mrs Mortimer worn out, but with a glimmer
     of hope in her mind. Such was the great work which, without a moment's hesitation, Lucilla took
     upon her shoulders. She had no more fear of the result than she had of wetting her feet, which
     was a thing Mrs Mortimer and Thomas were both concerned about. But then Lucilla knew her own
     resources, and what she was capable of, and proceeded upon her way with that unconscious calm
     of genius which is always so inexplicable to the ordinary world.
</div></body></text></TEI>