<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
Chapter V
Miss Marjoribanks did not leave the contralto any time to recover from her surprise; she went
     up to her direct where she stood, with her song arrested on her lips, as she had risen hastily
     from the piano. "Is it Rose?" said Lucilla, going forward with the most eager cordiality, and
     holding out both her hands; though, to be sure, she knew very well it was not Rose, who was
     about half the height of the singer, and was known to everybody in Mount Pleasant to be utterly
     innocent of a voice.
"No," said Miss Lake, who was much astonished and startled and offended, as was unfortunately
     rather her custom. She was a young woman without any of those instincts of politeness, which
     make some people pleasant in spite of themselves; and she added nothing to soften this abrupt
     negative, but drew her hands away from the stranger and stood bolt upright, looking at her,
     with a burning blush, caused by temper much more than by embarrassment, on her face.
"Then," said Lucilla, dropping lightly into the most comfortable chair she could get sight of
     in the bare little parlour, "it is Barbara—and that is a great deal better; Rose is a good
     little thing, but—she is different, you know. It is so odd you should not remember me; I
     thought everybody knew me in Carlingford. You know I have been a long time away, and now I have
     come home for good. Your voice is just the very thing to go with mine: was it not a lucky thing
     that I should have passed just at the right moment? I don't know how it is, but somehow these
     lucky chances always happen to me. I am Lucilla Marjoribanks, you know."
"Indeed!" said Barbara, who had not the least intention of being civil, "I did not recognise
     you in the least."
"Yes, I remember you were always shortsighted a little," said Miss Marjoribanks calmly. "I
     should so like if we could try a duet. I have been having lessons in Italy, you know, and I am
     sure I could give you a few hints. I always like, when I can, to be of use. Tell me what songs
     you have that we could sing together. You know, my dear, it is not as if I was asking you for
     mere amusement to myself; my grand object in life is to be a comfort to papa——"
"Do you mean Dr Marjoribanks?" said the uncivil Barbara. "I am sure he does not care in the
     least for music. I think you must be making a mistake——"
"Oh, no," said Lucilla, "I never make mistakes. I don't mean to sing to him, you
     know; but you are just the very person I wanted. As for the ridiculous idea some people have
     that nobody can be called on who does not live in Grange Lane, I assure you I mean to make an
     end of that. Of course I cannot commence just all in a moment. But it would always be an
     advantage to practise a little together. I like to know exactly how far one can calculate upon
     everybody; then one can tell, without fear of breaking down, just what one may venture to
     do."
"I don't understand in the least," said Barbara, whose pride was up in arms. "Perhaps you
     think I am a professional singer?"
"My dear, a professional singer spoils everything," said Miss Marjoribanks; "it changes the
     character of an evening altogether. There are so few people who understand that. When you have
     professional singers, you have to give yourself up to music; and that is not my view in the
     least. My great aim, as all my friends are aware, is to be a comfort to dear papa."
"I wish you would not talk in riddles," said Lucilla's amazed and indignant companion, in her
     round rich contralto. "I suppose you really are Miss Marjoribanks. I have always heard that
     Miss Marjoribanks was a little——"
"There!" said Lucilla triumphantly; "really it is almost like a recitativo to hear you speak.
     I am so glad. What have you got there? Oh, to be sure, it's that duet out of the
     Trovatore. Do let us try it; there is nobody here, and everything is so convenient—and you know
     it would never do to risk a breakdown. Will you play the accompaniment, or shall I?" said Miss
     Marjoribanks, taking off her gloves. As for the drawing-master's daughter, she stood aghast,
     lost in such sudden bewilderment and perplexity that she could find no words to reply. She was
     not in the least amiable or yielding by nature; but Lucilla took it so much as a matter of
     course that Barbara could not find a word to say; and before she could be sure that it was
     real, Miss Marjoribanks had seated herself at the piano. Barbara was so obstinate that she
     would not sing the first part, which ought to have been hers; but she was not clever enough for
     her antagonist. Lucilla sang her part by herself gallantly; and when it came to Barbara's turn
     the second time, Miss Marjoribanks essayed the second in a false voice, which drove the
     contralto off her guard; and then the magnificent volume of sound flowed forth, grand enough to
     have filled Lucilla with envy if she had not been sustained by that sublime confidence in
     herself which is the first necessity to a woman with a mission. She paused a moment in the
     accompaniment to clap her hands after that strophe was accomplished, and then resumed with
     energy. For, to be sure, she knew by instinct what sort of clay the people were made of by whom
     she had to work, and gave them their reward with that liberality and discrimination which is
     the glory of enlightened despotism. Miss Marjoribanks was naturally elated when she had
     performed this important and successful tour. She got up from the piano, and closed it
     in her open, imperial way. "I do not want to tire you, you know," she said; "that will do for
     to-day. I told you your voice was the very thing to go with mine. Give my love to Rose when she
     comes in, but don't bring her with you when you come to me. She is a good little thing—but then
     she is different, you know," said the bland Lucilla; and she held out her hand to her captive
     graciously, and gathered up her parasol, which she had left on her chair. Barbara Lake let her
     visitor go after this, with a sense that she had fallen asleep, and had dreamt it all; but,
     after all, there was something in the visit which was not disagreeable when she came to think
     it over. The drawing-master was poor, and he had a quantity of children, as was natural, and
     Barbara had never forgiven her mother for dying just at the moment when she had a chance of
     seeing a little of what she called the world. At that time Mr Lake and his portfolio of
     drawings were asked out frequently to tea; and when he had pupils in the family, some kind
     people asked him to bring one of his daughters with him—so that Barbara, who was ambitious, had
     beheld herself for a month or two almost on the threshold of Grange Lane. And it was at this
     moment of all others, just at the same time as Mrs Marjoribanks finished her pale career, that
     poor Mrs Lake thought fit to die, to the injury of her daughter's prospects and the destruction
     of her hopes. Naturally Barbara had never quite forgiven that injury. It was this sense of
     having been ill-used which made her so resolute about sending Rose to Mount Pleasant, though
     the poor little girl did not in the least want to go, and was very happy helping her papa at
     the School of Design. But Barbara saw no reason why Rose should be happy, while she herself had
     to resign her inclinations and look after a set of odious children. To be sure, it was a little
     hard upon a young woman of a proper ambition, who knew she was handsome, to fall back into
     housekeeping, and consent to remain unseen and unheard; for Barbara was also aware that she had
     a remarkable voice. In these circumstances, it may be imagined that, after the first movement
     of a passionate temper was over, when she had taken breath, and had time to consider this
     sudden and extraordinary visit, a glimmer of hope and interest penetrated into the bosom of the
     gloomy girl. She was two years older than Miss Marjoribanks, and as different in "style" as she
     was in voice. She was not stout as yet, though it is the nature of a contralto to be stout; but
     she was tall, with all due opportunity for that development which might come later. And then
     Barbara possessed a kind of beauty, the beauty of a passionate and somewhat sullen brunette,
     dark and glowing, with straight black eyebrows, very dark and very straight, which gave, oddly
     enough, a suggestion of oblique vision to her eyes; but her eyes were not in the least oblique,
     and looked at you straight from under that black line of shadow with no doubtful expression.
     She was shy in a kind of way, as was natural to a young woman who had never seen any society,
     and felt herself, on the whole, injured and unappreciated. But no two things could be more
     different than this shyness which made Barbara look you straight in the face with a kind of
     scared defiance, and the sweet shyness that pleaded for kind treatment in the soft eyes of
     little Rose, who was plain, and had the oddest longing to make people comfortable, and please
     them in her way, which, to be sure, was not always successful. Barbara sat down on the stool
     before the piano, which Miss Marjoribanks had been so obliging as to close, and thought it all
     over with growing excitement. No doubt it was a little puzzling to make out how the discovery
     of a fine contralto, and the possibility of getting up unlimited duets, could further Lucilla
     in the great aim of her life, which was to be a comfort to her dear papa. But Barbara was like
     a young soldier of fortune, ready to take a great deal for granted, and swallow much that was
     mysterious in the programme of the adventurous general who might lead her on to glory. In half
     an hour her dreams had gone so far that she saw herself receiving in Miss Marjoribanks's
     drawing-room the homage, not only of Grange Lane, but even of the county families, who would be
     attracted by rumours of her wonderful performance; and Barbara was, to her own consciousness,
     walking up the middle aisle of Carlingford Church in a veil of real Brussels, before little Mr
     Lake came in, hungry and good-tempered, from his round. To be sure, she had not concluded who
     was to be the bridegroom; but that was one of those matters of detail which could not be
     precisely concluded on till the time.
Such was the immediate result, so far as this secondary personage was concerned, of Lucilla's
     masterly impromptu; and it is needless to say that the accomplished warrior, who had her wits
     always about her, and had made, while engaged in a simple reconnaissance, so brilliant and
     successful a capture, withdrew from the scene still more entirely satisfied with herself.
     Nothing, indeed, could have come more opportunely for Lucilla, who possessed in perfection that
     faculty of throwing herself into the future, and anticipating the difficulties of a position,
     which is so valuable to all who aspire to be leaders of mankind. With a prudence which Dr
     Marjoribanks himself would have acknowledged to be remarkable "in a person of her age and sex,"
     Lucilla had already foreseen that to amuse her guests entirely in her own person, would be at
     once impracticable and "bad style." The first objection might have been got over, for Miss
     Marjoribanks had a soul above the ordinary limits of possibility, but the second unanswerable.
     This discovery, however, satisfied all the necessities of the position. Lucilla, who was
     liberal, as genius ought always to be, was perfectly willing that all the young ladies in
     Carlingford should sing their little songs while she was entertaining her guests; and then at
     the right moment, when her ruling mind saw it was necessary, would occur the duet—the one duet
     which would be the great feature of the evening. Thus it will be seen that another quality of
     the highest order developed itself during Miss Marjoribanks's deliberations; for, to tell the
     truth, she set a good deal of store by her voice, and had been used to applause, and had tasted
     the sweetness of individual success. This, however, she was willing to sacrifice for the
     enhanced and magnificent effect which she felt could be produced by the combination of the two
     voices; and the sacrifice was one which a weaker woman would have been incapable of making. She
     went home past Salem Chapel by the little lane which makes a line of communication between the
     end of Grove Street and the beginning of Grange Lane, with a sentiment of satisfaction worthy
     the greatness of her mission. Dr Marjoribanks never came home to lunch, and indeed had a
     contempt for that feminine indulgence; which, to be sure, might be accounted for by the fact
     that about that time in the day the Doctor very often found himself to be passing close by one
     or other of the houses in the neighbourhood which had a reputation for good sherry or madeira,
     such as exists no more. Lucilla, accordingly, had her lunch alone, served to her with
     respectful care by Nancy, who was still under the impression of the interview of the morning;
     and it occurred to Miss Marjoribanks, as she sat at table alone, that this was an opportunity
     too valuable to be left unimproved; for, to be sure, there are few things more pleasant than a
     little impromptu luncheon-party, where everybody comes without being expected, fresh from the
     outside world, and ready to tell all that is going on; though, on the other hand, it was a
     little doubtful how it might work in Carlingford, where the men had generally something to do,
     and where the married ladies took their luncheon when the children had their dinner, and
     presided at the nursery meal. And as for a party of young ladies, even supposing they had the
     courage to come, with no more solid admixture of the more important members of society,
     Lucilla, to tell the truth, had no particular taste for that. Miss Marjoribanks reflected as
     she ate—and indeed, thanks to her perfect health and her agreeable morning walk, Lucilla had a
     very pretty appetite, and enjoyed her meal in a way that would have been most satisfactory to
     her many friends—that it must be by way of making his visit, which was aggravating under all
     circumstances, more aggravating still, that Tom Marjoribanks had decided to come now, of all
     times in the world. "If he had waited till things were organised, he might have been of a
     little use," Lucilla said to herself; "for at least he could have brought some of the men that
     come on circuit, and that would have made a little novelty; but, of course, just now it would
     never do to make a rush at people, and invite them all at once." After a moment's
     consideration, however. Miss Marjoribanks, with her usual candour, reflected that it was not in
     Tom Marjoribanks's power to change the time of the Carlingford assizes, and that, accordingly,
     he was not to be blamed in this particular at least. "Of course it is not his fault,"
     she added, to herself, "but it is astonishing how things happen with some men always at the
     wrong moment; and it is so like Tom." These reflections were interrupted by the
     arrival of visitors, whom Miss Marjoribanks received with her usual grace. The first was old
     Mrs Chiley, who kissed Lucilla, and wanted to know how she had enjoyed herself on the
     Continent, and if she had brought many pretty things home. "My dear, you have grown ever so
     much since the last time I saw you," the old lady said in her grandmotherly way, "and stout
     with it, which is such a comfort with a tall girl; and then your poor dear mamma was so
     delicate. I have always been a little anxious about you on that account, Lucilla; and I am so
     glad, my dear, to see you looking so strong."
"Dear Mrs Chiley," said Miss Marjoribanks, who perhaps in her heart was not quite so
     gratified by this compliment as the old lady intended, "the great aim of my life is to be a
     comfort to dear papa."
Mrs Chiley was very much moved by this filial piety, and she told Lucilla that story about
     the Colonel's niece, Susan, who was such a good daughter, and had refused three excellent
     offers, to devote herself to her father and mother, with which the public in Grange Lane were
     tolerably acquainted. "And one of them was a baronet, my dear," said Mrs Chiley. Miss
     Marjoribanks did not make any decided response, for she felt that it would be dangerous to
     commit herself to such a height of self-abnegation as that; but the old lady was quite pleased
     to hear of her travels and adventures instead; and stayed so long that Mrs Centum and Mrs
     Woodburn, who happened to arrive at the same moment, found her still there. Mrs Chiley was a
     little afraid of Mrs Woodburn, and she took her leave hastily, with another kiss; and Lucilla
     found herself face to face with the only two women who could attempt a rival enterprise to her
     own in Carlingford. As for Mrs Woodburn, she had settled herself in an easy-chair by the fire,
     and was fully prepared to take notes. To be sure, Lucilla was the very person to fall victim to
     her arts; for that confidence in herself which, in one point of view, gave grandeur to the
     character of Miss Marjoribanks, gave her also a certain naïveté and openness which the most
     simple rustic could not have surpassed.
"I am sure by her face she has been telling you about my niece Susan," said the mimic,
     assuming Mrs Chiley's tone, and almost her appearance, for the moment, "and that one of them
     was a baronet, my dear. I always know from her looks what she has been saying; and 'the Colonel
     was much as usual, but suffering a little from the cold, as he always does in this climate.'
     She must be a good soul, for she always has her favourite little speeches written in her
     face."
"I am sure I don't know," said Miss Marjoribanks, who felt it was her duty to make an
     example; "there has always been one thing remarked of me all my life, that I never have had a
     great sense of humour. I know it is singular, but when one has a defect, it is always so much
     better to confess it. I always get on very well with anything else, but I never had any sense
     of humour, you know; and I am very fond of Mrs Chiley. She has always had a fancy for me from
     the time I was born; and she has such nice manners. But then, it is so odd I should have no
     sense of humour," said Lucilla, addressing herself to Mrs Centum, who was sitting on the sofa
     by her. "Don't you think it is very odd?"
"I am sure it is very nice," said Mrs Centum. "I hate people that laugh at everything. I
     don't see much to laugh at myself, I am sure, in this distracting world; any one who has a lot
     of children and servants like me to look after, finds very little to laugh at." And she seized
     the opportunity to enter upon domestic circumstances. Mrs Woodburn did not answer a word. She
     made a most dashing murderous sketch of Lucilla, but that did the future ruler of Carlingford
     very little harm; and then, by the evening, it was known through all Grange Lane that Miss
     Marjoribanks had snubbed the caricaturist who kept all the good people in terror of their
     lives. Snubbed her absolutely, and took the words out of her very mouth, was the report that
     flew through Grange Lane; and it may be imagined how Lucilla's prestige rose in consequence,
     and how much people began to expect of Miss Marjoribanks, who had performed such a feat almost
     on the first day of her return home.
</div></body></text></TEI>