<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Felix Holt, the Radical</title><author>Eliot, George [pseud.] (1819-1880)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER VIII.

"Rumour doth double like the voice and echo."
Shakespeare.
The mind of a man is as a country which was once open to squatters, who have bred and
      multiplied and become masters of the land. But then happeneth a time when new and hungry
      comers dispute the land; and there is trial of strength, and the stronger wins. Nevertheless
      the first squatters be they who have prepared the ground, and the crops to the end will be
      sequent (though chiefly on the nature of the soil, as of light sand, mixed loam, or heavy
      clay, yet) somewhat on the primal labour and sowing.
That talkative maiden, Rumour, though in the interest of art she is figured as a
      youthful winged beauty with flowing garments, soaring above the heads of men, and breathing
      world-thrilling news through a gracefully-curved trumpet, is in fact a very old maid, who
      puckers her silly face by the fireside, and really does no more than chirp a wrong guess or a
      lame story into the ear of a fellow-gossip; all the rest of the work attributed to her is done
      by the ordinary working of those passions against which men pray in the Litany, with the help
      of a plentiful stuipidity against which
       we have never yet had any authorised form of prayer.
When Mr Scales's strong need to make an impressive figure in conversation, together with his
      very slight need of any other premise than his own sense of his wide general knowledge and
      probable infallibility, led him to specify five hundred thousand as the lowest admissible
      amount of Harold Transome's commercially-acquired fortune, it was not fair to put this down to
      poor old Miss Rumour, who had only told Scales that the fortune was considerable. And again,
      when the curt Mr Sircome found occasion at Treby to mention the five hundred thousand as a
      fact that folks seemed pretty sure about, this expansion of the butler into "folks" was
      entirely due to Mr Sircome's habitual preference for words which could not be laid hold of or
      give people a handle over him. It was in this simple way that the report of Harold Transome's
      fortune spread and was manified, adding much lustre to his opinions in the eyes of Liberals,
      and compelling even men of the opposite party to admit that it increased his eligibility as a
      member for North Loamshire. It was observed by a sound thinker in these parts that property
      was ballast; and when once the aptness of that metaphor had
       been perceived, it followed that a man was not fit to navigate the sea of
      politics without a great deal of such ballast; and that, rightly understood, whatever
      increased the expense of election, inasmuch as it virtually raised the property qualification,
      was an unspeakable boon to the country.
Meanwhile the fortune that was getting larger in the imagination of constituents was
      shrinking a little in the imagination of its owner. It was hardly more than a hundred and
      fifty thousand; and there were not only the heavy mortgages to be paid off, but also a large
      amount of capital was needed in order to repair the farm-buildings all over the estate, to
      carry out extensive draining, and make allowances to incoming tenants, which might remove the
      difficulty of newly letting the farms in a time of agricultural depression. The farms actually
      tenanted were held by men who had begged hard to succeed their fathers in getting a little
      poorer every year, on land which was also getting poorer, where the highest rate of increase
      was in the arrears of rent, and where the master, in crushed hat and corduroys, looked
      pitiably lean and care-worn by the side of pauper labourers, who showed that superior
      assimilating power often observed to attend nourishment by the public money. Mr Goffe, of
       Rabbit's End, had never had it explained to him that, according to the true
      theory of rent, land must inevitably be given up when it would not yield a profit equal to the
      ordinary rate of interest; so that from want of knowing what was inevitable, and not from a
      Titanic spirit of opposition, he kept on his land. He often said of himself, with a melancholy
      wipe of his sleeve across his brow, that he "didn't know which-a-way to turn;" and he would
      have been still more at a loss on the subject if he had quitted Rabbit's End with a waggonful
      of furniture and utensils, a file of receipts, a wife with five children, and a shepherd-dog
      in low spirits.
It took no long time for Harold Transome to discover this state of things, and to see,
      moreover, that, except on the demesne immediately around the house, the timber had been
      mismanaged. The woods had been recklessly thinned, and there had been insufficient planting.
      He had not yet thoroughly investigated the various accounts kept by his mother, by Jermyn, and
      by Banks the bailiff; but what had been done with the large sums which had been received for
      timber was a suspicious mystery to him. He observed that the farm held by Jermyn was in
      first-rate order, that a good deal had been spent on the buildings, and that the rent had
      stood
       unpaid. Mrs Transome had taken an opportunity of saying that Jermyn had had some
      of the mortgage-deeds transferred to him, and that his rent was set against so much interest.
      Harold had only said, in his careless yet decisive way, "O, Jermyn be hanged! It seems to me
      if Durfey hadn't died and made room for me, Jermyn would have ended by coming to live here,
      and you would have had to keep the lodge and open the gate for his carriage. But I shall pay
      him off—mortgages and all—by-and-by. I'll owe him nothing—not even a curse." Mrs Transome said
      no more. Harold did not care to enter fully into the subject with his mother. The fact that
      she had been active in the management of the estate—had ridden about it continually, had
      busied herself with accounts, had been head-bailiff of the vacant farms, and had yet allowed
      things to go wrong—was set down by him simply to the general futility of women's attempts to
      transact men's business. He did not want to say anything to annoy her: he was only determined
      to let her understand, as quietly as possible, that she had better cease all interference.
Mrs Transome did understand this; and it was very little that she dared to say on business,
      though there was a fierce struggle of her anger and
       pride with a dread which was nevertheless supreme. As to the old tenants, she
      only observed, on hearing Harold burst forth about their wretched condition, "that with the
      estate so burthened, the yearly loss by arrears could better be borne than the outlay and
      sacrifice necessary in order to let the farms anew."
"I was really capable of calculating, Harold," she ended, with a touch of bitterness. "It
      seems easy to deal with farmers and their affairs when you only see them in print, I daresay;
      but it's not quite so easy when you live among them. You have only to look at Sir Maximus's
      estate: you will see plenty of the same thing. The times have been dreadful, and old families
      like to keep their old tenants. But I daresay that is Toryism."
"It's a hash of odds and ends, if that is Toryism, my dear mother. However, I wish you had
      kept three more old tenants; for then I should have had three more fifty-pound voters. And, in
      a hard run, one may be beaten by a head. But," Harold added, smiling and handing her a ball of
      worsted which had fallen, "a woman ought to be a Tory, and graceful, and handsome, like you. I
      should hate a woman who took up my opinions, and talked for me. I'm an Oriental, you know. I
      say, mother,
       shall we have this room furnished with rose-colour? I notice that it suits your
      bright grey hair."
Harold thought it was only natural that his mother should have been in a sort of subjection
      to Jermyn throughout the awkward circumstances of the family. It was the way of women, and all
      weak minds, to think that what they had been used to was inalterable, and any quarrel with a
      man who managed private affairs was necessarily a formidable thing. He himself was proceeding
      very cautiously, and preferred not even to know too much just at present, lest a certain
      personal antipathy he was conscious of towards Jermyn, and an occasional liability to
      exasperation, should get the better of a calm and clear-sighted resolve not to quarrel with
      the man while he could be of use. Harold would have been disgusted with himself if he had
      helped to frustrate his own purpose. And his strongest purpose now was to get returned for
      Parliament, to make a figure there as a Liberal member, and to become on all grounds a
      personage of weight in North Loamshire.
How Harold Transome came to be a Liberal in opposition to all the traditions of his family,
      was a more subtle inquiry than he had ever cared to follow out. The newspapers undertook
       to explain it. The North Loamshire Herald witnessed with a grief and
      disgust certain to be shared by all persons who were actuated by whole-some British feeling,
      an example of defection in the inheritor of a family name which in times past had been
      associated with attachment to right principle, and with the maintenance of our constitution in
      Church and State; and pointed to it as an additional proof that men who had passed any large
      portion of their lives beyond the limits of our favoured country, usually contracted not only
      a laxity of feeling towards Protestantism, nay, towards religion itself—a latitudinarian
      spirit hardly distinguishable from atheism—but also a levity of disposition, inducing them to
      tamper with those institutions by which alone Great Britain had risen to her pre-eminence
      among the nations. Such men, infected with outlandish habits, intoxicated with vanity,
      grasping at momentary power by flattery of the multitude, fearless because godless, liberal
      because un-English, were ready to pull one stone from under another in the national edifice,
      till the great structure tottered to its fall. On the other hand, the Duffield
       Watchman saw in this signal instance of self-liberation from the trammels of prejudice,
      a
       decisive guarantee of intellectual pre eminence, united with a generous
      sensibility to the claims of man as man, which had burst asunder, and cast off, by a
      spontaneous exertion of energy, the cramping out-worn shell of hereditary bias and class
      interest.
But these large-minded guides of public opinion argued from wider data than could be
      furnished by any knowledge of the particular case concerned. Harold Transome was neither the
      dissolute cosmopolitan so vigorously sketched by the Tory Herald , nor the
      intellectual giant and moral lobster suggested by the liberal imagination of the
       Watchman . Twenty years ago he had been a bright, active, good-tempered lad, with
      sharp eyes and a good aim; he delighted in success and in predominance; but he did not long
      for an impossible predominance, and become sour and sulky because it was impossible. He played
      at the games he was clever in, and usually won; all other games he let alone, and thought them
      of little worth. At home and at Eton he had been side by side with his stupid elder brother
      Durfey, whom he despised; and he very early began to reflect that since this Caliban in
      miniature was older than himself, he must carve out his own fortune.
       That was a nuisance; and on the whole the world seemed rather ill-arranged, at
      Eton especially, where there were many reasons why Harold made no great figure. He was not
      sorry the money was wanting to send him to Oxford; he did not see the good of Oxford; he had
      been surrounded by many things during his short life, of which he had distinctly said to
      himself that he did not see the good, and he was not disposed to venerate on the strength of
      any good that others saw. He turned his back on home very cheerfully, though he was rather
      fond of his mother, and very fond of Transome Court, and the river where he had been used to
      fish; but he said to himself as he passed the lodge-gates, "I'll get rich somehow, and have an
      estate of my own, and do what I like with it." This determined aiming at something not easy
      but clearly possible, marked the direction in which Harold's nature was strong; he had the
      energetic will and muscle, the self-confidence, the quick perception, and the narrow
      imagination which make what is admiringly called the practical mind.
Since then his character had been ripened by a various experience, and also by much
      knowledge which he had set himself deliberately to gain.
       But the man was no more than the boy writ large, with an extensive commentary.
      The years had nourished an inclination to as much opposition as would enable him to assert his
      own independence and power without throwing himself into that tabooed condition which robs
      power of its triumph. And this inclination had helped his shrewdness in forming judgments
      which were at once innovating and moderate. He was addicted at once to rebellion and to
      conformity, and only an intimate personal knowledge could enable any one to predict where his
      conformity would begin. The limit was not defined by theory, but was drawn in an irregular
      zigzag by early disposition and association; and his resolution, of which he had never lost
      hold, to be a thorough Englishman again some day, had kept up the habit of considering all his
      conclusions with reference to English politics and English social conditions. He meant to
      stand up for every change that the economical condition of the country required, and he had an
      angry contempt for men with coronets on their coaches, but too small a share of brains to see
      when they had better make a virtue of necessity. His respect was rather for men who had no
      coronets, but who achieved a just influence
       by furthering all measures which the common sense of the country, and the
      increasing self-assertion of the majority, peremptorily demanded. He could be such a man
      himself.
In fact Harold Transome was a clever, frank, good-natured egoist; not stringently
      consistent, but without any disposition to falsity; proud, but with a pride that was moulded
      in an individual rather than an hereditary form; unspeculative, unsentimental, unsympathetic;
      fond of sensual pleasures, but disinclined to all vice, and attached as a healthy,
      clear-sighted person, to all conventional morality, construed with a certain freedom, like
      doctrinal articles to which the public order may require subscription. A character is apt to
      look but indifferently, written out in this way. Reduced to a map, our premises seem
      insignificant, but they make, nevertheless, a very pretty freehold to live in and walk over;
      and so, if Harold Transome had been among your acquaintances, and you had observed his
      qualities through the medium of his agreeable person, bright smile, and a certain easy charm
      which accompanies sensuousness when unsullied by coarseness—through the medium also of the
      many opportunities in which he would have made himself useful or pleasant to you—you would
      have thought him a good fellow,
       highly acceptable as a guest, a colleague, or a brother-in-law. Whether all
      mothers would have liked him as a son, is another question.
It is a fact perhaps kept a little too much in the background, that mothers have a self
      larger than their maternity, and that when their sons have become taller than themselves, and
      are gone from them to college or into the world, there are wide spaces of their time which are
      not filled with praying for their boys, reading old letters, and envying yet blessing those
      who are attending to their shirtbuttons. Mrs Transome was certainly not one of those bland,
      adoring, and gently tearful women. After sharing the common dream that when a beautiful
      man-child was born to her, her cup of happiness would be full, she had travelled through long
      years apart from that child to find herself at last in the presence of a son of whom she was
      afraid, who was utterly unmanageable by her, and to whose sentiments in any given case she
      possessed no key. Yet Harold was a kind son: he kissed his mother's brow, offered her his arm,
      let her choose what she liked for the house and garden, asked her whether she would have bays
      or greys for her new carriage, and was bent on seeing her make as good a figure in the
      neighbourhood as any other woman of her rank.
       She trembled under this kindness: it was not enough to satisfy her; still, if it
      should ever cease and give place to something else—she was too uncertain about Harold's
      feelings to imagine clearly what that something would be. The finest threads, such as no eye
      sees, if bound cunningly about the sensitive flesh, so that the movement to break them would
      bring torture, may make a worse bondage than any fetters. Mrs Transome felt the fatal threads
      about her, and the bitterness of this helpless bondage mingled itself with the new elegancies
      of the dining and drawing rooms, and all the household changes which Harold had ordered to be
      brought about with magical quickness. Nothing was as she had once expected it would be. If
      Harold had shown the least care to have her stay in the room with him— if he had really cared
      for her opinion—if he had been what she had dreamed he would be in the eyes of those people
      who had made her world—if all the past could be dissolved, and leave no solid trace of
      itself—mighty ifs that were all impossible—she would have tasted some joy; but now
      she began to look back with regret to the days when she sat in loneliness among the old
      drapery, and still longed for something that might happen. Yet, save in a
       bitter little speech, or in deep sigh heard by no one besides Denner, she kept
      all these things hidden in her heart, and went out in the autumn sunshine to overlook the
      alterations in the pleasure-grounds very much as a happy woman might have done. One day,
      however, when she was occupied in this way, an occasion came on which she chose to express
      indirectly a part of her inward care.
She was standing on the broad gravel in the afternoon; the long shadows lay on the grass;
      the light seemed the more glorious because of the reddened and golden trees. The gardeners
      were busy at their pleasant work; the newly-turned soil gave out an agreeable fragrance; and
      little Harry was playing with Nimrod round old Mr Transome, who sat placidly on a low
      garden-chair. The scene would have made a charming picture of English domestic life, and the
      handsome, majestic, grey-haired woman (obviously grandmamma) would have been especially
      admired. But the artist would have felt it requisite to turn her face towards her husband and
      little grandson, and to have given her an elderly amiability of expression which would have
      divided remark with his exquisite rendering of her Indian shawl. Mrs Transome's face was
      turned
       the other way, and for this reason she only heard an approaching step, and did
      not see whose it was; yet it startled her: it was not quick enough to be her son's step, and
      besides, Harold was away at Duffield. It was Mr Jermyn's.

</div></body></text></TEI>