<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
Chapter XXII
The Archdeacon returned to Carlingford before Thursday, as he had anticipated; but in the
     interval Mr Cavendish had not recovered his courage so far as to renew his visit to Miss
     Marjoribanks, or to face the man who had alarmed him so much. Everybody in Grange Lane remarked
     at the time how worried poor Mrs Woodburn looked. Her eyes lost their brightness, which some
     people thought was the only beauty she had, and her nerves and her temper both failed her, no
     one could tell why. The personal sketches she made at this moment were truculent and bitter to
     an unheard-of degree. She took off Mr Beverley with a savage force which electrified her
     audience, and put words into his mouth which everybody admitted were exactly like him, if he
     could ever be imagined to have fallen into the extraordinary circumstances in which the mimic
     placed him. In short, Mrs Woodburn made a little drama out of the Archdeacon. Mr Beverley, of
     course, knew nothing about this, and showed some surprise now and then at the restrained
     laughter which he heard in the corners; but when anybody spoke of Mrs Woodburn, he showed an
     instinctive want of confidence. "I have not studied her sufficiently to give an opinion of
     her," he said, which was certainly the very reverse of her deliverance upon him. To tell the
     truth, she had rather studied him too much, and gave too keen an edge to his characteristic
     qualities, as is natural to all literary portraiture, and even went so far that, in the end,
     people began to ask whether she had any personal spite against him.
"She don't know him," Mr Woodburn said, when he heard some faint echo of this suggestion.
     "She's clever, and it carries her away, you know. She enters into it so, she don't know how far
     she is going; but I can answer for it she never saw the Archdeacon before; and Hal isn't here
     to give her the key-note, as she says. He has met everybody, I believe, one place or
     another," the simple man said, with a little natural pride; for in his heart he was vain of his
     fashionable brother-in-law. As for Mr Cavendish himself, it began to be understood that he was
     with a friend who was sick, on the Continent; and soon—for news had a wonderful tendency to
     increase and grow bigger as it spread in Grange Lane—that his friend was dying, and that a
     probable large increase of fortune to the popular favourite would be the result, which was an
     idea that did credit to the imagination of Carlingford. He had disappeared completely once more
     after the eventful day which we have described, carrying out in the fullest way Lucilla's
     prediction, but striking Barbara Lake with bitter disappointment. Miss Marjoribanks had a great
     many things to occupy her, but Barbara had nothing except the humble duty of looking after her
     little brothers and sisters, and attending to her father's comfort, which had never been
     occupations particularly to her mind. And then Barbara was aware that, if she neglected her
     duties, Rose, on her return from the School of Design, would do them, though with a fierce
     little outbreak of indignation, which the elder sister felt she could bear; and accordingly,
     she did little else but brood over his sudden disappearance, and spend her time at the window
     looking for his return.
Lucilla conducted herself, as might have been expected, in a much more rational and dignified
     manner. She made herself very agreeable to the Archdeacon, who unbended very much, and grew
     very nice, as Mrs Chiley herself allowed. "But, my dear, I am uneasy about his opinions," the
     old lady said. He certainly had a very free way of talking, and was ready to discuss
      anything, and was not approved of by Mr Bury. But still he had very good connections
     and a nice position, and had always a chance of being Bishop of Carlingford; and in marriage it
     is well known that one never can have everything one wants. So that, on the whole, even Mrs
     Chiley did not see what difference his opinions made, so far as Lucilla was concerned. When
     Miss Marjoribanks went down to Colonel Chiley's in the evening and made tea for the old people,
     like a daughter of the house, Mr Beverley was always disposed to go over to the enemy, as the
     old Colonel said. No doubt he had enough of Colonel Chiley, who had not received a new idea
     into his mind since the battle of Waterloo, and did not see what people had to do with such
     nonsense. And then the Archdeacon would very often walk home with the young visitor. During
     this time, as was natural, Mr Beverley heard Mr Cavendish's name a hundred times, and
     regretted, like all the world, that so eminent a member of the Carlingford commonwealth should
     be absent during his visit; but, at the same time, Lucilla took great care to avoid all
     personalities, and kept a discreet silence even about the gifts and accomplishments of her
     almost-lover. Mrs Chiley sighed, poor soul, when she saw how her young friend avoided this
     subject, and thought sometimes that he was forgotten, sometimes that the poor dear was breaking
     her heart for him; but it is needless to say that neither of these suppositions was in the
     least true.
And then it began to be considered rather odd in Carlingford that the Archdeacon should pay
     such a long visit. Mrs Chiley no doubt was very kind and hospitable, and exceedingly glad to
     receive such a distinguished clergyman; but when a man has been six weeks in any one's house,
     and shows no inclination of going, it is natural that people should feel a little surprised.
     His visitation was over, and he had dined with everybody, and studied the place and its
     characteristics, and entered into everything that was going on. The only thing, indeed, that he
     did not seem to think of, was going away. If it had been Mr Cavendish, the chances are that he
     would have made himself so much one of the family, that his departure would have been felt as a
     domestic calamity; but the Archdeacon was very different from Mr Cavendish. So long as he was
     in the house it was impossible to forget either his position or his ways of thinking, or the
     absence of any real connection between himself and his hosts. He did not combat or contradict
     anybody, but he would give a faint smile when the Colonel uttered his old-fashioned sentiments,
     which drove the old soldier frantic. "As if I was not able to form an opinion, by Jove!"
     Colonel Chiley said; while, on the other hand, the Archdeacon was quite ready to enter into the
     young people's absurd theories, and discuss the very Bible itself, as if that were a book to be
     discussed. As for the Rector, he turned his head away when he passed Colonel Chiley's door, and
     Miss Bury made visits of condolence and sympathy. "You must feel it a great responsibility
     having Mr Beverley with you," the Rector's sister would say, though naturally without any
     distinct explanation of her meaning; and then she would look at Mrs Chiley and sigh.
"Oh, I am sure it is a great pleasure," Mrs Chiley answered, not willing to let down the
     prestige of her guest. "He is very nice, and takes a great deal of interest in everything; and
     then, you know, he is a connection of ours. The Colonel's niece, Mary Chiley——"
"Yes, I know," said Miss Bury. "Poor thing! she looked suffering the last time I saw her. I
     hope she has found the true consolation to support her, now she has entered into the troubles
     of life."
"Well, yes, I hope so," said Mrs Chiley, a little doubtfully; "but you know one does not feel
     the troubles of life very severely at her age; and I don't think I should have called a baby a
     trouble when I was like her. I never had any, you know, and I used to fret over it a great
     deal; but the Colonel never liked the noise of children, and I suppose it is all for the
     best."
"One may always be sure of that," said Miss Bury, in her instructive way. "I suppose the
     Archdeacon is going soon," she added; "he has been here a long time now. I almost wonder he
     likes to be so long absent from his parish. Two months, is it not?"
"Oh, no—not quite six weeks," said Mrs Chiley briskly. "I hope he may be persuaded to stay
     some time longer. I look upon it as quite a compliment to Carlingford; for, to be sure, he
     would not stay if he had not some attraction," said the imprudent old woman. And this was
     precisely what Miss Bury wanted, as any one of acute perceptions might have seen from the
     first.
"It must be a great responsibility for you," said the Rector's sister, with a sigh, pressing
     Mrs Chiley's hand. "If it should turn out badly, you know——Of course, my brother and I don't
     agree with Mr Beverley on all points—though I am sure I hope he is quite conscientious; but I
     do feel for you with such a responsibility," said Miss Bury, with a look that made the old lady
     nervous in spite of herself. Thus, notwithstanding all her sense of the duties of hospitality,
     and her anxiety about Lucilla's interests, she could not but feel that it would be rather a
     relief to get so formidable a guest fairly out of the house. It is uncomfortable, it must be
     allowed, to entertain in your house anybody, particularly a clergyman of whom your Rector does
     not approve; and there could be no doubt that the Archdeacon was not like the clergymen that
     Mrs Chiley had been accustomed to. "And he could come back another time," she said to herself,
     by way of conciliating her own weariness with her visitor's advantage and the interests of
     Lucilla. But notwithstanding these reflections on Mrs Chiley's part and notwithstanding the
     Colonel's less amiable growl, uttered every morning—"Does that parson of yours never mean to go
     away?"—the Archdeacon showed no intention of budging. It was poor Mrs Chiley who had all the
     brunt to bear, to exhaust herself in civilities and to be upbraided with "that parson of
     yours"—whereas he was not in the least her parson, nor even the kind of man she approved of as
     a clergyman. All this, however, the brave old woman bore with fortitude for Lucilla's sake:
     certainly it must be Lucilla who kept him in Carlingford—if it were not something else.
Things were in this condition, Mr Cavendish having again disappeared into utter darkness, and
     Carlingford beginning to enter warmly into the question whether or not Mr Beverley was paying
     attention to Lucilla, when it happened to Miss Marjoribanks one morning to meet the Archdeacon
     in a little lane running between Grove Street and Grange Lane. Opening from this lane was a
     little door in the wall, which admitted to a little garden very bright with flowers of the
     simplest old-fashioned kinds, with a little house planted at its extremity, which had
     pretensions to be an old-fashioned and quasi-rural cottage, on the score of being very rickety,
     uncomfortable, and badly arranged. But it must be a very impracticable erection indeed which
     does not look tolerable under the bright sunshine on a summer noon, at the end of a pretty
     garden where children are playing and birds singing, and a woman or two about. Lucilla was
     standing at the door of this little closed-up hermitage, almost filling up the opening with her
     crisp summer draperies, and affording only a very partial and tempting glimpse of its flowers
     and shrubs and whitewashed walls inside; and when Mr Beverley came up to Miss Marjoribanks he
     felt his curiosity excited. "Is it Armida's garden, or the Elysian fields—" said the
     Archdeacon; and he made a dead stop before the door, not knowing any more than any other blind
     mortal what he was going to find inside.
"I don't know anything about Armida," said Miss Marjoribanks; "unfortunately they were all
     Cambridge in their ways of thinking at Mount Pleasant, and our classics got dreadfully
     neglected. But you may come in if you like—at least I think you may come in, if you will
     promise not to frighten the children. I am sure they never saw an Archdeacon in their
     lives."
"Are there children?" said Mr Beverley, with a doubtful air; for, to tell the truth, he had
     come to the age at which men think it best to avoid children, unless, indeed, they happen to
     have a personal interest in them; and he stretched his neck a little to see in over Miss
     Marjoribanks's head.
"There are a whole lot of children, and a pretty governess," said Lucilla. "It is a school,
     and I am so much interested in it. I may call it my school, for that matter. I came to know her
     in the funniest way; but I will tell you that another time. And it was just my luck, as usual.
     She is so nice, and quite a lady. If you will not say you are an Archdeacon, to frighten the
     children, I will let you come in."
"You shall call me whatever you like," said Mr Beverley; "when I am with the lady-patroness,
     what does it matter what I call myself? Let me see how you manage your educational department.
     I have already bowed before your genius in the other branches of government; but this ought to
     be more in my own way."
"I don't think you care for visiting schools," said Lucilla. "I know you think it is a bore;
     but she is so nice, and so nice-looking; I am sure you will be pleased with her. I am quite
     sure she is a lady, and has seen better days."
"Oh, those dreadful women that have seen better days!" said the Archdeacon; "I think Mrs
     Chiley has a regiment of them. It is hard to know how to get one's self into sympathy with
     those faded existences. They fill me with an infinite pity; but then what can one do? If one
     tries to recall them to the past, it sounds like mockery—and if one speaks of the present, it
     wounds their feelings. It is a great social difficulty," said Mr Beverley; and he fixed his
     eyes on the ground and entered meditatively, without looking where he was going, in his
     Broad-Church way.
"Dear Mrs Chiley is so kind," said Lucilla, who was a little puzzled for the moment, and did
     not know what to say.
"Mrs Chiley is a good, pure, gentle woman," said the Archdeacon. He spoke in a tone which
     settled the question, and from which there was no appeal; and no doubt what he said was
     perfectly true, though it was not a very distinct characterisation. Thus they went in together
     into the bright little garden, thinking of nothing in particular, and loitering as people do
     who do not know what is coming. There was something that morning in Mr Beverley's tone and
     manner which struck Lucilla as something more than usual. She was not a young woman to attach
     undue importance to looks and tones; but the Archdeacon's manner was so softened and mellowed,
     and his eyes had so much expression in them, and he looked at Lucilla with such marked regard,
     that it was impossible for her not to recognise that a crisis might be approaching. To be sure,
     it was not by any means so near as that crisis manqué which had so lately passed over
     her head in respect to Mr Cavendish. But still Miss Marjoribanks could not but remark the signs
     of a slowly approaching and most likely more important climax; and as she remarked it, Lucilla
     naturally by anticipation prepared herself for the coming event that thus threw a shadow upon
     her. She did not make up her mind to accept Mr Beverley any more than she had made up her mind
     to accept Mr Cavendish; but she thought it only her duty to him and to herself, and to society
     in general, to take his claims into full consideration. And no doubt, if these claims had
     seemed to her sufficiently strong to merit such a reward, Miss Marjoribanks had it in her to
     marry the Archdeacon, and make him an admirable wife, though she was not at the present moment,
     so far as she was aware, absolutely what foolish people call in love with him. At the same
     time, she made herself all the more agreeable to Mr Beverley from her sense of the dawn of
     tenderness with which he regarded her. And in this way they went up the broad central path
     which traversed the little garden, neither looking to the left nor the right, but presenting
     all that appearance of being occupied with each other, which, especially to a female observer,
     is so easy of interpretation. For, to be sure, the Archdeacon had not the remotest idea into
     whose house he was going, nor who it was whom he was about to see.
But as it happened, Lucilla's protégée, who had seen better days, had just finished one of
     her lessons, and sent her little pupils out into the garden. She was preparing for the next
     little class, when, raising her eyes accidentally, she saw Miss Marjoribanks coming through the
     garden with the Archdeacon by her side. She was the same person whom Mr Bury had brought to
     Lucilla with the idea of recommending her to Dr Marjoribanks as a companion and chaperone for
     his daughter; but since then Mrs Mortimer's appearance had considerably changed. She had grown
     younger by ten years during the period of comparative comfort and tranquillity which Lucilla's
     active help and championship had procured for her. Her house, and her garden, and her little
     scholars, and the bloom on her cheeks, and the filling-up of her worn frame, were all Miss
     Marjoribanks's doing. In the intervals of her legislative cares Lucilla had run about all over
     Carlingford searching for pupils, and at the same moment had cut and stitched and arranged, and
     papered walls, and planted flower-beds, for the feeble creature thus thrown upon her. This was
     a side of Lucilla's character which certainly she did nothing to hide from the public, but
     which, at the same time, she never made any fuss about; and it was an endless pleasure to her
     to find a protégée so perfectly content to be "done for," and do as she was told to do. It was
     thus that the poor faded widow, who was sensitive and had feelings, and forgot herself so far
     as to faint, or nearly to faint, just at the most unlucky moment possible, when the Rector's
     character and dignity demanded superior self-control on her part, had found her youth again and
     her good looks under Lucilla's shadow. When she looked up and saw the two approaching, Mrs
     Mortimer's first impulse was to smile at the conjunction; but the next moment she had dropped
     the books out of her hands, and was standing gazing out like a woman in a dream, with the
     colour all gone out of her cheeks, and even out of her lips, in the surprise of the moment. It
     was only surprise and a kind of dismay; it was not terror, like that which Mr Cavendish had
     exhibited at the same apparition. She dropped into her chair without knowing it, and probably
     would have fainted this time also, if something more urgent than mere "feelings" had not roused
     her up. As it was, it happened very happily for her that she had thus a little preparation.
     When she saw that her patroness was leading Mr Beverley up to the door, and that in a minute
     more he would inevitably be brought to her very side, Mrs Mortimer roused up all her strength.
     She gathered up her books in her hand without knowing very well what she was doing, and, taking
     virtue from necessity, went desperately out to meet them. It was Miss Marjoribanks who first
     saw her, white and tottering, leaning against the trellis of the little porch, and Lucilla
     could not but give a little cry of alarm and wonder. What kind of man could this be, who thus
     struck down another victim without even so much as a glance? It was just then that the
     Archdeacon raised his eyes, and saw standing before him, among the faded roses, the woman whom
     he had been approaching so indifferently—the faded existence that had seen better days. He saw
     her, and he stood stock-still, as if it was she who was the basilisk, and the look of pleased
     interest went out of his face in a moment. In that moment he had become as unconscious of the
     presence of Lucilla as if he had never in his life softened his voice to her ear, or talked
     nonsense to please her. His eyes did not seem big enough to take in the figure which stood
     shrinking and looking at him in the porch. Then he made one long step forward, and took hold of
     her sleeve—not her hand—as if to convince himself that it was something real he saw. He showed
     no joy, nor satisfaction, nor anything but sheer amaze and wonder, at this unexpected
     appearance, for he had not had time to prepare himself as she had. "Am I dreaming, or is it
     you?" he said, in a voice that sounded as different from the voice with which he had been
     speaking to Lucilla, as if years had elapsed between the two. And it would be vain to describe
     the amazement and singular sense that the earth had suddenly given way under her feet, with
     which Miss Marjoribanks stood by and looked on.
</div></body></text></TEI>