<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Felix Holt, the Radical</title><author>Eliot, George [pseud.] (1819-1880)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="42">
CHAPTER XLI.

He rates me as a merchant does the wares
He will not purchase—"quality not high!—
'Twill lose its colour opened to the sun,
Has no aroma, and, in fine, is naught—
I barter not for such commodities—
There is no ratio betwixt sand and gems."
'Tis wicked judgment! for the soul can grow,
As embryos, that live and move but blindly,
Burst from the dark, emerge regenerate,
And lead a life of vision and of choice.
Esther did not take the carriage into Malthouse Lane, but left it to wait for her
      outside the town; and when she entered the house she put her finger on her lip to Lyddy and
      ran lightly up-stairs. She wished to surprise her father by this visit, and she succeeded. The
      little minister was just then almost surrounded by a wall of books, with merely his head
      peeping above them, being much embarrassed to find a substitute for tables and desks on which
      to arrange the volumes he kept open for reference. He was absorbed in mastering all those
      painstaking interpretations of the Book of Daniel, which are by
       this time well gone to the limbo of mistaken criticism; and Esther, as she
      opened the door softly, heard him rehearsing aloud a passage in which he declared, with some
      parenthetic provisoes, that he conceived not how a perverse ingenuity could blunt the edge of
      prophetic explicitness, or how an open mind could fail to see in the chronology of "the little
      horn" the resplendent lamp of an inspired symbol searching out the germinal growth of an
      antichristian power.
"You will not like me to interrupt you, father?" said Esther, slyly.
"Ah, my beloved child!" he exclaimed, upsetting a pile of books, and thus unintentionally
      making a convenient breach in his wall, through which Esther could get up to him and kiss him.
      "Thy appearing is as a joy despaired of. I had thought of thee as the blinded think of the
      daylight—which indeed is a thing to rejoice in, like all other good, though we see it not
      nigh."
"Are you sure you have been as well and comfortable as you said you were in your letters?"
      said Esther, seating herself close in front of her father, and laying her hand on his
      shoulder.
"I wrote truly, my dear, according to my knowledge at the time. But to an old memory like
       mine the present days are but as a little water poured on the deep. It seems now
      that all has been as usual, except my studies, which have gone somewhat curiously into
      prophetic history. But I fear you will rebuke me for my negligent apparel," said the little
      man, feeling in front of Esther's brightness like a bat overtaken by the morning.
"That is Lyddy's fault, who sits crying over her want of Christian assurance instead of
      brushing your clothes and putting out your clean cravat. She is always saying her
      righteousness is filthy rags, and really I don't think that is a very strong expression for
      it. I'm sure it is dusty clothes and furniture."
"Nay, my dear, your playfulness glances too severely on our faithful Lyddy. Doubtless I am
      myself deficient, in that I do not aid her infirm memory by admonition. But now tell me aught
      that you have left untold about yourself. Your heart has gone out somewhat towards this
      family— the old man and the child, whom I had not reckoned of?"
"Yes, father. It is more and more difficult to me to see how I can make up my mind to
      disturb these people at all."
"Something should doubtless be devised to lighten
       the loss and the change to the aged father and mother. I would have you in any
      case seek to temper a vicissitude, which is nevertheless a providential arrangement not to be
      wholly set aside."
"Do you think, father—do you feel assured that a case of inheritance like this of mine is a
      sort of providential arrangement that makes a command?"
"I have so held it," said Mr Lyon, solemnly; "in all my meditations I have so held it. For
      you have to consider, my dear, that you have been led by a peculiar path, and into experience
      which is not ordinarily the lot of those who are seated in high places; and what I have hinted
      to you already in my letters on this head, I shall wish on a future opportunity to enter into
      more at large."
Esther was uneasily silent. On this great question of her lot she saw doubts and
      difficulties, in which it seemed as if her father could not help her. There was no
      illumination for her in this theory of providential arrangement. She said suddenly (what she
      had not thought of at all suddenly),
"Have you been again to see Felix Holt, father? You have not mentioned him in your
      letters."
"I have been since I last wrote, my dear, and
       I took his mother with me, who, I fear, made the time heavy to him with her
      plaints. But afterwards I carried her away to the house of a brother minister at Loamford, and
      returned to Felix, and then we had much discourse."
"Did you tell him of everything that has happened —I mean about me—about the Transomes?"
"Assuredly I told him, and he listened as one astonished. For he had much to hear, knowing
      nought of your birth, and that you had any other father than Rufus Lyon. 'Tis a narrative I
      trust I shall not be called on to give to others; but I was not without satisfaction in
      unfolding the truth to this young man, who hath wrought himself into my affection strangely—I
      would fain hope for ends that will be a visible good in his less way-worn life, when mine
      shall be no longer."
"And you told him how the Transomes had come, and that I was staying at Transome Court?"
"Yes, I told these things with some particularity, as is my wont concerning what hath
      imprinted itself on my mind."
"What did Felix say?"
"Truly, my dear, nothing desirable to recite," said Mr Lyon, rubbing his hand over his
      brow.
"Dear father, he did say something, and you
       always remember what people say. Pray tell me; I want to know."
"It was a hasty remark, and rather escaped him than was consciously framed. He said, 'Then
      she will marry Transome; that is what Transome means.'"
"That was all?" said Esther, turning rather pale, and biting her lip with the determination
      that the tears should not start.
"Yes, we did not go further into that branch of the subject. I apprehend there is no warrant
      for his seeming prognostic, and I should not be without disquiet if I thought otherwise. For I
      confess that in your accession to this great position and property, I contemplate with hopeful
      satisfaction your remaining attached to that body of congregational Dissent, which, as I hold,
      hath retained most of pure and primitive discipline. Your education and peculiar history would
      thus be seen to have coincided with a long train of events in making this family property a
      mean of honouring and illustrating a purer form of Christianity than that which hath unhappily
      obtained the pre-eminence in this land. I speak, my child, as you know, always in the hope
      that you will fully join our communion; and this dear wish of my heart—nay,
       this urgent prayer—would seem to be frustrated by your marriage with a man, of
      whom there is at least no visible indication that he would unite himself to our body."
If Esther had been less agitated, she would hardly have helped smiling at the picture her
      father's words suggested of Harold Transome "joining the church" in Malthouse Yard. But she
      was too seriously preoccupied with what Felix had said, which hurt her in a two-edged fashion
      that was highly significant. First, she was angry with him for daring to say positively whom
      she would marry; secondly, she was angry at the implication that there was from the first a
      cool deliberate design in Harold Transome to marry her. Esther said to herself that she was
      quite capable of discerning Harold Transome's disposition, and judging of his conduct. She
      felt sure he was generous and open. It did not lower him in her opinion that since
      circumstances had brought them together he evidently admired her—was in love with her—in
      short, desired to marry her; and she thought that she discerened the delicacy which hindered
      him from being more explicit. There is no point on which young women are more easily piqued
      than this of their sufficiency to judge the men who
       make love to them. And Esther's generous nature delighted to believe in
      genorosity. All these thoughts were making a tumult in her mind while her father was
      suggesting the radiance her lot might cast on the cause of congregational Dissent. She heard
      what he said, and remembered it afterwards, but she made no reply at present, and chose rather
      to start up in search of a brush—an action which would seem to her father quite a usual
      sequence with her. It served the purpose of diverting him from a lengthy subject.
"Have you yet spoken with Mr Transome concerning Mistress Holt, my dear?" he said, as Esther
      was moving about the room. "I hinted to him that you would best decide how assistance should
      be tendered to her."
"No, father, we have not approached the subject. Mr Transome may have forgotten it, and, for
      several reasons, I would rather not talk of this—of money matters to him at present. There is
      money due to me from the Lukyns and the Pendrells."
"They have paid it," said Mr Lyon, opening his desk. "I have it here ready to deliver to
      you."
"Keep it, father, and pay Mrs Holt's rent with it, and do anything else that is wanted for
      her. We must consider everything temporary now," said
       Esther, enveloping her father in a towel, and beginning to brush his auburn
      fringe of hair, while he shut his eyes in preparation for this pleasant passivity. "Everything
      is uncertain—what may become of Felix—what may become of us all. O dear!" she went on,
      changing suddenly to laughing merriment, "I am beginning to talk like Lyddy, I think."
"Truly," said Mr Lyon, smiling, "the uncertainty of things is a text rather too wide and
      obvious for fruitful application; and to discourse of it is, as one may say, to bottle up the
      air, and make a present of it to those who are already standing out of doors."
"Do you think," said Esther, in the course of their chat, "that the Treby people know at all
      about the reasons of my being at Transome Court?"
"I have had no sign thereof; and indeed there is no one, as it appears, who could make the
      story public. The man Christian is away in London with Mr Debarry, Parliament now beginning;
      and Mr Jermyn would doubtless respect the confidence of the Transomes. I have not seen him
      lately. I know nothing of his movements. And so far as my own speech is concerned, and my
      strict command to Lyddy, I have withheld the means of information even as to your having
      returned to Transome Court
       in the carriage, not wishing to give any occasion to solicitous questioning till
      time hath somewhat inured me. But it hath got abroad that you are there, and is the subject of
      conjectures, whereof, I imagine, the chief is, that you are gone as companion to Mistress
      Transome; for some of our friends have already hinted a rebuke to me that I should permit your
      taking a position so little likely to further your spiritual welfare."
"Now, father, I think I shall be obliged to run away from you, not to keep the carriage too
      long," said Esther, as she finished her reforms in the minister's toilette. "You look
      beautiful now, and I must give Lyddy a little lecture before I go."
"Yes, my dear; I would not detain you, seeing that my duties demand me. But take with you
      this Treatise, which I have purposely selected. It concerns all the main questions between
      ourselves and the Establishment—government, discipline, State-support. It is seasonable that
      you should give a nearer attention to these polemics, lest you be drawn aside by the
      fallacious association of a State Church with elevated rank."
Esther chose to take the volume submissively, rather than to adopt the ungraceful sincerity
      of saying that she was unable at present to give her mind
       to the original functions of a bishop, or the comparative merit of Endowments
      and Voluntaryism. But she did not run her eyes over the pages during her solitary drive to get
      a foretaste of the argument, for she was entirely occupied with Felix Holt's prophecy that she
      would marry Harold Transome.

</div></body></text></TEI>