<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="42">
Chapter XLII
There were a great many reasons why this should be a critical period in Miss Marjoribanks's
     life. For one thing, it was the limit she had always proposed to herself for her term of
     young-ladyhood; and naturally, as she outgrew the age for them, she felt disposed to put away
     childish things. To have the control of society in her hands was a great thing; but still the
     mere means, without any end, was not worth Lucilla's while—and her Thursdays were almost a bore
     to her in her present stage of development. They occurred every week, to be sure, as usual; but
     the machinery was all perfect, and went on by itself, and it was not in the nature of things
     that such a light adjunct of existence should satisfy Lucilla, as she opened out into the
     ripeness of her thirtieth year. It was this that made Mr Ashburton so interesting to her, and
     his election a matter into which she entered so warmly, for she had come to an age at which she
     might have gone into Parliament herself had there been no disqualification of sex, and when it
     was almost a necessity for her to make some use of her social influence. Miss Marjoribanks had
     her own ideas in respect to charity, and never went upon ladies' committees, nor took any
     further share than what was proper and necessary in parish work; and when a woman has an active
     mind, and still does not care for parish work, it is a little hard for her to find a "sphere."
     And Lucilla, though she said nothing about a sphere, was still more or less in that condition
     of mind which has been so often and so fully described to the British public—when the ripe
     female intelligence, not having the natural resource of a nursery and a husband to manage,
     turns inwards, and begins to "make a protest" against the existing order of society, and to
     call the world to account for giving it no due occupation—and to consume itself. She was not
     the woman to make protests, nor claim for herself the doubtful honours of a false position; but
     she felt all the same that at her age she had outlived the occupations that were sufficient for
     her youth. To be sure, there were still the dinners to attend to, a branch of human affairs
     worthy of the weightiest consideration, and she had a house of her own, as much as if she had
     been half a dozen times married; but still there are instincts which go even beyond dinners,
     and Lucilla had become conscious that her capabilities were greater than her work. She was a
     Power in Carlingford, and she knew it; but still there is little good in the existence of a
     Power unless it can be made use of for some worthy end.
She was coming up Grange Lane rather late one evening, pondering upon these things—thinking
     within herself compassionately of poor Mr Cavendish, a little in the same way as he had been
     thinking of her, but from the opposite point of view. For Lucilla could not but see the
     antithesis of their position, and how he was the foolish apprentice who had chosen his own way
     and was coming to a bad end, while she was the steady one about to ride by in her Lord Mayor's
     coach. And Miss Marjoribanks was thinking at the same time of the other candidate, whose
     canvass was going on so successfully; and that, after the election and all the excitement was
     over, she would feel a blank—and Lucilla did not see how the blank was to be filled up as she
     looked into the future; for, as has been said, parish work was not much in her way, and for a
     woman who feels that she is a Power, there are so few other outlets. She was a little
     disheartened as she thought it all over. Gleams of possibility, it is true, crossed her mind,
     such as that of marrying the member for Carlingford, for instance, and thus beginning a new and
     more important career; but she was too experienced a woman not to be aware by this time, that
     possibilities which did not depend upon herself alone had better not be calculated upon. And
     there did occur to her, among other things, the idea of making a great Experiment which could
     be carried out only by a woman of genius—of marrying a poor man, and affording to Carlingford
     and England an example which might influence unborn generations. Such were the thoughts that
     were passing through her mind when, to her great surprise, she came up to her father, walking
     up Grange Lane over the dirty remains of the snow—for there was a great deal of snow that year.
     It was so strange a sight to see Dr Marjoribanks walking that at the first glance Lucilla was
     startled, and thought something was the matter; but, of course, it all arose from a perfectly
     natural and explainable cause.
"I have been down to see Mrs Chiley," said the Doctor; "she has her rheumatism very bad
     again; and the horse has been so long out that I thought I would walk home. I think the old
     lady is a little upset about Cavendish, Lucilla. He was always a pet of hers."
"Dear Mrs Chiley! she is not very bad, I hope?" said Miss Marjoribanks.
"Oh, no, she is not very bad," said the Doctor, in a dreary tone. "The poor old machine is
     just about breaking up, that is all. We can cobble it this once, but next time perhaps——"
"Don't talk in such a disheartening way, papa," said Lucilla. "I am sure she is not so very
     old."
"We're all pretty old, for that matter," said the Doctor; "we can't run on for ever, you
     know. If you had been a boy like that stupid fellow Tom, you might have carried on my practice,
     Lucilla—and even extended it, I shouldn't wonder," Dr Marjoribanks added, with a little grunt,
     as who should say that is the way of the world.
"But I am not a boy," said Lucilla mildly; "and even if I had been, you know, I might have
     chosen another profession. Tom never had any turn for medicine that I ever heard of——"
"I hope you know pretty well about all the turns he ever had with that old—woman," said the
     Doctor, pulling himself up sharply, "always at your ear. I suppose she never talks of anything
     else. But I hope you have too much sense for that sort of thing, Lucilla. Tom will never be
     anything but a poor man if he were to live a hundred years."
"Perhaps not, papa," said Lucilla, with a little sigh. The Doctor knew nothing about the
     great social experiment which it had entered into Miss Marjoribanks's mind to make for the
     regeneration of her contemporaries and the good of society, or possibly he might not have
     distinguished Tom by that particular title. Was it he, perhaps, who was destined to be the hero
     of a domestic drama embodying the best principles of that Moral Philosophy which Lucilla had
     studied with such success at Mount Pleasant? She did not ask herself the question, for things
     had not as yet come to that point, but it gleamed upon her mind as by a side-light.
"I don't know how you would get on if you were poor," said the Doctor. "I don't think that
     would suit you. You would make somebody a capital wife, I can say that for you, Lucilla, that
     had plenty of money and a liberal disposition like yourself. But poverty is another sort of
     thing, I can tell you. Luckily you're old enough to have got over all the love-in-a-cottage
     ideas—if you ever had them," Dr Marjoribanks added. He was a worldly man himself, and he
     thought his daughter a worldly woman; and yet, though he thoroughly approved of it, he still
     despised Lucilla a little for her prudence, which is a paradoxical state of mind not very
     unusual in the world.
"I don't think I ever had them," said Lucilla; "not that kind of poverty. I know what a
     cottage means; it means a wretched man, always about the house with his feet in slippers, you
     know—what poor dear Mr Cavendish would come to if he was poor——"
The Doctor laughed, though he had not seemed up to this moment much disposed for laughing.
     "So that is all your opinion of Cavendish," he said; "and I don't think you are far wrong
     either; and yet that was a young fellow that might have done better," Dr Marjoribanks said
     reflectively, perhaps not without a slight prick of conscience that he had forsaken an old
     friend.
"Yes," said Lucilla, with a certain solemnity—"but you know, papa, if a man will not when he
     may——" And she sighed, though the Doctor, who had not been thinking of Mr Cavendish's prospects
     in that light, laughed once more; but it was a sharp sort of sudden laugh without much heart in
     it. He had most likely other things of more importance in his mind.
"Well, there have been a great many off and on since that time," he said, smiling rather
     grimly. "It is time you were thinking about it seriously, Lucilla. I am not so sure about some
     things as I once was, and I'd rather like to see you well settled before——It's a kind of
     prejudice a man has," the Doctor said abruptly, which, whatever he might mean by it, was a
     dismal sort of speech to make.
"Before what, papa?" asked Lucilla, with a little alarm.
"Tut—before long, to be sure," he said impatiently. "Ashburton would not be at all amiss if
     he liked it and you liked it; but it's no use making any suggestions about those things. So
     long as you don't marry a fool——" Dr Marjoribanks said, with energy. "I know—that is, of
     course, I've seen what that is; you can't expect to get perfection, as you might have
     looked for perhaps at twenty; but I advise you to marry, Lucilla. I don't think you are cut out
     for a single woman, for my part."
"I don't see the good of single women," said Lucilla, "unless they are awfully rich; and I
     don't suppose I shall ever be awfully rich. But, papa, so long as I can be a comfort to
     you——"
"Yes," said the Doctor, with that tone which Lucilla could remember fifteen years ago, when
     she made the same magnanimous suggestion, "but I can't live for ever, you know. It would be a
     pity to sacrifice yourself to me, and then perhaps next morning find that it was a useless
     sacrifice. It very often happens like that when self-devotion is carried too far. You've
     behaved very well, and shown a great deal of good sense, Lucilla—more than I gave you credit
     for when you commenced—I may say that; and if there was to be any change, for instance——"
"What change?" said Lucilla, not without some anxiety; for it was an odd way of talking, to
     say the least of it; but the Doctor had come to a pause, and did not seem disposed to
     resume.
"It is not so pleasant as I thought walking over this snow," he said; "I can't give
      that up, that I can see. And there's more snow in the air if I'm any judge of the
     weather. There—go in—go in; don't wait for me;—but mind you make haste and dress, for I want my
     dinner. I may have to go down to Mrs Chiley again to-night."
It was an odd way of talking, and it was odd to break off like this; but then, to be sure,
     there was no occasion for any more conversation, since they had just arrived at their own door.
     It made Lucilla uneasy for the moment, but while she was dressing she managed to explain it to
     herself, and to think, after all, it was only natural that her papa should have seen a little
     into the movement and commotion of her thoughts; and then poor dear old Mrs Chiley being so
     ill, who was one of his own set, so to speak. He was quite cheerful later in the evening, and
     enjoyed his dinner, and was even more civil than usual to Mrs John. And though he did not come
     up to tea, he made his appearance afterwards with a flake of new-fallen snow still upon his
     rusty gray whiskers. He had gone to see his patient again, notwithstanding the silent storm
     outside. And his countenance was a little overcast this time, no doubt by the late walk, and
     the serious state Mrs Chiley was in, and his encounter with the snow.
"Oh, yes, she is better," he said. "I knew she would do this time. People at our time of life
     don't go off in that accidental kind of way. When a woman has been so long used to living, it
     takes her a time to get into the way of dying. She might be a long time thinking about it yet,
     if all goes well——"
"Papa, don't speak like that!" said Lucilla. "Dying! I can't bear to think of such a thing.
     She is not so very old."
"Such things will happen whether you can bear to think of them or not," said the Doctor. "I
     said you would go down and see her to-morrow. We've all held out a long time—the lot of us. I
     don't like to think of the first gap myself, but somebody must make a beginning, you know."
"The Chileys were always older than you," said Mrs John. "I remember in poor Mrs
     Marjoribanks's time:—they were quite elderly then, and you were just beginning. When my Tom was
     a baby——"
"We were always of the same set," said the Doctor, interrupting her without hesitation.
     "Lucilla, they say Cavendish has got hold of the Rector. He has made believe to be penitent,
     you know. That is cleverer than anything you could have done. And if he can't be won back again
     it will be serious, the Colonel says. You are to try if you can suggest anything. It seems,"
     said the Doctor, with mingled amusement and satire, and a kind of gratification "that Ashburton
     has great confidence in you."
"It must have been the agent," said Lucilla. "I don't think any of the rest of them are equal
     to that. I don't see, if that is the case, how we are to win him back. If Mr Ashburton had ever
     done anything very wicked, perhaps——"
"You are safe to say he is not penitent anyhow," said Dr Marjoribanks, and he took
     his candle and went away with a smile. But either Mr Ashburton's good opinion of Lucilla, or
     some other notion, had touched the Doctor. He was not a man who said much at any time, but when
     he bade her good-night, his hand drooped upon Lucilla's shoulder, and he patted it softly, as
     he might have patted the head of a child. It was not much, but still it was a good deal from
     him. To feel the lingering touch of her father's hand caressing her, even in so mild a way, was
     something quite surprising and strange to Miss Marjoribanks. She looked up at him almost with
     alarm, but he was just then turning away with his candle in his hand. And he seemed to have
     laid aside his gloom, and even smiled to himself as he went upstairs. "If she had been
     the boy instead of that young ass," he said to himself. He could not have explained why he was
     more than ordinarily hard just then upon the innocent, far-distant Tom, who was unlucky, it is
     true, but not exactly an ass, after all. But somehow it struck the Doctor more than ever how
     great a loss it was to society and to herself that Lucilla was not "the boy." She could have
     continued, and perhaps extended, the practice, whereas just now it was quite possible that she
     might drop down into worsted-work and tea-parties like any other single woman—while Tom, who
     had carried off the family honours, and was "the boy" in this limited and unfruitful
     generation, was never likely to do anything to speak of, and would be a poor man if he were to
     live for a hundred years. Perhaps there was something else behind that made the Doctor's brow
     contract a little as he crossed the threshold of his chamber, into which, no more than into the
     recesses of his heart, no one ever penetrated; but it was the lighter idea of that comparison,
     which had no actual pain in it, but only a kind of humorous discontent, which was the last
     articulate thought in his mind as he went to his room and closed his door with a little
     sharpness, as he always did, upon the outside world.
Aunt Jemima, for her part, lingered a little with Lucilla downstairs. "My dear, I don't think
     my brother-in-law looks well to-night. I don't think Carlingford is so healthy as it is said to
     be. If I were you, Lucilla, I would try and get your papa to take something," said Mrs John,
     with anxiety, "before he goes to bed."
"Dear Aunt Jemima, he never takes anything. You forget he is a doctor," said Miss
     Marjoribanks. "It always puts him out when he has to go out in the evening; and he is sad about
     Mrs Chiley, though he would not say so." But nevertheless Lucilla knocked at his door when she
     went upstairs. And the Doctor, though he did not open, growled within with a voice which
     reassured his dutiful daughter. "What should I want, do you think, but to be left quiet?" the
     Doctor said. And even Mrs John, who had waited at his door, with her candle in her hand, to
     hear the result, shrank within at the sound and was seen no more. And Miss Marjoribanks, too,
     went to her rest, with more than one subject of thought which kept her awake. In the first
     place, the Rector was popular in his way, and if he chose to call all his forces to rally round
     a penitent, there was no saying what might come of it; and then Lucilla could not help going
     back in the most illogical manner to her father's caress, and wondering what was the meaning of
     it. Meantime the snow fell heavily outside, and wrapped everything in a soft and secret
     whiteness. And amid the whiteness and darkness, the lamp burned steadily outside at the
     garden-gate, which pointed out the Doctor's door amid all the closed houses and dark
     garden-walls in Grange Lane—a kind of visible succour and help always at hand for those who
     were suffering. And though Dr Marjoribanks was not like a young man making a practice, but had
     perfect command of Carlingford, and was one of the richest men in it, it was well known in the
     town that the very poorest, if in extremity, in the depths of the wildest night that ever blew,
     would not seek help there in vain. The bell that had roused him when he was young, still hung
     near him in the silence of his closed-up house when he was old, and still could make him spring
     up, all self-possessed and ready, when the enemy Death had to be fought with. But that night
     the snow cushioned the wire outside, and even made white cornices and columns about the steady
     lamp, and the Doctor slept within, and no one disturbed him; for except Mrs Chiley and a few
     chronic patients, there was nothing particularly amiss in Carlingford, and then it was Dr Rider
     whom all the new people went to, the people who lived in the innumerable new houses at the
     other end of Carlingford, and had no hallowing tradition of the superior authority of Grange
     Lane.
</div></body></text></TEI>