<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII.
LETTER FROM ISAURA CICOGNA TO MADAME DE GRANTMESNIL.

 VILLA D’——-, A———. 
I can never express to you, my beloved Eulalie, the strange charm which a letter from you
      throws over my poor little lonely world for days after it is received. There is always in it
      something that comforts, something that sustains, but also a something that troubles and
      disquiets me. I suppose Goethe is right, “that it is the property of true genius to disturb
      all settled ideas,” in order, no doubt, to lift them into a higher level when they settle down
      again.
Your sketch of the new work you are meditating amid the orange groves of Provence interests
      me intensely; yet, do you forgive me when I add that the interest is not without terror? I do
      not find myself able to comprehend how, amid those lovely scenes of Nature, your mind
      voluntarily surrounds itself with images of pain and discord. I stand in awe of the calm with
      which you subject to your analysis the infirmities of reason and the tumults of passion. And
      all those laws of the social state which seem to me so fixed and immovable you treat with so
      quiet a scorn, as if they were but the gossamer threads which a touch of your slight woman’s
      hand could brush away. But I cannot venture to discuss such subjects with you. It is only the
      skilled enchanter who can stand safely in the magic circle, and compel the spirits that he
      summons, even if they are evil, to minister to ends in which he foresees a good.
We continue to live here very quietly, and I do not as yet feel the worse for the colder
      climate. Indeed, my wonderful doctor, who was recommended to me as American, but is in reality
      English, assures me that a single winter spent here under his care will suffice for my
      complete re-establishment. Yet that career, to the training for which so many years have been
      devoted, does not seem to me so alluring as it once did.
I have much to say on this subject, which I defer till I can better collect my own thoughts
      on it; at present they are confused and struggling. The great Maestro has been most
      gracious.
In what a radiant atmosphere his genius lives and breathes! Even in his cynical moods, his
      very cynicism has in it the ring of a jocund music,—the laugh of Figaro, not of
      Mephistopheles.
We went to dine with him last week. He invited to meet us Madame S——-, who has this year
      conquered all opposition, and reigns alone, the great S——-; Mr. T————, a pianist of admirable
      promise; your friend M. Savarin, wit, critic, and poet, with his pleasant, sensible wife; and
      a few others, who, the Maestro confided to me in a whisper, were authorities in the press.
      After dinner S——- sang to us, magnificently, of course. Then she herself graciously turned to
      me, said how much she had heard from the Maestro in my praise, and so and so. I was persuaded
      to sing after her. I need not say to what disadvantage. But I forgot my nervousness; I forgot
      my audience; I forgot myself, as I always do when once my soul, as it were, finds wing in
      music, and buoys itself in the air, relieved from the sense of earth. I knew not that I had
      succeeded till I came to a close, and then my eyes resting on the face of the grand prima
      donna, I was seized with an indescribable sadness, with a keen pang of remorse. Perfect
      artiste though she be, and with powers in her own realm of art which admit of no living equal,
      I saw at once that I had pained her: she had grown almost livid; her lips were quivering, and
      it was only with a great effort that she muttered out some faint words intended for applause.
      I comprehended by an instinct how gradually there can grow upon the mind of an artist the most
      generous that jealousy which makes the fear of a rival annihilate the delight in art. If ever
      I should achieve S——-’s fame as a singer, should I feel the same jealousy?—I think not now,
      but I have not been tested. She went away abruptly. I spare you the recital of the compliments
      paid to me by my other auditors, compliments that gave me no pleasure; for on all lips, except
      those of the Maestro, they implied, as the height of eulogy, that I had inflicted torture upon
      S——-. “If so,” said he, “she would be as foolish as a rose that was jealous of the whiteness
      of a lily. You would do yourself great wrong, my child, if you tried to vie with the rose in
      its own colour.”
He patted my bended head as he spoke, with that kind of fatherly king-like fondness with
      which he honours me; and I took his hand in mine, and kissed it gratefully. “Nevertheless,”
      said Savarin, “when the lily comes out there will be a furious attack on it, made by the
      clique that devotes itself to the rose: a lily clique will be formed en revanche, and I
      foresee a fierce paper war. Do not be frightened at its first outburst: every fame worth
      having must be fought for.”
Is it so? have you had to fight for your fame, Eulalie? and do you hate all contests as much
      as I do?
Our only other gayety since I last wrote was a soiree at M. Louvier’s. That republican
      millionaire was not slow in attending to the kind letter you addressed to him recommending us
      to his civilities. He called at once, placed his good offices at our disposal, took charge of
      my modest fortune, which he has invested, no doubt, as safely as it is advantageously in point
      of interest, hired our carriage for us, and in short has been most amiably useful.
At his house we met many to me most pleasant, for they spoke with such genuine appreciation
      of your works and yourself. But there were others whom I should never have expected to meet
      under the roof of a Croesus who has so great a stake in the order of things established. One
      young man—a noble whom he specially presented to me, as a politician who would be at the head
      of affairs when the Red Republic was established—asked me whether I did not agree with him
      that all private property was public spoliation, and that the great enemy to civilization was
      religion, no matter in what form.
He addressed to me these tremendous questions with an effeminate lisp, and harangued on them
      with small feeble gesticulations of pale dirty fingers covered with rings.
I asked him if there were many who in France shared his ideas.
“Quite enough to carry them some day,” he answered with a lofty smile. “And the day may be
      nearer than the world thinks, when my confreres will be so numerous that they will have to
      shoot down each other for the sake of cheese to their bread.”
That day nearer than the world thinks! Certainly, so far as one may judge the outward signs
      of the world at Paris, it does not think of such things at all. With what an air of
      self-content the beautiful city parades her riches! Who can gaze on her splendid palaces, her
      gorgeous shops, and believe that she will give ear to doctrines that would annihilate private
      rights of property; or who can enter her crowded churches, and dream that she can ever again
      install a republic too civilized for religion?

 Adieu. Excuse me for this dull letter. If I have written on much that has little interest
      even for me, it is that I wish to distract my mind from brooding over the question that
      interests me most, and on which I most need your counsel. I will try to approach it in my
      next. ISAURA. FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
Eulalie, Eulalie!—What mocking spirit has been permitted in this modern age of ours to place
      in the heart of woman the ambition which is the prerogative of men? You indeed, so richly
      endowed with a man’s genius, have a right to man’s aspirations. But what can justify such
      ambition in me? Nothing but this one unintellectual perishable gift of a voice that does but
      please in uttering the thoughts of others. Doubtless I could make a name familiar for its
      brief time to the talk of Europe,—a name, what name? a singer’s name. Once I thought that name
      a glory. Shall I ever forget the day when you first shone upon me; when, emerging from
      childhood as from a dim and solitary bypath, I stood forlorn on the great thoroughfare of
      life, and all the prospects before me stretched sad in mists and in rain? You beamed on me
      then as the sun coming out from the cloud and changing the face of earth; you opened to my
      sight the fairy-land of poetry and art; you took me by the hand and said, “Courage! there is
      at each step some green gap in the hedgerows, some, soft escape from the stony thoroughfare.
      Beside the real life expands the ideal life to those who seek it. Droop not, seek it: the
      ideal life has its sorrows, but it never admits despair; as on the ear of him who follows the
      winding course of a stream, the stream ever varies the note of its music,—now loud with the
      rush of the falls; now low and calm as it glides by the level marge of smooth banks; now
      sighing through the stir of the reeds; now babbling with a fretful joy as some sudden curve on
      the shore stays its flight among gleaming pebbles,—so to the soul of the artist is the voice
      of the art ever fleeting beside and before him. Nature gave thee the bird’s gift of song:
      raise the gift into art, and make the art thy companion.
“Art and Hope were twin-born, and they die together.” See how faithfully I remember,
      methinks, your very words. But the magic of the words, which I then but dimly understood, was
      in your smile and in your eye, and the queen-like wave of your hand as if beckoning to a world
      which lay before you, visible and familiar as your native land. And how devotedly, with what
      earnestness of passion, I gave myself up to the task of raising my gift into an art! I thought
      of nothing else, dreamed of nothing else; and oh, now sweet to me then were words of praise!
      “Another year yet,” at length said the masters, “and you ascend your throne among the queens
      of song.” Then—then—I would have changed for no other throne on earth my hope of that to be
      achieved in the realms of my art. And then came that long fever: my strength broke down, and
      the Maestro said, “Rest, or your voice is gone, and your throne is lost forever.” How hateful
      that rest seemed to me! You again came to my aid. You said, “The time you think lost should be
      but time improved. Penetrate your mind with other songs than the trash of Libretti. The more
      you habituate yourself to the forms, the more you imbue yourself with the spirit, in which
      passions have been expressed and character delineated by great writers, the more completely
      you will accomplish yourself in your own special art of singer and actress.” So, then, you
      allured me to a new study. Ah! in so doing did you dream that you diverted me from the old
      ambition? My knowledge of French and Italian, and my rearing in childhood, which had made
      English familiar to me, gave me the keys to the treasure-houses of three languages. Naturally
      I began with that in which your masterpieces are composed. Till then I had not even read your
      works. They were the first I chose. How they impressed, how they startled me! what depths in
      the mind of man, in the heart of woman, they revealed to me! But I owned to you then, and I
      repeat it now, neither they nor any of the works in romance and poetry which form the boast of
      recent French literature satisfied yearnings for that calm sense of beauty, that divine joy in
      a world beyond this world, which you had led me to believe it was the prerogative of ideal art
      to bestow. And when I told you this with the rude frankness you had bid me exercise in talk
      with you, a thoughtful, melancholy shade fell over your face, and you said quietly, “You are
      right, child; we, the French of our time, are the offspring of revolutions that settled
      nothing, unsettled all: we resemble those troubled States which rush into war abroad in order
      to re-establish peace at home. Our books suggest problems to men for reconstructing some
      social system in which the calm that belongs to art may be found at last: but such books
      should not be in your hands; they are not for the innocence and youth of women as yet
      unchanged by the systems which exist.” And the next day you brought me ‘l’asso’s great poem,
      the “Gerusalemme Liberata,” and said, smiling, “Art in its calm is here.”
You remember that I was then at Sorrento by the order of my physician. Never shall I forget
      the soft autumn day when I sat amongst the lonely rocklets to the left of the town,—the sea
      before me, with scarce a ripple; my very heart steeped in the melodies of that poem, so
      marvellous for a strength disguised in sweetness, and for a symmetry in which each proportion
      blends into the other with the perfectness of a Grecian statue. The whole place seemed to me
      filled with the presence of the poet to whom it had given birth. Certainly the reading of that
      poem formed an era in my existence: to this day I cannot acknowledge the faults or weaknesses
      which your criticisms pointed out; I believe because they are in unison with my own nature,
      which yearns for harmony, and, finding that, rests contented. I shrink from violent contrasts,
      and can discover nothing tame and insipid in a continuance of sweetness and serenity. But it
      was not till after I had read “La Gerusalemme” again and again, and then sat and brooded over
      it, that I recognized the main charm of the poem in the religion which clings to it as the
      perfume clings to a flower,—a religion sometimes melancholy, but never to me sad. Hope always
      pervades it. Surely if, as you said, “Hope is twin-born with art,” it is because art at its
      highest blends itself unconsciously with religion, and proclaims its affinity with hope by its
      faith in some future good more perfect than it has realized in the past.
Be this as it may, it was in this poem so pre-eminently Christian that I found the something
      which I missed and craved for in modern French masterpieces; even yours,—a something
      spiritual, speaking to my own soul, calling it forth; distinguishing it as an essence apart
      from mere human reason; soothing, even when it excited; making earth nearer to heaven. And
      when I ran on in this strain to you after my own wild fashion, you took my head between your
      hands and kissed me, and said, “Happy are those who believe! long may that happiness be
      thine!” Why did I not feel in Dante the Christian charm that I felt in Tasso? Dante in your
      eyes, as in those of most judges, is infinitely the greater genius; but reflected on the dark
      stream of that genius the stars are so troubled, the heaven so threatening.
Just as my year of holiday was expiring, I turned to English literature; and Shakspeare, of
      course, was the first English poet put into my hands. It proves how childlike my mind still
      was, that my earliest sensation in reading him was that of disappointment. It was not only
      that, despite my familiarity with English (thanks chiefly to the care of him whom I call my
      second father), there is much in the metaphorical diction of Shakspeare which I failed to
      comprehend; but he seemed to me so far like the modern French writers who affect to have found
      inspiration in his muse, that he obtrudes images of pain and suffering without cause or motive
      sufficiently clear to ordinary understandings, as I had taught myself to think it ought to be
      in the drama.
He makes Fate so cruel that we lose sight of the mild deity behind her. Compare, in this,
      Corneille’s “Polyeucte,” with the “Hamlet.” In the first an equal calamity befalls the good,
      but in their calamity they are blessed. The death of the martyr is the triumph of his creed.
      But when we have put down the English tragedy,—when Hamlet and Ophelia are confounded in death
      with Polonius and the fratricidal king, we see not what good end for humanity is achieved. The
      passages that fasten on our memory do not make us happier and holier: they suggest but
      terrible problems, to which they give us no solution.
In the “Horaces” of Corneille there are fierce contests, rude passions, tears drawn from
      some of the bitterest sources of human pity; but then through all stands out, large and
      visible to the eyes of all spectators, the great ideal of devoted patriotism. How much of all
      that has been grandest in the life of France, redeeming even its worst crimes of revolution in
      the love of country, has had its origin in the “Horaces” of Corneille. But I doubt if the
      fates of Coriolanus and Caesar and Brutus and Antony, in the giant tragedies of Shakspeare,
      have made Englishmen more willing to die for England. In fine, it was long before—I will not
      say I understood or rightly appreciated Shakspeare, for no Englishman would admit that I or
      even you could ever do so, but before I could recognize the justice of the place his country
      claims for him as the genius without an equal in the literature of Europe. Meanwhile the
      ardour I had put into study, and the wear and tear of the emotions which the study called
      forth, made themselves felt in a return of my former illness, with symptoms still more
      alarming; and when the year was out I was ordained to rest for perhaps another year before I
      could sing in public, still less appear on the stage. How I rejoiced when I heard that fiat!
      for I emerged from that year of study with a heart utterly estranged from the profession in
      which I had centred my hopes before—Yes, Eulalie, you had bid me accomplish myself for the
      arts of utterance; by the study of arts in which thoughts originate the words they employ; and
      in doing so I had changed myself into another being. I was forbidden all fatigue of mind: my
      books were banished, but not the new self which the books had formed. Recovering slowly
      through the summer, I came hither two months since, ostensibly for the advice of Dr. C———-,
      but really in the desire to commune with my own heart and be still.
And now I have poured forth that heart to you, would you persuade me still to be a singer?
      If you do, remember at least how jealous and absorbing the art of the singer and the actress
      is,—how completely I must surrender myself to it, and live among books or among dreams no
      more. Can I be anything else but singer? and if not, should I be contented merely to read and
      to dream?
I must confide to you one ambition which during the lazy Italian summer took possession of
      me; I must tell you the ambition, and add that I have renounced it as a vain one. I had hoped
      that I could compose, I mean in music. I was pleased with some things I did: they expressed in
      music what I could not express in words; and one secret object in coming here was to submit
      them to the great Maestro. He listened to them patiently: he complimented me on my accuracy in
      the mechanical laws of composition; he even said that my favourite airs were “touchants et
      gracieux.”
And so he would have left me, but I stopped him timidly, and said, “Tell me frankly, do you
      think that with time and study I could compose music such as singers equal to myself would
      sing to?”
“You mean as a professional composer?”
“Well, yes.”
“And to the abandonment of your vocation as a singer?”
“Yes.”
“My dear child, I should be your worst enemy if I encouraged such a notion: cling to the
      career in which you call be greatest; gain but health, and I wager my reputation on your
      glorious success on the stage. What can you be as a composer? You will set pretty music to
      pretty words, and will be sung in drawing-rooms with the fame a little more or less that
      generally attends the compositions of female amateurs. Aim at something higher, as I know you
      would do, and you will not succeed. Is there any instance in modern times, perhaps in any
      times, of a female composer who attains even to the eminence of a third-rate opera-writer?
      Composition in letters may be of no sex. In that Madame Dudevant and your friend Madame de
      Grantmesnil can beat most men; but the genius of musical composition is homme, and accept it
      as a compliment when I say that you are essentially femme.”
He left me, of course, mortified and humbled; but I feel he is right as regards myself,
      though whether in his depreciation of our whole sex I cannot say. But as this hope has left
      me, I have become more disquieted, still more restless. Counsel me, Eulalie; counsel, and, if
      possible, comfort me. ISAURA. FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
No letter from you yet, and I have left you in peace for ten days. How do you think I have
      spent them? The Maestro called on us with M. Savarin, to insist on our accompanying them on a
      round of the theatres. I had not been to one since my arrival. I divined that the kind-hearted
      composer had a motive in this invitation. He thought that in witnessing the applauses bestowed
      on actors, and sharing in the fascination in which theatrical illusion holds an audience, my
      old passion for the stage, and with it the longing for an artiste’s fame, would revive.
In my heart I wished that his expectations might be realized. Well for me if I could once
      more concentrate all my aspirations on a prize within my reach!
We went first to see a comedy greatly in vogue, and the author thoroughly understands the
      French stage of our day. The acting was excellent in its way. The next night we went to the
      Odeon, a romantic melodrama in six acts, and I know not how many tableaux. I found no fault
      with the acting there. I do not give you the rest of our programme. We visited all the
      principal theatres, reserving the opera and Madame S——— for the last. Before I speak of the
      opera, let me say a word or two on the plays.
There is no country in which the theatre has so great a hold on the public as in France; no
      country in which the successful dramatist has so high a fame; no country perhaps in which the
      state of the stage so faithfully represents the moral and intellectual condition of the
      people. I say this not, of course, from my experience of countries which I have not visited,
      but from all I hear of the stage in Germany and in England.
The impression left on my mind by the performances I witnessed is, that the French people
      are becoming dwarfed. The comedies that please them are but pleasant caricatures of petty
      sections in a corrupt society. They contain no large types of human nature; their witticisms
      convey no luminous flashes of truth; their sentiment is not pure and noble,—it is a sickly and
      false perversion of the impure and ignoble into travesties of the pure and noble.
Their melodramas cannot be classed as literature: all that really remains of the old French
      genius is its vaudeville. Great dramatists create great parts. One great part, such as a
      Rachel would gladly have accepted, I have not seen in the dramas of the young generation.
High art has taken refuge in the opera; but that is not French opera. I do not complain so
      much that French taste is less refined. I complain that French intellect is lowered. The
      descent from “Polyeucte” to “Ruy Blas” is great, not so much in the poetry of form as in the
      elevation of thought; but the descent from “Ruy Blas” to the best drama now produced is out of
      poetry altogether, and into those flats of prose which give not even the glimpse of a
      mountain-top.
But now to the opera. S——— in Norma! The house was crowded, and its enthusiasm as loud as it
      was genuine. You tell me that S——— never rivalled Pasta, but certainly her Norma is a great
      performance. Her voice has lost less of its freshness than I had been told, and what is lost
      of it her practised management conceals or carries off.
The Maestro was quite right: I could never vie with her in her own line; but conceited and
      vain as I may seem even to you in saying so, I feel in my own line that I could command as
      large an applause,—of course taking into account my brief-lived advantage of youth. Her
      acting, apart from her voice, does not please me. It seems to me to want intelligence of the
      subtler feelings, the under-current of emotion which constitutes the chief beauty of the
      situation and the character. Am I jealous when I say this? Read on and judge.
On our return that night, when I had seen the Venosta to bed, I went into my own room,
      opened the window, and looked out. A lovely night, mild as in spring at Florence,—the moon at
      her full, and the stars looking so calm and so high beyond our reach of their tranquillity.
      The evergreens in the gardens of the villas around me silvered over, and the summer boughs,
      not yet clothed with leaves, were scarcely visible amid the changeless smile of the laurels.
      At the distance lay Paris, only to be known by its innumerable lights. And then I said to
      myself,
“No, I cannot be an actress; I cannot resign my real self for that vamped-up hypocrite
      before the lamps. Out on those stage-robes and painted cheeks! Out on that simulated utterance
      of sentiments learned by rote and practised before the looking-glass till every gesture has
      its drill!”
Then I gazed on those stars which provoke our questionings, and return no answer, till my
      heart grew full,—so full,—and I bowed my head and wept like a child.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
And still no letter from you! I see in the journals that you have left Nice. Is it that you
      are too absorbed in your work to have leisure to write to me? I know you are not ill, for if
      you were, all Paris would know of it. All Europe has an interest in your health. Positively I
      will write to you no more till a word from yourself bids me do so.
I fear I must give up my solitary walks in the Bois de Boulogne: they were very dear to me,
      partly because the quiet path to which I confined myself was that to which you directed me as
      the one you habitually selected when at Paris, and in which you had brooded over and revolved
      the loveliest of your romances; and partly because it was there that, catching, alas! not
      inspiration but enthusiasm from the genius that had hallowed the place, and dreaming I might
      originate music, I nursed my own aspirations and murmured my own airs. And though so close to
      that world of Paris to which all artists must appeal for judgment or audience, the spot was so
      undisturbed, so sequestered. But of late that path has lost its solitude, and therefore its
      charm.
Six days ago the first person I encountered in my walk was a man whom I did not then heed.
      He seemed in thought, or rather in revery, like myself; we passed each other twice or thrice,
      and I did not notice whether he was young or old, tall or short; but he came the next day, and
      a third day, and then I saw that he was young, and, in so regarding him, his eyes became fixed
      on mine. The fourth day he did not come, but two other men came, and the look of one was
      inquisitive and offensive. They sat themselves down on a bench in the walk, and though I did
      not seem to notice them, I hastened home; and the next day, in talking with our kind Madame
      Savarin, and alluding to these quiet walks of mine, she hinted, with the delicacy which is her
      characteristic, that the customs of Paris did not allow demoiselles comme il faut to walk
      alone even in the most sequestered paths of the Bois.
I begin now to comprehend your disdain of customs which impose chains so idly galling on the
      liberty of our sex.
We dined with the Savarins last evening: what a joyous nature he has! Not reading Latin, I
      only know Horace by translations, which I am told are bad; but Savarin seems to me a sort of
      half Horace,—Horace on his town-bred side, so playfully well-bred, so good-humoured in his
      philosophy, so affectionate to friends, and so biting to foes. But certainly Savarin could not
      have lived in a country farm upon endives and mallows. He is town-bred and Parisian, jusqu’au
      bout des ongles. How he admires you, and how I love him for it! Only in one thing he
      disappoints me there. It is your style that he chiefly praises: certainly that style is
      matchless; but style is only the clothing of thought, and to praise your style seems to me
      almost as invidious as the compliment to some perfect beauty, not on her form and face, but on
      her taste and dress.
We met at dinner an American and his wife,—a Colonel and Mrs. Morley: she is delicately
      handsome, as the American women I have seen generally are, and with that frank vivacity of
      manner which distinguishes them from English women. She seemed to take a fancy to me, and we
      soon grew very good friends.
She is the first advocate I have met, except yourself, of that doctrine upon the rights of
      Women, of which one reads more in the journals than one hears discussed in salons. Naturally
      enough I felt great interest in that subject, more especially since my rambles in the Bois
      were forbidden; and as long as she declaimed on the hard fate of the women who, feeling within
      them powers that struggle for air and light beyond the close precinct of household duties,
      find themselves restricted from fair rivalry with men in such fields of knowledge and toil and
      glory as men since the world began have appropriated to themselves, I need not say that I went
      with her cordially: you can guess that by my former letters. But when she entered into the
      detailed catalogue of our exact wrongs and our exact rights, I felt all the pusillanimity of
      my sex and shrank back in terror.
Her husband, joining us when she was in full tide of eloquence, smiled at me with a kind of
      saturnine mirth. “Mademoiselle, don’t believe a word she says: it is only tall talk! In
      America the women are absolute tyrants, and it is I who, in concert with my oppressed
      countrymen, am going in for a platform agitation to restore the Rights of Men.”
Upon this there was a lively battle of words between the spouses, in which, I must own, I
      thought the lady was decidedly worsted.
No, Eulalie, I see nothing in these schemes for altering our relations towards the other sex
      which would improve our condition. The inequalities we suffer are not imposed by law,—not even
      by convention: they are imposed by nature.
Eulalie, you have had an experience unknown to me: you have loved. In that day did you,—you,
      round whom poets and sages and statesmen gather, listening to your words as to an oracle,—did
      you feel that your pride of genius had gone out from you, that your ambition lived in whom you
      loved, that his smile was more to you than the applause of a world?
I feel as if love in a woman must destroy her rights of equality, that it gives to her a
      sovereign even in one who would be inferior to herself if her love did not glorify and crown
      him. Ah! if I could but merge this terrible egotism which oppresses me, into the being of some
      one who is what I would wish to be were I man! I would not ask him to achieve fame. Enough if
      I felt that he was worthy of it, and happier methinks to console him when he failed than to
      triumph with him when he won. Tell me, have you felt this? When you loved did you stoop as to
      a slave, or did you bow down as to a master?
FROM MADAME DE GRANTMESNIL TO ISAURA CICOGNA.
Chere enfant,—All your four letters have reached me the same day. In one of my sudden whims
      I set off with a few friends on a rapid tour along the Riviera to Genoa, thence to Turin on to
      Milan. Not knowing where we should rest even for a day, my letters were not forwarded.
I came back to Nice yesterday, consoled for all fatigues in having insured that accuracy in
      description of localities which my work necessitates.
You are, my poor child, in that revolutionary crisis through which genius passes in youth
      before it knows its own self, and longs vaguely to do or to be a something other than it has
      done or has been before. For, not to be unjust to your own powers, genius you have,—that
      inborn undefinable essence, including talent, and yet distinct from it. Genius you have, but
      genius unconcentrated, undisciplined. I see, though you are too diffident to say so openly,
      that you shrink from the fame of singer, because, fevered by your reading, you would fain
      aspire to the thorny crown of author. I echo the hard saying of the Maestro: I should be your
      worst enemy did I encourage you to forsake a career in which a dazzling success is so assured,
      for one in which, if it were your true vocation, you would not ask whether you were fit for
      it; you would be impelled to it by the terrible star which presides over the birth of
      poets.
Have you, who are so naturally observant, and of late have become so reflective, never
      remarked that authors, however absorbed in their own craft, do not wish their children to
      adopt it? The most successful author is perhaps the last person to whom neophytes should come
      for encouragement. This I think is not the case with the cultivators of the sister arts.
The painter, the sculptor, the musician, seem disposed to invite disciples and welcome
      acolytes. As for those engaged in the practical affairs of life, fathers mostly wish their
      sons to be as they have been.
The politician, the lawyer, the merchant, each says to his children, “Follow my steps.” All
      parents in practical life would at least agree in this,—they would not wish their sons to be
      poets. There must be some sound cause in the world’s philosophy for this general concurrence
      of digression from a road of which the travellers themselves say to those whom they love best,
      “Beware!”
Romance in youth is, if rightly understood, the happiest nutriment of wisdom in after-years;
      but I would never invite any one to look upon the romance of youth as a thing

 “To case in periods and embalm in ink.” 
Enfant, have you need of a publisher to create romance? Is it not in yourself? Do not
      imagine that genius requires for its enjoyment the scratch of the pen and the types of the
      printer. Do not suppose that the poet, the romancier, is most poetic, most romantic, when he
      is striving, struggling, labouring, to check the rush of his ideas, and materialize the images
      which visit him as souls into such tangible likenesses of flesh and blood that the highest
      compliment a reader can bestow on them is to say that they are lifelike: No: the poet’s real
      delight is not in the mechanism of composing; the best part of that delight is in the
      sympathies he has established with innumerable modifications of life and form, and art and
      Nature, sympathies which are often found equally keen in those who have not the same gift of
      language. The poet is but the interpreter. What of?—Truths in the hearts of others. He utters
      what they feel. Is the joy in the utterance? Nay, it is in the feeling itself. So, my dear,
      dark-bright child of song, when I bade thee open, out of the beaten thoroughfare, paths into
      the meads and river-banks at either side of the formal hedgerows, rightly dost thou add that I
      enjoined thee to make thine art thy companion. In the culture of that art for which you are so
      eminently gifted, you will find the ideal life ever beside the real. Are you not ashamed to
      tell me that in that art you do but utter the thoughts of others? You utter them in music;
      through the music you not only give to the thoughts a new character, but you make them
      reproductive of fresh thoughts in your audience.
You said very truly that you found in composing you could put into music thoughts which you
      could not put into words. That is the peculiar distinction of music. No genuine musician can
      explain in words exactly what he means to convey in his music.
How little a libretto interprets an opera; how little we care even to read it! It is the
      music that speaks to us; and how?—Through the human voice. We do not notice how poor are the
      words which the voice warbles. It is the voice itself interpreting the soul of the musician
      which enchants and enthralls us. And you who have that voice pretend to despise the gift.
      What! despise the power of communicating delight!—the power that we authors envy; and rarely,
      if ever, can we give delight with so little alloy as the singer.
And when an audience disperses, can you guess what griefs the singer may have comforted?
      what hard hearts he may have softened? what high thoughts he may have awakened?
You say, “Out on the vamped-up hypocrite! Out on the stage-robes and painted cheeks!”
I say, “Out on the morbid spirit which so cynically regards the mere details by which a
      whole effect on the minds and hearts and souls of races and nations can be produced!”
There, have I scolded you sufficiently? I should scold you more, if I did not see in the
      affluence of your youth and your intellect the cause of your restlessness. Riches are always
      restless. It is only to poverty that the gods give content.
You question me about love; you ask if I have ever bowed to a master, ever merged my life in
      another’s: expect no answer on this from me. Circe herself could give no answer to the
      simplest maid, who, never having loved, asks, “What is love?”
In the history of the passions each human heart is a world in itself; its experience profits
      no others. In no two lives does love play the same part or bequeath the same record.
I know not whether I am glad or sorry that the word “love” now falls on my ear with a sound
      as slight and as faint as the dropping of a leaf in autumn may fall on thine.
I volunteer but this lesson, the wisest I can give, if thou canst understand it: as I bade
      thee take art into thy life, so learn to look on life itself as an art. Thou couldst discover
      the charm in Tasso; thou couldst perceive that the requisite of all art, that which pleases,
      is in the harmony of proportion. We lose sight of beauty if we exaggerate the feature most
      beautiful.
Love proportioned adorns the homeliest existence; love disproportioned deforms the
      fairest.
Alas! wilt thou remember this warning when the time comes in which it may be needed?
E——- G———-. 
</div></body></text></TEI>