<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAPTER IV.
“Piccola, piccola! com e cortese! another invitation from M. Louvier for next
      Saturday,—conversazione.” This was said in Italian by an elderly lady bursting noisily into
      the room,—elderly, yet with a youthful expression of face, owing perhaps to a pair of very
      vivacious black eyes. She was dressed, after a somewhat slatternly fashion, in a wrapper of
      crimson merino much the worse for wear, a blue handkerchief twisted turban-like round her
      head, and her feet encased in list slippers. The person to whom she addressed herself was a
      young lady with dark hair, which, despite its evident repugnance, was restrained into smooth
      glossy braids over the forehead, and at the crown of the small graceful head into the simple
      knot which Horace has described as “Spartan.” Her dress contrasted the speaker’s by an
      exquisite neatness.
We have seen her before as the lady in the pearl-coloured robe; but seen now at home she
      looks much younger. She was one of those whom, encountered in the streets or in society, one
      might guess to be married,—probably a young bride; for thus seen there was about her an air of
      dignity and of self-possession which suits well with the ideal of chaste youthful matronage;
      and in the expression of the face there was a pensive thoughtfulness beyond her years. But as
      she now sat by the open window arranging flowers in a glass bowl, a book lying open on her
      lap, you would never have said, “What a handsome woman!” you would have said, “What a charming
      girl!” All about her was maidenly, innocent, and fresh. The dignity of her bearing was lost in
      household ease, the pensiveness of her expression in an untroubled serene sweetness.
Perhaps many of my readers may have known friends engaged in some absorbing cause of
      thought, and who are in the habit when they go out, especially if on solitary walks, to take
      that cause of thought with them. The friend may be an orator meditating his speech, a poet his
      verses, a lawyer a difficult case, a physician an intricate malady. If you have such a friend,
      and you observe him thus away from his home, his face will seem to you older and graver. He is
      absorbed in the care that weighs on him. When you see him in a holiday moment at his own
      fireside, the care is thrown aside; perhaps he mastered while abroad the difficulty that had
      troubled him; he is cheerful, pleasant, sunny. This appears to be very much the case with
      persons of genius. When in their own houses we usually find them very playful and childlike.
      Most persons of real genius, whatever they may seem out of doors, are very sweet-tempered at
      home, and sweet temper is sympathizing and genial in the intercourse of private life.
      Certainly, observing this girl as she now bends over the flowers, it would be difficult to
      believe her to be the Isaura Cicogna whose letters to Madame de Grantinesnil exhibit the
      doubts and struggles of an unquiet, discontented, aspiring mind. Only in one or two passages
      in those letters would you have guessed at the writer in the girl as we now see her. It is in
      those passages where she expresses her love of harmony, and her repugnance to contest: those
      were characteristics you might have read in her face.
Certainly the girl is very lovely: what long dark eyelashes! what soft, tender, dark-blue
      eyes! now that she looks up and smiles, what a bewitching smile it is! by what sudden play of
      rippling dimples the smile is enlivened and redoubled! Do you notice one feature? In very
      showy beauties it is seldom noticed; but I, being in my way a physiognomist, consider that it
      is always worth heeding as an index of character. It is the ear. Remark how delicately it is
      formed in her: none of that heaviness of lobe which is a sure sign of sluggish intellect and
      coarse perception. Hers is the artist’s ear. Note next those hands: how beautifully shaped!
      small, but not doll-like hands,—ready and nimble, firm and nervous hands, that could work for
      a helpmate. By no means very white, still less red, but somewhat embrowned as by the sun, such
      as you may see in girls reared in southern climes, and in her perhaps betokening an impulsive
      character which had not accustomed itself, when at sport in the open air, to the thraldom of
      gloves,—very impulsive people even in cold climates seldom do.
In conveying to us by a few bold strokes an idea of the sensitive, quick-moved, warm-blooded
      Henry II., the most impulsive of the Plantagenets, his contemporary chronicler tells us that
      rather than imprison those active hands of his, even in hawking-gloves, he would suffer his
      falcon to fix its sharp claws into his wrist. No doubt there is a difference as to what is
      befitting between a burly bellicose creature like Henry II. and a delicate young lady like
      Isaura Cicogna; and one would not wish to see those dainty wrists of hers seamed and scarred
      by a falcon’s claws. But a girl may not be less exquisitely feminine for slight heed of
      artificial prettiness. Isaura had no need of pale bloodless hands to seem one of Nature’s
      highest grade of gentlewomen even to the most fastidious eyes. About her there was a charm
      apart from her mere beauty, and often disturbed instead of heightened by her mere intellect:
      it consisted in a combination of exquisite artistic refinement, and of a generosity of
      character by which refinement was animated into vigour and warmth.
The room, which was devoted exclusively to Isaura, had in it much that spoke of the
      occupant. That room, when first taken furnished, had a good deal of the comfortless showiness
      which belongs to ordinary furnished apartments in France, especially in the Parisian suburbs,
      chiefly let for the summer: thin limp muslin curtains that decline to draw; stiff mahogany
      chairs covered with yellow Utrecht velvet; a tall secretaire in a dark corner; an oval
      buhl-table set in tawdry ormolu, islanded in the centre of a poor but gaudy Scotch carpet; and
      but one other table of dull walnut-wood, standing clothless before a sofa to match the chairs;
      the eternal ormolu clock flanked by the two eternal ormolu candelabra on the dreary
      mantelpiece. Some of this garniture had been removed, others softened into cheeriness and
      comfort. The room somehow or other—thanks partly to a very moderate expenditure in pretty
      twills with pretty borders, gracefully simple table-covers, with one or two additional small
      tables and easy-chairs, two simple vases filled with flowers; thanks still more to a nameless
      skill in re-arrangement, and the disposal of the slight knick-knacks and well-bound volumes,
      which, even in travelling, women who have cultivated the pleasures of taste carry about
      them—had been coaxed into that quiet harmony, that tone of consistent subdued colour, which
      corresponded with the characteristics of the inmate. Most people might have been puzzled where
      to place the piano, a semi-grand, so as not to take up too much space in the little room; but
      where it was placed it seemed so at home that you might have supposed the room had been built
      for it.
There are two kinds of neatness,—one is too evident, and makes everything about it seem
      trite and cold and stiff; and another kind of neatness disappears from our sight in a
      satisfied sense of completeness,—like some exquisite, simple, finished style of writing, an
      Addison’s or a St. Pierre’s.
This last sort of neatness belonged to Isaura, and brought to mind the well-known line of
      Catullus when on recrossing his threshold he invokes its welcome,—a line thus not inelegantly
      translated by Leigh Hunt,

 “Smile every dimple on the cheek of Home.” 
I entreat the reader’s pardon for this long descriptive digression; but Isaura is one of
      those characters which are called many-sided, and therefore not very easy to comprehend. She
      gives us one side of her character in her correspondence with Madame de Grantmesnil, and
      another side of it in her own home with her Italian companion,—half nurse, half chaperon.
“Monsieur Louvier is indeed very courteous,” said Isaura, looking up from the flowers with
      the dimpled smile we have noticed. “But I think, Madre, that we should do well to stay at home
      on Saturday,—not peacefully, for I owe you your revenge at Euchre.”
“You can’t mean it, Piecola!” exclaimed the Signora, in evident consternation. “Stay at
      home!—why stay at home? Euchre is very well when there is nothing else to do: but change is
      pleasant; le bon Dieu likes it,

 “‘Ne caldo ne gelo Resta mai in cielo.’ 
“And such beautiful ices one gets at M. Louvier’s! Did you taste the pistachio ice? What
      fine rooms, and so well lit up! I adore light. And the ladies so beautifully dressed: one sees
      the fashions. Stay at home! play at Euchre indeed! Piccola, you cannot be so cruel to
      yourself: you are young.”
“But, dear Madre, just consider; we are invited because we are considered professional
      singers: your reputation as such is of course established,—mine is not; but still I shall be
      asked to sing, as I was asked before; and you know Dr. C. forbids me to do so except to a very
      small audience; and it is so ungracious always to say ‘No;’ and besides, did you not yourself
      say, when we came away last time from M. Louvier’s, that it was very dull, that you knew
      nobody, and that the ladies had such superb toilets that you felt mortified—and—”
“Zitto! zitto! you talk idly, Piccola,—very idly. I was mortified then in my old black Lyons
      silk; but have I not bought since then my beautiful Greek jacket,—scarlet and gold lace? and
      why should I buy it if I am not to show it?”
“But, dear Madre, the jacket is certainly very handsome, and will make an effect in a little
      dinner at the Savarins or Mrs. Morley’s; but in a great formal reception like M. Louvier’s
      will it not look—”
“Splendid!” interrupted the Signora.
“But singolare.”
“So much the better; did not that great English Lady wear such a jacket, and did not every
      one admire her, piu tosto invidia the compassione?”
Isaura sighed. Now the jacket of the Signora was a subject of disquietude to her friend. It
      so happened that a young English lady of the highest rank and the rarest beauty had appeared
      at M. Louvier’s, and indeed generally in the beau monde of Paris, in a Greek jacket that
      became her very much. The jacket had fascinated, at M. Louvier’s, the eyes of the Signora. But
      of this Isaura was unaware. The Signora, on returning home from M. Louvier’s, had certainly
      lamented much over the mesquin appearance of her old-fashioned Italian habiliments compared
      with the brilliant toilette of the gay Parisiennes; and Isaura—quite woman enough to
      sympathize with woman in such womanly vanities—proposed the next day to go with the Signora to
      one of the principal couturieres of Paris, and adapt the Signora’s costume to the fashions of
      the place. But the Signora having predetermined on a Greek jacket, and knowing by instinct
      that Isaura would be disposed to thwart that splendid predilection, had artfully suggested
      that it would be better to go to the couturiere with Madame Savarin, as being a more
      experienced adviser,—and the coupe only held two.
As Madame Savarin was about the same age as the Signora, and dressed as became her years and
      in excellent taste, Isaura thought this an admirable suggestion; and pressing into her
      chaperon’s hand a billet de banque sufficient to re-equip her cap-a pie, dismissed the subject
      from her mind. But the Signora was much too cunning to submit her passion for the Greek jacket
      to the discouraging comments of Madame Savarin. Monopolizing the coupe, she became absolute
      mistress of the situation. She went to no fashionable couturiere’s. She went to a magasin that
      she had seen advertised in the Petites Afiches as supplying superb costumes for fancy-balls
      and amateur performers in private theatricals. She returned home triumphant, with a jacket
      still more dazzling to the eye than that of the English lady.
When Isaura first beheld it, she drew back in a sort of superstitious terror, as of a comet
      or other blazing portent.
“Cosa stupenda!” (stupendous thing!) She might well be dismayed when the Signora proposed to
      appear thus attired in M. Louvier’s salon. What might be admired as coquetry of dress in a
      young beauty of rank so great that even a vulgarity in her would be called distinguee, was
      certainly an audacious challenge of ridicule in the elderly ci-devant music-teacher.
But how could Isaura, how can any one of common humanity, say to a woman resolved upon
      wearing a certain dress, “You are not young and handsome enough for that?” Isaura could only
      murmur, “For many reasons I would rather stay at home, dear Madre.”
“Ah! I see you are ashamed of me,” said the Signora, in softened tones: “very natural. When
      the nightingale sings no more, she is only an ugly brown bird;” and therewith the Signora
      Venosta seated herself submissively, and began to cry.
On this Isaura sprang up, wound her arms round the Signora’s neck, soothed her with coaxing,
      kissed and petted her, and ended by saying, “Of course we will go;” and, “but let me choose
      you another dress,—a dark-green velvet trimmed with blonde: blonde becomes you so well.”
“No, no: I hate green velvet; anybody can wear that. Piccola, I am not clever like thee; I
      cannot amuse myself like thee with books. I am in a foreign land. I have a poor head, but I
      have a big heart” (another burst of tears); “and that big heart is set on my beautiful Greek
      jacket.”
“Dearest Madre,” said Isaura, half weeping too, “forgive me, you are right. The Greek jacket
      is splendid; I shall be so pleased to see you wear it: poor Madre! so pleased to think that in
      the foreign land you are not without something that pleases you!”
</div></body></text></TEI>