<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="82">
CHAPTER II.
Among things indescribable is that which is called “Agitation” in Paris—“Agitation” without
      riot or violence—showing itself by no disorderly act, no turbulent outburst. Perhaps the cafes
      are more crowded; passengers in the streets stop each other more often, and converse in small
      knots and groups; yet, on the whole, there is little externally to show how loudly the heart
      of Paris is beating. A traveller may be passing through quiet landscapes, unconscious that a
      great battle is going on some miles off, but if he will stop and put his ear to the ground he
      will recognise by a certain indescribable vibration, the voice of the cannon.
But at Paris an acute observer need not stop and put his ear to the ground; he feels within
      himself a vibration—a mysterious inward sympathy which communicates to the individual a
      conscious thrill—when the passions of the multitude are stirred, no matter how silently.
Tortoni’s cafe was thronged when Duplessis and Frederic Lemercier entered it: it was in vain
      to order breakfast; no table was vacant either within the rooms or under the awnings
      without.
But they could not retreat so quickly as they had entered. On catching sight of the
      financier several men rose and gathered round him, eagerly questioning:
“What do you think, Duplessis? Will any insult to France put a drop of warm blood into the
      frigid veins of that miserable Ollivier?”
“It is not yet clear that France has been insulted, Messieurs,” replied Duplessis,
      phlegmatically.
“Bah! Not insulted! The very nomination of a Hohenzollern to the crown of Spain was an
      insult—what would you have more?”
“I tell you what it is, Duplessis,” said the Vicomte de Breze, whose habitual light good
      temper seemed exchanged for insolent swagger—“I tell you what it is, your friend the Emperor
      has no more courage than a chicken. He is grown old, and infirm, and lazy; he knows that he
      can’t even mount on horseback. But if, before this day week, he has not declared war on the
      Prussians, he will be lucky if he can get off as quietly as poor Louis Philippe did under
      shelter of his umbrella, and ticketed ‘Schmidt.’ Or could you not, M. Duplessis, send him back
      to London in a bill of exchange?”
“For a man of your literary repute, M. le Vicomte,” said Duplessis, “you indulge in a
      strange confusion of metaphors. But, pardon me, I came here to breakfast, and I cannot remain
      to quarrel. Come, Lemercier, let us take our chance of a cutlet at the Trois Freres.”
“Fox, Fox,” cried Lemercier, whistling to a poodle that had followed him into the cafe, and,
      frightened by the sudden movement and loud voices of the habitues, had taken refuge under the
      table.
“Your dog is poltron,” said De Breze; “call him Nap.” At this stroke of humour there was a
      general laugh, in the midst of which Duplessis escaped, and Frederic, having discovered and
      caught his dog, followed with that animal tenderly clasped in his arms.
“I would not lose Fox for a great deal,” said Lemercier with effusion; “a pledge of love and
      fidelity from an English lady the most distinguished: the lady left me—the dog remains.”
Duplessis smiled grimly: “What a thoroughbred Parisian you are, my dear Frederic! I believe
      if the tramp of the last angel were sounding, the Parisians would be divided into two sets:
      one would be singing the Marseillaise, and parading the red flag; the other would be shrugging
      their shoulders and saying, ‘Bah! as if le Bon Dieu would have the bad taste to injure
      Paris—the Seat of the Graces, the School of the Arts, the Fountain of Reason, the Eye of the
      World;’ and so be found by the destroying angel caressing poodles and making bons mots about
      les femmes.”
“And quite right, too,” said Lemercier, complacently; “what other people in the world could
      retain lightness of heart under circumstances so unpleasant? But why do you take things so
      solemnly? Of course there will be war idle now to talk of explanations and excuses. When a
      Frenchman says, ‘I am insulted,’ he is not going to be told that he is not insulted. He means
      fighting, and not apologising. But what if there be war? Our brave soldiers beat the
      Prussians—take the Rhine—return to Paris covered with laurels; a new Boulevard de Berlin
      eclipses the Boulevard Sebastopol. By the way, Duplessis, a Boulevard de Berlin will be a good
      speculation—better than the Rue de Louvier. Ah! is not that my English friend, Grarm Varn?”
      here, quitting the arm of Duplessis, Lemercier stopped a gentleman who was about to pass him
      unnoticing. “Bon jour, mon ami! how long have you been at Paris?”
“I only arrived last evening,” answered Graham, “and my stay will be so short that it is a
      piece of good luck, my dear Lemercier, to meet with you, and exchange a cordial shake of the
      hand.”
“We are just going to breakfast at the Trois Freres—Duplessis and I—pray join us.”
“With great pleasure—ah, M. Duplessis, I shall be glad to hear from you that the Emperor
      will be firm enough to check the advances of that martial fever which, to judge by the persons
      I meet, seems to threaten delirium.”
Duplessis looked very keenly at Graham’s face, as he replied slowly: “The English, at least,
      ought to know that when the Emperor by his last reforms resigned his personal authority for
      constitutional monarchy, it ceased to be a question whether he could or could not be firm in
      matters that belonged to the Cabinet and the Chambers. I presume that if Monsieur Gladstone
      advised Queen Victoria to declare war upon the Emperor of Russia, backed by a vast majority in
      Parliament, you would think me very ignorant of constitutional monarchy and Parliamentary
      government if I said, ‘I hope Queen Victoria will resist that martial fever.’”
“You rebuke me very fairly, M. Duplessis, if you can show me that the two cases are
      analogous; but we do not understand in England that, despite his last reforms, the Emperor has
      so abnegated his individual ascendency, that his will, clearly and resolutely expressed, would
      not prevail in his Council and silence opposition in the Chambers. Is it so? I ask for
      information.”
The three men were walking on towards the Palais Royal side by side while this conversation
      proceeded.
“That all depends,” replied Duplessis, “upon what may be the increase of popular excitement
      at Paris. If it slackens, the Emperor, no doubt, could turn to wise account that favourable
      pause in the fever. But if it continues to swell, and Paris cries, ‘War,’ in a voice as loud
      as it cried to Louis Philippe ‘Revolution,’ do you think that the Emperor could impose on his
      ministers the wisdom of peace? His ministers would be too terrified by the clamour to
      undertake the responsibility of opposing it—they would resign. Where is the Emperor to find
      another Cabinet? a peace Cabinet? What and who are the orators for peace?—whom a handful!—who?
      Gambetta, Jules Favre, avowed Republicans,—would they even accept the post of ministers to
      Louis Napoleon? If they did, would not their first step be the abolition of the Empire?
      Napoleon is therefore so far a constitutional monarch in the same sense as Queen Victoria,
      that the popular will in the country (and in France in such matters Paris is the country)
      controls the Chambers, controls the Cabinet; and against the Cabinet the Emperor could not
      contend. I say nothing of the army—a power in France unknown to you in England, which would
      certainly fraternise with no peace party. If war is proclaimed,—let England blame it if she
      will—she can’t lament it more than I should: but let England blame the nation; let her blame,
      if she please, the form of the government, which rests upon popular suffrage; but do not let
      her blame our sovereign more than the French would blame her own, if compelled by the
      conditions on which she holds her crown to sign a declaration of war, which vast majorities in
      a Parliament just elected, and a Council of Ministers whom she could not practically replace,
      enforced upon her will.”
“Your observations, M. Duplessis, impress me strongly, and add to the deep anxieties with
      which, in common with all my countrymen, I regard the menacing aspect of the present hour. Let
      us hope the best. Our Government, I know, is exerting itself to the utmost verge of its power,
      to remove every just ground of offence that the unfortunate nomination of a German Prince to
      the Spanish throne could not fail to have given to French statesmen.”
“I am glad you concede that such a nomination was a just ground of offence,” said Lemercier,
      rather bitterly; “for I have met Englishmen who asserted that France had no right to resent
      any choice of a sovereign that Spain might make.”
“Englishmen in general are not very reflective politicians in foreign affairs,” said Graham;
      “but those who are must see that France could not, without alarm the most justifiable,
      contemplate a cordon of hostile states being drawn around her on all sides,—Germany, is,
      itself so formidable since the field of Sadowa, on the east; a German prince in the southwest;
      the not improbable alliance between Prussia and the Italian kingdom, already so alienated from
      the France to which it owed so much. If England would be uneasy were a great maritime power
      possessed of Antwerp, how much more uneasy might France justly be if Prussia could add the
      armies of Spain to those of Germany, and launch them both upon France. But that cause of alarm
      is over—the Hohenzollern is withdrawn. Let us hope for the best.”
The three men had now seated themselves at a table in the Trois Freres, and Lemercier
      volunteered the task of inspecting the menu and ordering the repast, still keeping guard on
      Fox.
“Observe that man,” said Duplessis, pointing towards a gentleman who had just entered; “the
      other day he was the popular hero—now, in the excitement of threatened war, he is permitted to
      order his bifteck uncongratulated, uncaressed; such is fame at Paris! here to-day and gone
      to-morrow.”
“How did the man become famous?”
“He is a painter, and refused a decoration—the only French painter who ever did.”
“And why refuse?”
“Because he is more stared at as the man who refused than he would have been as the man who
      accepted. If ever the Red Republicans have their day, those among them most certain of human
      condemnation will be the coxcombs who have gone mad for the desire of human applause.”
“You are a profound philosopher, M. Duplessis.”
“I hope not—I have an especial contempt for philosophers. Pardon me a moment—I see a man to
      whom I would say a word or two.”
Duplessis crossed over to another table to speak to a middle-aged man of somewhat remarkable
      countenance, with the red ribbon in his buttonhole, in whom Graham recognised an ex-minister
      of the Emperor, differing from most of those at that day in his Cabinet, in the reputation of
      being loyal to his master and courageous against a mob. Left thus alone with Lemercier, Graham
      said:
“Pray tell me where I can find your friend the Marquis de Rochebriant. I called at his
      apartment this morning, and I was told that he had gone on some visit into the country, taking
      his valet, and the concierge could not give me his address. I thought myself so lucky on
      meeting with you, who are sure to know.”
“No, I do not; it is some days since I saw Alain. But Duplessis will be sure to know.” Here
      the financier rejoined them.
“Mon cher, Grarm Varn wants to know for what Sabine shades Rochebriant has deserted the
      ‘fumum opes strepitumque’ of the capital.”
“Ah! the Marquis is a friend of yours, Monsieur?”
“I can scarcely boast that honour, but he is an acquaintance whom I should be very glad to
      see again.”
“At this moment he is at the Duchesse de Tarascon’s country-house near Fontainebleau; I had
      a hurried line from him two days ago stating that he was going there on her urgent invitation.
      But he may return to-morrow; at all events he dines with me on the 8th, and I shall be charmed
      if you will do me the honour to meet him at my house.”
“It is an invitation too agreeable to refuse, and I thank you very much for it.”
Nothing worth recording passed further in conversation between Graham and the two Frenchmen.
      He left them smoking their cigars in the garden, and walked homeward by the Rue de Rivoli. As
      he was passing beside the Magasin du Louvre he stopped, and made way for a lady crossing
      quickly out of the shop towards her carriage at the door. Glancing at him with a slight
      inclination of her head in acknowledgment of his courtesy, the lady recognised his
      features,—
“Ah, Mr. Vane!” she cried, almost joyfully—“you are then at Paris, though you have not come
      to see me.”
“I only arrived last night, dear Mrs. Morley,” said Graham, rather embarrassed, “and only on
      some matters of business which unexpectedly summoned me. My stay will probably be very
      short.”
“In that case let me rob you of a few minutes—no, not rob you even of them; I can take you
      wherever you want to go, and as my carriage moves more quickly than you do on foot, I shall
      save you the minutes instead of robbing you of them.”
“You are most kind, but I was only going to my hotel, which is close by.”
“Then you have no excuse for not taking a short drive with me in the Champs
      Elysees—come.”
Thus bidden, Graham could not civilly disobey. He handed the fair American into her
      carriage, and seated himself by her side.
</div></body></text></TEI>