<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook, Bebee, by Ouida</title><author>Ouida, [pseud.] (1839-1908)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II.
The two years had not been all playtime any more than they had been all summer.
When one has not father, or mother, or brother, and all one's friends have barely bread
     enough for themselves, life cannot be very easy, nor its crusts very many at any time.
Bébée had a cherub's mouth, and a dreamer's eyes, and a poet's thoughts sometimes in her own
     untaught and unconscious fashion.
But all the same she was a little hard-working Brabant peasant girl; up whilst the birds
     twittered in the dark; to bed when the red sun sank beyond the far blue line of the plains; she
     hoed, and dug, and watered, and planted her little plot; she kept her cabin as clean as a
     fresh-blossomed primrose; she milked her goat and swept her floor; she sat, all the warm days,
     in the town, selling her flowers, and in the winter time, when her garden yielded her nothing,
     she strained her sight over lace-making in the city to get the small bit of food that stood
     between her and that hunger which to the poor means death.
A hard life; very hard when hail and snow made the streets of Brussels like slopes of ice; a
     little hard even in the gay summer time when she sat under the awning fronting the Maison du
     Roi; but all the time the child throve on it, and was happy, and dreamed of many graceful and
     gracious things whilst she was weeding among her lilies, or tracing the threads to and fro on
     her lace pillow.
Now—when she woke to the full sense of her wonderful sixteen years—Bébée, standing barefoot
     on the mud floor, was as pretty a sight as was to be seen betwixt Scheldt and Rhine.
The sun had only left a soft warmth like an apricot's on her white skin. Her limbs, though
     strong as a mountain pony's, were slender and well shaped. Her hair curled in shiny crumpled
     masses, and tumbled about her shoulders. Her pretty round plump little breast was white as the
     lilies in the grass without, and in this blooming time of her little life, Bébée, in her way,
     was beautiful as a peach-bloom is beautiful, and her innocent, courageous, happy eyes had
     dreams in them underneath their laughter, dreams that went farther than the green woods of
     Laeken, farther even than the white clouds of summer.
She could not move among them idly as poets and girls love to do; she had to be active amidst
     them, else drought and rain, and worm and snail, and blight and frost, would have made havoc of
     their fairest hopes.
The loveliest love is that which dreams high above all storms, unsoiled by all burdens; but
     perhaps the strongest love is that which, whilst it adores, drags its feet through mire, and
     burns its brow in heat, for the thing beloved.
So Bébée dreamed in her garden; but all the time for sake of it hoed and dug, and hurt her
     hands, and tired her limbs, and bowed her shoulders under the great metal pails from the
     well.
This wondrous morning, with the bright burden of her sixteen years upon her, she dressed
     herself quickly and fed her fowls, and, happy as a bird, went to sit on her little wooden stool
     in the doorway.
There had been fresh rain in the night: the garden was radiant; the smell of the wet earth
     was sweeter than all perfumes that are burned in palaces.
The dripping rosebuds nodded against her hair as she went out; the starling called to her,
     "Bébée, Bébée—bonjour, bonjour." These were all the words it knew. It said the same words a
     thousand times a week. But to Bébée it seemed that the starling most certainly knew that she
     was sixteen years old that day.
Breaking her bread into the milk, she sat in the dawn and thought, without knowing that she
     thought it, "How good it is to live when one is young!"
Old people say the same thing often, but they sigh when they say it. Bébée smiled.
Mère Krebs opened her door in the next cottage, and nodded over the wall.
"What a fine thing to be sixteen!—a merry year, Bébée."
Marthe, the carpenter's wife, came out from her gate, broom in hand.
"The Holy Saints keep you, Bébée; why, you are quite a woman now!"
The little children of Varnhart, the charcoal-burner, who were as poor as any mouse in the
     old churches, rushed out of their little home up the lane, bringing with them a cake stuck full
     of sugar and seeds, and tied round with a blue ribbon, that their mother had made that very
     week, all in her honor.
"Only see, Bébée! Such a grand cake!" they shouted, dancing down the lane. "Jules picked the
     plums, and Jeanne washed the almonds, and Christine took the ribbon off her own communion cap,
     all for you—all for you; but you will let us come and eat it too?"
Old Gran'mère Bishot, who was the oldest woman about Laeken, hobbled through the grass on her
     crutches and nodded her white shaking head, and smiled at Bébée.
"I have nothing to give you, little one, except my blessing, if you care for that."
Bébée ran out, breaking from the children, and knelt down in the wet grass, and bent her
     pretty sunny head to the benediction.
Trine, the miller's wife, the richest woman of them all, called to the child from the steps
     of the mill,—'
"A merry year, and the blessing of Heaven, Bébée! Come up, and here is my first dish of
     cherries for you; not tasted one myself; they will make you a feast with Varnhart's cake,
     though she should have known better, so poor as she is. Charity begins at home, and these
     children's stomachs are empty."
Bébée ran up and then down again gleefully, with her lapful of big black cherries; Tambour,
     the old white dog, who had used to drag her about in his milk cart, leaping on her in sympathy
     and congratulation.
"What a supper we will have!" she cried to the charcoal-burner's children, who were turning
     somersaults in the dock leaves, while the swans stared and hissed.
When one is sixteen, cherries and a cake have a flavor of Paradise still, especially when
     they are tasted twice, or thrice at most, in all the year.
An old man called to her as she went by his door. All these little cabins lie close together,
     with only their apple-trees, or their tall beans, or their hedges of thorn between them; you
     may ride by and never notice them if you do not look for them under the leaves closely, as you
     would for thrushes' nests.
He, too, was very old; a lifelong neighbor and gossip of Antoine's; he had been a day laborer
     in these same fields all his years, and had never travelled farther than where the red
     mill-sails turned among the colza and the corn.
"Come in, my pretty one, for a second," he whispered, with an air of mystery that made
     Bébée's heart quicken with expectancy. "Come in; I have something for you. They were my dead
     daughter's—you have heard me talk of her—Lisette, who died forty year or more ago, they say;
     for me I think it was yesterday. Mère Krebs—she is a hard woman—heard me talking of my girl.
     She burst out laughing, 'Lord's sake, fool, why, your girl would be sixty now an she had
     lived.' Well, so it may be; you see, the new mill was put up the week she died, and you call
     the new mill old; but, my girl, she is young to me. Always young. Come here, Bébée."
Bébée went after him a little awed, into the dusky interior, that smelt of stored apples and
     of dried herbs that hung from the roof. There was a walnut-wood press, such as the peasants of
     France and the low countries keep their homespun linen in and their old lace that serves for
     the nuptials and baptisms of half a score of generations.
The old man unlocked it with a trembling hand, and there came from it an odor of dead
     lavender and of withered rose leaves.
On the shelves there were a girl's set of clothes, and a girl's sabots, and a girl's
     communion veil and wreath.
"They are all hers," he whispered,—"all hers. And sometimes in the evening time I see her
     coming along the lane for them—do you not know? There is nothing changed; nothing changed; the
     grass, and the trees, and the huts, and the pond are all here; why should she only be gone
     away?"
"Antoine is gone."
"Yes. But he was old; my girl is young."
He stood a moment, with the press door open, a perplexed trouble in his dim eyes; the divine
     faith of love and the mule-like stupidity of ignorance made him cling to this one thought
     without power of judgment in it.
"They say she would be sixty," he said, with a little dreary smile. "But that is absurd, you
     know. Why, she had cheeks like yours, and she would run—no lapwing could fly faster over corn.
     These are her things, you see; yes—all of them. That is the sprig of sweetbrier she wore in her
     belt the day before the wagon knocked her down and killed her. I have never touched the things.
     But look here, Bébée, you are a good child and true, and like her just a little. I mean to give
     you her silver clasps. They were her great-great-great-grandmother's before her. God knows how
     old they are not. And a girl should have some little wealth of that sort; and for Antoine's
     sake—"
The old man stayed behind, closing the press door upon the lavender-scented clothes, and
     sitting down in the dull shadow of the hut to think of his daughter, dead forty summers and
     more.
Bébée went out with the brave broad silver clasps about her waist, and the tears wet on her
     cheeks for a grief not her own.
To be killed just when one was young, and was loved liked that, and all the world was in its
     May-day flower! The silver felt cold to her touch—as cold as though it were the dead girl's
     hands that held her.
The garlands that the children strung of daisies and hung about her had never chilled her
     so.
But little Jeanne, the youngest of the charcoal-burner's little tribe, running to meet her,
     screamed with glee, and danced in the gay morning.
"Oh, Bébée! how you glitter! Did the Virgin send you that off her own altar? Let me see—let
     me touch! Is it made of the stars or of the sun?"
And Bébée danced with the child, and the silver gleamed and sparkled, and all the people came
     running out to see, and the milk carts were half an hour later for town, and the hens cackled
     loud unfed, and the men even stopped on their way to the fields and paused, with their scythes
     on their shoulders, to stare at the splendid gift.
"There is not such another set of clasps in Brabant; old work you could make a fortune of in
     the curiosity shops in the Montagne," said Trine Krebs, going up the steps of her mill house.
     "But, all the same, you know, Bébée, things off a dead body bring mischance sometimes."
But Bébée danced with the child, and did not hear.
Whose fête day had ever begun like this one of hers?
She was a little poet at heart, and should not have cared for such vanities; but when one is
     only sixteen, and has only a little rough woollen frock, and sits in the market place or the
     lace-room, with other girls around, how should one be altogether indifferent to a broad,
     embossed, beautiful shield of silver that sparkled with each step one took?
A quarter of an hour idle thus was all, however, that Bébée or her friends could spare at
     five o'clock on a summer morning, when the city was waiting for its eggs, its honey, its
     flowers, its cream, and its butter, and Tambour was shaking his leather harness in impatience
     to be off with his milk-cans.
So Bébée, all holiday though it was, and heroine though she felt herself, ran indoors, put up
     her cakes and cherries, cut her two basketfuls out of the garden, locked her hut, and went on
     her quick and happy little feet along the grassy paths toward the city.
The sorting and tying up of the flowers she always left until she was sitting under the
     awning in front of the Broodhuis; the same awning, tawny as an autumn pear and weather-blown as
     an old sail, which had served to shelter Antoine Mäes from heat and rain through all the years
     of his life.
"Go to the Madeleine; you will make money there, with your pretty blue eyes, Bébée," people
     had said to her of late; but Bébée had shaken her head.
Where she had sat in her babyhood at Antoine's feet, she would sit so long as she sold
     flowers in Brussels,—here, underneath the shadow of the Gothic towers that saw Egmont die.
Old Antoine had never gone into the grand market that is fashioned after the Madeleine of
     Paris, and where in the cool, wet, sweet-smelling halls, all the flowers of Brabant are spread
     in bouquets fit for the bridal of Una, and large as the shield of the Red-Cross Knight.
Antoine could not compete with all those treasures of greenhouse and stove. He had always had
     his little stall among those which spread their tawny awnings and their merry hardy blossoms
     under the shadow of the Hôtel de Ville, in the midst of the buyings and sellings, the games and
     the quarrels, the auctions and the Cheap Johns, the mountebank and the marriage parties, that
     daily and hourly throng the Grande Place.
Here Bébée, from three years old, had been used to sit beside him. By nature she was as gay
     as a lark. The people always heard her singing as they passed the garden. The children never
     found their games so merry as when she danced their rounds with them; and though she dreamed so
     much out there in the air among the carnations and the roses, or in the long, low workroom in
     the town, high against the crocketed pinnacles of the cathedral, yet her dreams, if vaguely
     wistful, were all bright of hue and sunny in their fantasies. Still, Bébée had one sad
     unsatisfied desire: she wanted to know so much, and she knew nothing.
She did not care for the grand gay people.
When the band played, and the park filled, and the bright little cafés were thronged with
     pleasure seekers, and the crowds flocked hither and thither to the woods, to the theatres, to
     the galleries, to the guinguettes, Bébée, going gravely along with her emptied baskets
     homeward, envied none of these.
When at Noël the little children hugged their loads of puppets and sugar-plums; when at the
     Fête Dieu the whole people flocked out be-ribboned and vari-colored like any bed of spring
     anemones; when in the merry midsummer the chars-a-bancs trundled away into the forest with
     laughing loads of students and maidens; when in the rough winters the carriages left furred and
     jewelled women at the doors of the operas or the palaces,—Bébée, going and coming through the
     city to her flower stall or lace work, looked at them all, and never thought of envy or
     desire.
She had her little hut: she could get her bread; she lived with the flowers; the neighbors
     were good to her, and now and then, on a saint's day, she too got her day in the woods; it
     never occurred to her that her lot could be better.
But sometimes sitting, looking at the dark old beauty of the Broodhuis, or at the wondrous
     carven fronts of other Spanish houses, or at the painted stories of the cathedral windows, or
     at the quaint colors of the shipping on the quay, or at the long dark aisles of trees that went
     away through the forest, where her steps had never wandered,—sometimes Bébée would get
     pondering on all this unknown world that lay before and behind and around her, and a sense of
     her own utter ignorance would steal on her; and she would say to herself, "If only I knew a
     little—just a very little!"
But it is not easy to know even a very little when you have to work for your bread from
     sunrise to nightfall, and when none of your friends know how to read or write, and even your
     old priest is one of a family of peasants, and can just teach you the alphabet, and that is
     all. For Father Francis could do no more than this; and all his spare time was taken up in
     digging his cabbage plot and seeing to his beehives; and the only books that Bébée ever beheld
     were a few tattered lives of saints that lay moth-eaten on a shelf of his cottage.
But Brussels has stones that are sermons, or rather that are quaint, touching, illuminated
     legends of the Middle Ages, which those who run may read.
Brussels is a gay little city that lies as bright within its girdle of woodland as any
     butterfly that rests upon moss.
The city has its ways and wiles of Paris. It decks itself with white and gold. It has music
     under its trees and soldiers in its streets, and troops marching and countermarching along its
     sunny avenues. It has blue and pink, and yellow and green, on its awnings and on its house
     fronts. It has a merry open-air life on its pavements at little marble tables before little
     gay-colored cafés. It has gilded balconies, and tossing flags, and comic operas, and leisurely
     pleasure seekers, and tries always to believe and make the world believe that it is Paris in
     very truth.
But this is only the Brussels of the noblesse and the foreigners.
There is a Brussels that is better than this—a Brussels that belongs to the old burgher life,
     to the artists and the craftsmen, to the master-masons of the Moyen-âge, to the same spirit and
     soul that once filled the free men of Ghent and the citizens of Bruges and the besieged of
     Leyden, and the blood of Egmont and of Horn.
Down there by the water-side, where the old quaint walls lean over the yellow sluggish
     stream, and the green barrels of the Antwerp barges swing against the dusky piles of the
     crumbling bridges.
In the gray square desolate courts of the old palaces, where in cobwebbed galleries and
     silent chambers the Flemish tapestries drop to pieces.
In the great populous square, where, above the clamorous and rushing crowds, the majestic
     front of the Maison du Roi frowns against the sun, and the spires and pinnacles of the
     burgomaster's gathering-halls tower into the sky in all the fantastic luxuriance of Gothic
     fancy.
Under the vast shadowy wings of angels in the stillness of the cathedral, across whose sunny
     aisles some little child goes slowly all alone, laden with lilies for the Feast of the
     Assumption, till their white glory hides its curly head.
In all strange quaint old-world niches withdrawn from men in silent grass-grown corners,
     where a twelfth-century corbel holds a pot of roses, or a Gothic arch yawns beneath a wool
     warehouse, or a waterspout with a grinning faun's head laughs in the grim humor of the
     Moyen-âge above the bent head of a young lace-worker.
In all these, Brussels, though more worldly than her sisters of Ghent and Bruges, and far
     more worldly yet than her Teuton cousins of Freiburg and Nürnberg, is still in her own way like
     as a monkish story mixed up with the Romaunt of the Rose; or rather like some gay French
     vaudeville, all fashion and jest, illustrated in old Missal manner with helm and hauberk, cope
     and cowl, praying knights and fighting priests, winged griffins and nimbused saints,
     flame-breathing dragons and enamoured princes, all mingled together in the illuminated colors
     and the heroical grotesque romance of the Middle Ages.
And it was this side of the city that Bébée knew; and she loved it well, and would not leave
     it for the market of the Madeleine.
She had no one to tell her anything, and all Antoine had ever been able to say to her
     concerning the Broodhuis was that it had been there in his father's time; and regarding St.
     Gudule, that his mother had burned many a candle before its altars for a dead brother who had
     been drowned off the dunes.
But the child's mind, unled, but not misled, had pondered on these things, and her heart had
     grown to love them; and perhaps no student of Spanish architecture, no antiquary of Moyen-âge
     relics, loved St. Gudule and the Broodhuis as little ignorant Bébée did.
There had been a time when great dark, fierce men had builded these things, and made the
     place beautiful. So much she knew; and the little wistful, untaught brain tried to project
     itself into those unknown times, and failed, and yet found pleasure in the effort. And Bébée
     would say to herself as she walked the streets, "Perhaps some one will come some day who will
     tell me all those things."
Meanwhile, there were the flowers, and she was quite content.
Besides, she knew all the people: the old cobbler, who sat next her, and chattered all day
     long like a magpie; the tinker, who had come up many a summer night to drink a-glass with
     Antoine; the Cheap John, who cheated everybody else, but who had always given her a toy or a
     trinket at every Fête Dieu all the summers she had known; the little old woman, sour as a crab,
     who sold rosaries and pictures of saints, and little waxen Christs upon a tray; the big dogs
     who pulled the carts in, and lay panting all day under the rush-bottomed chairs on which the
     egg-wives and the fruit sellers sat, and knitted, and chaffered; nay, even the gorgeous
     huissier and the frowning gendarme, who marshalled the folks into order as they went up for
     municipal registries, or for town misdemeanors,—she knew them all; had known them all ever
     since she had first trotted in like a little dog at Antoine's heels.
So Bébée stayed there.
It is, perhaps, the most beautiful square in all Northern Europe, with its black timbers, and
     gilded carvings, and blazoned windows, and majestic scutcheons, and fantastic pinnacles. That
     Bébée did not know, but she loved it, and she sat resolutely in front of the Broodhuis, selling
     her flowers, smiling, chatting, helping the old woman, counting her little gains, eating her
     bit of bread at noonday like any other market girl, but at times glancing up to the stately
     towers and the blue sky, with a look on her face that made the old tinker and cobbler whisper
     together, "What does she see there?—the dead people or the angels?"
The truth was that even Bébée herself did not know very surely what she saw—something that
     was still nearer to her than even this kindly crowd that loved her. That was all she could have
     said had anybody asked her.
But none did.
No one wanted to hear what the dead said; and for the angels, the tinker and the cobbler were
     of opinion that one had only too much of them sculptured about everywhere, and shining on all
     the casements—in reverence be it spoken, of course.
</div></body></text></TEI>