<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="63">
CHAPTER III.
When the door had closed on the Chevalier, Frederic’s countenance became very grave. Drawing
      his chair near to Alain, he said: “We have not seen much of each other lately,—nay, no
      excuses; I am well aware that it could scarcely be otherwise. Paris has grown so large and so
      subdivided into sets, that the best friends belonging to different sets become as divided as
      if the Atlantic flowed between them. I come to-day in consequence of something I have just
      heard from Duplessis. Tell me, have you got the money for the wood you sold to M. Collot a
      year ago?”
“No,” said Alain, falteringly.
“Good heavens! none of it?”
“Only the deposit of ten per cent., which of course I spent, for it formed the greater part
      of my income. What of Collot? Is he really unsafe?”
“He is ruined, and has fled the country. His flight was the talk of the Bourse this morning.
      Duplessis told me of it.”
Alain’s face paled. “How is Louvier to be paid? Read that letter!”
Lemercier rapidly scanned his eye over the contents of Louvier’s letter.
“It is true, then, that you owe this man a year’s interest—more than 7,000 louis?”
“Somewhat more—yes. But that is not the first care that troubles me—Rochebriant may be lost,
      but with it not my honour. I owe the Russian Prince 300 louis, lost to him last night at
      ecarte. I must find a purchaser for my coupe and horses; they cost me 600 louis last year,—do
      you know any one who will give me three?”
“Pooh! I will give you six; your alezan alone is worth half the money!”
“My dear Frederic, I will not sell them to you on any account. But you have so many
      friends—”
“Who would give their soul to say, ‘I bought these horses of Rochebriant.’ Of course I do.
      Ha! young Rameau, you are acquainted with him?”
“Rameau! I never heard of him!”
“Vanity of vanities, then what is fame? Rameau is the editor of Le Sens Commun. You read
      that journal?”
“Yes, it has clever articles, and I remember how I was absorbed in the eloquent romance
      which appeared in it.”
“Ah! by the Signora Cicogna, with whom I think you were somewhat smitten last year.”
“Last year—was I? How a year can alter a man! But my debt to the Prince. What has Le Sens
      Commun to do with my horses?”
“I met Rameau at Savarin’s the other evening. He was making himself out a hero and a martyr!
      his coupe had been taken from him to assist in a barricade in that senseless emeute ten days
      ago; the coupe got smashed, the horses disappeared. He will buy one of your horses and
      coupe.
“Leave it to me! I know where to dispose of the other two horses. At what hour do you want
      the money?”
“Before I go to dinner at the club.”
“You shall have it within two hours; but you must not dine at the club to-day. I have a note
      from Duplessis to invite you to dine with him to-day!”
“Duplessis! I know so little of him!”
“You should know him better. He is the only man who can give you sound advice as to this
      difficulty with Louvier; and he will give it the more carefully and zealously because he has
      that enmity to Louvier which one rival financier has to another. I dine with him too. We shall
      find an occasion to consult him quietly; he speaks of you most kindly. What a lovely girl his
      daughter is!”
“I dare say. Ah! I wish I had been less absurdly fastidious. I wish I had entered the army
      as a private soldier six months ago; I should have been a corporal by this time! Still it is
      not too late. When Rochebriant is gone, I can yet say with the Mouszquetaire in the melodrame:
      ‘I am rich—I have my honour and my sword!’”
“Nonsense! Rochebriant shall be saved; meanwhile I hasten to Rameau. Au revoir, at the Hotel
      Duplessis—seven o’clock.”
Lemercier went, and in less than two hours sent the Marquis bank-notes for 600 louis,
      requesting an order for the delivery of the horses and carriage.
That order written and signed, Alain hastened to acquit himself of his debt of honour, and
      contemplating his probable ruin with a lighter heart presented himself at the Hotel
      Duplessis.
Duplessis made no pretensions to vie with the magnificent existence of Louvier. His house,
      though agreeably situated and flatteringly styled the Hotel Duplessis, was of moderate size,
      very unostentatiously furnished; nor was it accustomed to receive the brilliant motley crowds
      which assembled in the salons of the elder financier.
Before that year, indeed, Duplessis had confined such entertainments as he gave to quiet men
      of business, or a few of the more devoted and loyal partisans of the Imperial dynasty; but
      since Valerie came to live with him he had extended his hospitalities to wider and livelier
      circles, including some celebrities in the world of art and letters as well as of fashion. Of
      the party assembled that evening at dinner were Isaura, with the Signora Venosta, one of the
      Imperial Ministers, the Colonel whom Alain had already met at Lemercier’s supper, Deputes
      (ardent Imperialists), and the Duchesse de Tarascon; these, with Alain and Frederic, made up
      the party. The conversation was not particularly gay. Duplessis himself, though an exceedingly
      well-read and able man, had not the genial accomplishments of a brilliant host.
      Constitutionally grave and habitually taciturn—though there were moments in which he was
      roused out of his wonted self into eloquence or wit—he seemed to-day absorbed in some
      engrossing train of thought. The Minister, the Deputes and the Duchesse de Tarascon talked
      politics, and ridiculed the trumpery emeute of the 14th; exulted in the success of the
      plebiscite; and admitting, with indignation, the growing strength of Prussia, and—with
      scarcely less indignation, but more contempt, censuring the selfish egotism of England in
      disregarding the due equilibrium of the European balance of power,—hinted at the necessity of
      annexing Belgium as a set-off against the results of Sadowa.
Alain found himself seated next to Isaura—to the woman who had so captivated his eye and
      fancy on his first arrival in Paris.
Remembering his last conversation with Graham nearly a year ago, he felt some curiosity to
      ascertain whether the rich Englishman had proposed to her, and if so, been refused or
      accepted.
The first words that passed between them were trite enough, but after a little pause in the
      talk, Alain said:
“I think Mademoiselle and myself have an acquaintance in common-Monsieur Vane, a
      distinguished Englishman. Do you know if he be in Paris at present? I have not seen him for
      many months.”
“I believe he is in London; at least, Colonel Morley met the other day a friend of his who
      said so.”
Though Isaura strove to speak in a tone of indifference, Alain’s ear detected a ring of pain
      in her voice; and watching her countenance, he was impressed with a saddened change in its
      expression. He was touched, and his curiosity was mingled with a gentler interest as he said
      “When I last saw M. Vane I should have judged him to be too much under the spell of an
      enchantress to remain long without the pale of the circle she draws around her.”
Isaura turned her face quickly towards the speaker, and her lips moved, but she said nothing
      audibly.
“Can there have been quarrel or misunderstanding?” thought Alain; and after that question
      his heart asked itself, “Supposing Isaura were free, her affections disengaged, could he wish
      to woo and to win her?” and his heart answered—“Eighteen months ago thou wert nearer to her
      than now. Thou wert removed from her for ever when thou didst accept the world as a barrier
      between you; then, poor as thou wert, thou wouldst have preferred her to riches. Thou went
      then sensible only of the ingenuous impulses of youth, but the moment thou saidst, ‘I am
      Rochebriant, and having once owned the claims of birth and station, I cannot renounce them for
      love, Isaura became but a dream. Now that ruin stares thee in the face—now that thou must
      grapple with the sternest difficulties of adverse fate—thou hast lost the poetry of sentiment
      which could alone give to that dream the colours and the form of human life.” He could not
      again think of that fair creature as a prize that he might even dare to covet. And as he met
      her inquiring eyes, and saw her quivering lip, he felt instinctively that Graham was dear to
      her, and that the tender interest with which she inspired himself was untroubled by one pang
      of jealousy. He resumed:
“Yes, the last time I saw the Englishman he spoke with such respectful homage of one lady,
      whose hand he would deem it the highest reward of ambition to secure, that I cannot but feel
      deep compassion for him if that ambition has been foiled; and thus only do I account for his
      absence from Paris.”
“You are an intimate friend of Mr. Vane’s?”
“No, indeed, I have not that honour; our acquaintance is but slight, but it impressed me
      with the idea of a man of vigorous intellect, frank temper, and perfect honour.”
Isaura’s face brightened with the joy we feel when we hear the praise of those we love.
At this moment, Duplessis, who had been observing the Italian and the young Marquis, for the
      first time during dinner, broke silence.
“Mademoiselle,” he said, addressing Isaura across the table, “I hope I have not been
      correctly informed that your literary triumph has induced you to forego the career in which
      all the best judges concur that your successes would be not less brilliant; surely one art
      does not exclude another.”
Elated by Alain’s report of Graham’s words, by the conviction that these words applied to
      herself, and by the thought that her renunciation of the stage removed a barrier between them,
      Isaura answered, with a sort of enthusiasm:
“I know not, M. Duplessis, if one art excludes another; if there be desire to excel in each.
      But I have long lost all desire to excel in the art you refer to, and resigned all idea of the
      career in which it opens.”
“So M. Vane told me,” said Alain, in a whisper.
“When?”
“Last year—on the day that he spoke in terms of admiration so merited of the lady whom M.
      Duplessis has just had the honour to address.”
All this while, Valerie, who was seated at the further end of the table beside the Minister,
      who had taken her in to dinner, had been watching, with eyes, the anxious tearful sorrow of
      which none but her father had noticed, the low-voiced confidence between Alain and the friend,
      whom till that day she had so enthusiastically loved. Hitherto she had been answering in
      monosyllables all attempts of the great man to draw her into conversation; but now, observing
      how Isaura blushed and looked down, that strange faculty in women, which we men call
      dissimulation, and which in them is truthfulness to their own nature, enabled her to carry off
      the sharpest anguish she had ever experienced, by a sudden burst of levity of spirit. She
      caught up some commonplace the Minister had adapted to what he considered the poverty of her
      understanding, with a quickness of satire which startled that grave man, and he gazed at her
      astonished. Up to that moment he had secretly admired her as a girl well brought up—as girls
      fresh from a French convent are supposed to be; now, hearing her brilliant rejoinder to his
      stupid observation, he said inly: “Dame! the low birth of a financier’s daughter shows
      itself.”
But, being a clever man himself, her retort put him on his mettle, and he became, to his own
      amazement, brilliant himself. With that matchless quickness which belongs to Parisians, the
      guests around him seized the new esprit de conversation which had been evoked between the
      statesman and the childlike girl beside him; and as they caught up the ball, lightly flung
      among them, they thought within themselves how much more sparkling the financier’s pretty,
      lively daughter was than that dark-eyed young muse, of whom all the journalists of Paris were
      writing in a chorus of welcome and applause, and who seemed not to have a word to say worth
      listening to, except to the handsome young Marquis, whom, no doubt, she wished to
      fascinate.
Valerie fairly outshone Isaura in intellect and in wit; and neither Valerie nor Isaura
      cared, to the value of a bean-straw, about that distinction. Each was thinking only of the
      prize which the humblest peasant women have in common with the most brilliantly accomplished
      of their sex—the heart of a man beloved.
</div></body></text></TEI>