<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="58">
CHAPTER IV.
Isaura was seated in her pretty salon, with the Venosta, M. Savarin, the Morleys, and the
      financier Louvier, when Rameau was announced.
“Ha!” cried Savarin, “we were just discussing a matter which nearly concerns you, cher
      poete. I have not seen you since the announcement that Pierre Firmin is no other than Victor
      de Mauleon. Ma foi, that worthy seems likely to be as dangerous with his pen as he was once
      with his sword. The article in which he revealed himself makes a sharp lunge on the
      Government. ‘Take care of yourself. When hawks and nightingales fly together the hawk may
      escape, and the nightingale complain of the barbarity of kings, in a cage: ‘flebiliter gemens
      infelix avis.‘’”
“He is not fit to conduct a journal,” replied Rameau, magniloquently, “who will not brave a
      danger for his body in defence of the right to infinity for his thought.”
“Bravo!” said Mrs. Morley, clapping her pretty hands. “That speech reminds me of home. The
      French are very much like the Americans in their style of oratory.”
“So,” said Louvier, “my old friend the Vicomte has come out as a writer, a politician, a
      philosopher; I feel hurt that he kept this secret from me despite our intimacy. I suppose you
      knew it from the first, M. Rameau?”
“No, I was as much taken by surprise as the rest of the world. You have long known M. de
      Mauleon?”
“Yes, I may say we began life together—that is, much at the same time.”
“What is he like in appearance?” asked Mrs. Morley. “The ladies thought him very handsome
      when he was young,” replied Louvier. “He is still a fine-looking man, about my height.”
“I should like to know him!” cried Mrs. Morley, “if only to tease that husband of mine. He
      refuses me the dearest of woman’s rights.—I can’t make him jealous.”
“You may have the opportunity of knowing this ci-devant Lovelace very soon,” said Rameau,
      “for he has begged me to present him to Mademoiselle Cicogna, and I will ask her permission to
      do so, on Thursday evening when she receives.”
Isaura, who had hitherto attended very listlessly to the conversation, bowed assent. “Any
      friend of yours will be welcome. But I own the articles signed in the name of Pierre Firmin do
      not prepossess me in favour of their author.”
“Why so?” asked Louvier; “surely you are not an Imperialist?”
“Nay, I do not pretend to be a politician at all, but there is something in the writing of
      Pierre Firmin that pains and chills me.”
“Yet the secret of its popularity,” said Savarin, “is that it says what every one says—only
      better.”
“I see now that it is exactly that which displeases me; it is the Paris talk condensed into
      epigram: the graver it is the less it elevates—the lighter it is, the more it saddens.”
“That is meant to hit me,” said Savarin, with his sunny laugh—“me whom you call
      cynical.”
“No, dear M. Savarin; for above all your cynicism is genuine gaiety, and below it solid
      kindness. You have that which I do not find in M. de Mauleon’s writing, nor often in the talk
      of the salon—you have youthfulness.”
“Youthfulness at sixty—flatterer!”
“Genius does not count its years by the almanac,” said Mrs. Morley. “I know what Isaura
      means—she is quite right; there is a breath of winter in M. de Mauleon’s style, and an odour
      of fallen leaves. Not that his diction wants vigour; on the contrary, it is crisp with
      hoar-frost. But the sentiments conveyed by the diction are those of a nature sear and
      withered. And it is in this combination of brisk words and decayed feelings that his writing
      represents the talk and mind of Paris. He and Paris are always fault-finding: fault-finding is
      the attribute of old age.”
Colonel Morley looked round with pride, as much as to say, “Clever talker my wife.”
Savarin understood that look, and replied to it courteously. “Madame has a gift of
      expression which Emile de Girardin can scarcely surpass. But when she blames us for
      fault-finding, can she expect the friends of liberty to praise the present style of
      things?”
“I should be obliged to the friends of liberty,” said the Colonel, drily, “to tell me how
      that state of things is to be mended. I find no enthusiasm for the Orleanists, none for a
      Republic; people sneer at religion; no belief in a cause, no adherence to an opinion. But the
      worst of it is that, like all people who are blases, the Parisians are eager for strange
      excitement, and ready to listen to any oracle who promises a relief from indifferentism. This
      it is which makes the Press more dangerous in France than it is in any other country.
      Elsewhere the Press sometimes leads, sometimes follows, public opinion. Here there is no
      public opinion to consult, and instead of opinion the Press represents passion.”
“My dear Colonel Morley,” said Savarin, “I hear you very often say that a Frenchman cannot
      understand America. Permit me to observe that an American cannot understand France—or at least
      Paris. Apropos of Paris that is a large speculation of yours, Louvier, in the new suburb.”
“And a very sound one; I advise you to invest in it. I can secure you at present 5 per cent.
      on the rental; that is nothing—the houses will be worth double when the Rue de Louvier is
      completed.”
“Alas! I have no money; my new journal absorbs all my capital.”
“Shall I transfer the money I hold for you, Signorina, and add to them whatever you may have
      made by your delightful roman, as yet lying idle, to this investment? I cannot say more in its
      favour than this: I have embarked a very large portion of my capital in the Rue de Louvier,
      and I flatter myself that I am not one of those men who persuade their friends to do a foolish
      thing by setting them the example.”
“Whatever you advise on such a subject,” said Isaura, graciously, “is sure to be as wise as
      it is kind!”
“You consent, then?”
“Certainly.”
Here the Venosta, who had been listening with great attention to Louvier’s commendation of
      this investment, drew him aside, and whispered in his ear: “I suppose, M. Louvier, that one
      can’t put a little money-a very little money—poco-poco pocolino, into your street.”
“Into my street! Ah, I understand—into the speculation of the Rue de Louvier! Certainly you
      can. Arrangements are made on purpose to suit the convenience of the smallest capitalists—from
      500 francs upwards.”
“And you feel quite sure that we shall double our money when the street is completed—I
      should not like to have my brains in my heels.”

 [“‘Avere il cervello nella calcagna,”—viz., to act without prudent reflection.]
      
“More than double it, I hope, long before the street is completed.”
“I have saved a little money—very little. I have no relations, and I mean to leave it all to
      the Signorina; and if it could be doubled, why, there would be twice as much to leave
      her.”
“So there would,” said Louvier. “You can’t do better than put it all into the Rue de
      Louvier. I will send you the necessary papers to-morrow, when I send hers to the
      Signorina.”
Louvier here turned to address himself to Colonel Morley, but finding that degenerate son of
      America indisposed to get cent. per cent. for his money when offered by a Parisian, he very
      soon took his leave. The other visitors followed his example, except Rameau, who was left
      alone with the Venosta and Isaura. The former had no liking for Rameau, who showed her none of
      the attentions her innocent vanity demanded, and she soon took herself off to her own room to
      calculate the amount of her savings, and dream of the Rue de Louvier and “golden joys.”
Rameau approaching his chair to Isaura’s then commenced conversation, drily enough, upon
      pecuniary matters; acquitting himself of the mission with which De Mauleon had charged him,
      the request for a new work from her pen for the Sens Commun, and the terms that ought to be
      asked for compliance. The young lady-author shrank from this talk. Her private income, though
      modest, sufficed for her wants, and she felt a sensitive shame in the sale of her thoughts and
      fancies.
Putting hurriedly aside the mercantile aspect of the question, she said that she had no
      other work in her mind at present—that, whatever her vein of invention might be, it flowed at
      its own will, and could not be commanded.
“Nay,” said Rameau, “this is not true. We fancy, in our hours of indolence, that we must
      wait for inspiration; but once force ourselves to work, and ideas spring forth at the wave of
      the pen. You may believe me here, I speak from experience: I, compelled to work, and in modes
      not to my taste—I do my task I know not how. I rub the lamp, ‘the genius comes.’”
“I have read in some English author that motive power is necessary to continued labour: you
      have motive power, I have none.”
“I do not quite understand you.”
“I mean that a strong ruling motive is required to persist in any regular course of action
      that needs effort: the motive with the majority of men is the need of subsistence; with a
      large number (as in trades or professions), not actually want, but a desire of gain, and
      perhaps of distinction, in their calling: the desire of professional distinction expands into
      the longings for more comprehensive fame, more exalted honours, with the few who become great
      writers, soldiers, statesmen, orators.”
“And do you mean to say you have no such motive?”
“None in the sting of want, none in the desire of gain.”
“But fame?”
“Alas! I thought so once. I know not now—I begin to doubt if fame should be sought by
      women.” This was said very dejectedly.
“Tut, dearest Signorina! what gadfly has stung you? Your doubt is a weakness unworthy of
      your intellect; and even were it not, genius is destiny and will be obeyed: you must write,
      despite yourself—and your writing must bring fame, whether you wish it or not.”
Isaura was silent, her head drooped on her breast—there were tears in her downcast eyes.
Rameau took her hand, which she yielded to him passively, and clasping it in both his own,
      he rushed on impulsively—
“Oh, I know what these misgivings are when we feel ourselves solitary, unloved: how often
      have they been mine! But how different would labour be if shared and sympathised with by a
      congenial mind, by a heart that beats in unison with one’s own!”
Isaura’s breast heaved beneath her robe, she sighed softly.
“And then how sweet the fame of which the one we love is proud! how trifling becomes the
      pang of some malignant depreciation, which a word from the beloved one can soothe! O
      Signorina! O Isaura! are we not made for each other? Kindred pursuits, hopes, and fears in
      common; the same race to run, the same goal to win! I need a motive stronger than I have yet
      known for the persevering energy that insures success: supply to me that motive. Let me think
      that whatever I win in the strife of the world is a tribute to Isaura. No, do not seek to
      withdraw this hand, let me claim it as mine for life. I love you as man never loved before—do
      not reject my love.”
They say the woman who hesitates is lost. Isaura hesitated, but was not yet lost. The words
      she listened to moved her deeply. Offers of marriage she had already received: one from a rich
      middle-aged noble, a devoted musical virtuoso; one from a young avocat fresh from the
      provinces, and somewhat calculating on her dot; one from a timid but enthusiastic admirer of
      her genius and her beauty, himself rich, handsome, of good birth, but with shy manners and
      faltering tongue.
But these had made their proposals with the formal respect habitual to French decorum in
      matrimonial proposals. Words so eloquently impassioned as Gustave Rameau’s had never before
      thrilled her ears; Yes, she was deeply moved; and yet, by that very emotion she knew that it
      was not to the love of this wooer that her heart responded.
There is a circumstance in the history of courtship familiar to the experience of many
      women, that while the suitor is pleading his cause, his language may touch every fibre in the
      heart of his listener, yet substitute, as it were, another presence for his own. She may be
      saying to herself, “Oh that another had said those words!” and be dreaming of the other, while
      she hears the one. Thus it was with Isaura, and not till Rameau’s voice had ceased did that
      dream pass away, and with a slight shiver she turned her face towards the wooer sadly and
      pityingly. “It cannot be,” she said, in a low whisper; “I were not worthy of your love could I
      accept it. Forget that you have so spoken; let me still be a friend admiring your genius,
      interested in your career. I cannot be more. Forgive me if I unconsciously led you to think I
      could, I am so grieved to pain you.”
“Am I to understand,” said Rameau, coldly, for his amour propre was resentful, “that the
      proposals of another have been more fortunate than mine?” And he named the youngest and
      comeliest of those whom she had rejected. “Certainly not,” said Isaura.
Rameau rose and went to the window, turning his face from her. In reality he was striving to
      collect his thoughts and decide on the course it were most prudent for him now to pursue. The
      fumes of the absinthe which had, despite his previous forebodings, emboldened him to hazard
      his avowal, had now subsided into the languid reaction which is generally consequent on that
      treacherous stimulus, a reaction not unfavourable to passionless reflection. He knew that if
      he said he could not conquer his love, he would still cling to hope, and trust to perseverance
      and time, he should compel Isaura to forbid his visits and break off their familiar
      intercourse. This would be fatal to the chance of yet winning her, and would also be of
      serious disadvantage to his more worldly interests. Her literary aid might become essential to
      the journal on which his fortunes depended; and at all events, in her conversation, in her
      encouragement, in her sympathy with the pains and joys of his career, he felt a support, a
      comfort, nay, an inspiration. For the spontaneous gush of her fresh thoughts and fancies
      served to recruit his own jaded ideas, and enlarge his own stinted range of invention. No, he
      could not commit himself to the risk of banishment from Isaura.
And mingled with meaner motives for discretion, there was one of which he was but vaguely
      conscious, purer and nobler. In the society of this girl, in whom whatever was strong and high
      in mental organisation became so sweetened into feminine grace by gentleness of temper and
      kindliness of disposition, Rameau felt himself a better man. The virgin-like dignity with
      which she moved, so untainted by a breath of scandal, amid salons in which the envy of virtues
      doubted sought to bring innocence itself into doubt, warmed into a genuine reverence the
      cynicism of his professed creed.
While with her, while under her chastening influence, he was sensible of a poetry infused
      within him far more true to the Camoenae than all he had elaborated into verse. In these
      moments he was ashamed of the vices he had courted as distractions. He imagined that with her
      all his own, it would be easy to reform.
No; to withdraw wholly from Isaura was to renounce his sole chance of redemption.
While these thoughts, which it takes so long to detail, passed rapidly through his brain, he
      felt a soft touch on his arm, and, turning his face slowly, encountered the tender,
      compassionate eyes of Isaura.
“Be consoled, dear friend,” she said, with a smile, half cheering, half mournful. “Perhaps
      for all true artists the solitary lot is the best.”
“I will try to think so,” answered Rameau; “and meanwhile I thank you with a full heart for
      the sweetness with which you have checked my presumption—the presumption shall not be
      repeated. Gratefully I accept the friendship you deign to tender me. You bid me forget the
      words I uttered. Promise in turn that you will forget them—or at least consider them
      withdrawn. You will receive me still as friend?”
“As friend, surely: yes. Do we not both need friends?” She held out her hand as she spoke;
      he bent over it, kissed it with respect, and the interview thus closed.
</div></body></text></TEI>