<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER IV.
Some weeks have passed since Graham’s talk with Isaura in the garden; he has not visited the
      villa since. His cousins the D’Altons have passed through Paris on their way to Italy, meaning
      to stay a few days; they stayed nearly a month, and monopolized much of Graham’s
      companionship. Both these were reasons why, in the habitual society of the Duke, Graham’s
      persuasion that he was not yet free to court the hand of Isaura became strengthened, and with
      that persuasion necessarily came a question equally addressed to his conscience. “If not yet
      free to court her hand, am I free to expose myself to the temptation of seeking to win her
      affection?” But when his cousin was gone, his heart began to assert its own rights, to argue
      its own case, and suggest modes of reconciling its dictates to the obligations which seemed to
      oppose them. In this hesitating state of mind he received the following note:—

 VILLA ———, LAC D’ENGHIEN. 
MY DEAR MR. VANE,—We have retreated from Paris to the banks of this beautiful little lake.
      Come and help to save Frank and myself from quarrelling with each other, which, until the
      Rights of Women are firmly established, married folks always will do when left to themselves,
      especially if they are still lovers, as Frank and I are. Love is a terribly quarrelsome thing.
      Make us a present of a few days out of your wealth of time. We will visit Montmorency and the
      haunts of Rousseau, sail on the lake at moonlight, dine at gypsy restaurants under trees not
      yet embrowned by summer heats, discuss literature and politics, “Shakspeare and the musical
      glasses,”—and be as sociable and pleasant as Boccaccio’s tale-tellers, at Fiesole. We shall be
      but a small party, only the Savarins, that unconscious sage and humourist Signora Venosta, and
      that dimple-cheeked Isaura, who embodies the song of nightingales and the smile of summer.
      Refuse, and Frank shall not have an easy moment till he sends in his claims for thirty
      millions against the Alabama.

 Yours, as you behave, LIZZIE MORLEY. 
Graham did not refuse. He went to Enghien for four days and a quarter. He was under the same
      roof as Isaura. Oh, those happy days! so happy that they defy description. But though to
      Graham the happiest days he had ever known, they were happier still to Isaura. There were
      drawbacks to his happiness, none to hers,—drawbacks partly from reasons the weight of which
      the reader will estimate later; partly from reasons the reader may at once comprehend and
      assess. In the sunshine of her joy, all the vivid colourings of Isaura’s artistic temperament
      came forth, so that what I may call the homely, domestic woman-side of her nature faded into
      shadow. If, my dear reader, whether you be man or woman, you have come into familiar contact
      with some creature of a genius to which, even assuming that you yourself have a genius in its
      own way, you have no special affinities, have you not felt shy with that creature? Have you
      not, perhaps, felt how intensely you could love that creature, and doubted if that creature
      could possibly love you? Now I think that shyness and that disbelief are common with either
      man or woman, if, however conscious of superiority in the prose of life, he or she recognizes
      inferiority in the poetry of it. And yet this self-abasement is exceedingly mistaken. The
      poetical kind of genius is so grandly indulgent, so inherently deferential, bows with such
      unaffected modesty to the superiority in which it fears it may fail (yet seldom does
      fail),—the superiority of common-sense. And when we come to women, what marvellous truth is
      conveyed by the woman who has had no superior in intellectual gifts among her own sex!
      Corinne, crowned at the Capitol, selects out of the whole world as the hero of her love no
      rival poet and enthusiast, but a cold-blooded, sensible Englishman.
Graham Vane, in his strong masculine form of intellect—Graham Vane, from whom I hope much,
      if he live to fulfil his rightful career—had, not unreasonably, the desire to dominate the
      life of the woman whom he selected as the partner of his own; but the life of Isaura seemed to
      escape him. If at moments, listening to her, he would say to himself, “What a companion! life
      could never be dull with her,” at other moments he would say, “True, never dull, but would it
      be always safe?” And then comes in that mysterious power of love which crushes all beneath its
      feet, and makes us end self-commune by that abject submission of reason, which only murmurs,
      “Better be unhappy with the one you love than happy with one whom you do not.” All such
      self-communes were unknown to Isaura. She lived in the bliss of the hour. If Graham could have
      read her heart, he would have dismissed all doubt whether he could dominate her life. Could a
      Fate or an Angel have said to her, “Choose,—on one side I promise you the glories of a
      Catalani, a Pasta, a Sappho, a De Stael, a Georges Sand, all combined into one immortal name;
      or, on the other side, the whole heart of the man who would estrange himself from you if you
      had such combination of glories,”—her answer would have brought Graham Vane to her feet. All
      scruples, all doubts, would have vanished; he would have exclaimed, with the generosity
      inherent in the higher order of man, “Be glorious, if your nature wills it so. Glory enough to
      me that you would have resigned glory itself to become mine.” But how is it that men worth a
      woman’s loving become so diffident when they love intensely? Even in ordinary cases of love
      there is so ineffable a delicacy in virgin woman, that a man, be he how refined soever, feels
      himself rough and rude and coarse in comparison; and while that sort of delicacy was
      pre-eminent in this Italian orphan, there came, to increase the humility of the man so proud
      and so confident in himself when he had only men to deal with, the consciousness that his
      intellectual nature was hard and positive beside the angel-like purity and the fairy-like play
      of hers.
There was a strong wish on the part of Mrs. Morley to bring about the union of these two.
      She had a great regard and a great admiration for both. To her mind, unconscious of all
      Graham’s doubts and prejudices, they were exactly suited to each other. A man of intellect so
      cultivated as Graham’s, if married to a commonplace English “Miss,” would surely feel as if
      life had no sunshine and no flowers. The love of an Isaura would steep it in sunshine, pave it
      with flowers. Mrs. Morley admitted—all American Republicans of gentle birth do admit—the
      instincts which lead “like” to match with “like,” an equality of blood and race. With all her
      assertion of the Rights of Woman, I do not think that Mrs. Morley would ever have conceived
      the possibility of consenting that the richest and prettiest and cleverest girl in the States
      could become the wife of a son of hers if the girl had the taint of negro blood, even though
      shown nowhere save the slight distinguishing hue of her finger-nails. So had Isaura’s merits
      been threefold what they were and she had been the wealthy heiress of a retail grocer, this
      fair Republican would have opposed (more strongly than many an English duchess, or at least a
      Scotch duke, would do, the wish of a son), the thought of an alliance between Graham Vane and
      the grocer’s daughter! But Isaura was a Cicogna, an offspring of a very ancient and very noble
      house. Disparities of fortune, or mere worldly position, Mrs. Morley supremely despised. Here
      were the great parities of alliance,—parities in years and good looks and mental culture. So,
      in short, she in the invitation given to them had planned for the union between Isaura and
      Graham. To this plan she had an antagonist, whom she did not even guess, in Madame Savarin.
      That lady, as much attached to Isaura as was Mrs. Morley herself, and still more desirous of
      seeing a girl, brilliant and parentless, transferred from the companionship of Signora Venosta
      to the protection of a husband, entertained no belief in the serious attentions of Graham
      Vane. Perhaps she exaggerated his worldly advantages, perhaps she undervalued the warmth of
      his affections; but it was not within the range of her experience, confined much to Parisian
      life, nor in harmony with her notions of the frigidity and morgue of the English national
      character, that a rich and high-born young man, to whom a great career in practical public
      life was predicted, should form a matrimonial alliance with a foreign orphan girl, who, if of
      gentle birth, had no useful connections, would bring no correspondent dot, and had been reared
      and intended for the profession of the stage. She much more feared that the result of any
      attentions on the part of such a man would be rather calculated to compromise the orphan’s
      name, or at least to mislead her expectations, than to secure her the shelter of a wedded
      home. Moreover, she had cherished plans of her own for Isaura’s future. Madame Savarin had
      conceived for Gustave Rameau a friendly regard, stronger than that which Mrs. Morley
      entertained for Graham Vane, for it was more motherly. Gustave had been familiarized to her
      sight and her thoughts since he had first been launched into the literary world under her
      husband’s auspices; he had confided to her his mortification in his failures, his joy in his
      successes. His beautiful countenance, his delicate health, his very infirmities and defects,
      had endeared him to her womanly heart. Isaura was the wife of all others who, in Madame
      Savarin’s opinion, was made for Rameau. Her fortune, so trivial beside the wealth of the
      Englishman, would be a competence to Rameau; then that competence might swell into vast riches
      if Isaura succeeded on the stage. She found with extreme displeasure that Isaura’s mind had
      become estranged from the profession to which she had been destined, and divined that a
      deference to the Englishman’s prejudices had something to do with that estrangement. It was
      not to be expected that a Frenchwoman, wife to a sprightly man of letters, who had intimate
      friends and allies in every department of the artistic world, should cherish any prejudice
      whatever against the exercise of an art in which success achieved riches and renown; but she
      was prejudiced, as most Frenchwomen are, against allowing to unmarried girls the same freedom
      and independence of action that are the rights of women—French women—when married; and she
      would have disapproved the entrance of Isaura on her professional career until she could enter
      it as a wife, the wife of an artist, the wife of Gustave Rameau.
Unaware of the rivalry between these friendly diplomatists and schemers, Graham and Isaura
      glided hourly more and more down the current, which as yet ran smooth. No words by which love
      is spoken were exchanged between them; in fact, though constantly together, they were very
      rarely, and then but for moments, alone with each other. Mrs. Morley artfully schemed more
      than once to give them such opportunities for that mutual explanation of heart which, she saw,
      had not yet taken place; with art more practised and more watchful, Madame Savarin contrived
      to baffle her hostess’s intention. But, indeed, neither Graham nor Isaura sought to make
      opportunities for themselves. He, as we know, did not deem himself wholly justified in
      uttering the words of love by which a man of honour binds himself for life; and she!—what girl
      pure-hearted and loving truly does not shrink from seeking the opportunities which it is for
      the man to court? Yet Isaura needed no words to tell her that she was loved,—no, nor even a
      pressure of the hand, a glance of the eye; she felt it instinctively, mysteriously, by the
      glow of her own being in the presence of her lover. She knew that she herself could not so
      love unless she were beloved.
Here woman’s wit is keener and truthfuller than man’s. Graham, as I have said, did not feel
      confident that he had reached the heart of Isaura. He was conscious that he had engaged her
      interest, that he had attracted her fancy; but often, when charmed by the joyous play of her
      imagination, he would sigh to himself, “To natures so gifted what single mortal can be the all
      in all.”
They spent the summer mornings in excursions round the beautiful neighbourhood, dined early,
      and sailed on the calm lake at moonlight. Their talk was such as might be expected from lovers
      of books in summer holidays. Savarin was a critic by profession; Graham Vane, if not that, at
      least owed such literary reputation as he had yet gained to essays in which the rare critical
      faculty was conspicuously developed.
It was pleasant to hear the clash of these two minds encountering each other; they differed
      perhaps less in opinions than in the mode by which opinions are discussed. The Englishman’s
      range of reading was wider than the Frenchman’s, and his scholarship more accurate; but the
      Frenchman had a compact neatness of expression, a light and nimble grace, whether in the
      advancing or the retreat of his argument, which covered deficiencies, and often made them
      appear like merits. Graham was compelled, indeed, to relinquish many of the forces of superior
      knowledge or graver eloquence, which with less lively antagonists he could have brought into
      the field, for the witty sarcasm of Savarin would have turned them aside as pedantry or
      declamation. But though Graham was neither dry nor diffuse, and the happiness at his heart
      brought out the gayety of humour which had been his early characteristic, and yet rendered his
      familiar intercourse genial and playful, still there was this distinction between his humour
      and Savarin’s wit,—that in the first there was always something earnest, in the last always
      something mocking. And in criticism Graham seemed ever anxious to bring out a latent beauty,
      even in writers comparatively neglected; Savarin was acutest when dragging forth a blemish
      never before discovered in writers universally read.
Graham did not perhaps notice the profound attention with which Isaura listened to him in
      these intellectual skirmishes with the more glittering Parisian. There was this distinction
      she made between him and Savarin,—when the last spoke she often chimed in with some happy
      sentiment of her own; but she never interrupted Graham, never intimated a dissent from his
      theories of art, or the deductions he drew from them; and she would remain silent and
      thoughtful for some minutes when his voice ceased. There was passing from his mind into hers
      an ambition which she imagined, poor girl, that he would be pleased to think he had inspired,
      and which might become a new bond of sympathy between them. But as yet the ambition was vague
      and timid,—an idea or a dream to be fulfilled in some indefinite future.
The last night of this short-lived holiday-time, the party, after staying out on the lake to
      a later hour than usual, stood lingering still on the lawn of the villa; and their host, who
      was rather addicted to superficial studies of the positive sciences, including, of course, the
      most popular of all, astronomy, kept his guests politely listening to speculative conjectures
      on the probable size of the inhabitants of Sirius, that very distant and very gigantic
      inhabitant of heaven who has led philosophers into mortifying reflections upon the utter
      insignificance of our own poor little planet, capable of producing nothing greater than
      Shakspeares and Newtons, Aristotles and Caesars,—mannikins, no doubt, beside intellects
      proportioned to the size of the world in which they flourish.
As it chanced, Isaura and Graham were then standing close to each other and a little apart
      from the rest. “It is very strange,” said Graham, laughing low, “how little I care about
      Sirius. He is the sun of some other system, and is perhaps not habitable at all, except by
      Salamanders. He cannot be one of the stars with which I have established familiar
      acquaintance, associated with fancies and dreams and hopes, as most of us do, for instance,
      with Hesperus, the moon’s harbinger and comrade. But amid all those stars there is one—not
      Hesperus—which has always had from my childhood a mysterious fascination for me. Knowing as
      little of astrology as I do of astronomy, when I gaze upon that star I become credulously
      superstitious, and fancy it has an influence on my life. Have you, too, any favourite
      star?”
“Yes,” said Isaura; “and I distinguish it now, but I do not even know its name, and never
      would ask it.”
“So like me. I would not vulgarize my unknown source of beautiful illusions by giving it the
      name it takes in technical catalogues. For fear of learning that name I never have pointed it
      out to any one before. I too at this moment distinguish it apart from all its brotherhood.
      Tell me which is yours.”
Isaura pointed and explained. The Englishman was startled. By what strange coincidence could
      they both have singled out from all the host of heaven the same favourite star? “Cher Vane,”
      cried Savarin, “Colonel Morley declares that what America is to the terrestrial system Sirius
      is to the heavenly. America is to extinguish Europe, and then Sirius is to extinguish the
      world.”
“Not for some millions of years; time to look about us,” said the Colonel, gravely. “But I
      certainly differ from those who maintain that Sirius recedes from us. I say that he
      approaches. The principles of a body so enlightened must be those of progress.” Then
      addressing Graham in English, he added, “there will be a mulling in this fogified planet some
      day, I predicate. Sirius is a keener!”
“I have not imagination lively enough to interest myself in the destinies of Sirius in
      connection with our planet at a date so remote,” said Graham, smiling. Then he added in a
      whisper to Isaura, “My imagination does not carry me further than to wonder whether this day
      twelvemonth—the 8th of July-we two shall both be singling out that same star, and gazing on it
      as now, side by side.”
This was the sole utterance of that sentiment in which the romance of love is so rich that
      the Englishman addressed to Isaura during those memorable summer days at Enghien.
</div></body></text></TEI>