<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="45">
CHAPTER X.
The Englishman halted at the threshold. His eye, passing rapidly over the figure of Savarin
      reading in the window-niche, rested upon Rameau and Isaura seated on the same divan, he with
      her hand clasped in both his own, and bending his face towards hers so closely that a loose
      tress of her hair seemed to touch his forehead.
The Englishman halted, and no revolution which changes the habitudes and forms of States was
      ever so sudden as that which passed without a word in the depths of his unconjectured heart.
      The heart has no history which philosophers can recognize. An ordinary political observer,
      contemplating the condition of a nation, may very safely tell us what effects must follow the
      causes patent to his eyes; but the wisest and most far-seeing sage, looking at a man at one
      o’clock, cannot tell us what revulsions of his whole being may be made ere the clock strike
      two.
As Isaura rose to greet her visitor, Savarin came from the window-niche, the manuscript in
      his hand.
“Son of perfidious Albion,” said Savarin, gayly, “we feared you had deserted the French
      alliance. Welcome back to Paris, and the entente cordiale.”
“Would I could stay to enjoy such welcome! but I must again quit Paris.”
“Soon to return, n’est ce pas? Paris is an irresistible magnet to les beaux esprits. A
      propos of beaux esprits, be sure to leave orders with your bookseller, if you have one, to
      enter your name as subscriber to a new journal.”
“Certainly, if Monsieur Savarin recommends it.”
“He recommends it as a matter of course; he writes in it,” said Rameau.
“A sufficient guarantee for its excellence. What is the name of the journal?”
“Not yet thought of,” answered Savarin. “Babes must be born before they are christened; but
      it will be instruction enough to your bookseller to order the new journal to be edited by
      Gustave Rameau.”
Bowing ceremoniously to the editor in prospect, Graham said, half ironically, “May I hope
      that in the department of criticism you will not be too hard upon poor Tasso?”
“Never fear; the Signorina, who adores Tasso, will take him under her special protection,”
      said Savarin, interrupting Rameau’s sullen and embarrassed reply.
Graham’s brow slightly contracted. “Mademoiselle,” he said, “is then to be united in the
      conduct of this journal with M. Gustave Rameau?”
“No, indeed!” exclaimed Isaura, somewhat frightened at the idea.
“But I hope,” said Savarin, “that the Signorina may become a contributor too important for
      an editor to offend by insulting her favourites, Tasso included. Rameau and I came hither to
      entreat her influence with her intimate and illustrious friend, Madame de Grantmesnil, to
      insure the success of our undertaking by sanctioning the announcement of her name as a
      contributor.”
“Upon social questions,—such as the laws of marriage?” said Graham, with a sarcastic smile,
      which concealed the quiver of his lip and the pain in his voice.
“Nay,” answered Savarin, “our journal will be too sportive, I hope, for matters so profound.
      We would rather have Madame de Grantmesnil’s aid in some short roman, which will charm the
      fancy of all and offend the opinions of none. But since I came into the room, I care less for
      the Signorina’s influence with the great authoress,” and he glanced significantly at the
      manuscript.
“How so?” asked Graham, his eye following the glance.
“If the writer of this manuscript will conclude what she has begun, we shall be independent
      of Madame de Grantmesnil.”
“Fie!” cried Isaura, impulsively, her face and neck bathed in blushes,—“fie! such words are
      a mockery.”
Graham gazed at her intently, and then turned his eyes on Savarin. He guessed aright the
      truth. “Mademoiselle then is an author? In the style of her friend Madame de Grantmesnil?”
“Bah!” said Savarin, “I should indeed be guilty of mockery if I paid the Signorina so false
      a compliment as to say that in a first effort she attained to the style of one of the most
      finished sovereigns of language that has ever swayed the literature of France. When I say,
      ‘Give us this tale completed, and I shall be consoled if the journal does not gain the aid of
      Madame de Grantmesnil,’ I mean that in these pages there is that nameless charm of freshness
      and novelty which compensates for many faults never committed by a practised pen like Madame
      de Grantmesnil’s. My dear young lady, go on with this story,—finish it; when finished, do not
      disdain any suggestions I may offer in the way of correction,—and I will venture to predict to
      you so brilliant a career as author, that you will not regret should you resign for that
      career the bravoes you could command as actress and singer.”
The Englishman pressed his hand convulsively to his heart, as if smitten by a sudden spasm.
      But as his eyes rested on Isaura’s face, which had become radiant with the enthusiastic
      delight of genius when the path it would select opens before it as if by a flash from heaven,
      whatever of jealous irritation, whatever of selfish pain he might before have felt; was gone,
      merged in a sentiment of unutterable sadness and compassion. Practical man as he was, he knew
      so well all the dangers, all the snares, all the sorrows, all the scandals menacing name and
      fame, that in the world of Paris must beset the fatherless girl who, not less in authorship
      than on the stage, leaves the safeguard of private life forever behind her, who becomes a prey
      to the tongues of the public. At Paris, how slender is the line that divides the authoress
      from the Bohemienne! He sank into his chair silently, and passed his hand over his eyes, as if
      to shut out a vision of the future.
Isaura in her excitement did not notice the effect on her English visitor. She could not
      have divined such an effect as possible. On the contrary, even subordinate to her joy at the
      thought that she had not mistaken the instincts which led her to a nobler vocation than that
      of the singer, that the cage-bar was opened, and space bathed in sunshine was inviting the
      new-felt wings,—subordinate even to that joy was a joy more wholly, more simply woman’s. “If,”
      thought she, in this joy, “if this be true, my proud ambition is realized; all disparities of
      worth and fortune are annulled between me and him to whom I would bring no shame of
      mesalliance!” Poor dreamer, poor child!
“You will let me see what you have written,” said Rameau, somewhat imperiously, in the sharp
      voice habitual to him, and which pierced Graham’s ear like a splinter of glass.
“No, not now; when finished.”
“You will finish it?”
“Oh, yes; how can I help it after such encouragement?” She held out her hand to Savarin, who
      kissed it gallantly; then her eyes intuitively sought Graham’s. By that time he had recovered
      his self-possession. He met her look tranquilly, and with a smile; but the smile chilled her,
      she knew not why.
The conversation then passed upon books and authors of the day, and was chiefly supported by
      the satirical pleasantries of Savarin, who was in high good-spirits.
Graham, who, as we know, had come with the hope of seeing Isaura alone, and with the
      intention of uttering words which, however guarded, might yet in absence serve as links of
      union, now no longer coveted that interview, no longer meditated those words. He soon rose to
      depart.
“Will you dine with me to-morrow?” asked Savarin. “Perhaps I may induce the Signorina and
      Rameau to offer you the temptation of meeting them.”
“By to-morrow I shall be leagues away.”
Isaura’s heart sank. This time the manuscript was fairly forgotten.
“You never said you were going so soon,” cried Savarin. “When do you come back, vile
      deserter?”
“I cannot even guess. Monsieur Rameau, count me among your subscribers. Mademoiselle, my
      best regards to Signora Venosta. When I see you again, no doubt you will have become
      famous.”
Isaura here could not control herself. She rose impulsively, and approached him, holding out
      her hand, and attempting a smile.
“But not famous in the way that you warned me from,” she said in whispered tones. “You are
      friends with me still?” It was like the piteous wail of a child seeking to make it up with one
      who wants to quarrel, the child knows not why. Graham was moved, but what could he say? Could
      he have the right to warn her from this profession also; forbid all desires, all roads of fame
      to this brilliant aspirant? Even a declared and accepted lover might well have deemed that
      that would be to ask too much. He replied, “Yes, always a friend, if you could ever need one.”
      Her hand slid from his, and she turned away wounded to the quick.
“Have you your coupe at the door?” asked Savarin.
“Simply a fiacre.”
“And are going back at once to Paris?”
“Yes.”
“Will you kindly drop me in the Rue de Rivoli?”
“Charmed to be of use.”
</div></body></text></TEI>