<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">
CHAPTER X.
The next morning Graham sent again for M. Renard. “Well,” he cried, when that dignitary
      appeared and took a seat beside him, “chance has favoured me.”
“I always counted on chance, Monsieur. Chance has more wit in its little finger than the
      Paris police in its whole body.”
“I have ascertained the relations, on the mother’s side, of Louise Duval, and the only
      question is how to get at them.” Here Graham related what he had heard, and ended by saying,
      “This Victor de Mauleon is therefore my Louise Duval’s uncle. He was, no doubt, taking charge
      of her in the year that the persons interested in her discovery lost sight of her in Paris;
      and surely he must know what became of her afterwards.”
“Very probably; and chance may befriend us yet in the discovery of Victor de Mauleon. You
      seem not to know the particulars of that story about the jewels which brought him into some
      connection with the police, and resulted in his disappearance from Paris.”
“No; tell me the particulars.”
“Victor de Mauleon was heir to some 60,000 or 70,000 francs a year, chiefly on the mother’s
      side; for his father, though the representative of one of the most ancient houses in Normandy,
      was very poor, having little of his own except the emoluments of an appointment in the Court
      of Louis Philippe.
“But before, by the death of his parents, Victor came into that inheritance, he very largely
      forestalled it. His tastes were magnificent. He took to ‘sport,’ kept a famous stud, was a
      great favourite with the English, and spoke their language fluently. Indeed he was considered
      very accomplished, and of considerable intellectual powers. It was generally said that some
      day or other, when he had sown his wild oats, he would, if he took to politics, be an eminent
      man. Altogether he was a very strong creature. That was a very strong age under Louis
      Philippe. The viveurs of Paris were fine types for the heroes of Dumas and Sue,—full of animal
      life and spirits. Victor de Mauleon was a romance of Dumas, incarnated.”
“Monsieur Renard, forgive me that I did not before do justice to your taste in polite
      literature.”
“Monsieur, a man in my profession does not attain even to my humble eminence if he be not
      something else than a professional. He must study mankind wherever they are described, even in
      les romans. To return to Victor de Mauleon. Though he was a ‘sportman,’ a gambler, a Don Juan,
      a duel list, nothing was ever said against his honour. On the contrary, on matters of honour
      he was a received oracle; and even though he had fought several duels (that was the age of
      duels), and was reported without a superior, almost without an equal, in either weapon, the
      sword or the pistol, he is said never to have wantonly provoked an encounter, and to have so
      used his skill that he contrived never to slay, nor even gravely to wound, an antagonist.
“I remember one instance of his generosity in this respect; for it was much talked of at the
      time. One of your countrymen, who had never handled a fencing-foil nor fired a pistol, took
      offence at something M. de Mauleon had said in disparagement of the Duke of Wellington, and
      called him out. Victor de Mauleon accepted the challenge, discharged his pistol, not in the
      air—that might have been an affront—but so as to be wide of the mark, walked up to the lines
      to be shot at, and when missed, said, ‘Excuse the susceptibility of a Frenchman loath to
      believe that his countryman can be beaten save by accident, and accept every apology one
      gentleman can make to another for having forgotten the respect due to one of the most renowned
      of your national heroes.’ The Englishman’s name was Vane. Could it have been your father?”
“Very probably; just like my father to call out any man who insulted the honour of his
      country, as represented by its men. I hope the two combatants became friends?”
“That I never heard; the duel was over; there my story ends.”
“Pray go on.”
“One day—it was in the midst of political events which would have silenced most subjects of
      private gossip—the beau monde was startled by the news that the Vicomte (he was then, by his
      father’s death, Vicomte) de Mauleon had been given into the custody of the police on the
      charge of stealing the jewels of the Duchesse de (the wife of a distinguished foreigner). It
      seems that some days before this event, the Duc, wishing to make Madame his spouse an
      agreeable surprise, had resolved to have a diamond necklace belonging to her, and which was of
      setting so old-fashioned that she had not lately worn it, reset for her birthday. He therefore
      secretly possessed himself of the key to an iron safe in a cabinet adjoining her dressing-room
      (in which safe her more valuable jewels were kept), and took from it the necklace. Imagine his
      dismay when the jeweller in the Rue Vivienne to whom he carried it recognized the pretended
      diamonds as imitation paste which he himself had some days previously inserted into an empty
      setting brought to him by a Monsieur with whose name he was unacquainted. The Duchesse was at
      that time in delicate health; and as the Duc’s suspicions naturally fell on the servants,
      especially on the femme de chambre, who was in great favour with his wife, he did not like to
      alarm Madame, nor through her to put the servants on their guard. He resolved, therefore, to
      place the matter in the hands of the famous ————, who was then the pride and ornament of the
      Parisian police. And the very night afterwards the Vicomte de Mauleon was caught and
      apprehended in the cabinet where the jewels were kept, and to which he had got access by a
      false key, or at least a duplicate key, found in his possession. I should observe that M. de
      Mauleon occupied the entresol in the same hotel in which the upper rooms were devoted to the
      Duc and Duchesse and their suite. As soon as this charge against the Vicomte was made known
      (and it was known the next morning), the extent of his debts and the utterness of his ruin
      (before scarcely conjectured or wholly unheeded) became public through the medium of the
      journals, and furnished an obvious motive for the crime of which he was accused. We Parisians,
      Monsieur, are subject to the most startling reactions of feeling. The men we adore one day we
      execrate the next. The Vicomte passed at once from the popular admiration one bestows on a
      hero to the popular contempt with which one regards a petty larcener. Society wondered how it
      had ever condescended to receive into its bosom the gambler, the duellist, the Don Juan.
      However, one compensation in the way of amusement he might still afford to society for the
      grave injuries he had done it. Society would attend his trial, witness his demeanour at the
      bar, and watch the expression of his face when he was sentenced to the galleys. But, Monsieur,
      this wretch completed the measure of his iniquities. He was not tried at all. The Duc and
      Duchesse quitted Paris for Spain, and the Duc instructed his lawyer to withdraw his charge,
      stating his conviction of the Vicomte’s complete innocence of any other offence than that
      which he himself had confessed.”
“What did the Vicomte confess? You omitted to state that.”
“The Vicomte, when apprehended, confessed that, smitten by an insane passion for the
      Duchesse, which she had, on his presuming to declare it, met with indignant scorn, he had
      taken advantage of his lodgment in the same house to admit himself into the cabinet adjoining
      her dressing-room by means of a key which he had procured, made from an impression of the
      key-hole taken in wax.
“No evidence in support of any other charge against the Vicomte was forthcoming,—nothing, in
      short, beyond the infraction du domicile caused by the madness of youthful love, and for which
      there was no prosecution. The law, therefore, could have little to say against him. But
      society was more rigid; and exceedingly angry to find that a man who had been so conspicuous
      for luxury should prove to be a pauper, insisted on believing that M. de Mauleon was guilty of
      the meaner, though not perhaps, in the eyes of husbands and fathers, the more heinous, of the
      two offences. I presume that the Vicomte felt that he had got into a dilemma from which no
      pistol-shot or sword-thrust could free him, for he left Paris abruptly, and has not since
      reappeared. The sale of his stud and effects sufficed, I believe, to pay his debts, for I will
      do him the justice to say that they were paid.”
“But though the Vicomte de Mauleon has disappeared, he must have left relations at Paris,
      who would perhaps know what has become of him and of his niece.”
“I doubt it. He had no very near relations. The nearest was an old celibataire of the same
      name, from whom he had some expectations, but who died shortly after this esclandre, and did
      not name the Vicomte in his will. M. Victor had numerous connections among the highest
      families, the Rochebriants, Chavignys, Vandemars, Passys, Beauvilliers; but they are not
      likely to have retained any connection with a ruined vaurien, and still less with a niece of
      his who was the child of a drawing-master. But now you have given me a clew, I will try to
      follow it up. We must find the Vicomte, and I am not without hope of doing so. Pardon me if I
      decline to say more at present. I would not raise false expectations; but in a week or two I
      will have the honour to call again upon Monsieur.”
“Wait one instant. You have really a hope of discovering M. de Mauleon?”
“Yes. I cannot say more at present.”
M. Renard departed. Still that hope, however faint it might prove, served to reanimate
      Graham; and with that hope his heart, as if a load had been lifted from its mainspring,
      returned instinctively to the thought of Isaura. Whatever seemed to promise an early discharge
      of the commission connected with the discovery of Louise Duval seemed to bring Isaura nearer
      to him, or at least to excuse his yearning desire to see more of her, to understand her
      better. Faded into thin air was the vague jealousy of Gustave Rameau which he had so
      unreasonably conceived; he felt as if it were impossible that the man whom the “Ondine of
      Paris” claimed as her lover could dare to woo or hope to win an Isaura. He even forgot the
      friendship with the eloquent denouncer of the marriage-bond, which a little while ago had
      seemed to him an unpardonable offence. He remembered only the lovely face, so innocent, yet so
      intelligent; only the sweet voice, which had for the first time breathed music into his own
      soul; only the gentle hand, whose touch had for the first time sent through his veins the
      thrill which distinguishes from all her sex the woman whom we love. He went forth elated and
      joyous, and took his way to Isaura’s villa. As he went, the leaves on the trees under which he
      passed seemed stirred by the soft May breeze in sympathy with his own delight. Perhaps it was
      rather the reverse: his own silent delight sympathized with all delight in awakening Nature.
      The lover seeking reconciliation with the loved one from whom some trifle has unreasonably
      estranged him, in a cloudless day of May,—if he be not happy enough to feel a brotherhood in
      all things happy,—a leaf in bloom, a bird in song,—then indeed he may call himself lover, but
      he does not know what is love.
</div></body></text></TEI>