<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook, Bebee, by Ouida</title><author>Ouida, [pseud.] (1839-1908)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="28">
CHAPTER XXVIII.
She sat quite still and upright in the wagon with the dark lands rushing by her. She never
     spoke at all. She had a look that frightened him upon her face. When he tried to touch her
     hand, she shivered away from him.
The charcoal-burner, hardy and strong among forest-reared men, cowered like a child in a
     corner, and covered his eyes and wept.
So the night wore away.
She had no perception of anything that happened to her until she was led through her own
     little garden in the early day, and her starling cried to her, "Bonjour, Bonjour!" Even then
     she only looked about her in a bewildered way, and never spoke.
Were the sixteen days a dream?
She did not know.
The women whom Jeannot summoned, his mother and sisters, and Mère Krebs, and one or two
     others, weeping for what had been the hardness of their hearts against her, undressed her, and
     laid her down on her little bed, and opened the shutters to the radiance of the sun.
She let them do as they liked, only she seemed neither to hear nor speak, and she never
     spoke.
All that Jeannot could tell was that he had found her in Paris, and had saved her from the
     river.
The women were sorrowful, and reproached themselves. Perhaps she had done wrong, but they had
     been harsh, and she was so young.
The two little sabots with the holes worn through the soles touched them; and they blamed
     themselves for having shut their hearts and their doors against her as they saw the fixed blue
     eyes, without any light in them, and the pretty mouth closed close against either sob or
     smile.
After all she was Bébée—the little bright blithe thing that had danced with their children,
     and sung to their singing, and brought them always the first roses of the year. If she had been
     led astray, they should have been gentler with her.
So they told themselves and each other.
What had she seen in that terrible Paris to change her like this?—they could not tell She
     never spoke.
The cock crowed gayly to the sun. The lamb bleated in the meadow. The bees boomed among the
     pear-tree blossoms. The gray lavender blew in the open house door. The green leaves threw
     shifting shadows on the floor.
All things were just the same as they had been the year before, when she had woke to the joy
     of being a girl of sixteen.
But Bébée now lay quite still and silent on her little bed; as quiet as the waxen Gesù that
     they laid in the manger at the Nativity.
"If she would only speak!" the women and the children wailed, weeping sorely.
But she never spoke; nor did she seem to know any one of them. Not even the starling as he
     flew on her pillow and called her.
"Give her rest," they all said; and one by one moved away, being poor folk and hard working,
     and unable to lose a whole day.
Mère Krebs stayed with her, and Jeannot sat in the porch where her little spinning-wheel
     stood, and rocked himself to and fro; in vain agony, powerless.
He had done all he could, and it was of no avail.
Then people who had loved her, hearing, came up the green lanes from the city—the cobbler and
     the tinman, and the old woman who sold saints' pictures by the Broodhuis. The Varnhart children
     hung about the garden wicket, frightened and sobbing. Old Jehan beat his knees with his hands,
     and said only over and over again, "Another dead—another dead!—the red mill and I see them all
     dead!"
The long golden day drifted away, and the swans swayed to and fro, and the willows grew
     silver in the sunshine.
Bébée, only, lay quite still and never spoke. The starling sat above her head; his wings
     drooped, and he was silent too.
Towards sunset Bébée raised herself and called aloud: they ran to her.
"Get me a rosebud—one with the moss round it," she said to them.
They went out into the garden, and brought her one wet with dew.
She kissed it, and laid it in one of her little wooden shoes that stood upon the bed.
"Send them to him," she said wearily; "tell him I walked all the way."
Then her head drooped; then momentary consciousness died out: the old dull lifeless look
     crept over her face again like the shadow of death.
The starling spread his broad black wings above her head. She lay quite still once more. The
     women left the rosebud in the wooden shoe, not knowing what she meant.
Night fell. Mère Krebs watched beside her. Jeannot went down to the old church to beseech
     heaven with all his simple, ignorant, tortured soul. The villagers hovered about, talking in
     low sad voices, and wondering, and dropping one by one into their homes. They were sorry, very
     sorry; but what could they do?
It was quite night. The lights were put out in the lane. Jeannot, with Father Francis, prayed
     before the shrine of the Seven Sorrows. Mère Krebs slumbered in her rush-bottomed chair; she
     was old and worked hard. The starling was awake.
Bébée rose in her bed, and looked around, as she had done when she had asked for the
     moss-rosebud.
A sense of unutterable universal pain ached over all her body.
She did not see her little home, its four white walls, its lattice shining in the moon, its
     wooden bowls and plates, its oaken shelf and presses, its plain familiar things that once had
     been so dear,—she did not see them; she only saw the brown woman with her arm about his
     throat.
She sat up in her bed and slipped her feet on to the floor; the pretty little rosy feet that
     he had used to want to clothe in silken stockings.
Poor little feet! she felt a curious compassion for them; they had served her so well, and
     they were so tired.
She sat up a moment with that curious dull agony, aching everywhere in body and in brain. She
     kissed the rosebud once more and laid it gently down in the wooden shoe. She did not see
     anything that was around her. She felt a great dulness that closed in on her, a great weight
     that was like iron on her head.
She thought she was in the strange, noisy, cruel city, with' the river close to her, and all
     her dead dreams drifting down it like murdered children, whilst that woman kissed him.
She slipped her feet on to the floor, and rose and stood upright. There was a door open to
     the moonlight—the door where she had sat spinning and singing in a thousand happy days; the
     lavender blew; the tall, unbudded green lilies swayed in the wind; she looked at them, and knew
     none of them.
The night air drifted through her linen dress, and played on her bare arms, and lifted the
     curls of her hair; the same air that had played with her so many times out of mind when she had
     been a little tottering thing that measured its height by the red rosebush. But it brought her
     no sense of where she was.
All she saw was the woman who kissed him.
There was the water beyond; the kindly calm water, all green with the moss and the nests of
     the ouzels and the boughs of the hazels and willows, where the swans were asleep in the reeds,
     and the broad lilies spread wide and cool.
But she did not see any memory in it. She thought it was the cruel gray river in the strange
     white city: and she cried to it; and went out into the old familiar ways, and knew none of
     them; and ran feebly yet fleetly through the bushes and flowers, looking up once at the stars
     with a helpless broken blind look, like a thing that is dying.
"He does not want me!" she said to them; "he does not want me!—other women kiss him
     there!"
Then with a low fluttering sound like a bird's when its wings are shot, and yet it tries to
     rise, she hovered a moment over the water, and stretched her arms out to it.
"He does not want me!" she murmured; "he does not want me—and I am so tired. Dear God!"
Then she crept down, as a weary child creeps to its mother, and threw herself forward, and
     let the green dark waters take her where they had found her amidst the lilies, a little
     laughing yearling thing.
There she soon lay, quite quiet, with her face turned to the stars, and the starling poised
     above to watch her as she slept.
She had been only Bébée: the ways of God and man had been too hard for her.
When the messengers of Flamen came that day, they took him back a dead moss-rose and a pair
     of little wooden shoes worn through with walking.
"One creature loved me once," he says to women who wonder why the wooden shoes are there.
</div></body></text></TEI>