<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="38">
CHAPTER III.
The Duchesse de Tarascon occupied a vast apartment in the Rue Royale, close to the
      Tuileries. She held a high post among the ladies who graced the brilliant court of the
      Empress. She had survived her second husband the duke, who left no issue, and the title died
      with him.
Alain and Enguerrand were ushered up the grand staircase, lined with tiers of costly exotics
      as if for a fete; but in that and in all kinds of female luxury, the Duchesse lived in a state
      of fete perpetuelle. The doors on the landing-place were screened by heavy portieres of Genoa
      velvet, richly embroidered in gold with the ducal crown and cipher. The two salons through
      which the visitors passed to the private cabinet or boudoir were decorated with Gobelin
      tapestries, fresh, with a mixture of roseate hues, and depicting incidents in the career of
      the first emperor; while the effigies of the late duke’s father—the gallant founder of a
      short-lived race figured modestly in the background. On a table of Russian malachite within
      the recess of the central window lay, preserved in glass cases, the baton and the sword, the
      epaulettes and the decorations of the brave Marshal. On the consoles and the mantelpieces
      stood clocks and vases of Sevres that could scarcely be eclipsed by those in the Imperial
      palaces. Entering the cabinet, they found the Duchesse seated at her writing-table, with a
      small Skye terrier, hideous in the beauty of the purest breed, nestled at her feet. This room
      was an exquisite combination of costliness and comfort,—Luxury at home. The hangings were of
      geranium-coloured silk, with double curtains of white satin; near to the writing-table a
      conservatory, with a white marble fountain at play in the centre, and a trellised aviary at
      the back. The walls were covered with small pictures,—chiefly portraits and miniatures of the
      members of the imperial family, of the late Duc, of his father the Marshal and Madame la
      Marechale, of the present Duchesse herself, and of some of the principal ladies of the
      court.
The Duchesse was still in the prime of life. She had passed her fortieth year, but was so
      well “conserved” that you might have guessed her to be ten years younger. She was tall; not
      large, but with rounded figure inclined to en bon point; with dark hair and eyes, but fair
      complexion, injured in effect rather than improved by pearl-powder, and that atrocious
      barbarism of a dark stain on the eyelids which has of late years been a baneful fashion;
      dressed,—I am a man, and cannot describe her dress; all I know is that she had the
      acknowledged fame of the best-dressed subject of France. As she rose from her seat there was
      in her look and air the unmistakable evidence of grande dame,—a family likeness in feature to
      Alain himself, a stronger likeness to the picture of her first cousin (his mother) which was
      preserved at Rochebriant. Her descent was indeed from ancient and noble houses. But to the
      distinction of race she added that of fashion, crowning both with a tranquil consciousness of
      lofty position and unblemished reputation.
“Unnatural cousin!” she said to Alain, offering her hand to him, with a gracious smile,—“all
      this age in Paris, and I see you for the first time. But there is joy on earth as in heaven
      over sinners who truly repent. You repent truly—n’est ce pas?”
It is impossible to describe the caressing charm which the Duchesse threw into her words,
      voice, and look. Alain was fascinated and subdued.
“Ah, Madame la Duchesse,” said he, bowing over the fait hand he lightly held, “it was not
      sin, unless modesty be a sin, which made a rustic hesitate long before he dared to offer his
      homage to the queen of the graces.”
“Not badly said for a rustic,” cried Enguerrand; “eh, Madame?”
“My cousin, you are pardoned,” said the Duchesse. “Compliment is the perfume of
      gentilhommerie; and if you brought enough of that perfume from the flowers of Rochebriant to
      distribute among the ladies at court, you will be terribly the mode there. Seducer!”—here she
      gave the Marquis a playful tap on the cheek, not in a coquettish but in a mother-like
      familiarity, and looking at him attentively, said: “Why, you are even handsomer than your
      father. I shall be proud to present to their Imperial Majesties so becoming a cousin. But seat
      yourselves here, Messieurs, close to my arm-chair, caussons.”
The Duchesse then took up the ball of the conversation. She talked without any apparent
      artifice, but with admirable tact; put just the questions about Rochebriant most calculated to
      please Alain, shunning all that might have pained him; asking him for descriptions of the
      surrounding scenery, the Breton legends; hoping that the old castle would never be spoiled by
      modernizing restorations; inquiring tenderly after his aunt, whom she had in her childhood
      once seen, and still remembered with her sweet, grave face; paused little for replies; then
      turned to Enguerrand with sprightly small-talk on the topics of the day, and every now and
      then bringing Alain into the pale of the talk, leading on insensibly until she got Enguerrand
      himself to introduce the subject of the emperor, and the political troubles which were
      darkening a reign heretofore so prosperous and splendid.
Her countenance then changed; it became serious, and even grave in its expression.
“It is true,” she said, “that the times grow menacing, menacing not only to the throne, but
      to order and property and France. One by one they are removing all the breakwaters which the
      empire had constructed between the executive and the most fickle and impulsive population that
      ever shouted ‘long live’ one day to the man whom they would send to the guillotine the next.
      They are denouncing what they call personal government. Grant that it has its evils; but what
      would they substitute,—a constitutional monarchy like the English? That is impossible with
      universal suffrage and without an hereditary chamber. The nearest approach to it was the
      monarchy of Louis Philippe,—we know how sick they became of that. A republic?—mon Dieu!
      composed of Republicans terrified out of their wits at each other. The moderate men, mimics of
      the Girondins, with the Reds and the Socialists and the Communists, ready to tear them to
      pieces. And then—What then?—the commercialists, the agriculturists, the middle class combining
      to elect some dictator who will cannonade the mob and become a mimic Napoleon, grafted on a
      mimic Necker or a mimic Danton. Oh, Messieurs, I am French to the core. You inheritors of such
      names must be as French as I am; and yet you men insist on remaining more useless to France in
      the midst of her need than I am,—I, a woman who can but talk and weep.”
The Duchesse spoke with a warmth of emotion which startled and profoundly affected Alain. He
      remained silent, leaving it to Enguerrand to answer.
“Dear Madame,” said the latter, “I do not see how either myself or our kinsman can merit
      your reproach. We are not legislators. I doubt if there is a single department in France that
      would elect us, if we offered ourselves. It is not our fault if the various floods of
      revolution leave men of our birth and opinions stranded wrecks of a perished world. The
      emperor chooses his own advisers, and if they are bad ones, his Majesty certainly will not ask
      Alain and me to replace them.”
“You do not answer—you evade me,” said the Duchesse; with a mournful smile. “You are too
      skilled a man of the world, Monsieur Enguerrand, not to know that it is not only legislators
      and ministers that are necessary to the support of a throne, and the safeguard of a nation. Do
      you not see how great a help it is to both throne and nation when that section of public
      opinion which is represented by names illustrious in history, identified with records of
      chivalrous deeds and loyal devotion, rallies round the order established? Let that section of
      public opinion stand aloof, soured and discontented, excluded from active life, lending no
      counter-balance to the perilous oscillations of democratic passion, and tell me if it is not
      an enemy to itself as well as a traitor to the principles it embodies?”
“The principles it embodies, Madame,” said Alain, “are those of fidelity to a race of kings
      unjustly set aside, less for the vices than the virtues of ancestors. Louis XV. was the worst
      of the Bourbons,—he was the bien aime: he escapes. Louis XVI. was in moral attributes the best
      of the Bourbons,—he dies the death of a felon. Louis XVIII., against whom much may be said,
      restored to the throne by foreign bayonets, reigning as a disciple of Voltaire might reign,
      secretly scoffing alike at the royalty and the religion which were crowned in his person, dies
      peacefully in his bed. Charles X., redeeming the errors of his youth by a reign untarnished by
      a vice, by a religion earnest and sincere, is sent into exile for defending established order
      from the very inroads which you lament. He leaves an heir against whom calumny cannot invent a
      tale, and that heir remains an outlaw simply because he descends from Henry IV., and has a
      right to reign. Madame, you appeal to us as among the representatives of the chivalrous deeds
      and loyal devotion which characterized the old nobility of France. Should we deserve that
      character if we forsook the unfortunate, and gained wealth and honour in forsaking?”
“Your words endear you to me. I am proud to call you cousin,” said the Duchesse. “But do
      you, or does any man in his senses believe that if you upset the Empire you could get back the
      Bourbons; that you would not be in imminent danger of a Government infinitely more opposed to
      the theories on which rests the creed of Legitimists than that of Louis Napoleon? After all,
      what is there in the loyalty of you Bourbonites that has in it the solid worth of an argument
      which can appeal to the comprehension of mankind, except it be the principle of a hereditary
      monarchy? Nobody nowadays can maintain the right divine of a single regal family to impose
      itself upon a nation. That dogma has ceased to be a living principle; it is only a dead
      reminiscence. But the institution of monarchy is a principle strong and vital, and appealing
      to the practical interests of vast sections of society. Would you sacrifice the principle
      which concerns the welfare of millions, because you cannot embody it in the person of an
      individual utterly insignificant in himself? In a word, if you prefer monarchy to the hazard
      of republicanism for such a country as France, accept the monarchy you find, since it is quite
      clear you cannot rebuild the monarchy you would prefer. Does it not embrace all the great
      objects for which you call yourself Legitimist? Under it religion is honoured, a national
      Church secured, in reality if not in name; under it you have united the votes of millions to
      the establishment of the throne; under it all the material interests of the country,
      commercial, agricultural, have advanced with an unequalled rapidity of progress; under it
      Paris has become the wonder of the world for riches, for splendour, for grace and beauty;
      under it the old traditional enemies of France have been humbled and rendered impotent. The
      policy of Richelieu has been achieved in the abasement of Austria; the policy of Napoleon I.
      has been consummated in the salvation of Europe from the semi-barbarous ambition of Russia.
      England no longer casts her trident in the opposition scale of the balance of European power.
      Satisfied with the honour of our alliance, she has lost every other ally; and her forces
      neglected, her spirit enervated, her statesmen dreaming believers in the safety of their
      island, provided they withdraw from the affairs of Europe, may sometimes scold us, but will
      certainly not dare to fight. With France she is but an inferior satellite; without France she
      is—nothing. Add to all this a court more brilliant than that of Louis XIV., a sovereign not
      indeed without faults and errors, but singularly mild in his nature, warm-hearted to friends,
      forgiving to foes, whom personally no one could familiarly know and not be charmed with a
      bonte of character, lovable as that of Henri IV.,—and tell me what more than all this could
      you expect from the reign of a Bourbon?”
“With such results,” said Alain, “from the monarchy you so eloquently praise, I fail to
      discover what the emperor’s throne could possibly gain by a few powerless converts from an
      unpopular, and you say, no doubt truly, from a hopeless cause.”
“I say monarchy gains much by the loyal adhesion of any man of courage, ability, and honour.
      Every new monarchy gains much by conversions from the ranks by which the older monarchies were
      strengthened and adorned. But I do not here invoke your aid merely to this monarchy, my
      cousin; I demand your devotion to the interests of France; I demand that you should not rest
      an outlaw from her service. Ah, you think that France is in no danger, that you may desert or
      oppose the Empire as you list, and that society will remain safe! You are mistaken. Ask
      Enguerrand.”
“Madame,” said Enguerrand, “you overrate my political knowledge in that appeal; but,
      honestly speaking, I subscribe to your reasonings. I agree with you that the empire sorely
      needs the support of men of honour; it has one cause of rot which now undermines it,—dishonest
      jobbery in its administrative departments; even in that of the army, which apparently is so
      heeded and cared for. I agree with you that France is in danger, and may need the swords of
      all her better sons, whether against the foreigner or against her worst enemies,—the mobs of
      her great towns. I myself received a military education, and but for my reluctance to separate
      myself from my father and Raoul, I should be a candidate for employments more congenial to me
      than those of the Bourse and my trade in the glove-shop. But Alain is happily free from all
      family ties, and Alain knows that my advice to him is not hostile to your exhortations.”
“I am glad to think he is under so salutary an influence,” said the Duchesse; and seeing
      that Alain remained silent and thoughtful, she wisely changed the subject, and shortly
      afterwards the two friends took leave.
</div></body></text></TEI>