<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="65">
CHAPTER V.
“Monsieur le Marquis,” said Duplessis, when the salon was cleared of all but himself and the
      two friends, “Lemercier has confided to me the state of your affairs in connection with M.
      Louvier, and flatters me by thinking my advice may be of some service; if so, command me.”
“I shall most gratefully accept your advice,” answered Alain, “but I fear my condition
      defies even your ability and skill.”
“Permit me to hope not, and to ask a few necessary questions. M. Louvier has constituted
      himself your sole mortgagee; to what amount, at what interest, and from what annual proceeds
      is the interest paid?”
Herewith Alain gave details already furnished to the reader. Duplessis listened, and noted
      down the replies.
“I see it all,” he said, when Alain had finished. “M. Louvier had predetermined to possess
      himself of your estate: he makes himself mortgagee at a rate of interest so low, that I tell
      you fairly, at the present value of money, I doubt if you could find any capitalist who would
      accept the transfer of the mortgage at the same rate. This is not like Louvier, unless he had
      an object to gain, and that object is your land. The revenue from your estate is derived
      chiefly from wood, out of which the interest due to Louvier is to be paid. M. Gandrin, in a
      skilfully-guarded letter, encourages you to sell the wood from your forests to a man who
      offers you several thousand francs more than it could command from customary buyers. I say
      nothing against M. Gandrin, but every man who knows Paris as I do, knows that M. Louvier can
      put, and has put, a great deal of money into M. Gandrin’s pocket. The purchaser of your wood
      does not pay more than his deposit, and has just left the country insolvent. Your purchaser,
      M. Collot, was an adventurous speculator; he would have bought anything at any price, provided
      he had time to pay; if his speculations had been lucky he would have paid. M. Louvier knew, as
      I knew, that M. Collot was a gambler, and the chances were that he would not pay. M. Louvier
      allows a year’s interest on his hypotheque to become due-notice thereof duly given to you by
      his agent—now you come under the operation of the law. Of course, you know what the law
      is?”
“Not exactly,” answered Alain, feeling frostbitten by the congealing words of his
      counsellor; “but I take it for granted that if I cannot pay the interest of a sum borrowed on
      my property, that property itself is forfeited.”
“No, not quite that—the law is mild. If the interest which should be paid half-yearly
      remains unpaid at the end of a year, the mortgagee has a right to be impatient, has he
      not?”
“Certainly he has.”
“Well, then, on fait un commandement tendant de saisie immobiliere, viz: The mortgagee gives
      a notice that the property shall be put up for sale. Then it is put up for sale, and in most
      cases the mortgagee buys it in. Here, certainly, no competitors in the mere business way would
      vie with Louvier; the mortgage at three and a half per cent. covers more than the estate is
      apparently worth. Ah! but stop, M. le Marquis; the notice is not yet served: the whole process
      would take six months from the day it is served to the taking possession after the sale; in
      the meanwhile, if you pay the interest due, the action drops. Courage, M. le Marquis! Hope
      yet, if you condescend to call me friend.”
“And me,” cried Lemercier; “I will sell out of my railway shares to-morrow-see to it,
      Duplessis—enough to pay off the damnable interest. See to it, mon ami.”
“Agree to that, M. le Marquis, and you are safe for another year,” said Duplessis, folding
      up the paper on which he had made his notes, but fixing on Alain quiet eyes half concealed
      under drooping lids.
“Agree to that!” cried Rochebriant, rising—“agree to allow even my worst enemy to pay for me
      moneys I could never hope to repay—agree to allow the oldest and most confiding friends to do
      so—M. Duplessis, never! If I carried the porter’s knot of an Auverguat, I should still remain
      gentilhomme and Breton.”
Duplessis, habitually the driest of men, rose with a moistened eye and flushing
      cheek—“Monsieur le Marquis, vouchsafe me the honour to shake hands with you. I, too, am by
      descent gentilhomme, by profession a speculator on the Bourse. In both capacities I approve
      the sentiment you have uttered. Certainly, if our friend Frederic lent you 7000 Louis or so
      this year, it would be impossible for you even to foresee the year in which you could repay
      it; but,”—here Duplessis paused a minute, and then lowering the tone of his voice, which had
      been somewhat vehement and enthusiastic, into that of a colloquial good-fellowship, equally
      rare to the measured reserve of the financier, he asked, with a lively twinkle of his grey
      eye, “Did you never hear, Marquis, of a little encounter between me and M. Louvier?”
“Encounter at arms—does Louvier fight?” asked Alain, innocently.
“In his own way he is always fighting; but I speak metaphorically. You see this small house
      of mine—so pinched in by the houses next to it that I can neither get space for a ball-room
      for Valerie, nor a dining-room for more than a friendly party like that which has honoured me
      to-day. Eh bien! I bought this house a few years ago, meaning to buy the one next to it and
      throw the two into one. I went to the proprietor of the next house, who, as I knew, wished to
      sell. ‘Aha,’ he thought, ‘this is the rich Monsieur Duplessis;’ and he asked me 2000 louis
      more than the house was worth. We men of business cannot bear to be too much cheated; a little
      cheating we submit to—much cheating raises our gall. Bref—this was on Monday. I offered the
      man 1000 louis above the fair price, and gave him till Thursday to decide. Somehow or other
      Louvier hears of this. ‘Hillo!’ says Louvier, ‘here is a financier who desires a hotel to vie
      with mine!’ He goes on Wednesday to my next-door neighbour. ‘Friend, you want to sell your
      house. I want to buy—the price?’ The proprietor, who does not know him by sight, says: ‘It is
      as good as sold. M. Duplessis and I shall agree.’ ‘Bah! What sum did you ask M. Duplessis?’ He
      names the sum; 2000 louis more than he can get elsewhere. ‘But M. Duplessis will give me the
      sum.’ ‘You ask too little. I will give 3000. A fig for M. Duplessis. I am Monsieur Louvier.’
      So when I call on Thursday the house is sold. I reconcile myself easily enough to the loss of
      space for a larger dining-room; but though Valerie was then a child at a convent, I was sadly
      disconcerted by the thought that I could have no salle de bal ready for her when she came to
      reside with me. Well, I say to myself, patience; I owe M. Louvier a good turn; my time to pay
      him off will come. It does come, and very soon. M. Louvier buys an estate near Paris—builds a
      superb villa. Close to his property is a rising forest ground for sale. He goes to the
      proprietor: says the proprietor to himself, ‘The great Louvier wants this,’ and adds 5000
      louis to its market price. Louvier, like myself, can’t bear to be cheated egregiously. Louvier
      offers 2000 louis more than the man could fairly get, and leaves him till Saturday to
      consider. I hear of this—speculators hear of everything. On Friday night I go to the man and I
      give him 6000 louis, where he had asked 5000. Fancy Louvier’s face the next day! But there my
      revenge only begins,” continued Duplessis, chuckling inwardly. “My forest looks down on the
      villa he is building. I only wait till his villa is built, in order to send to my architect
      and say, Build me a villa at least twice as grand as M. Louvier’s, then clear away the forest
      trees, so that every morning he may see my palace dwarfing into insignificance his own.”
“Bravo!” cried Lemercier, clapping his hands. Lemercier had the spirit of party, and felt
      for Duplessis against Louvier much as in England Whig feels against Tory, or vice versa.
“Perhaps now,” resumed Duplessis, more soberly,—“perhaps now, M. le Marquis, you may
      understand why I humiliate you by no sense of obligation if I say that M. Louvier shall not be
      the Seigneur de Rochebriant if I can help it. Give me a line of introduction to your Breton
      lawyer and to Mademoiselle your aunt—let me have your letters early to-morrow. I will take the
      afternoon train. I know not how many days I may be absent, but I shall not return till I have
      carefully examined the nature and conditions of your property. If I see my way to save your
      estate, and give a mauvais quart d’heure to Louvier, so much the better for you, M. le
      Marquis; if I cannot, I will say frankly, ‘Make the best terms you can with your
      creditor.’”
“Nothing can be more delicately generous than the way you put it,” said Alain; “but pardon
      me, if I say that the pleasantry with which you narrate your grudge against M. Louvier does
      not answer its purpose in diminishing my sense of obligation.” So, linking his arm in
      Lemercier’s, Alain made his bow and withdrew.
When his guests had gone, Duplessis remained seated in meditation—apparently pleasant
      meditation, for he smiled while indulging it; he then passed through the reception-rooms to
      one at the far end appropriated to Valerie as a boudoir or morning-room, adjoining her
      bed-chamber; he knocked gently at the door, and, all remaining silent within, he opened it
      noiselessly and entered. Valerie was reclining on the sofa near the window-her head drooping,
      her hands clasped on her knees. Duplessis neared her with tender stealthy steps, passed his
      arm round her, and drew her head towards his bosom. “Child!” he murmured; “my child, my only
      one!”
At that soft loving voice, Valerie flung her arms round him, and wept aloud like an infant
      in trouble. He seated himself beside her, and wisely suffered her to weep on, till her passion
      had exhausted itself; he then said, half fondly, half chillingly: “Have you forgotten our
      conversation only three days ago? Have you forgotten that I then drew forth the secret of your
      heart? Have you forgotten what I promised you in return for your confidence? and a promise to
      you have I ever yet broken?”
“Father! father! I am so wretched and so ashamed of myself for being wretched! Forgive me.
      No, I do not forget your promise; but who can promise to dispose of the heart of another? and
      that heart will never be mine. But bear with me a little, I shall soon recover.”
“Valerie, when I made you the promise you now think I cannot keep, I spoke only from that
      conviction of power to promote the happiness of a child which nature implants in the heart of
      parents; and it may be also from the experience of my own strength of will, since that which I
      have willed I have always won. Now I speak on yet surer ground. Before the year is out you
      shall be the beloved wife of Alain de Rochebriant. Dry your tears and smile on me, Valerie. If
      you will not see in me mother and father both, I have double love for you, motherless child of
      her who shared the poverty of my youth, and did not live to enjoy the wealth which I hold as a
      trust for that heir to mine all which she left me.”
As this man thus spoke you would scarcely have recognized in him the old saturnine
      Duplessis, his countenance became so beautified by the one soft feeling which care and
      contest, ambition and money-seeking, had left unaltered in his heart. Perhaps there is no
      country in which the love of parent and child, especially of father and daughter, is so strong
      as it is in France; even in the most arid soil, among the avaricious, even among the
      profligate, it forces itself into flower. Other loves fade away: in the heart of the true
      Frenchman that parent love blooms to the last. Valerie felt the presence of that love as a
      divine protecting guardianship. She sank on her knees and covered his hand with grateful
      kisses.
“Do not torture yourself, my child, with jealous fears of the fair Italian. Her lot and
      Alain de Rochebriant’s can never unite; and whatever you may think of their whispered
      converse, Alain’s heart at this moment is too filled with anxious troubles to leave one spot
      in it accessible even to a frivolous gallantry. It is for us to remove these troubles; and
      then, when he turns his eyes towards you, it will be with the gaze of one who beholds his
      happiness. You do not weep now, Valerie!”
</div></body></text></TEI>