<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="108">
CHAPTER III.
While De Breze and his friends were feasting at the cafe Anglais, and faring better than the
      host had promised—for the bill of fare comprised such luxuries as ass, mule, peas, fried
      potatoes, and champagne (champagne in some mysterious way was inexhaustible during the time of
      famine)—a very different group had assembled in the rooms of Isaura Cicogna. She and the
      Venosta had hitherto escaped the extreme destitution to which many richer persons had been
      reduced. It is true that Isaura’s fortune placed in the hands of the absent Louvier, and
      invested in the new street that was to have been, brought no return. It was true that in that
      street the Venosta, dreaming of cent. per cent., had invested all her savings. But the
      Venosta, at the first announcement of war, had insisted on retaining in hand a small sum from
      the amount Isaura had received from her “roman,” that might suffice for current expenses, and
      with yet more acute foresight had laid in stores of provisions and fuel immediately after the
      probability of a siege became apparent. But even the provident mind of the Venosta had never
      foreseen that the siege would endure so long, or that the prices of all articles of necessity
      would rise so high. And meanwhile all resources—money, fuel, provisions—had been largely drawn
      upon by the charity and benevolence of Isaura, without much remonstrance on the part of the
      Venosta, whose nature was very accessible to pity. Unfortunately, too, of late money and
      provisions had failed to Monsieur and Madame Rameau, their income consisting partly of rents
      no longer paid, and the profits of a sleeping partnership in the old shop, from which custom
      had departed; so that they came to share the fireside and meals at the rooms of their son’s
      fiancee with little scruple, because utterly unaware that the money retained and the
      provisions stored by the Venosta were now nearly exhausted.
The patriotic ardour which had first induced the elder Rameau to volunteer his services as a
      National Guard had been ere this cooled if not suppressed, first by the hardships of the duty,
      and then by the disorderly conduct of his associates, and their ribald talk and obscene songs.
      He was much beyond the age at which he could be registered. His son was, however, compelled to
      become his substitute, though from his sickly health and delicate frame attached to that
      portion of the National Guard which took no part in actual engagements, and was supposed to do
      work on the ramparts and maintain order in the city.
In that duty, so opposed to his tastes and habits, Gustave signalised himself as one of the
      loudest declaimers against the imbecility of the Government, and in the demand for immediate
      and energetic action, no matter at what loss of life, on the part of all—except the heroic
      force to which he himself was attached. Still, despite his military labours, Gustave found
      leisure to contribute to Red journals, and his contributions paid him tolerably well. To do
      him justice, his parents concealed from him the extent of their destitution; they, on their
      part, not aware that he was so able to assist them, rather fearing that he himself had nothing
      else for support but his scanty pay as a National Guard. In fact, of late the parents and son
      had seen little of each other. M. Rameau, though a Liberal politician, was Liberal as a
      tradesman, not as a Red Republican or a Socialist. And, though little heeding his son’s
      theories while the Empire secured him from the practical effect of them, he was now as
      sincerely frightened at the chance of the Communists becoming rampant as most of the Parisian
      tradesmen were. Madame Rameau, on her side, though she had the dislike to aristocrats which
      was prevalent with her class, was a stanch Roman Catholic; and seeing in the disasters that
      had befallen her country the punishment justly incurred by its sins, could not but be shocked
      by the opinions of Gustave, though she little knew that he was the author of certain articles
      in certain journals, in which these opinions were proclaimed with a vehemence far exceeding
      that which they assumed in his conversation. She had spoken to him with warm anger, mixed with
      passionate tears, on his irreligious principles; and from that moment Gustave shunned to give
      her another opportunity of insulting his pride and depreciating his wisdom.
Partly to avoid meeting his parents, partly because he recoiled almost as much from the
      ennui of meeting the other visitors at her apartments—the Paris ladies associated with her in
      the ambulance, Raoul de Vandeniar, whom he especially hated, and the Abbe Vertpre, who had
      recently come into intimate friendship with both the Italian ladies—his visits to Isaura had
      become exceedingly rare. He made his incessant military duties the pretext for absenting
      himself; and now, on this evening, there were gathered round Isaura’s hearth—on which burned
      almost the last of the hoarded fuel—the Venosta, the two Rameaus, the Abbe Vertpre, who was
      attached as confessor to the society of which Isaura was so zealous a member. The old priest
      and the young poetess had become dear friends. There is in the nature of a woman (and
      especially of a woman at once so gifted and so childlike as Isaura, combining an innate
      tendency towards faith with a restless inquisitiveness of intellect, which is always
      suggesting query or doubt) a craving for something afar from the sphere of her sorrow, which
      can only be obtained through that “bridal of the earth and sky” which we call religion. And
      hence, to natures like Isaura’s, that link between the woman and the priest, which the
      philosophy of France has never been able to dissever.
“It is growing late,” said Madame Rameau; “I am beginning to feel uneasy. Our dear Isaura is
      not yet returned.”
“You need be under no apprehension,” said the Abby. “The ladies attached to the ambulance of
      which she is so tender and zealous a sister incur no risk. There are always brave men related
      to the sick and wounded who see to the safe return of the women. My poor Raoul visits that
      ambulance daily. His kinsman, M. de Rochebriant, is there among the wounded.”
“Not seriously hurt, I hope,” said the Venosta; “not disfigured? He was so handsome; it is
      only the ugly warrior whom a scar on the face improves.”
“Don’t be alarmed, Signora; the Prussian guns spared his face. His wounds in themselves were
      not dangerous, but he lost a good deal of blood. Raoul and the Christian brothers found him
      insensible among a heap of the slain.”
“M. de Vandemar seems to have very soon recovered the shock of his poor brother’s death,”
      said Madame Rameau. “There is very little heart in an aristocrat.”
The Abbe’s mild brow contracted. “Have more charity, my daughter. It is because Raoul’s
      sorrow for his lost brother is so deep and so holy that he devotes himself more than ever to
      the service of the Father which is in heaven. He said, a day or two after the burial, when
      plans for a monument to Enguerrand were submitted to him: ‘May my prayer be vouchsafed, and my
      life be a memorial of him more acceptable to his gentle spirit than monuments of bronze or
      marble. May I be divinely guided and sustained in my desire to do such good acts as he would
      have done had he been spared longer to earth. And whenever tempted to weary, may my conscience
      whisper, Betray not the trust left to thee by thy brother, lest thou be not reunited to him at
      last.”’
“Pardon me, pardon!” murmured Madame Rameau humbly, while the Venosta burst into tears.
The Abbe, though a most sincere and earnest ecclesiastic, was a cheery and genial man of the
      world; and, in order to relieve Madame Rameau from the painful self-reproach he had before
      excited, he turned the conversation. “I must beware, however,” he said, with his pleasant
      laugh, “as to the company in which I interfere in family questions; and especially in which I
      defend my poor Raoul from any charge brought against him. For some good friend this day sent
      me a terrible organ of communistic philosophy, in which we humble priests are very roughly
      handled, and I myself am especially singled out by name as a pestilent intermeddler in the
      affairs of private households. I am said to set the women against the brave men who are
      friends of the people, and am cautioned by very truculent threats to cease from such
      villainous practices.” And here, with a dry humour that turned into ridicule what would
      otherwise have excited disgust and indignation among his listeners, he read aloud passages
      replete with the sort of false eloquence which was then the vogue among the Red journals. In
      these passages, not only the Abbe was pointed out for popular execration, but Raoul de
      Vandemar, though not expressly named, was clearly indicated as a pupil of the Abbe’s, the type
      of a lay Jesuit.
The Venosta alone did not share in the contemptuous laughter with which the inflated style
      of these diatribes inspired the Rameaus. Her simple Italian mind was horror-stricken by
      language which the Abbe treated with ridicule.
“Ah!” said M. Rameau, “I guess the author—that firebrand Felix Pyat.”
“No,” answered the Abbe; “the writer signs himself by the name of a more learned
      atheist—Diderot le jeune.” Here the door opened, and Raoul entered, accompanying Isaura. A
      change had come over the face of the young Vandemar since his brother’s death. The lines about
      the mouth had deepened, the cheeks had lost their rounded contour and grown somewhat hollow.
      But the expression was as serene as ever, perhaps even less pensively melancholy. His whole
      aspect was that of a man who has sorrowed, but been supported in sorrow; perhaps it was more
      sweet-certainly it was more lofty.
And, as if there were in the atmosphere of his presence something that communicated the
      likeness of his own soul to others, since Isaura had been brought into his companionship, her
      own lovely face had caught the expression that prevailed in his—that, too, had become more
      sweet—that, too, had become more lofty.
The friendship that had grown up between these two young mourners was of a very rare nature.
      It had in it no sentiment that could ever warm into the passion of human love. Indeed, had
      Isaura’s heart been free to give away, love for Raoul de Vandemar would have seemed to her a
      profanation. He was never more priestly than when he was most tender. And the tenderness of
      Raoul towards her was that of some saint-like nature towards the acolyte whom it attracted
      upwards. He had once, just before Enguerrand’s death, spoken to Isaura with a touching candour
      as to his own predilection for a monastic life. “The worldly avocations that open useful and
      honourable careers for others have no charm for me. I care not for riches nor power, nor
      honours nor fame. The austerities of the conventual life have no terror for me; on the
      contrary, they have a charm, for with them are abstraction from earth and meditation on
      heaven. In earlier years I might, like other men, have cherished dreams of human love, and
      felicity in married life, but for the sort of veneration with which I regarded one to whom I
      owe—humanly speaking—whatever of good there may be in me. Just when first taking my place
      among the society of young men who banish from their life all thought of another, I came under
      the influence of a woman who taught me to see that holiness was beauty. She gradually
      associated me with her acts of benevolence, and from her I learned to love God too well not to
      be indulgent to his creatures. I know not whether the attachment I felt to her could have been
      inspired in one who had not from childhood conceived a romance, not perhaps justified by
      history, for the ideal images of chivalry. My feeling for her at first was that of the pure
      and poetic homage which a young knight was permitted, sans reproche, to render to some fair
      queen or chatelaine, whose colours he wore in the lists, whose spotless repute he would have
      perilled his life to defend. But soon even that sentiment, pure as it was, became chastened
      from all breath of earthly love, in proportion as the admiration refined itself into
      reverence. She has often urged me to marry, but I have no bride on this earth. I do but want
      to see Enguerrand happily married, and then I quit the world for the cloister.”
But after Enguerrand’s death, Raoul resigned all idea of the convent. That evening, as he
      attended to their homes Isaura and the other ladies at to the ambulance, he said, in answer to
      inquiries about his mother, “She is resigned and calm. I have promised her I will not, while
      she lives, bury her other son: I renounce my dreams of the monastery.”
Raoul did not remain many minutes at Isaura’s. The Abbe accompanied him on his way home. “I
      have a request to make to you,” said the former; “you know, of course, your distant cousin the
      Vicomte de Mauleon?”
“Yes. Not so well as I ought, for Enguerrand liked him.”
“Well enough, at all events, to call on him with a request which I am commissioned to make,
      but it might come better from you as a kinsman. I am a stranger to him, and I know not whether
      a man of that sort would not regard as an officious intermeddling any communication made to
      him by a priest. The matter, however, is a very simple one. At the convent of ———- there is a
      poor nun who is, I fear, dying. She has an intense desire to see M. de Mauleon, whom she
      declares to be her uncle, and her only surviving relative. The laws of the convent are not too
      austere to prevent the interview she seeks in such a case. I should add that I am not
      acquainted with her previous history. I am not the confessor of the sisterhood; he, poor man,
      was badly wounded by a chance ball a few days ago when attached to an ambulance on the
      ramparts. As soon as the surgeon would allow him to see any one, he sent for me, and bade me
      go to the nun I speak of—Sister Ursula. It seems that he had informed her that M. de Mauleon
      was at Paris, and had promised to ascertain his address. His wound had prevented his doing so,
      but he trusted to me to procure the information. I am well acquainted with the Superieure of
      the convent, and I flatter myself that she holds me in esteem. I had therefore no difficulty
      to obtain her permission to see this poor nun, which I did this evening. She implored me for
      the peace of her soul to lose no time in finding out M. de Mauleon’s address, and entreating
      him to visit her. Lest he should demur, I was to give him the name by which he had known her
      in the world—Louise Duval. Of course I obeyed. The address of a man who has so distinguished
      himself in this unhappy siege I very easily obtained, and repaired at once to M. de Mauleon’s
      apartment. I there learned that he was from home, and it was uncertain whether he would not
      spend the night on the ramparts.”
“I will not fail to see him early in the morning,” said Raoul, “and execute your
      commission.”
</div></body></text></TEI>