<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="75">
CHAPTER X.
Madame Savarin wrote a very kind and very apologetic letter to Isaura, but no answer was
      returned to it. Madame Savarin did not venture to communicate to her husband the substance of
      a conversation which had ended so painfully. He had, in theory, a delicacy of tact, which, if
      he did not always exhibit it in practice, made him a very severe critic of its deficiency in
      others. Therefore, unconscious of the offence given, he made a point of calling at Isaura’s
      apartments, and leaving word with her servant that “he was sure she would be pleased to hear
      M. Rameau was somewhat better, though still in danger.”
It was not till the third day after her interview with Madame Savarin that Isaura left her
      own room,—she did so to receive Mrs. Morley.
The fair American was shocked to see the change in Isaura’s countenance. She was very pale,
      and with that indescribable appearance of exhaustion which betrays continued want of sleep;
      her soft eyes were dim, the play of her lips was gone, her light step weary and languid.
“My poor darling!” cried Mrs. Morley, embracing her, “you have indeed been ill! What is the
      matter?—who attends you?”
“I need no physician, it was but a passing cold—the air of Paris is very trying. Never mind
      me, dear—what is the last news?”
Therewith Mrs. Morley ran glibly through the principal topics of the hour: the breach
      threatened between M. Ollivier and his former liberal partisans; the tone unexpectedly taken
      by M. de Girardin; the speculations as to the result of the trial of the alleged conspirators
      against the Emperor’s life, which was fixed to take place towards the end of that month of
      June,—all matters of no slight importance to the interests of an empire. Sunk deep into the
      recesses of her fauteuil, Isaura seemed to listen quietly, till, when a pause came, she said
      in cold clear tones:
“And Mr. Graham Vane—he has refused your invitation?”
“I am sorry to say he has—he is so engaged in London.”
“I knew he had refused,” said Isaura, with a low bitter laugh.
“How? who told you?”
“My own good sense told me. One may have good sense, though one is a poor scribbler.”
“Don’t talk in that way; it is beneath you to angle for compliments.”
“Compliments, ah! And so Mr. Vane has refused to come to Paris; never mind, he will come
      next year. I shall not be in Paris then. Did Colonel Morley see Mr. Vane?”
“Oh, yes; two or three times.”
“He is well?”
“Quite well, I believe—at least Frank did not say to the contrary; but, from what I hear, he
      is not the person I took him for. Many people told Frank that he is much changed since he came
      into his fortune—is grown very stingy, quite miserly indeed; declines even a seat in
      Parliament because of the expense. It is astonishing how money does spoil a man.”
“He had come into his fortune when he was here. Money had not spoiled him then.”
Isaura paused, pressing her hands tightly together; then she suddenly rose to her feet, the
      colour on her cheek mantling and receding rapidly, and fixing on her startled visitor eyes no
      longer dim, but with something half fierce, half imploring in the passion of their gaze, said:
      “Your husband spoke of me to Mr. Vane: I know he did. What did Mr. Vane answer? Do not evade
      my question. The truth! the truth! I only ask the truth!”
“Give me your hand; sit here beside me, dearest child.”
“Child!—no, I am a woman!—weak as a woman, but strong as a woman too!—The truth!”
Mrs. Morley had come prepared to carry out the resolution she had formed and “break” to
      Isaura “the truth,” that which the girl now demanded. But then she had meant to break the
      truth in her own gentle, gradual way. Thus suddenly called upon, her courage failed her. She
      burst into tears. Isaura gazed at her dry-eyed.
“Your tears answer me. Mr. Vane has heard that I have been insulted. A man like him does not
      stoop to love for a woman who has known an insult. I do not blame him; I honour him the
      more—he is right.”
“No-no-no!—you insulted! Who dared to insult you? (Mrs. Morley had never heard the story
      about the Russian Prince.) Mr. Vane spoke to Frank, and writes of you to me as of one whom it
      is impossible not to admire, to respect; but—I cannot say it—you will have the truth,—there,
      read and judge for yourself.” And Mrs. Morley drew forth and thrust into Isaura’s hands the
      letter she had concealed from her husband. The letter was not very long; it began with
      expressions of warm gratitude to Mrs. Morley, not for her invitation only, but for the
      interest she had conceived in his happiness. It went on thus “I join with my whole heart in
      all that you say, with such eloquent justice, of the mental and personal gifts so bounteously
      lavished by nature on the young lady whom you name.
“No one can feel more sensible than I of the charm of so exquisite a loveliness; no one can
      more sincerely join in the belief that the praise which greets the commencement of her career
      is but the whisper of the praise that will cheer its progress with louder and louder
      plaudits.
“He only would be worthy of her hand, who, if not equal to herself in genius, would feel
      raised into partnership with it by sympathy with its objects and joy in its triumphs. For
      myself, the same pain with which I should have learned she had adopted the profession which
      she originally contemplated, saddened and stung me when, choosing a career that confers a
      renown yet more lasting than the stage, she no less left behind her the peaceful immunities of
      private life. Were I even free to consult only my own heart in the choice of the one sole
      partner of my destinies (which I cannot at present honestly say that I am, though I had
      expected to be so ere this, when I last saw you at Paris); could I even hope—which I have no
      right to do—that I could chain to myself any private portion of thoughts which now flow into
      the large channels by which poets enrich the blood of the world,—still (I say it in
      self-reproach, it may be the fault of my English rearing, it may rather be the fault of an
      egotism peculiar to myself)—still I doubt if I could render happy any woman whose world could
      not be narrowed to the Home that she adorned and blessed.
“And yet not even the jealous tyranny of man’s love could dare to say to natures like hers
      of whom we speak, ‘Limit to the household glory of one the light which genius has placed in
      its firmament for the use and enjoyment of all.’”
“I thank you so much,” said Isaura, calmly; “suspense makes a woman so weak—certainty so
      strong.” Mechanically she smoothed and refolded the letter—mechanically, with slow, lingering
      hands—then she extended it to her friend, smiling.
“Nay, will you not keep it yourself?” said Mrs. Morley. “The more you examine the
      narrow-minded prejudices, the English arrogant man’s jealous dread of superiority—nay, of
      equality—in the woman he ‘can only value as he does his house or his horse, because she is his
      exclusive property, the more you will be rejoiced to find yourself free for a more worthy
      choice. Keep the letter; read it till you feel for the writer forgiveness and disdain.”
Isaura took back the letter, and leaned her cheek on her hand, looking dreamily into space.
      It was some moments before she replied, and her words then had no reference to Mrs. Morley’s
      consolatory exhortation.
“He was so pleased when he learned that I renounced the career on which I had set my
      ambition. I thought he would have been so pleased when I sought in another career to raise
      myself nearer to his level—I see now how sadly I was mistaken. All that perplexed me before in
      him is explained. I did not guess how foolishly I had deceived myself till three days
      ago,—then I did guess it; and it was that guess which tortured me so terribly that I could not
      keep my heart to myself when I saw you to-day; in spite of all womanly pride it would force
      its way—to the truth.
“Hush! I must tell you what was said to me by another friend of mine—a good friend, a wise
      and kind one. Yet I was so angry when she said it that I thought I could never see her
      more.”
“My sweet darling! who was this friend, and what did she say to you?”
“The friend was Madame Savarin.”
“No woman loves you more except myself—and she said?”
“That she would have suffered no daughter of hers to commit her name to the talk of the
      world as I have done—be exposed to the risk of insult as I have been—until she had the shelter
      and protection denied to me. And I have thus overleaped the bound that a prudent mother would
      prescribe to her child, have become one whose hand men do not seek, unless they themselves
      take the same roads to notoriety. Do you not think she was right?”
“Not as you so morbidly put it, silly girl,—certainly not right. But I do wish that you had
      the shelter and protection which Madame Savarin meant to express; I do wish that you were
      happily married to one very different from Mr. Vane—one who would be more proud of your genius
      than of your beauty—one who would say, ‘My name, safer far in its enduring nobility than those
      that depend on titles and lands—which are held on the tenure of the popular breath—must be
      honoured by posterity, for She has deigned to make it hers. No democratic revolution can
      disennoble me.”
“Ay, ay, you believe that men will be found to think with complacency that they owe to a
      wife a name they could not achieve for themselves. Possibly there are such men. Where?—among
      those that are already united by sympathies in the same callings, the same labours, the same
      hopes and fears with the women who have left behind them the privacies of home. Madame de
      Grantmesnil was wrong. Artists should wed with artists. True—true!”
Here she passed her hand over her forehead—it was a pretty way of hers when seeking to
      concentrate thought—and was silent a moment or so.
“Did you ever feel,” she then asked dreamily, “that there are moments in life when a dark
      curtain seems to fall over one’s past that a day before was so clear, so blended with the
      present? One cannot any longer look behind; the gaze is attracted onward, and a track of fire
      flashes upon the future,—the future which yesterday was invisible. There is a line by some
      English poet—Mr. Vane once quoted it, not to me, but to M. Savarin, and in illustration of his
      argument, that the most complicated recesses of thought are best reached by the simplest forms
      of expression. I said to myself, ‘I will study that truth if ever I take to literature as I
      have taken to song;’ and—yes—it was that evening that the ambition fatal to woman fixed on me
      its relentless fangs—at Enghien—we were on the lake—the sun was setting.”
“But you do not tell me the line that so impressed you,” said Mrs. Morley, with a woman’s
      kindly tact.
“The line—which line? Oh, I remember; the line was this:
“‘I see as from a tower the end of all.”
“And now—kiss me, dearest—never a word again to me about this conversation: never a word
      about Mr. Vane—the dark curtain has fallen on the past.”
</div></body></text></TEI>