<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER IV.
On the same day in which Graham dined with the Savarins, M. Louvier assembled round his
      table the elite of the young Parisians who constituted the oligarchy of fashion, to meet whom
      he had invited his new friend the Marquis de Rochebriant. Most of them belonged to the
      Legitimist party, the noblesse of the faubourg; those who did not, belonged to no political
      party at all,—indifferent to the cares of mortal States as the gods of Epicurus. Foremost
      among this Jeunesse doree were Alain’s kinsmen, Raoul and Enguerrand de Vandemar. To these
      Louvier introduced him with a burly parental bonhomie, as if he were the head of the family.
      “I need not bid you, young folks, to make friends with each other. A Vandemar and a
      Rochebriant are not made friends,—they are born friends.” So saying he turned to his other
      guests.
Almost in an instant Alain felt his constraint melt away in the cordial warmth with which
      his cousins greeted him. These young men had a striking family likeness to each other, and yet
      in feature, colouring, and expression, in all save that strange family likeness, they were
      contrasts. Raoul was tall, and, though inclined to be slender, with sufficient breadth of
      shoulder to indicate no inconsiderable strength of frame. His hair worn short and his silky
      beard worn long were dark; so were his eyes, shaded by curved drooping lashes; his complexion
      was pale, but clear and healthful. In repose the expression of his face was that of a somewhat
      melancholy indolence, but in speaking it became singularly sweet, with a smile of the
      exquisite urbanity which no artificial politeness can bestow; it must emanate from that native
      high breeding which has its source in goodness of heart.
Enguerrand was fair, with curly locks of a golden chestnut. He wore no beard, only a small
      mustache rather darker than his hair. His complexion might in itself be called effeminate, its
      bloom was so fresh and delicate; but there was so much of boldness and energy in the play of
      his countenance, the hardy outline of the lips, and the open breadth of the forehead, that
      “effeminate” was an epithet no one ever assigned to his aspect. He was somewhat under the
      middle height, but beautifully proportioned, carried himself well, and somehow or other did
      not look short even by the side of tall men. Altogether he seemed formed to be a mother’s
      darling, and spoiled by women, yet to hold his own among men with a strength of will more
      evident in his look and his bearing than it was in those of his graver and statelier
      brother.
Both were considered by their young co-equals models in dress, but in Raoul there was no
      sign that care or thought upon dress had been bestowed; the simplicity of his costume was
      absolute and severe. On his plain shirt-front there gleamed not a stud, on his fingers there
      sparkled not a ring. Enguerrand, on the contrary, was not without pretension in his attire;
      the broderie in his shirt-front seemed woven by the Queen of the Fairies. His rings of
      turquoise and opal, his studs and wrist-buttons of pearl and brilliants, must have cost double
      the rental of Rochebriant, but probably they cost him nothing. He was one of those happy
      Lotharios to whom Calistas make constant presents. All about him was so bright that the
      atmosphere around seemed gayer for his presence.
In one respect at least the brothers closely resembled each other,—in that exquisite
      graciousness of manner for which the genuine French noble is traditionally renowned; a
      graciousness that did not desert them even when they came reluctantly into contact with
      roturiers or republicans; but the graciousness became egalite, fraternite, towards one of
      their caste and kindred.
“We must do our best to make Paris pleasant to you,” said Raoul, still retaining in his
      grasp the hand he had taken.
“Vilain cousin,” said the livelier Enguerrand, “to have been in Paris twenty-four hours, and
      without letting us know.”
“Has not your father told you that I called upon him?”
“Our father,” answered Raoul, “was not so savage as to conceal that fact; but he said you
      were only here on business for a day or two, had declined his invitation, and would not give
      your address. Pauvre pere! we scolded him well for letting you escape from us thus. My mother
      has not forgiven him yet; we must present you to her to-morrow. I answer for your liking her
      almost as much as she will like you.”
Before Alain could answer dinner was announced. Alain’s place at dinner was between his
      cousins. How pleasant they made themselves! It was the first time in which Alain had been
      brought into such familiar conversation with countrymen of his own rank as well as his own
      age. His heart warmed to them. The general talk of the other guests was strange to his ear; it
      ran much upon horses and races, upon the opera and the ballet; it was enlivened with satirical
      anecdotes of persons whose names were unknown to the Provincial; not a word was said that
      showed the smallest interest in politics or the slightest acquaintance with literature. The
      world of these well-born guests seemed one from which all that concerned the great mass of
      mankind was excluded, yet the talk was that which could only be found in a very polished
      society. In it there was not much wit, but there was a prevalent vein of gayety, and the
      gayety was never violent, the laughter was never loud; the scandals circulated might imply
      cynicism the most absolute, but in language the most refined. The Jockey Club of Paris has its
      perfume.
Raoul did not mix in the general conversation; he devoted himself pointedly to the amusement
      of his cousin, explaining to him the point of the anecdotes circulated, or hitting off in
      terse sentences the characters of the talkers.
Enguerrand was evidently of temper more vivacious than his brother, and contributed freely
      to the current play of light gossip and mirthful sally.
Louvier, seated between a duke and a Russian prince, said little except to recommend a wine
      or an entree, but kept his eye constantly on the Vandemars and Alain.
Immediately after coffee the guests departed. Before they did so, however, Raoul introduced
      his cousin to those of the party most distinguished by hereditary rank or social position.
      With these the name of Rochebriant was too historically famous not to insure respect of its
      owner; they welcomed him among them as if he were their brother.
The French duke claimed him as a connection by an alliance in the fourteenth century; the
      Russian prince had known the late Marquis, and trusted that the son would allow him to improve
      into friendship the acquaintance he had formed with the father.
Those ceremonials over, Raoul linked his arm in Alain’s and said: “I am not going to release
      you so soon after we have caught you. You must come with me to a house in which I at least
      spend an hour or two every evening. I am at home there. Bah! I take no refusal. Do not suppose
      I carry you off to Bohemia,—a country which, I am sorry to say, Enguerrand now and then
      visits, but which is to me as unknown as the mountains of the moon. The house I speak of is
      comme il faut to the utmost. It is that of the Contessa di Rimini,—a charming Italian by
      marriage, but by birth and in character on ne peut plus Francaise. My mother adores her.”
That dinner at M. Louvier’s had already effected a great change in the mood and temper of
      Alain de Rochebriant; he felt, as if by magic, the sense of youth, of rank, of station, which
      had been so suddenly checked and stifled, warmed to life within his veins. He should have
      deemed himself a boor had he refused the invitation so frankly tendered.
But on reaching the coupe which the brothers kept in common, and seeing it only held two, he
      drew back.
“Nay, enter, mon cher,” said Raoul, divining the cause of his hesitation; “Enguerrand has
      gone on to his club.”
</div></body></text></TEI>