<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="114">
CHAPTER IX.
“Ah, indeed! what a difference! what a difference!” said Gustave to himself when he entered
      Julie’s apartment. In her palmier days, when he had first made her acquaintance, the apartment
      no doubt had been infinitely more splendid, more abundant in silks and fringes and flowers and
      nicknacks; but never had it seemed so cheery and comfortable and home-like as now. What a
      contrast to Isaura’s dismantled chilly salon! She drew him towards the hearth, on which,
      blazing though it was, she piled fresh billets, seated him in the easiest of easy-chairs,
      knelt beside him, and chafed his numbed hands in hers; and as her bright eyes fixed tenderly
      on his, she looked so young and so innocent! You would not then have called her the “Ondine of
      Paris.”
But when, a little while after, revived by the genial warmth and moved by the charm of her
      beauty, Gustave passed his arm round her neck and sought to draw her on his lap, she slid from
      his embrace, shaking her head gently, and seated herself, with a pretty air of ceremonious
      decorum, at a little distance.
Gustave looked at her amazed.
“Causons,” said she, gravely, “thou wouldst know why I am so well dressed, so comfortably
      lodged, and I am longing to explain to thee all. Some days ago I had just finished my
      performance at the cafe—, and was putting on my shawl, when a tall Monsieur, fort bel homme,
      with the air of a grand seigneur, entered the cafe, and approaching me politely, said, ‘I
      think I have the honour to address Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin?’ ‘That is my name,’ I said,
      surprised; and, looking at him more intently, I recognised his face. He had come into the cafe
      a few days before with thine old acquaintance Frederic Lemercier, and stood by when I asked
      Frederic to give me news of thee. ‘Mademoiselle,’ he continued, with a serious melancholy
      smile, ‘I shall startle you when I say that I am appointed to act as your guardian by the last
      request of your mother.’ ‘Of Madame Surville?’ ‘Madame Surville adopted you, but was not your
      mother. We cannot talk at ease here. Allow me to request that you will accompany me to
      Monsieur ——-, the avoue. It is not very far from this—and by the way—I will tell you some news
      that may sadden, and some news that may rejoice.’
“There was an earnestness in the voice and look of this Monsieur that impressed me. He did
      not offer me his arm; but I walked by his side in the direction he chose. As we walked he told
      me in very few words that my mother had been separated from her husband, and for certain
      family reasons had found it so difficult to rear and provide for me herself, that she had
      accepted the offer of Madame Surville to adopt me as her own child. While he spoke, there came
      dimly back to me the remembrance of a lady who had taken me from my first home, when I had
      been, as I understood, at nurse, and left me with poor dear Madame Surville, saying, ‘This is
      henceforth your mamma.’
“I never again saw that lady. It seems that many years afterwards my true mother desired to
      regain me. Madame Surville was then dead. She failed to trace me out, owing, alas! to my own
      faults and change of name. She then entered a nunnery, but, before doing so, assigned a sum of
      100,000 francs to this gentleman, who was distantly connected with her, with full power to him
      to take it to himself, or give it to my use should he discover me, at his discretion. ‘I ask
      you,’ continued the Monsieur, ‘to go with me to Mons. N———‘s, because the sum is still in his
      hands. He will confirm my statement. All that I have now to say is this, If you accept my
      guardianship, if you obey implicitly my advice, I shall consider the interest of this sum
      which has accumulated since deposited with M. ——- due to you; and the capital will be your dot
      on marriage, if the marriage be with my consent.’”
Gustave had listened very attentively, and without interruption, until now; when he looked
      up, and said with his customary sneer, “Did your Monsieur, fort bel homme, you say, inform you
      of the value of the advice, rather of the commands, you were implicitly to obey?”
“Yes,” answered Julie, “not then, but later. Let me go on. We arrived at M. N——-’s, an
      elderly grave man. He said that all he knew was that he held the money in trust for the
      Monsieur with me, to be given to him, with the accumulations of interest, on the death of the
      lady who had deposited it. If that Monsieur had instructions how to dispose of the money, they
      were not known to him. All he had to do was to transfer it absolutely to him on the proper
      certificate of the lady’s death. So you see, Gustave, that the Monsieur could have kept all
      from me if he had liked.”
“Your Monsieur is very generous. Perhaps you will now tell me his name.”
“No; he forbids me to do it yet.”
“And he took this apartment for you, and gave you money to buy that smart dress and these
      furs. Bah! mon enfant, why try to deceive me? Do I not know my Paris? A fort bel homme does
      not make himself guardian to a fort belle fine so young and fair as Mademoiselle Julie
      Caumartin without certain considerations which shall be nameless, like himself.”
Julie’s eyes flashed. “Ah, Gustave! ah, Monsieur!” she said, half angrily, half plaintively,
      “I see that my guardian knew you better than I did. Never mind; I will not reproach. Thou halt
      the right to despise me.”
“Pardon! I did not mean to offend thee,” said Gustave, somewhat disconcerted. “But own that
      thy story is strange; and this guardian, who knows me better than thou—does he know me at all?
      Didst thou speak to him of me?”
“How could I help it? He says that this terrible war, in which he takes an active part,
      makes his life uncertain from day to day. He wished to complete the trust bequeathed to him by
      seeing me safe in the love of some worthy man who”—she paused for a moment with an expression
      of compressed anguish, and then hurried on—“who would recognise what was good in me,—would
      never reproach me for—for—the past. I then said that my heart was thine: I could never marry
      any one but thee.”
“Marry me,” faltered Gustave—“marry!”
“And,” continued the girl, not heeding his interruption, “he said thou wert not the husband
      he would choose for me: that thou wert not—no, I cannot wound thee by repeating what he said
      unkindly, unjustly. He bade me think of thee no more. I said again, that is impossible.”
“But,” resumed Rameau, with an affected laugh, “why think of anything so formidable as
      marriage? Thou lovest me, and—” He approached again, seeking to embrace her. She recoiled.
      “No, Gustave, no. I have sworn solemnly by the memory of my lost mother—O—that I will never
      sin again. I will never be to thee other than thy friend—or thy wife.”
Before Gustave could reply to these words, which took him wholly by surprise, there was a
      ring at the outer door, and the old bonne ushered in Victor de Mauleon. He halted at the
      threshold, and his brow contracted.
“So you have already broken faith with me, Mademoiselle?”
“No, Monsieur, I have not broken faith,” cried Julie; passionately. “I told you that I would
      not seek to find out Monsieur Rameau. I did not seek, but I met him unexpectedly. I owed to
      him an explanation. I invited him here to give that explanation. Without it, what would he
      have thought of me? Now he may go, and I will never admit him again without your
      sanction.”
The Vicomte turned his stern look upon Gustave, who though, as we know, not wanting in
      personal courage, felt cowed by his false position; and his eye fell, quailed before De
      Mauleon’s gaze.
“Leave us for a few minutes alone, Mademoiselle,” said the Vicomte. “Nay, Julie,” he added,
      in softened tones, “fear nothing. I, too, owe explanation—friendly explanation—to M.
      Rameau.”
With his habitual courtesy towards women, he extended his hand to Julie, and led her from
      the room. Then, closing the door, he seated himself, and made a sign to Gustave to do the
      same.
“Monsieur,” said De Mauleon, “excuse me if I detain you. A very few words will suffice for
      our present interview. I take it for granted that Mademoiselle has told you that she is no
      child of Madame Surville’s: that her own mother bequeathed her to my protection and
      guardianship with a modest fortune which is at my disposal to give or withhold. The little I
      have seen already of Mademoiselle impresses me with sincere interest in her fate. I look with
      compassion on what she may have been in the past; I anticipate with hope what she may be in
      the future. I do not ask you to see her in either with my eyes. I say frankly that it is my
      intention, and I may add, my resolve, that the ward thus left to my charge shall be henceforth
      safe from the temptations that have seduced her poverty, her inexperience, her vanity, if you
      will, but have not yet corrupted her heart. Bref, I must request you to give me your word of
      honour that you will hold no further communication with her. I can allow no sinister influence
      to stand between her fate and honour.”
“You speak well and nobly, M. le Vicomte,” said Rameau, “and I give the promise you exact.”
      He added, feelingly: “It is true her heart has never been corrupted that is good,
      affectionate, unselfish as a child’s. J’ai l’honneur de vous saluer, M. le Vicomte.”
He bowed with a dignity unusual to him, and tears were in his eyes as he passed by De
      Mauleon and gained the anteroom. There a side-door suddenly opened, and Julie’s face, anxious,
      eager, looked forth.
Gustave paused: “Adieu, Mademoiselle! Adieu, though we may never meet again,—though our
      fates divide us,—believe me that I shall ever cherish your memory—and—”
The girl interrupted him, impulsively seizing his arm, and looking him in the face with a
      wild fixed stare. “Hush! dost thou mean to say that we are parted,—parted forever?”
“Alas!” said Gustave, “what option is before us? Your guardian rightly forbids my visits;
      and even were I free to offer you my hand, you yourself say that I am not a suitor he would
      approve.”
Julie turned her eyes towards De Mauleon, who, following Gustave into the ante-room, stood
      silent and impassive, leaning against the wall.
He now understood and replied to the pathetic appeal in the girl’s eyes.
“My young ward,” he said, “M. Rameau expresses himself with propriety and truth. Suffer him
      to depart. He belongs to the former life; reconcile yourself to the new.”
He advanced to take her hand, making a sign to Gustave to depart. But as he approached
      Julie, she uttered a weak piteous wail, and fell at his feet senseless. De Mauleon raised and
      carried her into her room, where he left her to the care of the old bonne. On re-entering the
      anteroom, he found Gustave still lingering by the outer door. “You will pardon me, Monsieur,”
      he said to the Vicomte, “but in fact I feel so uneasy, so unhappy. Has she—? You see, you see
      that there is danger to her health, perhaps to her reason, in so abrupt a separation, so cruel
      a rupture between us. Let me call again, or I may not have strength to keep my promise.”
De Mauleon remained a few minutes musing. Then he said in a whisper, “Come back into the
      salon. Let us talk frankly.”
</div></body></text></TEI>