<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="98">
CHAPTER XI.
Victor dressed and went out. The streets were crowded. Workmen were everywhere employed in
      the childish operation of removing all insignia, and obliterating all names that showed where
      an Empire had existed. One greasy citizen, mounted on a ladder, was effacing the words
      “Boulevard Haussman,” and substituting for Haussman, “Victor Hugo.”
Suddenly De Mauleon came on a group of blouses, interspersed with women holding babies and
      ragged boys holding stones, collected round a well-dressed slender man, at whom they were
      hooting and gesticulating, with menaces of doing something much worse. By an easy effort of
      his strong frame the Vicomte pushed his way through the tormentors, and gave his arm to their
      intended victim.
“Monsieur, allow me to walk home with you.” Therewith the shrieks and shouts and
      gesticulations increased. “Another impertinent! Another traitor! Drown him! Drown them both!
      To the Seine! To the Seine!” A burly fellow rushed forward, and the rest made a plunging push.
      The outstretched arm of De Mauleon kept the ringleader at bay. “Mes enfans,” cried Victor with
      a calm clear voice, “I am not an Imperialist. Many of you have read the articles signed Pierre
      Firmin, written against the tyrant Bonaparte when he was at the height of his power. I am
      Pierre Firmin—make way for me.” Probably not one in the crowd had ever read a word written by
      Pierre Firmin, nor even heard of the name. But they did not like to own ignorance; and that
      burly fellow did not like to encounter that arm of iron which touched his throat. So he cried
      out, “Oh! if you are the great Pierre Firmin, that alters the case. Make way for the patriot
      Pierre!”
“But,” shrieked a virago, thrusting her baby into De Mauleon’s face, “the other is the
      Imperialist, the capitalist, the vile Duplessis. At least we will have him.”
De Mauleon suddenly snatched the baby from her, and said, with imperturbable good temper,
      “Exchange of prisoners. I resign the man, and I keep the baby.”
No one who does not know the humours of a Parisian mob can comprehend the suddenness of
      popular change, or the magical mastery over crowds which is effected by quiet courage and a
      ready joke. The group was appeased at once. Even the virago laughed; and when De Mauleon
      restored the infant to her arms, with a gold piece thrust into its tiny clasp, she eyed the
      gold, and cried, “God bless you, citizen!” The two gentlemen made their way safely now.
“M. de Mauleon,” said Duplessis, “I know not how to thank you. Without your seasonable aid I
      should have been in great danger of life; and—would you believe it?—the woman who denounced
      and set the mob on me was one of the objects of a charity which I weekly dispense to the
      poor.”
“Of course I believe that. At the Red clubs no crime is more denounced than that of charity.
      It is the ‘fraud against Egalite’—a vile trick of the capitalist to save to himself the
      millions he ought to share with all by giving a sou to one. Meanwhile, take my advice, M.
      Duplessis, and quit Paris with your young daughter. This is no place for rich Imperialists at
      present.”
“I perceived that before to-day’s adventure. I distrust the looks of my very servants, and
      shall depart with Valerie this evening for Bretagne.”
“Ah! I heard from Louvier that you propose to pay off his mortgage on Rochebriant, and make
      yourself sole proprietor of my young kinsman’s property.”
“I trust you only believe half what you hear. I mean to save Rochebriant from Louvier, and
      consign it, free of charge, to your kinsman, as the dot of his bride, my daughter.”
“I rejoice to learn such good news for the head of my house. But Alain himself—is he not
      with the prisoners of war?”
“No, thank heaven. He went forth an officer of a regiment of Parisian Mobiles—went full of
      sanguine confidence; he came back with his regiment in mournful despondency. The undiscipline
      of his regiment, of the Parisian Mobiles generally, appears incredible. Their insolent
      disobedience to their officers, their ribald scoffs at their general—oh, it is sickening to
      speak of it! Alain distinguished himself by repressing a mutiny and is honoured by a signal
      compliment from the commander in a letter of recommendation to Palikao. But Palikao is nobody
      now. Alain has already been sent into Bretagne, commissioned to assist in organising a corps
      of Mobiles in his neighbourhood. Trochu, as you know, is a Breton. Alain is confident of the
      good conduct of the Bretons. What will Louvier do? He is an arch Republican; is he pleased now
      he has got what he wanted?”
“I suppose he is pleased, for he is terribly frightened. Fright is one of the great
      enjoyments of a Parisian. Good day. Your path to your hotel is clear now. Remember me kindly
      to Alain.”
De Mauleon continued his way through streets sometimes deserted, sometimes thronged. At the
      commencement of the Rue de Florentin he encountered the brothers Vandemar walking arm in
      arm.
“Ha, De Mauleon!” cried Enguerrand; “what is the last minute’s news?”
“I can’t guess. Nobody knows at Paris how soon one folly swallows up another. Saturn here is
      always devouring one or other of his children.”
“They say that Vinoy, after a most masterly retreat, is almost at our gates with 80,000
      men.”
“And this day twelvemonth we may know what he does with them.”
Here Raoul, who seemed absorbed in gloomy reflections, halted before the hotel in which the
      Contessa di Rimini lodged, and with a nod to his brother, and a polite, if not cordial
      salutation to Victor, entered the porte cochere.
“Your brother seems out of spirits,—a pleasing contrast to the uproarious mirth with which
      Parisians welcome the advance of calamity.”
“Raoul, as you know, is deeply religious. He regards the defeat we have sustained, and the
      peril that threatens us, as the beginning of a divine chastisement, justly incurred by our
      sins—I mean, the sins of Paris. In vain my father reminds him of Voltaire’s story, in which
      the ship goes down with a fripon on board. In order to punish the fripon, the honest folks are
      drowned.”
“Is your father going to remain on board the ship, and share the fate of the other honest
      folks?”
“Pas si bete. He is off to Dieppe for sea-bathing. He says that Paris has grown so dirty
      since the 4th September, that it is only fit for the feet of the Unwashed. He wished my mother
      to accompany him; but she replies, ‘No; there are already too many wounded not to need plenty
      of nurses.’ She is assisting to inaugurate a society of ladies in aid of the Soeurs de
      Charite. Like Raoul, she is devout, but she has not his superstitions. Still his superstitions
      are the natural reaction of a singularly earnest and pure nature from the frivolity and
      corruption which, when kneaded well up together with a slice of sarcasm, Paris calls
      philosophy.”
“And what, my dear Enguerrand, do you propose to do?”
“That depends on whether we are really besieged. If so, of course I become a soldier.”
“I hope not a National Guard?”
“I care not in what name I fight, so that I fight for France.”
As Enguerrand said these simple words, his whole countenance, seemed changed. The crest
      rose; his eyes sparkled; the fair and delicate beauty which had made him the darling of
      women—the joyous sweetness of expression and dainty grace of high breeding which made him the
      most popular companion to men,—were exalted in a masculine nobleness of aspect, from which a
      painter might have taken hints for a study of the young Achilles separated for ever from
      effeminate companionship at the sight of the weapons of war. De Mauleon gazed on him
      admiringly. We have seen that he shared the sentiments uttered—had resolved on the same course
      of action. But it was with the tempered warmth of a man who seeks to divest his thoughts and
      his purpose of the ardour of romance, and who, in serving his country, calculates on the gains
      to his own ambition. Nevertheless he admired in Enguerrand the image of his own impulsive and
      fiery youth.
“And you, I presume,” resumed Enguerrand, “will fight too, but rather with pen than with
      sword.”
“Pens will now only be dipped in red ink, and commonsense never writes in that colour; as
      for the sword, I have passed the age of forty-five, at which military service halts. But if
      some experience in active service, some knowledge of the art by which soldiers are disciplined
      and led, will be deemed sufficient title to a post of command, however modest the grade be, I
      shall not be wanting among the defenders of Paris.”
“My brave dear Vicomte, if you are past the age to serve, you are in the ripest age to
      command; and with the testimonials and the cross you won in Algeria, your application for
      employment will be received with gratitude by any general so able as Trochu.”
“I don’t know whether I shall apply to Trochu. I would rather be elected to command even by
      the Mobiles or the National Guard, of whom I have just spoken disparagingly; and no doubt both
      corps will soon claim and win the right to choose their officers. But if elected, no matter by
      whom, I shall make a preliminary condition; the men under me shall train, and drill, and
      obey,—soldiers of a very different kind from the youthful Pekins nourished on absinthe and
      self-conceit, and applauding that Bombastes Furioso, M. Hugo, when he assures the enemy that
      Paris will draw an idea from its scabbard. But here comes Savarin. Bon jour, my dear
      poet.”
“Don’t say good day. An evil day for journalists and writers who do not out-Herod Blanqui
      and Pyat. I know not how I shall get bread and cheese. My poor suburban villa is to be pulled
      down by way of securing Paris; my journal will be suppressed by way of establishing the
      liberty of the press. I ventured to suggest that the people of France should have some choice
      in the form of their government.”
“That was very indiscreet, my poor Savarin,” said Victor; “I wonder your printing-office has
      not been pulled down. We are now at the moment when wise men hold their tongues.”
“Perhaps so, M. de Mauleon. It might have been wiser for all of us, you as well as myself,
      if we had not allowed our tongues to be so free before this moment arrived. We live to learn;
      and if we ever have what may be called a passable government again, in which we may say pretty
      much what we like, there is one thing I will not do, I will not undermine that government
      without seeing a very clear way to the government that is to follow it. What say you, Pierre
      Firmin?”
“Frankly, I say that I deserve your rebuke,” answered De Mauleon thoughtfully. “But, of
      course, you are going to take or send Madame Savarin out of Paris.”
“Certainly. We have made a very pleasant party for our hegira this evening-among others the
      Morleys. Morley is terribly disgusted. A Red Republican slapped him on the shoulder and said,
      ‘American, we have a republic as well as you.’ ‘Pretty much you know about republics,’ growled
      Morley; ‘a French republic is as much like ours as a baboon is like a man.’ On which the Red
      roused the mob, who dragged the American off to the nearest station of the National Guard,
      where he was accused of being a Prussian spy. With some difficulty, and lots of brag about the
      sanctity of the stars and stripes, he escaped with a reprimand, and caution how to behave
      himself in future. So he quits a city in which there no longer exists freedom of speech. My
      wife hoped to induce Mademoiselle Cicogna to accompany us; I grieve to say she refuses. You
      know she is engaged in marriage to Gustave Rameau; and his mother dreads the effect that these
      Red Clubs and his own vanity may have upon his excitable temperament if the influence of
      Mademoiselle Cicogna be withdrawn.”
“How could a creature so exquisite as Isaura Cicogna ever find fascination in Gustave
      Rameau!” exclaimed Enguerrand.
“A woman like her,” answered De Mauleon, “always finds a fascination in self-sacrifice.”
“I think you divine the truth,” said Savarin, rather mournfully. “But I must bid you
      good-bye. May we live to shake hands reunis sons des meilleurs auspices.”
Here Savarin hurried off, and the other two men strolled into the Champs Elysees, which were
      crowded with loungers, gay and careless, as if there had been no disaster at Sedan, no
      overthrow of an Empire, no enemy on its road to Paris.
In fact the Parisians, at once the most incredulous and the most credulous of all
      populations, believed that the Prussians would never be so impertinent as to come in sight of
      the gates. Something would occur to stop them! The king had declared he did not war on
      Frenchmen, but on the Emperor: the Emperor gone, the war was over. A democratic republic was
      instituted. A horrible thing in its way, it is true; but how could the Pandour tyrant brave
      the infection of democratic doctrines among his own barbarian armies? Were not placards,
      addressed to our “German brethren,” posted upon the walls of Paris, exhorting the Pandours to
      fraternise with their fellow-creatures? Was not Victor Hugo going to publish “a letter to the
      German people”? Had not Jules Favre graciously offered peace, with the assurance that “France
      would not cede a stone of her fortresses—an inch of her territory? She would pardon the
      invaders and not march upon Berlin!” To all these, and many more such incontestable proofs,
      that the idea of a siege was moonshine, did Enguerrand and Victor listen as they joined group
      after group of their fellow-countrymen: nor did Paris cease to harbour such pleasing
      illusions, amusing itself with piously laying crowns at the foot of the statue of Strasbourg,
      swearing “they would be worthy of their Alsatian brethren,” till on the 19th of September the
      last telegram was received, and Paris was cut of from the rest of the world by the iron line
      of the Prussian invaders. “Tranquil and terrible,” says Victor Hugo, “she awaits the invasion!
      A volcano needs no assistance.”
</div></body></text></TEI>