<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Two
                              Destinies</title><author>Collins, Wilkie (1824-1889)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1876</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER XX. THE GREEN FLAG.
“I CONGRATULATE you, Mr. Germaine, on your power of painting in
                                   words. Your description gives me a vivid idea of Mrs. Van
                                   Brandt.”
“Does the portrait please you, Miss Dunross?”
“May I speak as plainly as usual?”
“Certainly!”
“Well, then, plainly, I don’t like your Mrs. Van Brandt.”
Ten days had passed; and thus far Miss Dunross had made her way
                                   into my confidence already!
By what means had she induced me to trust her with those secret and
                                   sacred sorrows of my life which I had hitherto kept for my
                                   mother’s ear alone? I can easily recall the rapid and subtle
                                   manner in which her sympathies twined themselves round mine; but
                                   I fail entirely to trace the infinite gradations of approach by
                                   which she surprised and conquered my habitual reserve. The
                                   strongest influence of all, the influence of the eye, was not
                                   hers. When the light was admitted into the room she was shrouded
                                   in her veil. At all other times the curtains were drawn, the
                                   screen was before the fire—I could see dimly the outline of her
                                   face, and I could see no more. The secret of her influence was
                                   perhaps partly attributable to the simple and sisterly manner in
                                   which she spoke to me, and partly to the indescribable interest
                                   which associated itself with her mere presence in the room. Her
                                   father had told me that she “carried the air of heaven with her.”
                                   In my experience, I can only say that she carried something with
                                   her which softly and inscrutably possessed itself of my will, and
                                   made me as unconsciously obedient to her wishes as if I had been
                                   her dog. The love-story of my boyhood, in all its particulars,
                                   down even to the gift of the green flag; the mystic predictions
                                   of Dame Dermody; the loss of every trace of my little Mary of
                                   former days; the rescue of Mrs. Van Brandt from the river; the
                                   apparition of her in the summer-house; the after-meetings with
                                   her in Edinburgh and in London; the final parting which had left
                                   its mark of sorrow on my face—all these events, all these
                                   sufferings, I confided to her as unreservedly as I have confided
                                   them to these pages. And the result, as she sat by me in the
                                   darkened room, was summed up, with a woman’s headlong impetuosity
                                   of judgment, in the words that I have just written—“I don’t like
                                   your Mrs. Van Brandt!”
“Why not?” I asked.
She answered instantly, “Because you ought to love nobody but
                                   Mary.”
“But Mary has been lost to me since I was a boy of thirteen.”
“Be patient, and you will find her again. Mary is patient—Mary is
                                   waiting for you. When you meet her, you will be ashamed to
                                   remember that you ever loved Mrs. Van Brandt—you will look on
                                   your separation from that woman as the happiest event of your
                                   life. I may not live to hear of it—but you
                                   will live to own that I was right.”
Her perfectly baseless conviction that time would yet bring about
                                   my meeting with Mary, partly irritated, partly amused me.
“You seem to agree with Dame Dermody,” I said. “You believe that
                                   our two destinies are one. No matter what time may elapse, or
                                   what may happen in the time, you believe my marriage with Mary is
                                   still a marriage delayed, and nothing more?”
“I firmly believe it.”
“Without knowing why—except that you dislike the idea of my
                                   marrying Mrs. Van Brandt?”
She knew that this view of her motive was not far from being the
                                   right one—and, womanlike, she shifted the discussion to new
                                   ground.
“Why do you call her Mrs. Van Brandt?” she asked. “Mrs. Van Brandt
                                   is the namesake of your first love. If you are so fond of her,
                                   why don’t you call her Mary?”
I was ashamed to give the true reason—it seemed so utterly unworthy
                                   of a man of any sense or spirit. Noticing my hesitation, she
                                   insisted on my answering her; she forced me to make my
                                   humiliating confession.
“The man who has parted us,” I said, “called her Mary. I hate him
                                   with such a jealous hatred that he has even disgusted me with the
                                   name! It lost all its charm for me when it passed his lips.”
I had anticipated that she would laugh at me. No! She suddenly
                                   raised her head as if she were looking at me intently in the
                                   dark.
“How fond you must be of that woman!” she said. “Do you dream of
                                   her now?”
“I never dream of her now.”
“Do you expect to see the apparition of her again?”
“It may be so—if a time comes when she is in sore need of help, and
                                   when she has no friend to look to but me.”
“Did you ever see the apparition of your little Mary?”
“Never!”
“But you used once to see her—as Dame Dermody predicted—in
                                   dreams?”
“Yes—when I was a lad.”
“And, in the after-time, it was not Mary, but Mrs. Van Brandt who
                                   came to you in dreams—who appeared to you in the spirit, when she
                                   was far away from you in the body? Poor old Dame Dermody. She
                                   little thought, in her life-time, that her prediction would be
                                   fullfilled by the wrong woman!”
To that result her inquiries had inscrutably conducted her! If she
                                   had only pressed them a little further—if she had not
                                   unconsciously led me astray again by the very next question that
                                   fell from her lips—she must have
                                   communicated to my mind the idea obscurely
                                   germinating in hers—the idea of a possible identity between the
                                   Mary of my first love and Mrs. Van Brandt!
“Tell me,” she went on. “If you met with your little Mary now, what
                                   would she be like? What sort of woman would you expect to
                                   see?”
I could hardly help laughing. “How can I tell,” I rejoined, “at
                                   this distance of time?”
“Try!” she said.
Reasoning my way from the known personality to the unknown, I
                                   searched my memory for the image of the frail and delicate child
                                   of my remembrance: and I drew the picture of a frail and delicate
                                   woman—the most absolute contrast imaginable to Mrs. Van
                                   Brandt!
The half-realized idea of identity in the mind of Miss Dunross
                                   dropped out of it instantly, expelled by the substantial
                                   conclusion which the contrast implied. Alike ignorant of the
                                   aftergrowth of health, strength, and beauty which time and
                                   circumstances had developed in the Mary of my youthful days, we
                                   had alike completely and unconsciously misled one another. Once
                                   more, I had missed the discovery of the truth, and missed it by a
                                   hair-breadth!
“I infinitely prefer your portrait of Mary,” said Miss Dunross, “to
                                   your portrait of Mrs. Van Brandt. Mary realizes my idea of what a
                                   really attractive woman ought to be. How you can have felt any
                                   sorrow for the loss of that other person (I detest buxom women!)
                                   passes my understanding. I can’t tell you how interested I am in
                                   Mary! I want to know more about her. Where is that pretty present
                                   of needle-work which the poor little thing embroidered for you so
                                   industriously? Do let me see the green flag!”
She evidently supposed that I carried the green flag about me! I
                                   felt a little confused as I answered her.
“I am sorry to disappoint you. The green flag is somewhere in my
                                   house in Perthshire.”
“You have not got it with you?” she exclaimed. “You leave her
                                   keepsake lying about anywhere? Oh, Mr. Germaine, you have indeed
                                   forgotten Mary! A woman, in your place, would have parted with
                                   her life rather than part with the one memorial left of the time
                                   when she first loved!”
She spoke with such extraordinary earnestness—with such agitation,
                                   I might almost say—that she quite startled me.
“Dear Miss Dunross,” I remonstrated, “the flag is not lost.”
“I should hope not!” she interposed, quickly. “If you lose the
                                   green flag, you lose the last relic of Mary—and more than that,
                                   if my belief is right.”
“What do you believe?”
“You will laugh at me if I tell you. I am afraid my first reading
                                   of your face was wrong—I am afraid you are a hard man.”
“Indeed you do me an injustice. I entreat you to answer me as
                                   frankly as usual. What do I lose in losing the last relic of
                                   Mary?”
“You lose the one hope I have for you,” she answered, gravely—“the
                                   hope of your meeting and your marriage with Mary in the time to
                                   come. I was sleepless last night, and I was thinking of your
                                   pretty love story by the banks of the bright English lake. The
                                   longer I thought, the more firmly I felt the conviction that the
                                   poor child’s green flag is destined to have its innocent
                                   influence in forming your future life. Your happiness is waiting
                                   for you in that artless little keepsake! I can’t explain or
                                   justify this belief of mine. It is one of my eccentricities, I
                                   suppose—like training my cats to perform to the music of my harp.
                                   But, if I were your old friend, instead of being only your friend
                                   of a few days, I would leave you no peace—I would beg and entreat
                                   and persist, as only a woman can
                                   persist—until I had made Mary’s gift as close a companion of
                                   yours, as your mother’s portrait in the locket there at your
                                   watch-chain. While the flag is with you, Mary’s influence is with
                                   you; Mary’s love is still binding you by the dear old tie; and
                                   Mary and you, after years of separation, will meet again!”
The fancy was in itself pretty and poetical; the earnestness which
                                   had given expression to it would have had its influence over a
                                   man of a far harder nature than mine. I confess she had made me
                                   ashamed, if she had done nothing more, of my neglect of the green
                                   flag.
“I will look for it the moment I am at home again,” I said; “and I
                                   will take care that it is carefully preserved for the
                                   future.”
“I want more than that,” she rejoined. “If you can’t wear the flag
                                   about you, I want it always to be with
                                   you—to go wherever you go. When they brought your luggage here
                                   from the vessel at Lerwick, you were particularly anxious about
                                   the safety of your traveling writing-desk—the desk there on the
                                   table. Is there anything very valuable in it?”
“It contains my money, and other things that I prize far more
                                   highly—my mother’s letters, and some family relics which I should
                                   be very sorry to lose. Besides, the desk itself has its own
                                   familiar interest as my constant traveling companion of many
                                   years past.”
Miss Dunross rose, and came close to the chair in which I was
                                   sitting.
“Let Mary’s flag be your constant traveling companion,” she said.
                                   “You have spoken far too gratefully of my services here as your
                                   nurse. Reward me beyond my deserts. Make allowances, Mr.
                                   Germaine, for the superstitious fancies of a lonely, dreamy
                                   woman. Promise me that the green flag shall take its place among
                                   the other little treasures in your desk!”
It is needless to say that I made the allowances and gave the
                                   promise—gave it, resolving seriously to abide by it. For the
                                   first time since I had known her, she put her poor, wasted hand
                                   in mine, and pressed it for a moment. Acting heedlessly under my
                                   first grateful impulse, I lifted her hand to my lips before I
                                   released it. She started—trembled—and suddenly and silently
                                   passed out of the room.
</div></body></text></TEI>