<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Two
                              Destinies</title><author>Collins, Wilkie (1824-1889)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1876</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER XIII. NOT CURED YET.
WE visited France, Germany, and Italy; and we were absent from
                                   England nearly two years.
Had time and change justified my confidence in them? Was the image
                                   of Mrs. Van Brandt an image long since dismissed from my
                                   mind?
No! Do what I might, I was still (in the prophetic language of Dame
                                   Dermody) taking the way to reunion with my kindred spirit in the
                                   time to come. For the first two or three months of our travels I
                                   was haunted by dreams of the woman who had so resolutely left me.
                                   Seeing her in my sleep, always graceful, always charming, always
                                   modestly tender toward me, I waited in the ardent hope of again
                                   beholding the apparition of her in my waking hours—of again being
                                   summoned to meet her at a given place and time. My anticipations
                                   were not fulfilled; no apparition showed itself. The dreams
                                   themselves grew less frequent and less vivid and then ceased
                                   altogether. Was this a sign that the days of her adversity were
                                   at an end? Having no further need of help, had she no further
                                   remembrance of the man who had tried to help her? Were we never
                                   to meet again?
I said to myself: “I am unworthy of the name of man if I don’t
                                   forget her now!” She still kept her place in my memory, say what
                                   I might.
I saw all the wonders of Nature and Art which foreign countries
                                   could show me. I lived in the dazzling light of the best society
                                   that Paris, Rome, Vienna could assemble. I passed hours on hours
                                   in the company of the most accomplished and most beautiful women
                                   whom Europe could produce—and still that solitary figure at Saint
                                   Anthony’s Well, those grand gray eyes that had rested on me so
                                   sadly at parting, held their place in my memory, stamped their
                                   image on my heart.
Whether I resisted my infatuation, or whether I submitted to it, I
                                   still longed for her. I did all I could to conceal the state of
                                   my mind from my mother. But her loving eyes discovered the
                                   secret: she saw that I suffered, and suffered with me. More than
                                   once she said: “George, the good end is not to be gained by
                                   traveling; let us go home.” More than once I answered, with the
                                   bitter and obstinate resolution of despair: “No. Let us try more
                                   new people and more new scenes.” It was only when I found her
                                   health and strength beginning to fail under the stress of
                                   continual traveling that I consented to abandon the hopeless
                                   search after oblivion, and to turn homeward at last.
I prevailed on my mother to wait and rest at my house in London
                                   before she returned to her favorite abode at the country-seat in
                                   Perthshire. It is needless to say that I remained in town with
                                   her. My mother now represented the one interest that held me
                                   nobly and endearingly to life. Politics, literature,
                                   agriculture—the customary pursuits of a man in my position—had
                                   none of them the slightest attraction for me.
We had arrived in London at what is called “the height of the
                                   season.” Among the operatic attractions of that year—I am writing
                                   of the days when the ballet was still a popular form of public
                                   entertainment—there was a certain dancer whose grace and beauty
                                   were the objects of universal admiration. I was asked if I had
                                   seen her, wherever I went, until my social position, as the one
                                   man who was indifferent to the reigning goddess of the stage,
                                   became quite unendurable. On the next occasion when I was invited
                                   to take a seat in a friend’s box, I accepted the proposal; and
                                   (far from willingly) I went the way of the world—in other words,
                                   I went to the opera.
The first part of the performance had concluded when we got to the
                                   theater, and the ballet had not yet begun. My friends amused
                                   themselves with looking for familiar faces in the boxes and
                                   stalls. I took a chair in a corner and waited, with my mind far
                                   away from the theater, from the dancing that was to come. The
                                   lady who sat nearest to me (like ladies in general) disliked the
                                   neighborhood of a silent man. She determined to make me talk to
                                   her.
“Do tell me, Mr. Germaine,” she said. “Did you ever see a theater
                                   anywhere so full as this theater is to-night?”
She handed me her opera-glass as she spoke. I moved to the front of
                                   the box to look at the audience.
It was certainty a wonderful sight. Every available atom of space
                                   (as I gradually raised the glass from the floor to the ceiling of
                                   the building) appeared to be occupied. Looking upward and upward,
                                   my range of view gradually reached the gallery. Even at that
                                   distance, the excellent glass which had been put into my hands
                                   brought the faces of the audience close to me. I looked first at
                                   the persons who occupied the front row of seats in the gallery
                                   stalls.
Moving the opera-glass slowly along the semicircle formed by the
                                   seats, I suddenly stopped when I reached the middle.
My heart gave a great leap as if it would bound out of my body.
                                   There was no mistaking that face among the
                                   commonplace faces near it. I had discovered Mrs. Van Brandt!
She sat in front—but not alone. There was a man in the stall
                                   immediately behind her, who bent over her and spoke to her from
                                   time to time. She listened to him, so far as I could see, with
                                   something of a sad and weary look. Who was the man? I might, or
                                   might not, find that out. Under any circumstances, I determined
                                   to speak to Mrs. Van Brandt.
The curtain rose for the ballet. I made the best excuse I could to
                                   my friends, and instantly left the box.
It was useless to attempt to purchase my admission to the gallery.
                                   My money was refused. There was not even standing room left in
                                   that part of the theater.
But one alternative remained. I returned to the street, to wait for
                                   Mrs. Van Brandt at the gallery door until the performance was
                                   over.
Who was the man in attendance on her—the man whom I had seen
                                   sitting behind her, and talking familiarly over her shoulder?
                                   While I paced backward and forward before the door, that one
                                   question held possession of my mind, until the oppression of it
                                   grew beyond endurance. I went back to my friends in the box,
                                   simply and solely to look at the man again.
What excuses I made to account for my strange conduct I cannot now
                                   remember. Armed once more with the lady’s opera-glass (I borrowed
                                   it and kept it without scruple), I alone, of all that vast
                                   audience, turned my back on the stage, and riveted my attention
                                   on the gallery stalls.
There he sat, in his place behind her, to all appearance
                                   spell-bound by the fascinations of the graceful dancer. Mrs. Van
                                   Brandt, on the contrary, seemed to find but little attraction in
                                   the spectacle presented by the stage. She looked at the dancing
                                   (so far as I could see) in an absent, weary manner. When the
                                   applause broke out in a perfect frenzy of cries and clapping of
                                   hands, she sat perfectly unmoved by the enthusiasm which pervaded
                                   the theater. The man behind her (annoyed, as I supposed, by the
                                   marked indifference which she showed to the performance) tapped
                                   her impatiently on the shoulder, as if he thought that she was
                                   quite capable of falling asleep in her stall. The familiarity of
                                   the action—confirming the suspicion in my mind which had already
                                   identified him with Van Brandt—so enraged me that I said or did
                                   something which obliged one of the gentlemen in the box to
                                   interfere. “If you can’t control yourself,” he whispered, “you
                                   had better leave us.” He spoke with the authority of an old
                                   friend. I had sense enough left to take his advice, and return to
                                   my post at the gallery door.
A little before midnight the performance ended. The audience began
                                   to pour out of the theater.
I drew back into a corner behind the door, facing the gallery
                                   stairs, and watched for her. After an interval which seemed to be
                                   endless, she and her companion appeared, slowly descending the
                                   stairs. She wore a long dark cloak; her head was protected by a
                                   quaintly shaped hood, which looked (on her) the most becoming head-dress that a woman could wear.
                                   As the two passed me, I heard the man speak to her in a tone of
                                   sulky annoyance.
“It’s wasting money,” he said, “to go to the expense of taking you to the opera.”
“I am not well,” she answered with her head down and her eyes on
                                   the ground. “I am out of spirits to-night.”
“Will you ride home or walk?”
“I will walk, if you please.”
I followed them unperceived, waiting to present myself to her until
                                   the crowd about them had dispersed. In a few minutes they turned
                                   into a quiet by-street. I quickened my pace until I was close at
                                   her side, and then I took off my hat and spoke to her.
She recognized me with a cry of astonishment. For an instant her
                                   face brightened radiantly with the loveliest expression of
                                   delight that I ever saw on any human countenance. The moment
                                   after, all was changed. The charming features saddened and
                                   hardened. She stood before me like a woman overwhelmed by
                                   shame—without uttering a word, without taking my offered
                                   hand.
Her companion broke the silence.
“Who is this gentleman?” he asked, speaking in a foreign accent,
                                   with an under-bred insolence of tone and manner.
She controlled herself the moment he addressed her. “This is Mr.
                                   Germaine,” she answered: “a gentleman who was very kind to me in
                                   Scotland.” She raised her eyes for a moment to mine, and took
                                   refuge, poor soul, in a conventionally polite inquiry after my
                                   health. “I hope you are quite well, Mr. Germaine,” said the soft,
                                   sweet voice, trembling piteously.
I made the customary reply, and explained that I had seen her at
                                   the opera. “Are you staying in London?” I asked. “May I have the
                                   honor of calling on you?”
Her companion answered for her before she could speak.
“My wife thanks you, sir, for the compliment you pay her. She
                                   doesn’t receive visitors. We both wish you good-night.”
Saying those words, he took off his hat with a sardonic assumption
                                   of respect; and, holding her arm in his, forced her to walk on
                                   abruptly with him. Feeling certainly assured by this time that
                                   the man was no other than Van Brandt, I was on the point of
                                   answering him sharply, when Mrs. Van Brandt checked the rash
                                   words as they rose to my lips.
“For my sake!” she whispered, over her shoulder, with an imploring
                                   look that instantly silenced me. After all, she was free (if she
                                   liked) to go back to the man who had so vilely deceived and
                                   deserted her. I bowed and left them, feeling with no common
                                   bitterness the humiliation of entering into rivalry with Mr. Van
                                   Brandt.
I crossed to the other side of the street. Before I had taken three
                                   steps away from her, the old infatuation fastened its hold on me
                                   again. I submitted, without a struggle against myself, to the
                                   degradation of turning spy and following them home. Keeping well
                                   behind, on the opposite side of the way, I tracked them to their
                                   own door, and entered in my pocket-book the name of the street
                                   and the number of the house.
The hardest critic who reads these lines cannot feel more
                                   contemptuously toward me than I felt toward myself. Could I still
                                   love a woman after she had deliberately preferred to me a
                                   scoundrel who had married her while he was the husband of another
                                   wife? Yes! Knowing what I now knew, I felt that I loved her just
                                   as dearly as ever. It was incredible, it was shocking; but it was
                                   true. For the first time in my life, I tried to take refuge from
                                   my sense of my own degradation in drink. I went to my club, and
                                   joined a convivial party at a supper table, and poured glass
                                   after glass of champagne down my throat, without feeling the
                                   slightest sense of exhilaration, without losing for an instant
                                   the consciousness of my own contemptible conduct. I went to my
                                   bed in despair; and through the wakeful night I weakly cursed the
                                   fatal evening at the river-side when I had met her for the first
                                   time. But revile her as I might, despise myself as I might, I
                                   loved her—I loved her still!
Among the letters laid on my table the next morning there were two
                                   which must find their place in this narrative.
The first letter was in a handwriting which I had seen once before,
                                   at the hotel in Edinburgh. The writer was Mrs. Van Brandt.
“For your own sake” (the letter ran) “make no attempt to see me,
                                   and take no notice of an invitation which I fear you will receive
                                   with this note. I am living a degraded life. I have sunk beneath
                                   your notice. You owe it to yourself, sir, to forget the miserable
                                   woman who now writes to you for the last time, and bids you
                                   gratefully a last farewell.”
Those sad lines were signed in initials only. It is needless to say
                                   that they merely strengthened my resolution to see her at all
                                   hazards. I kissed the paper on which her hand had rested, and
                                   then I turned to the second letter. It contained the “invitation”
                                   to which my correspondent had alluded, and it was expressed in
                                   these terms:
“Mr. Van Brandt presents his compliments to Mr. Germaine, and begs
                                   to apologize for the somewhat abrupt manner in which he received
                                   Mr. Germaine’s polite advances. Mr. Van Brandt suffers habitually
                                   from nervous irritability, and he felt particularly ill last
                                   night. He trusts Mr. Germaine will receive this candid
                                   explanation in the spirit in which it is offered; and he begs to
                                   add that Mrs. Van Brandt will be delighted to receive Mr.
                                   Germaine whenever he may find it convenient to favor her with a
                                   visit.”
That Mr. Van Brandt had some sordid interest of his own to serve in
                                   writing this grotesquely impudent composition, and that the
                                   unhappy woman who bore his name was heartily ashamed of the
                                   proceeding on which he had ventured, were conclusions easily
                                   drawn after reading the two letters. The suspicion of the man and
                                   of his motives which I naturally felt produced no hesitation in
                                   my mind as to the course which I had determined to pursue. On the
                                   contrary, I rejoiced that my way to an interview with Mrs. Van
                                   Brandt was smoothed, no matter with what motives, by Mr. Van
                                   Brandt himself.
I waited at home until noon, and then I could wait no longer.
                                   Leaving a message of excuse for my mother (I had just sense of
                                   shame enough left to shrink from facing her), I hastened away to
                                   profit by my invitation on the very day when I received it.
</div></body></text></TEI>