<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Republic by W.H. Mallock : HTML
                        version</title><author>Mallock, William Hurrell (1849-1923)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1877</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
BOOK III.
CHAPTER IV.
 LAURENCE had just got to the end of the first sentence, and Mr. Luke at the
                        same time was just reminding Mr. Stockton with some unction how impossible
                        it was for us to value properly that curious mixture of trumpery and
                        elevation, the ‘Apocalypse’ of John, unless we compared it with a very
                        kindred work, the ‘Pastor’ of Hermas, when a servant startled Laurence by
                        announcing in his ear the arrival of the vicar of the parish. 
 Everyone in dismay looked; and there, standing a pace away in the
                        background, the stranger was. He was an old man, very tall and spare, with
                        an ascetic aspect, but with a carriage dignified though slightly stooping,
                        and with severe, piercing eyes. The sudden embarrassment, however, which his
                        apparition seemed to cause the party was relieved somewhat by Laurence’s
                        taking him aside as if for some private conversation, and also by another
                        arrival of a far more genial nature—that of servants with tea, piles of
                        strawberries, iced coffee, and champagne cup. Mr. Rose at once bought
                        himself golden opinions of Lady Grace by helping her page, a pretty boy with
                        light curling hair, to arrange some tumblers on the grass. Mr. Stockton felt
                        his spirits suddenly rise, and began asking Lady Violet what she thought of
                        their new Republic as far as they had got with it. 
 ‘I don’t know,’ she answered petulantly. ‘As far as I can see, you want
                        everyone to read a great many books and to have only one opinion. For my
                        part, I hate people who do the one, and a society that does the other.’ 
 ‘What a charming girl Lady Violet is!’ said Mr. Stockton to Lady Grace, as
                        he stood by the tea table. ‘Such penetration! such
                        vivacity! such originality!’ 
 ‘What beautiful sermons he does preach, to be sure!’ murmured Lady Ambrose. 
 ‘Who? Who?’ enquired several voices. 
 ‘Why, Dr. Seydon,’ said Lady Ambrose. ‘Don’t you know him? Have you never
                        heard him in London—the gentleman with Mr. Laurence? See, he is coming back
                        again to have some tea.’ 
 It was indeed but too true. Mr. Luke’s face in especial grew very blank. Mr.
                        Saunders clenched his fist—a small one. 
 Dr. Seydon’s face, on the contrary, wore what for it was a really gracious
                        smile. He was mindful of how upon his arrival he had overheard the words
                        ‘Apocalypse’ and ‘mystery of Christianity.’ 
 As Laurence introduced him into the circle Lady Ambrose at once claimed
                        acquaintance with him, and made room for him at her side. 
 ‘I am sorry,’ he said, looking round him with a singularly dignified, almost
                        condescending courteousness, ‘to disturb in this way your Sunday’s reading.
                        But I can but stay a few moments. I shall not interrupt you long.’ 
 ‘We have been talking a good deal,’ said Laurence, ‘about the signs of the
                        times.’ 
 ‘And,’ said Lady Ambrose eagerly, feeling herself near a friend, ‘about all
                        this wicked infidelity and irreligion that is so much about in the world
                        now.’ 
 ‘Ah, yes,’ said Dr. Seydon slowly, and with a sudden frown, ‘it is true,
                        unhappily, that there is, or has been, much of that in our century. But what
                        remains is confined, I imagine (and that is sad enough, God knows) to the
                        half educated artisans in our large towns, whom the Church in former years,
                        alas! relaxed her hold on. For I fear I cannot deny that we, in this matter,
                        are not wholly guiltless. The Church, we may depend upon it, has much to
                        answer for.’ 
 ‘Perfectly true, my dear sir! perfectly true,’ exclaimed Mr. Luke, who could
                        never resist assenting to this sentiment. 
 Dr. Seydon darted a quick glance at Mr. Luke, as if he were anything but
                        pleased at finding himself so readily agreed with. 
 ‘But,’ he went on, ‘matters are fast assuming a more satisfactory
                        appearance; and the great advance made in true education, and the liberal
                        spirit that this brings with it, cannot fail to lead to that great change in
                        our position that we so much desiderate.’ 
 ‘Quite so,’ said Mr. Luke. ‘The true reading of ecclesiastical history—’ 
 ‘Ah!’ exclaimed Dr. Seydon, holding up his forefinger, ‘exactly so. You have
                        hit upon the right thing there.’ (‘Good gracious!’ thought Mr. Luke,
                        astounded at this patronising compliment, ‘I should think I had.’) ‘Could we
                        but get both the parties,’ Dr. Seydon went on, addressing Mr. Luke across
                        Lady Ambrose, ‘to understand fairly the history of the important era, the
                        matter would, I think, be as good as settled. You see,’ he said, turning to
                        Lady Ambrose, ‘if the Easterns will merely face steadily the pregnant fact
                        that Michael Cerularius, in his first letter to Leo IX., in 1053, took
                        absolutely no exception to any one point in Western doctrine, but simply to
                        certain secondary points of discipline, they will see that the gulf that
                        separates us is very slight when viewed by the clearer light of modern
                        thought. I think,’ he added, ‘that I saw Lady Ambrose’s name amongst the
                        subscribers to the Eastern Church Union Association.’ 
 ‘Oh yes,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘certainly. I do so wish that some union could
                        be brought about. For the Greek Church, you know, certainly have the
                        Apostolical Succession; and then, if we were only joined with them, the
                        Roman Catholics could never deny our orders—not,’ she added, with a most
                        cordial smile to Dr. Seydon, ‘that I don’t myself believe implicitly in
                        them, as it is.’ 
 A rapid frown gathered itself on Dr. Seydon’s brow. 
 ‘The denial of them,’ he said severely, ‘hurts the Romanists far more than
                        it does us. As to the Greeks, what I was going to say was this. Let them
                        just cast their eyes so far as the tenth century, and they will see—and pray
                        mark this, all of you,’ he said, holding up his forefinger, and shaking it
                        several times, ‘for this is very important—I say the Greeks will see, unless
                        they are determined to close their eyes, that at the time of the great
                        rupture with the West, they did actually acknowledge the entire soundness of
                        our confession of faith; the main point they objected to, and which they
                        thought fit ground then for separation, being that the Western Church did
                        not sing Alleluiah in Lent, and that it used in the Lord’s Supper unleavened
                        bread, which, Nicetas Pectoratus contended in an elaborate treatise, was
                        dead bread, and could not therefore be either supersubstantial or
                        consubstantial to us. It has been the fault of the Easterns, in fact, to be
                        ever over-subtle, and to fall into those excesses of human wisdom which are
                        foolishness with God. Isaac the Armenian, for instance, wrote a book to
                        prove his countrymen in heresy for twenty-nine different reasons, of which
                        the two most important are these—that they did not blow on baptised persons,
                        and that they made their consecrated oils of rapeseed and not of olives. But
                        two causes seem to me to be now working together, under God, to put the
                        Easterns into a more becoming spirit, and to make them more heartily willing
                        to join us. These are—I have mentioned them in the third volume of my
                        “History of the Filioque Clause”—first, that the genuine
                        Greek blood is becoming daily more adulterated, and the Greek intellect
                        losing therefore its old subtlety; and secondly, that the political
                        disturbance that now seems imminent in the East, will distract them from
                        abusing such subtlety as they still possess. We shall therefore meet on the
                        broad ground of our fundamental agreements; and once let the moral influence
                        of the two churches, the Greek and English, be mutually augmented by an open
                        union, in another five years, I imagine, we shall have heard the last of
                        infidelity, in England at least, or indeed of Romanism either.’ 
 ‘Now, that’s the sort of man,’ said Lady Ambrose, as soon as Dr. Seydon had
                        departed, ‘that I should like to have for my clergyman in our new Republic.’ 
 ‘Seydon!’ exclaimed Mr. Luke, ‘so that is he, is it? I thought I remembered
                        that face of his. Of course—I remember now, seeing that his college had
                        given this living to him.’ 
 ‘It was he,’ said Laurence to Miss Merton, ‘who, some years ago, prevented
                        Dr. Jenkinson being made a bishop, which he said, though it might be a
                        compliment to learning, would be a grievous insult to God.’ 
 ‘And so, Lady Ambrose,’ said Mr. Stockton, ‘you would like Dr. Seydon for a
                        clergyman! Well, in our ideal society you would be able to have any
                        clergyman you chose—any religion you chose—any which most satisfied your own
                        conscience.’ 
 ‘Oh, very well,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘if it would not interfere with one’s
                        religion in any way, I think all this culture and enlightenment most
                        delightful.’ 
 ‘It will bind us to nothing,’ said Mr. Stockton, ‘except to a recognition of
                        nobleness, of morality, of poetry. What Mr. Laurence has offered to read to
                        us is an account of how all of these are bound up in religion in
                            my sense of the word.’ 
 ‘Come, Mr. Laurence,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘please go on. It is wonderful,’
                        she added in a solemn whisper, ‘how even bad men, like old Mr. Laurence,
                        know at heart how it is really best to be good, and to believe in true
                        religion.’ 
 ‘As I grow old, my dear Otho,’ Laurence again began to read, ‘I am coming to
                        think over many things that I have hitherto thought too little about, and,
                        amongst others, the great mystery of Christianity. I am coming to see that,
                        from a too superficial way of looking at it, I have done this religion a
                        gross injustice, and have blindly failed to recognise how much of all that
                        we hold most precious in life is dependent on its severe and unbending
                        systems of theology and morals. It will perhaps strike you that it is rather
                        late in the day for me to pay my tribute to these, now that the world at
                        large is theoretically denying the former of them, and is practically
                        forgetting the latter. But it is this very fact that induces me to speak
                        out—the growing licence and the growing scepticism of modern society. I wish
                        to raise my voice against the present state of things, and to warn the world
                        that if it goes on much longer as it is going on now, it will soon have
                        irremediably ruined all the finer and more piquant flavours of life, and
                        that soon there will be actually nothing left to give rational zest to this
                        poor pitiful existence of ours. 
 ‘You know what an admirer I have always been, in many ways, of the ancients,
                        and how, in many ways, I think modern civilisation barbarous as compared
                        with theirs. I have not changed this opinion. I have only come lately to
                        understand what it means. The charm of ancient life lies mainly in its form.
                        In essence, the life open to us is, as I fully see now, infinitely superior.
                        And to what is this superiority due? Simply to Christianity. It came with
                        Christianity, and it will also go with it. 
 ‘I am not mad, Otho. Listen to me a little longer, my boy, and you will see
                        my meaning. 
 ‘To begin, then—just consider the one matter of humour. Compare the ancient
                        humourists with the modern. Think for a moment of Lucian, of Aristophanes,
                        of Plautus, of Petronius, of Horace; then think of Erasmus, Swift,
                        Cervantes, Voltaire, Sterne. Does not the mere memory of the two sets of
                        names bring home to you what a gulf in this matter there is between the
                        ancient world and the modern? Is not the modern humour an altogether
                        different thing from the ancient—broader and deeper beyond comparison or
                        measurement? The humour of the ancients could raise a laugh; true—that is
                        just what it could raise, and a laugh could express all the feelings raised
                        by it. Think of the intolerable vulgarity of Homers gods, who “laughed
                        consumedly” at Vulcan, as he waited on them,—why? because he was lame. The
                        sense of humour on Olympus was about equal to what it would be now in a
                        country lawyer’s Parlour. Think of Horace, who saw in a dull pun on two
                        proper names, a joke so excellent that he wrote a whole satire in honour of
                        it. It is true that Juvenal showed a somewhat finer sense, when he said that
                        when Fortune was pleased to be facetious, she made a nouveau
                            riche; Petronius, perhaps, was even in advance of Juvenal. But
                        ancient humour at its best was a shallow thing. It meant little. It was like
                        the bright sparkle on a brawling stream, hardly ankle-deep But our modern
                        humour is like the silent snake-like lights in a still water, that go
                        coiling down into depths unfathomable, as it lures our thoughts onwards to
                        the contemplation of endless issues. The twinkle in the eyes of a Sterne or
                        a Cervantes seems to hint to us of Eleusinian mysteries with a triumphant
                        solemn treachery; and wakes our souls, as we catch it, into a sudden, thrill
                        of delicious furtive insight. Such humour as this may excite laughter; but
                        no laughter can ease our feelings fully—they also demand tears; and even
                        tears are not enough for us. Of such humour as this the ancients had hardly
                        a notion; it differs from theirs as the man differs from the baby, and seems
                        almost like a new sense, peculiar to the modern world. 
 ‘Now, to what is this development of humour due—this new and exquisite
                        source of pleasure? Simply, as you must see, if you look into the matter, to
                        that much maligned thing, Christianity, and that marvellous system of moral
                        laws and restraints which, although accredited through imposture, elaborated
                        by barbarism, and received by credulity, has entirely changed the whole
                        complexion of life. Think how it has done this. It has slowly permeated and
                        penetrated all man's inner existence. It has given him new unearthly aims;
                        it has given him new unearthly standards by which to measure every action.
                        It has cunningly associated everything with the most awful or the most
                        glittering conceptions with which the imagination can scare or intoxicate
                        itself—with Hell, Heaven, Judgment, and so forth: and thus there is scarcely
                        a single choice or refusal that has been left indifferent, and not more or
                        less nearly connected with the most stupendous issues. The infinitely
                        beautiful, the infinitely terrible, the infinitely hateful meet us
                        everywhere. Everything is enchanted, and seems to be what it is not. The
                        enchantment quite deludes the vulgar; it a little deludes the wise; but the
                        wise are for ever in various ways secretly undoing the spell, and getting
                        glimpses of things as they really are. What a delight these glimpses are to
                        those that get them! Here lies the sense of humour—in the detection of truth
                        through revered and reigning falsehood. Think of the colloquies of Erasmus,
                        and his Laus Stultitiæ—there is an instance for you. Think of Don
                        Quixote—there is another. All its humour is due to Christian dreams of
                        honour, duty and chivalry. Who, again, would have cared for Swift’s showing
                        us that man was hateful, if Christ had not bewitched us into thinking that
                        man was loveable? Gulliver owes its point to the Gospels. Sterne sees
                        everything “big with infinite jest.” But why? Because Christianity has made
                        everything big also with infinite solemnity. A possible moral meaning is
                        secreted over the whole surface of life, like the scented oil in the cells
                        on the surface of an orange skin, The humourist catches the perfume of these
                        volatile oils, as they are crushed out and wasted by our every action. 
 ‘Think, too, by the way, of the kindred subject of wit. I was reading a play
                        of Congreve’s yesterday: and this made me reflect how nearly all the
                        brightest wit of the modern world consists in showing us this one thing—that
                        fidelity in marriage is ridiculous; that is, in showing us what, but for
                        Christianity, no one would ever have doubted. Such wit is, as it were, the
                        forbidden kiss we give to common sense, from which an angry religion has
                        been bent on separating us. 
 ‘Think, too, of that flower of Christian civilisation, the innuendo. That is
                        simply the adroit saying under difficulties of what, but for Christianity,
                        everyone would have taken for granted. 
 ‘Here, then, you see, are the wit, the innuendo, the humour of the world,
                        all owing their existence, or, at any rate, their flavour, to Christianity.
                        And what would life, what would conversation be without these? But it is not
                        these only that we owe to the same source. All our finer pleasures are
                        indebted for their chief taste to it likewise. Love in itself, for instance,
                        is, as everyone knows who has felt it, the coarsest and most foolish of all
                        our feelings. Leave it free to do what it pleases, and we soon cease to care
                        what it does. But Christianity, with a miraculous ingenuity, has confined
                        and cramped it into so grotesque and painful a posture, and set such
                        vigilant guardians to keep it there, that any return to its natural freedom
                        is a rapture, an adventure, and a truimph, which none but the wisest and
                        most skilful can compass with grace or safety, and which wise men,
                        therefore, think worth compassing. It is indeed the same with all the
                        natural and true pleasures of life—poor tasteless things not worth living
                        for, in themselves; but they have been so hidden away from us, and have come
                        to be in such bad odour with the world, that only the wisest—for wisdom is
                        but the detection of falsehood—see that they may be taken, and have the
                        courage to take them; and the wisdom they are conscious of in doing this,
                        forms a delicious sauce piquante—(of which humour, wit,
                        and so on, are some of the flavours)—to these same poor pleasures, that can
                        give us a real zest for them. 
 ‘Such a life of wisdom is, of course, only for the few. The wise must always
                        be few, as the rich must. The poor must make fine food for the rich to eat.
                        The fools must make fine follies for the wise to detect. We cannot all be
                        happy in a rational way. It is at least best that some of us should be. But
                        what I want to point out to you, my boy, is, that if society goes on as it
                        is going on now, nobody will be able soon to be rationally happy at all. It
                        is true that I do not now live much in the world; but I have sufficient
                        means of seeing the course it is taking. I, like Hamlet, have heard of its
                        “paintings,” how it “jigs and ambles and lisps, and nick-names God’s
                        creatures.” I know how fast all Christian moral sentiment is silently dying
                        out of it. Indeed, so rapid do I imagine to be the way in which it is losing
                        all proper feeling, that I should not be surprised were society in another
                        five years, if I am not dead by that time, to receive me back again. Now, as
                        long as Christianity was firmly fixed as a faith, we might amuse ourselves
                        by offending against its morals as much as we liked; for our acts were in no
                        danger of losing their forbidden character. There would always be a
                        persecution, under which pleasure might thrive. But now, since faith is
                        dead, we have only the moral sentiments left to us; and if we once get rid
                        of these by a too reckless violation of them, the whole work of
                        Christianity, which I have been trying to explain to you, will be undone.
                        Wit and humour, love and poetry, will all alike have left us. Life will have
                        lost its seasonings and its sauces: and served up to us au
                            naturel it will only nauseate us. Man, indeed, will then be
                        only separated from the animals by his capacity for ennui. 
 ‘I had once hoped that the middle classes—that vast and useless body, who
                        have neither the skill that produces their wealth, nor the taste that can
                        enjoy it—might have proved themselves at least of some use, by preserving
                        the traditions of a sound, respectable morality; that they might have kept
                        alive the nation’s power of being shocked and scandalised at wit, or grace,
                        or freedom. But no; they too are changed. With awkward halting gait they are
                        waddling in the footsteps of their betters, and they will soon have made
                        vice as vulgar as they long ago made virtue. 
 ‘To me, of course, all this matters little. Such flavours as life has, have
                        lasted me this far; nor will the world’s growing blankness affect me. I
                        shall never look into a woman’s eyes again. One of my own is blind now, and
                        the other is so dim that I doubt if the best-paid beauty could contrive to
                        look into it with more than an ironical tenderness. All this matters nothing
                        to me. But you, my boy—what will be left for you, when I am taken away from
                        the evil that is to come? Your prospect does not seem to me a cheerful one.
                        But alas! I can offer no remedy. I can only beguile my time by warning you.
                        At any rate, it is always good to think a little about the roots of things:
                        so I trust you will be in some way profited by these patruæ verbera
                            linguæ.’ 
 When Laurence closed the book there was a silence of some moments, as if no
                        one knew exactly how to take what had just been read. But at last Donald
                        Gordon exclaimed, in his devoutest of soft whispers: ‘Is Saul also among the
                        prophets?’ The words acted like a spell; the ice was broken, and Mr.
                        Herbert, who hitherto had hardly uttered a syllable the whole afternoon, now
                        broke out suddenly in his most emphatic accents. 
 ‘Thank you, my dear Laurence,’ he exclaimed; ‘thank you much, indeed. There
                        is something in what you have just read us that seems to me quite precious
                        and peculiar. Nor do I find any such honesty in any creed sung by priests in
                        churches, as I do in this sardonic confession of that great truth, which the
                        present age as a whole is resolutely bent upon forgetting—that the grand
                        knowledge for a man to know is the essential and eternal difference between
                        right and wrong, between base and noble; that there is a right
                        and a noble to be striven for, not for the sake of its consequences, but in
                        spite of them; and that it is this fact alone which, under countless forms,
                        is the one thing affirmed in all human art and implied in all serviceable
                        learning, Your Cervantes smiles it to you; your Swift curses it to you; your
                        Bernard of Morlaix hymns it to you; your saddened Shakespeare tells it to
                        you in every way. Strange indeed is it, and mournful, that we see a time
                        when the one truth that we live and die by not only needs to be pointed out
                        to us, but asserted passionately in the teeth of those whom we have elected
                        as our wisest teachers.’ Mr. Saunders at once took this to be a special
                        allusion to himself, and his face involuntarily began to array itself in a
                        smile of triumph. ‘However,’ Mr. Herbert went on benignantly, ‘you have
                        truly gone the right way to work in constructing an ideal society, if you
                        make it recognise this before all things, and see how witness is borne to it
                        by every pleasure and every interest of life.’ 
 ‘Ah, yes,’ exclaimed Mr. Stockton, ‘it is just this noble discrimination
                        between right and wrong, Mr. Herbert, that modern enlightenment will so
                        preeminently encourage and foster. Morality is quite indispensable to any
                        dream of the future. And as to religion—the motto of the future is
                        freedom—holy awful, individual freedom. We shall each be free to choose or
                        evolve the religion most profoundly suited to us.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘as long as I may keep my own religion, I shall
                        be quite satisfied; and about other people, I really don’t think I’m
                        bigoted—not as long, you know, as they belong to some church.
                        But religion is the thing I want. Of course we
                            must have morality. Mustn’t we?’ she added, with a
                        half-puzzled expression, turning to Lady Grace. 
 ‘Must!’ sighed Mrs. Sinclair. ‘It’s very easy to say must.’ 
 ‘Of course we must,’ said Lady Grace cheerfully. ‘My dear,’ she went on,
                        with a little kindly laugh towards Mr. Saunders, ‘he doesn’t really doubt
                        it.’ 
 Mr. Saunders sprang to his feet as if an adder had stung him. 
 ‘What!’ he exclaimed, standing in the centre of the group, and looking round
                        him, ‘and do I not really doubt that the degrading practice of prayer, the
                        fetish-worship of celibacy, of mortification, and so forth—do I not doubt
                        that the foul faith in a future life, the grotesque conceptions of the
                        theological virtues, and that preposterous idol of the marketplace, the
                        sanctity of marriage,—do you think I do not really doubt that we must retain
                        these? Do you think, on the contrary, I do not know that they are already
                        doomed? However,’ here Mr. Saunders paused suddenly and again sat down on
                        the grass, ‘there is no need for me at this moment to destroy any cherished
                        illusions; though I shall be happy to show my analysis of them that I spoke
                        about just now to anyone who is not afraid to inspect it. I hear much said
                        about tolerance, as a characteristic of your society. All I ask is, that you
                        have the courage to extend your tolerance to me. Your new Republic may be
                        full of illusions then. The great labour of destroying them will be
                        positively delicious to me.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Mr. Stockton, with a mixture of deference and patronage, ‘and
                        what does Miss Merton think?’ 
 ‘Oh,’ said Miss Merton with a slow smile, ‘I am all in favour of toleration.
                        I think that what I consider truth is quite good enough to stand on its own
                        merits, if unprejudiced eyes can only be got to see them. And I honestly do
                        think, that with really high-breeding, and with what we apparently mean by
                        culture, we should have at least one part of the world as good as we could
                        wish it. But yet—’ she added, hesitating a little, ‘we have surely settled
                        only half the question yet. We have said a good deal about this wide and
                        discerning taste that is to guide us, We have not said much yet about the
                        particular things—the occupations, the duties, the pleasures, that it will
                        lead us to choose.’ 
 ‘No,’ began Mr. Rose, ‘I should like myself very much to say something as to
                        that—as to the new pleasures that modern culture has made possible for us.’ 
 ‘Suppose—’ said Lady Ambrose with one of her most beaming smiles, as she
                        pushed her hat away over the back of her head, ‘suppose we talk of this
                        by-and-by—at dinner, or in the evening. Let us just enjoy a
                        little now. The air now is so truly delicious. It seems quite like a sin,
                        doesn’t it, to think of going in to dinner by-and-by.’ 
 A happy thought struck Lady Grace. 
 ‘Suppose we have dinner out of doors, Otho,’ she said, ‘in the pavilion with
                        the roses round it that you used to call the summer dining-room.’ 
 This proposal was received with what was little short of rapture. ‘That
                        really would be too delightful!’ exclaimed Lady Ambrose. ‘And what place
                        could sound more perfect for us to finish our new Republic in!’ It was
                        arranged accordingly. 
 ‘And now,’ exclaimed Lady Ambrose to Laurence confidentially, as the
                        conversation ceased to be general, ‘I want you to let me have a look at that
                        book of your uncle’s. I have often heard it spoken about. Lord Heartpool had
                        a copy, which he showed my poor father in Paris. Come, Mr. Laurence, you
                        need not hold it back. I’m sure there’s nothing in it that would do me any
                        harm.’ 
 ‘Well—no,’ said Laurence; ‘in this volume I don’t think there is.’ 
 ‘Because what you read just now,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘was all really in
                        favour of goodness, though it is true I didn’t quite like the tone of some
                        of it.’ 
 ‘What,’ interposed Mr. Rose, ‘is there another volume? I should much like to
                        see that.’ 
 ‘I declare, Mr. Laurence,’ said Lady Ambrose, who had now got the book in
                        her hand, ‘here’s something really quite pretty— at least, I’ve only got as
                        far as the first verse yet. It’s a little poem called “To the Wife of
                            an old Schoolfellow.”’ 
 ‘Read it out to us—do,’ said Laurence, with a soft smile. ‘It will
                        illustrate very well the letter we had just now.’ 
 ‘Do you know, I really think I might manage this,’ she said,
                        ‘although I’m not in the least by way of being a reader out. Listen, then,
                        and please don’t laugh at me.’ 

Let others seek for wisdom’s way    In modern science, modern
                            wit,— I turn to love, for all that these,    These two can
                            teach, is taught by it.  Yes, all. In that first hour we
                            met    And smiled and spoke so soft and long, love, Did
                            wisdom dawn; and I began    To disbelieve in right and wrong,
                            love.  Then, as love’s gospel clearer grew,    And
                            I each day your doorstep trod, love, I learned that love was all
                            in all,    And rose to disbelieve in God, love. 
                            Yes, wisdom’s book! you taught me this,    And ere I half had
                            read you through, love, I learned a deeper wisdom yet—
                               I learned to disbelieve in you, love.  So now, fair
                            teacher, I am wise,    And free: ’tis truth that makes us free,
                            love. But you—you’re pale! grow wise as I,

 As Lady Ambrose had read on, her voice had grown more and more disapproving,
                        and several times she had shown symptoms of being on the point of stopping. 
 ‘I’ve no doubt it’s all very witty,’ she said, putting down the book, which
                        was eagerly caught up by Mr. Rose, ‘but—but that sort of thing, you know,’
                        she exclaimed at last, ‘I think is rather better in the smoking-room.
                        However, I saw something next to those verses, that I think would suit Miss
                        Merton. It seemed to be a sort of address to the Virgin Mary.’ 
 Miss Merton looked a little embarrassed; Laurence looked astonished. 
 ‘Let me read it,’ exclaimed Mr. Rose, rapidly turning over the pages. ‘This
                        must be what Lady Ambrose means, I think:— 
My own, my one desire,


 ‘Yes,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘that’s it.’ 
 ‘Oh,’ said Laurence, ‘that is not my uncle’s; it is mine. It is the earliest
                        copy of verses I ever wrote. I was seventeen then, and by an odd freak my
                        uncle printed them in the end of his own collection.’ 
 Miss Merton’s embarrassment in a great measure disappeared. She looked
                        interested; and Mr. Rose, in slow, suave tones went on to read:— 

  Mine own, my one desire,     Virgin most fair   Of all
                            the virgin choir! Hail, O most pure, most perfect, loveliest
                            one!     Lo, in my hand I bear, Woven for the circling of
                            thy long gold hair, Culled leaves and flowers, from places which
                            the sun     The spring long shines upon, Where never
                            shepherd hath driven flock to graze,     Nor any grass is
                            mown; But there sound through all the sunny sweet warm
                            days,     Mid the green holy place,     The wild bee’s
                            wings alone.     Yea, and with jealous care The maiden
                            Reverence tends the fair things there, And watereth all of them
                            with sprinkling showers Of pearled grey dew from a clear running
                            river. Whoso is chaste of spirit utterly, May gather there
                            the leaves and fruits and flowers—     The unchaste, never.

 (‘I don’t at all approve of this,’ murmured Lady Ambrose.) 

    Take, and about thine hair     This anadem entwine—
                                Take, and for my sake wear, Who am more to thee than other
                            mortals are,     Whose is the holy lot As friend with
                            friend to walk and talk with thee, Hearing thy sweet mouth’s
                            music in mine ear,

 ‘Ah, they are sweet verses,’ said Mr. Rose; ‘a little too ascetic, perhaps,
                        to be quite Greek. They are from Euripides, I see—the address to Artemis of
                        Hippolytus.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Laurence; ‘I don’t think I ever wrote any original poetry.’ 
 ‘It’s exactly like Mr. Laurence—that bit,’ whispered Mrs. Sinclair. 
 ‘And now,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘as I suppose we shall ere long be all going to
                        dress for dinner, I will go, Mr. Laurence, if you will let me, and examine
                        that other volume you spoke of, of your uncle’s Miscellanies.’ 
 Mr. Rose moved slowly away; and as he did so, there came the sound of the
                        distant dressing-bell, which warned the whole party that it was time to be
                        following his example. 
</div></body></text></TEI>