<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg text of Endymion</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1880</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="76">
CHAPTER VIII
In old days, it was the habit to think and say that the House of Commons was an essentially
      “queer place,” which no one could understand until he was a member of it. It may, perhaps, be
      doubted whether that somewhat mysterious quality still altogether attaches to that assembly.
      “Our own Reporter,” has invaded it in all its purlieus. No longer content with giving an
      account of the speeches of its members, he is not satisfied unless he describes their persons,
      their dress, and their characteristic mannerisms. He tells us how they dine, even the wines
      and dishes which they favour, and follows them into the very mysteries of their smoking-room.
      And yet there is perhaps a certain fine sense of the feelings, and opinions, and humours of
      this assembly, which cannot be acquired by hasty notions and necessarily superficial remarks,
      but must be the result of long and patient observation, and of that quick sympathy with human
      sentiment, in all its classes, which is involved in the possession of that inestimable quality
      styled tact.
When Endymion Ferrars first took his seat in the House of Commons, it still fully possessed
      its character of enigmatic tradition. It had been thought that this, in a great degree, would
      have been dissipated by the Reform Act of 1832, which suddenly introduced into the hallowed
      precinct a number of individuals whose education, manners, modes of thought, were different
      from those of the previous inhabitants, and in some instances, and in some respects, quite
      contrary to them. But this was not so. After a short time it was observed that the old
      material, though at first much less in quantity, had leavened the new mass; that the tone of
      the former House was imitated and adopted, and that at the end of five years, about the time
      Endymion was returned to Parliament, much of its serene, and refined, and even classical
      character had been recovered.
For himself, he entered the chamber with a certain degree of awe, which, with use,
      diminished, but never entirely disappeared. The scene was one over which his boyhood even had
      long mused, and it was associated with all those traditions of genius, eloquence, and power
      that charm and inspire youth. His practical acquaintance with the forms and habits of the
      House from his customary attendance on their debates as private secretary to a cabinet
      minister, was of great advantage to him, and restrained that excitement which dangerously
      accompanies us when we enter into a new life, and especially a life of such deep and thrilling
      interests and such large proportions. This result was also assisted by his knowledge, at least
      by sight, of a large proportion of the old members, and by his personal and sometimes intimate
      acquaintance with those of his own party. There was much in his position, therefore, to soften
      that awkward feeling of being a freshman, which is always embarrassing.
He took his place on the second bench of the opposition side of the House, and nearly behind
      Lord Roehampton. Mr. Bertie Tremaine, whom Endymion encountered in the lobby as he was
      escaping to dinner, highly disapproved of this step. He had greeted Endymion with affable
      condescension. “You made your first mistake to-night, my dear Ferrars. You should have taken
      your seat below the gangway and near me, on the Mountain. You, like myself, are a man of the
      future.”
“I am a member of the opposition. I do not suppose it signifies much where I sit.”
“On the contrary, it signifies everything. After this great Tory reaction there is nothing
      to be done now by speeches, and, in all probability, very little that can be effectually
      opposed. Much, therefore, depends upon where you sit. If you sit on the Mountain, the public
      imagination will be attracted to you, and when they are aggrieved, which they will be in good
      time, the public passion, which is called opinion, will look to you for representation. My
      advice to my friends now is to sit together and say nothing, but to profess through the press
      the most advanced opinions. We sit on the back bench of the gangway, and we call ourselves the
      Mountain.”
Notwithstanding Mr. Bertie Tremaine’s oracular revelations, Endymion was very glad to find
      his old friend Trenchard generally his neighbour. He had a high opinion both of Trenchard’s
      judgment and acquirements, and he liked the man. In time they always managed to sit together.
      Job Thornberry took his seat below the gangway, on the opposition side, and on the floor of
      the House. Mr. Bertie Tremaine had sent his brother, Mr. Tremaine Bertie, to look after this
      new star, who he was anxious should ascend the Mountain; but Job Thornberry wishing to know
      whether the Mountain were going for “total and immediate,” and not obtaining a sufficiently
      distinct reply, declined the proffered intimation. Mr. Bertie Tremaine, being a landed
      proprietor as well as leader of the Mountain, was too much devoted to the rights of labour to
      sanction such middle-class madness.
“Peel with have to do it,” said Job. “You will see.”
“Peel now occupies the position of Necker,” said Mr. Bertie Tremaine, “and will make the
      same fiasco. Then you will at last have a popular government.”
“And the rights of labour?” asked Job. “All I hope is, I may have got safe to the States
      before that day.”
“There will be no danger,” said Mr. Bertie Tremaine. “There is this difference between the
      English Mountain and the French. The English Mountain has its government prepared. And my
      brother spoke to you because, when the hour arrives, I wished to see you a member of it.”
“My dear Endymion,” said Waldershare, “let us dine together before we meet in mortal
      conflict, which I suppose will be soon. I really think your Mr. Bertie Tremaine the most
      absurd being out of Colney Hatch.”
“Well, he has a purpose,” said Endymion; “and they say that a man with a purpose generally
      sees it realised.’
“What I do like in him,” said Waldershare, “is this revival of the Pythagorean system, and a
      leading party of silence. That is rich.”
One of the most interesting members of the House of Commons was Sir Fraunceys Scrope. He was
      the father of the House, though it was difficult to believe that from his appearance. He was
      tall, and had kept his distinguished figure; a handsome man, with a musical voice, and a
      countenance now benignant, though very bright, and once haughty. He still retained the same
      fashion of costume in which he had ridden up to Westminster more than half a century ago, from
      his seat in Derbyshire, to support his dear friend Charles Fox; real top-boots, and a blue
      coat and buff waistcoat. He was a great friend of Lord Roehampton, had a large estate in the
      same county, and had refused an earldom. Knowing Endymion, he came and sate by him one day in
      the House, and asked him, good-naturedly, how he liked his new life.
“It is very different from what it was when I was your age. Up to Easter we rarely had a
      regular debate, never a party division; very few people came up indeed. But there was a good
      deal of speaking on all subjects before dinner. We had the privilege then of speaking on the
      presentation of petitions at any length, and we seldom spoke on any other occasion. After
      Easter there was always at least one great party fight. This was a mighty affair, talked of
      for weeks before it came off, and then rarely an adjourned debate. We were gentlemen, used to
      sit up late, and should have been sitting up somewhere else had we not been in the House of
      Commons. After this party fight, the House for the rest of the session was a mere club.”
“There was not much business doing then,” said Endymion.
“There was not much business in the country then. The House of Commons was very much like
      what the House of Lords is now. You went home to dine, and now and then came back for an
      important division.”
“But you must always have had the estimates here,” said Endymion.
“Yes, but they ran through very easily. Hume was the first man who attacked the estimates.
      What are you going to do with yourself to-day? Will you take your mutton with me? You must
      come in boots, for it is now dinner-time, and you must return, I fancy. Twenty years ago, no
      man would think of coming down to the House except in evening dress. I remember so late as Mr.
      Canning, the minister always came down in silk stockings and pantaloons, or knee breeches. All
      things change, and quoting Virgil, as that young gentleman has just done, will be the next
      thing to disappear. In the last parliament we often had Latin quotations, but never from a
      member with a new constituency. I have heard Greek quoted here, but that was long ago, and a
      great mistake. The House was quite alarmed. Charles Fox used to say as to quotation—‘No Greek;
      as much Latin as you like; and never French under any circumstances. No English poet unless he
      had completed his century.’ These were like some other good rules, the unwritten orders of the
      House of Commons.”
</div></body></text></TEI>