<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg text of Endymion</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1880</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="64">
CHAPTER LXIV
This strangely-revived acquaintance with Job Thornberry was not an unfruitful incident in
      the life of Endymion. Thornberry was a man of original mind and singular energy; and, although
      of extreme views on commercial subjects, all his conclusions were founded on extensive and
      various information, combined with no inconsiderable practice. The mind of Thornberry was
      essentially a missionary one. He was always ready to convert people; and he acted with ardour
      and interest on a youth who, both by his ability and his social position, was qualified to
      influence opinion. But this youth was gifted with a calm, wise judgment, of the extent and
      depth of which he was scarcely conscious himself; and Thornberry, like all propagandists, was
      more remarkable for his zeal and his convictions, than for that observation and perception of
      character which are the finest elements in the management of men and affairs.
“What you should do,” said Thornberry, one day, to Endymion, “is to go to Scotland; go to
      the Glasgow district; that city itself, and Paisley, and Kilmarnock—keep your eye on Paisley.
      I am much mistaken if there will not soon be a state of things there which alone will break up
      the whole concern. It will burst it, sir; it will burst it.”
So Endymion, without saying anything, quietly went to Glasgow and its district, and noted
      enough to make him resolve soon to visit there again; but the cabinet reassembled in the early
      part of November, and he had to return to his duties.
In his leisure hours, Endymion devoted himself to the preparation of a report, for Mr.
      Sidney Wilton, on the condition and prospects of the manufacturing districts of the North of
      England, with some illustrative reference to that of the country beyond the Tweed. He
      concluded it before Christmas, and Mr. Wilton took it down with him to Gaydene, to study it at
      his leisure. Endymion passed his holidays with Lord and Lady Montfort, at their southern seat,
      Princedown.
Endymion spoke to Lady Montfort a little about his labours, for he had no secrets from her;
      but she did not much sympathise with him, though she liked him to be sedulous and to
      distinguish himself. “Only,” she observed, “take care not to be doctrinaire,
      Endymion. I am always afraid of that with you. It is Sidney’s fault; he always was
       doctrinaire. It was a great thing for you becoming his private secretary; to be the
      private secretary of a cabinet minister is a real step in life, and I shall always be most
      grateful to Sidney, whom I love for appointing you; but still, if I could have had my wish,
      you should have been Lord Roehampton’s private secretary. That is real politics, and he is a
      real statesman. You must not let Mr. Wilton mislead you about the state of affairs in the
      cabinet. The cabinet consists of the prime minister and Lord Roehampton, and, if they are
      united, all the rest is vapour. And they will not consent to any nonsense about touching the
      corn laws; you may be sure of that. Besides, I will tell you a secret, which is not yet
      Pulchinello’s secret, though I daresay it will be known when we all return to town—we shall
      have a great event when parliament meets; a royal marriage. What think you of that? The young
      queen is going to be married, and to a young prince, like a prince in a fairy tale. As Lord
      Roehampton wrote to me this morning, ‘Our royal marriage will be much more popular than the
      Anti-Corn-Law League.’”
The royal marriage was very popular; but, unfortunately, it reflected no splendour on the
      ministry. The world blessed the queen and cheered the prince, but shook its head at the
      government. Sir Robert Peel also—whether from his own motive or the irresistible impulse of
      his party need not now be inquired into—sanctioned a direct attack on the government, in the
      shape of a vote of want of confidence in them, immediately the court festivities were over,
      and the attack was defeated by a narrow majority.
“Nothing could be more unprincipled,” said Berengaria, “after he had refused to take office
      last year. As for our majority, it is, under such circumstances, twenty times more than we
      want. As Lord Roehampton says, one is enough.”
Trade and revenue continued to decline. There was again the prospect of a deficiency. The
      ministry, too, was kept in by the Irish vote, and the Irish then were very unpopular. The
      cabinet itself generally was downcast, and among themselves occasionally murmured a regret
      that they had not retired when the opportunity offered in the preceding year. Berengaria,
      however, would not bate an inch of confidence and courage. “You think too much,” she said to
      Endymion, “of trade and finance. Trade always comes back, and finance never ruined a country,
      or an individual either if he had pluck. Mr. Sidney Wilton is a croaker. The things he fears
      will never happen; or, if they do, will turn out to be unimportant. Look to Lord Roehampton;
      he is the man. He does not care a rush whether the revenue increases or declines. He is
      thinking of real politics: foreign affairs; maintaining our power in Europe. Something will
      happen, before the session is over, in the Mediterranean;” and she pressed her finger to her
      lip, and then she added, “The country will support Lord Roehampton as they supported Pitt, and
      give him any amount of taxes that he likes.”
In the meantime, the social world had its incidents as well as the political, and not less
      interesting. Not one of the most insignificant, perhaps, was the introduction into society of
      the Countess of Beaumaris. Her husband, sacrificing even his hunting, had come up to town at
      the meeting of parliament, and received his friends in a noble mansion on Piccadilly Terrace.
      All its equipments were sumptuous and refined, and everything had been arranged under the
      personal supervision of Mr. Waldershare. They commenced very quietly; dinners little but
      constant, and graceful and finished as a banquet of Watteau. No formal invitations; men were
      brought in to dinner from the House of Lords “just up,” or picked up, as it were carelessly,
      in the House of Commons by Mr. Waldershare, or were asked by Imogene, at a dozen hours’
      notice, in billets of irresistible simplicity. Soon it was whispered about, that the thing to
      do was to dine with Beaumaris, and that Lady Beaumaris was “something too delightful.” Prince
      Florestan frequently dined there; Waldershare always there, in a state of coruscation; and
      every man of fashion in the opposite ranks, especially if they had brains.
Then, in a little time, it was gently hoped that Imogene should call on their wives and
      mothers, or their wives and mothers call on her; and then she received, without any formal
      invitation, twice a week; and as there was nothing going on in London, or nothing half so
      charming, everybody who was anybody came to Piccadilly Terrace; and so as, after long
      observation, a new planet is occasionally discovered by a philosopher, thus society suddenly
      and indubitably discovered that there was at last a Tory house.
Lady Roehampton, duly apprised of affairs by her brother, had called on Lord and Lady
      Beaumaris, and had invited them to her house. It was the first appearance of Imogene in
      general society, and it was successful. Her large brown eyes, and long black lashes, her
      pretty mouth and dimple, her wondrous hair—which, it was whispered, unfolded, touched the
      ground—struck every one, and the dignified simplicity of her carriage was attractive. Her
      husband never left her side; while Mr. Waldershare was in every part of the saloons, watching
      her from distant points, to see how she got on, or catching the remarks of others on her
      appearance. Myra was kind to her as well as courteous, and, when the stream of arriving guests
      had somewhat ceased, sought her out and spoke to her; and then put her arm in hers, walked
      with her for a moment, and introduced her to one or two great personages, who had previously
      intimated their wish or their consent to that effect. Lady Montfort was not one of these. When
      parties are equal, and the struggle for power is intense, society loses much of its sympathy
      and softness. Lady Montfort could endure the presence of Tories, provided they were her
      kinsfolk, and would join, even at their houses, in traditionary festivities; but she shrank
      from passing the line, and at once had a prejudice against Imogene, who she instinctively felt
      might become a power for the enemy.
“I will not have you talk so much to that Lady Beaumaris,” she said to Endymion.
“She is an old friend of mine,” he replied.
“How could you have known her? She was a shop-girl, was not she, or something of that
      sort?”
“She and her family were very kind to me when I was not much better than a shop-boy myself,”
      replied Endymion, with a mantling cheek. “They are most respectable people, and I have a great
      regard for her.”
“Indeed! Well; I will not keep you from your Tory woman,” said Berengaria rudely; and she
      walked away.
Altogether, this season of ‘40 was not a very satisfactory one in any respect, as regarded
      society or the country in general. Party passion was at its highest. The ministry retained
      office almost by a casting vote; were frequently defeated on important questions; and whenever
      a vacancy occurred, it was filled by their opponents. Their unpopularity increased daily, and
      it was stimulated by the general distress. All that Job Thornberry had predicted as to the
      state of manufacturing Scotland duly occurred. Besides manufacturing distress, they had to
      encounter a series of bad harvests. Never was a body of statesmen placed in a more
      embarrassing and less enviable position. There was a prevalent, though unfounded, conviction
      that they were maintained in power by a combination of court favour with Irish sedition.
Lady Montfort and Lord Roehampton were the only persons who never lost heart. She was
      defiant; and he ever smiled, at least in public. “What nonsense!” she would say. “Mr. Sidney
      Wilton talks about the revenue falling off! As if the revenue could ever really fall off! And
      then our bad harvests. Why, that is the very reason we shall have an excellent harvest this
      year. You cannot go on always having bad harvests. Besides, good harvests never make a
      ministry popular. Nobody thanks a ministry for a good harvest. What makes a ministry popular
      is some great coup in foreign affairs.”
Amid all these exciting disquietudes, Endymion pursued a life of enjoyment, but also of
      observation and much labour. He lived more and more with the Montforts, but the friendship of
      Berengaria was not frivolous. Though she liked him to be seen where he ought to figure, and
      required a great deal of attention herself, she ever impressed on him that his present life
      was only a training for a future career, and that his mind should ever be fixed on the
      attainment of a high position. Particularly she impressed on him the importance of being a
      linguist. “There will be a reaction some day from all this political economy,” she would say,
      “and then there will be no one ready to take the helm.” Endymion was not unworthy of the
      inspiring interest which Lady Montfort took in him. The terrible vicissitudes of his early
      years had gravely impressed his character. Though ambitious, he was prudent; and, though born
      to please and be pleased, he was sedulous and self-restrained. Though naturally deeply
      interested in the fortunes of his political friends, and especially of Lord Roehampton and Mr.
      Wilton, a careful scrutiny of existing circumstances had prepared him for an inevitable
      change; and, remembering what was their position but a few years back, he felt that his sister
      and himself should be reconciled to their altered lot, and be content. She would still be a
      peeress, and the happy wife of an illustrious man; and he himself, though he would have to
      relapse into the drudgery of a public office, would meet duties the discharge of which was
      once the object of his ambition, coupled now with an adequate income and with many
      friends.
And among those friends, there were none with whom he maintained his relations more
      intimately than with the Neuchatels. He was often their guest both in town and at Hainault,
      and he met them frequently in society, always at the receptions of Lady Montfort and his
      sister. Zenobia used sometimes to send him a card; but these condescending recognitions of
      late had ceased, particularly as the great dame heard he was “always at that Lady
      Beaumaris’s.” One of the social incidents of his circle, not the least interesting to him, was
      the close attendance of Adriana and her mother on the ministrations of Nigel Penruddock. They
      had become among the most devoted of his flock; and this, too, when the rapid and startling
      development of his sacred offices had so alarmed the easy, though sagacious, Lord Roehampton,
      that he had absolutely expressed his wish to Myra that she should rarely attend them, and,
      indeed, gradually altogether drop a habit which might ultimately compromise her. Berengaria
      had long ago quitted him. This was attributed to her reputed caprice, yet it was not so. “I
      like a man to be practical,” she said. “When I asked for a deanery for him the other day, the
      prime minister said he could hardly make a man a dean who believed in the Real Presence.”
      Nigel’s church, however, was more crowded than ever, and a large body of the clergy began to
      look upon him as the coming man.
Towards the end of the year the “great coup in foreign affairs,” which Lady
      Montfort had long brooded over, and indeed foreseen, occurred, and took the world, who were
      all thinking of something else, entirely by surprise. A tripartite alliance of great powers
      had suddenly started into life; the Egyptian host was swept from the conquered plains of Asia
      Minor and Syria by English blue-jackets; St. Jean d’Acre, which had baffled the great
      Napoleon, was bombarded and taken by a British fleet; and the whole fortunes of the world in a
      moment seemed changed, and permanently changed.
“I am glad it did not occur in the season,” said Zenobia. “I really could not stand Lady
      Montfort if it were May.”
The ministry was elate, and their Christmas was right merrie. There seemed good cause for
      this. It was a triumph of diplomatic skill, national valour, and administrative energy. Myra
      was prouder of her husband than ever, and, amid all the excitement, he smiled on her with
      sunny fondness. Everybody congratulated her. She gave a little reception before the holidays,
      to which everybody came who was in town or passing through. Even Zenobia appeared; but she
      stayed a very short time, talking very rapidly. Prince Florestan paid his grave devoirs, with
      a gaze which seemed always to search into Lady Roehampton’s inmost heart, yet never lingering
      about her; and Waldershare, full of wondrous compliments and conceits, and really
      enthusiastic, for he ever sympathised with action; and Imogene, gorgeous with the Beaumaris
      sapphires; and Sidney Wilton, who kissed his hostess’s hand, and Adriana, who kissed her
      cheek.
“I tell you what, Mr. Endymion,” said Mr. Neuchatel, “you should make Lord Roehampton your
      Chancellor of the Exchequer, and then your government might perhaps go on a little.”
</div></body></text></TEI>