<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg text of Endymion</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1880</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="99">
CHAPTER XXXI
The marriage of Mr. Ferrars with Lady Montfort surprised some, but, on the whole, pleased
      everybody. They were both of them popular, and no one seemed to envy them their happiness and
      prosperity. The union took place at a season of the year when there was no London world to
      observe and to criticise. It was a quiet ceremony; they went down to Northumberland to Lady
      Montfort’s father, and they were married in his private chapel. After that they went off
      immediately to pay a visit to King Florestan and his queen; Myra had sent her a loving
      letter.
“Perhaps it will be the first time that your sister ever saw me with satisfaction,” remarked
      Lady Montfort, “but I think she will love me now! I always loved her; perhaps because she is
      so like you.”
It was a happy meeting and a delightful visit. They did not talk much of the past. The
      enormous change in the position of their host and hostess since the first days of their
      acquaintance, and, on their own part, some indefinite feeling of delicate reserve, combined to
      make them rather dwell on a present which was full of novelty so attractive and so absorbing.
      In his manner, the king was unchanged; he was never a demonstrative person, but simple,
      unaffected, rather silent; with a sweet temper and a tender manner, he seemed to be gratified
      that he had the power of conferring happiness on those around him. His feeling to his queen
      was one of idolatry, and she received Berengaria as a sister and a much-loved one. Their
      presence and the season of the year made their life a festival, and when they parted, there
      were entreaties and promises that the visit should be often repeated.
“Adieu! my Endymion,” said Myra at the last moment they were alone. “All has happened for
      you beyond my hopes; all now is safe. I might wish we were in the same land, but not if I lost
      my husband, whom I adore.”
The reason that forced them to curtail their royal visit was the state of politics at home,
      which had suddenly become critical. There were symptoms, and considerable ones, of disturbance
      and danger when they departed for their wedding tour, but they could not prevail on themselves
      to sacrifice a visit on which they had counted so much, and which could not be fulfilled on
      another occasion under the same interesting circumstances. Besides, the position of Mr.
      Ferrars, though an important, was a subordinate one, and though cabinet ministers were not
      justified in leaving the country, an under-secretary of state and a bridegroom might, it would
      seem, depart on his irresponsible holiday. Mr. Sidney Wilton, however, shook his head; “I do
      not like the state of affairs,” he said, “I think you will have to come back sooner than you
      imagine.”
“You are not going to be so foolish as to have an early session?” inquired Lady
      Montfort.
He only shrugged his shoulders, and said, “We are in a mess.”
What mess? and what was the state of affairs?
This had happened. At the end of the autumn, his Holiness the Pope had made half a dozen new
      cardinals, and to the surprise of the world, and the murmurs of the Italians, there appeared
      among them the name of an Englishman, Nigel Penruddock, archbishop in partibus.
      Shortly after this, a papal bull, “given at St. Peter’s, Rome, under the seal of the
      fisherman,” was issued, establishing a Romish hierarchy in England. This was soon followed by
      a pastoral letter by the new cardinal “given out of the Appian Gate,” announcing that
      “Catholic England had been restored to its orbit in the ecclesiastical firmament.”
The country at first was more stupefied than alarmed. It was conscious that something
      extraordinary had happened, and some great action taken by an ecclesiastical power, which from
      tradition it was ever inclined to view with suspicion and some fear. But it held its breath
      for a while. It so happened that the prime minister was a member of a great house which had
      become illustrious by its profession of Protestant principles, and even by its sufferings in a
      cause which England had once looked on as sacred. The prime minister, a man of distinguished
      ability, not devoid even of genius, was also a wily politician, and of almost unrivalled
      experience in the management of political parties. The ministry was weak and nearly worn out,
      and its chief, influenced partly by noble and historical sentiments, partly by a conviction
      that he had a fine occasion to rally the confidence of the country round himself and his
      friends, and to restore the repute of his political connection, thought fit, without
      consulting his colleagues, to publish a manifesto denouncing the aggression of the Pope upon
      our Protestantism as insolent and insidious, and as expressing a pretension of supremacy over
      the realm of England which made the minister indignant.
A confused public wanted to be led, and now they were led. They sprang to their feet like an
      armed man. The corporation of London, the universities of Oxford and Cambridge had audiences
      of the Queen; the counties met, the municipalities memorialised; before the first of January
      there had been held nearly seven thousand public meetings, asserting the supremacy of the
      Queen and calling on Her Majesty’s Government to vindicate it by stringent measures.
Unfortunately, it was soon discovered by the minister that there had been nothing illegal in
      the conduct of the Pope or the Cardinal, and a considerable portion of the Liberal party began
      to express the inconvenient opinion, that the manifesto of their chief was opposed to those
      principles of civil and religious liberty of which he was the hereditary champion. Some
      influential members of his own cabinet did not conceal their disapprobation of a step on which
      they had not been consulted.
Immediately after Christmas, Endymion and Lady Montfort settled in London. She was anxious
      to open her new mansion as soon as parliament met, and to organise continuous receptions. She
      looked upon the ministry as in a critical state, and thought it was an occasion when social
      influences might not inconsiderably assist them.
But though she exhibited for this object her wonted energy and high spirit, a fine
      observer—Mr. Sidney Wilton, for example—might have detected a change in the manner of
      Berengaria. Though the strength of her character was unaltered, there was an absence of that
      restlessness, it might be said, that somewhat feverish excitement, from which formerly she was
      not always free. The truth is, her heart was satisfied, and that brought repose. Feelings of
      affection, long mortified and pent up, were now lavished and concentrated on a husband of her
      heart and adoration, and she was proud that his success and greatness might be avowed as the
      objects of her life.
The campaign, however, for which such preparations were made, ended almost before it began.
      The ministry, on the meeting of parliament, found themselves with a discontented House of
      Commons, and discordant counsels among themselves. The anti-papal manifesto was the secret
      cause of this evil state, but the prime minister, to avoid such a mortifying admission, took
      advantage of two unfavourable divisions on other matters, and resigned.
Here was a crisis—another crisis! Could the untried Protectionists, without men, form an
      administration? It was whispered that Lord Derby had been sent for, and declined the attempt.
      Then there was another rumour, that he was going to try. Mr. Bertie Tremaine looked
      mysterious. The time for the third party had clearly arrived. It was known that he had the
      list of the next ministry in his breast-pocket, but it was only shown to Mr. Tremaine Bertie,
      who confided in secrecy to the initiated that it was the strongest government since “All the
      Talents.”
Notwithstanding this great opportunity, “All the Talents” were not summoned. The leader of
      the Protectionists renounced the attempt in despair, and the author of the anti-papal
      manifesto was again sent for, and obliged to introduce the measure which had already destroyed
      a government and disorganised a party.
“Sidney Wilton,” said Lady Montfort to her husband, “says that they are in the mud, and he
      for one will not go back—but he will go. I know him. He is too soft-hearted to stand an appeal
      from colleagues in distress. But were I you, Endymion, I would not return. I think you want a
      little rest, or you have got a great deal of private business to attend to, or something of
      that kind. Nobody notices the withdrawal of an under-secretary except those in office. There
      is no necessity why you should be in the mud. I will continue to receive, and do everything
      that is possible for our friends, but I think my husband has been an under-secretary long
      enough.”
Endymion quite agreed with his wife. The minister offered him preferment and the Privy
      Council, but Lady Montfort said it was really not so important as the office he had resigned.
      She was resolved that he should not return to them, and she had her way. Ferrars himself now
      occupied a rather peculiar position, being the master of a great fortune and of an
      establishment which was the headquarters of the party of which he was now only a private
      member; but, calm and collected, he did not lose his head; always said and did the right
      thing, and never forgot his early acquaintances. Trenchard was his bosom political friend.
      Seymour Hicks, who, through Endymion’s kindness, had now got into the Treasury, and was quite
      fashionable, had the run of the House, and made himself marvellously useful, while St. Barbe,
      who had become by mistake a member of the Conservative Club, drank his frequent claret cup
      every Saturday evening at Lady Montfort’s receptions with many pledges to the welfare of the
      Liberal administration.
The flag of the Tory party waved over the magnificent mansion of which Imogene Beaumaris was
      the graceful life. As parties were nearly equal, and the ministry was supposed to be in decay,
      the rival reception was as well attended as that of Berengaria. The two great leaders were
      friends, intimate, but not perhaps quite so intimate as a few years before. “Lady Montfort is
      very kind to me,” Imogene would say, “but I do not think she now quite remembers we are
      cousins.” Both Lord and Lady Waldershare seemed equally devoted to Lady Beaumaris. “I do not
      think,” he would say, “that I shall ever get Adriana to receive. It is an organic gift, and
      very rare. What I mean to do is to have a first-rate villa and give the party strawberries. I
      always say Adriana is like Nell Gwyn, and she shall go about with a pottle. One never sees a
      pottle of strawberries now. I believe they went out, like all good things, with the
      Stuarts.”
And so, after all these considerable events, the season rolled on and closed tranquilly.
      Lord and Lady Hainault continued to give banquets, over which the hostess sighed; Sir Peter
      Vigo had the wisdom to retain his millions, which few manage to do, as it is admitted that it
      is easier to make a fortune than to keep one. Mrs. Rodney, supremely habited, still drove her
      ponies, looking younger and prettier than ever, and getting more fashionable every day, and
      Mr. Ferrars and Berengaria, Countess of Montfort, retired in the summer to their beautiful and
      beloved Princedown.
</div></body></text></TEI>