<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg text of Endymion</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1880</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="70">
CHAPTER II
There was a dinner-party at Mr. Neuchatel’s, to which none were asked but the high
      government clique. It was the last dinner before the dissolution: “The dinner of consolation,
      or hope,” said Lord Roehampton. Lady Montfort was to be one of the guests. She was dressed,
      and her carriage in the courtyard, and she had just gone in to see her lord before she
      departed.
Lord Montfort was extremely fond of jewels, and held that you could not see them to
      advantage, or fairly judge of their water or colour, except on a beautiful woman. When his
      wife was in grand toilette, and he was under the same roof, he liked her to call on him in her
      way to her carriage, that he might see her flashing rivieres and tiaras, the lustre of her
      huge pearls, and the splendour of her emeralds and sapphires and rubies.
“Well, Berengaria,” he said in a playful tone, “you look divine. Never dine out again in a
      high dress. It distresses me. Bertolini was the only man who ever caught the tournure of your
      shoulders, and yet I am not altogether satisfied with his work. So, you are going to dine with
      that good Neuchatel. Remember me kindly to him. There are few men I like better. He is so
      sensible, knows so much, and so much of what is going on. I should have liked very much to
      have dined with him, but he is aware of my unfortunate state. Besides, my dear, if I were
      better I should not have enough strength for his dinners. They are really banquets; I cannot
      stand those ortolans stuffed with truffles and those truffles stuffed with ortolans. Perhaps
      he will come and dine with us some day off a joint.”
“The Queen of Mesopotamia will be here next week, Simon, and we must really give her what
      you call a joint, and then we can ask the Neuchatels and a few other people.”
“I was in hopes the dissolution would have carried everybody away,” said Lord Montfort
      rather woefully. “I wish the Queen of Mesopotamia were a candidate for some borough; I think
      she would rather like it.”
“Well, we could not return her, Simon; do not touch on the subject. But what have you got to
      amuse to-day?”
“Oh! I shall do very well. I have got the head of the French detective police to dine with
      me, and another man or two. Besides, I have got here a most amusing book, ‘Topsy Turvy;’ it
      comes out in numbers. I like books that come out in numbers, as there is a little suspense,
      and you cannot deprive yourself of all interest by glancing at the last page of the last
      volume. I think you must read ‘Topsy Turvy,’ Berengaria. I am mistaken if you do not hear of
      it. It is very cynical, which authors, who know a little of the world, are apt to be, and
      everything is exaggerated, which is another of their faults when they are only a trifle
      acquainted with manners. A little knowledge of the world is a very dangerous thing, especially
      in literature. But it is clever, and the man writes a capital style; and style is everything,
      especially in fiction.”
“And what is the name of the writer, Simon?”
“You never heard of it; I never did; but my secretary, who lives much in Bohemia, and is a
      member of the Cosmopolitan and knows everything, tells me he has written some things before,
      but they did not succeed. His name is St. Barbe. I should like to ask him to dinner if I knew
      how to get at him.”
“Well, adieu! Simon,” and, with an agitated heart, though apparent calmness, she touched his
      forehead with her lips. “I expect an unsatisfactory dinner.”
“Adieu! and if you meet poor Ferrars, which I dare say you will, tell him to keep up his
      spirits. The world is a wheel, and it will all come round right.”
The dinner ought not to have been unsatisfactory, for though there was no novelty among the
      guests, they were all clever and distinguished persons and united by entire sympathy. Several
      of the ministers were there, and the Roehamptons, and Mr. Sidney Wilton, and Endymion was also
      a guest. But the general tone was a little affected and unnatural; forced gaiety, and a levity
      which displeased Lady Montfort, who fancied she was unhappy because the country was going to
      be ruined, but whose real cause of dissatisfaction at the bottom of her heart was the affair
      of “the family seat.” Her hero, Lord Roehampton, particularly did not please her to-day. She
      thought him flippant and in bad taste, merely because he would not look dismal and talk
      gloomily.
“I think we shall do very well,” he said. “What cry can be better than that of ‘Cheap
      bread?’ It gives one an appetite at once.”
“But the Corn-Law League says your bread will not be cheap,” said Melchior Neuchatel.
“I wonder whether the League has really any power in the constituencies,” said Lord
      Roehampton. “I doubt it. They may have in time, but then in the interval trade will revive. I
      have just been reading Mr. Thornberry’s speech. We shall hear more of that man. You will not
      be troubled about any of your seats?” he said, in a lower tone of sympathy, addressing Mrs.
      Neuchatel, who was his immediate neighbour.
“Our seats?” said Mrs. Neuchatel, as if waking from a dream. “Oh, I know nothing about them,
      nor do I understand why there is a dissolution. I trust that parliament will not be dissolved
      without voting the money for the observation of the transit of Venus.”
“I think the Roman Catholic vote will carry us through,” said a minister.
“Talking of Roman Catholics,” said Mr. Wilton, “is it true that Penruddock has gone over to
      Rome?”
“No truth in it,” replied a colleague. “He has gone to Rome—there is no doubt of that, and
      he has been there some time, but only for distraction. He had overworked himself.”
“He might have been a Dean if he had been a practical man,” whispered Lady Montfort to Mr.
      Neuchatel, “and on the high road to a bishopric.”
“That is what we want, Lady Montfort,” said Mr. Neuchatel; “we want a few practical men. If
      we had a practical man as Chancellor of the Exchequer, we should not be in the scrape in which
      we now are.”
“It is not likely that Penruddock will leave the Church with a change of government possibly
      impending. We could do nothing for him with his views, but he will wait for Peel.”
“Oh! Peel will never stand those high-fliers. He put the Church into a Lay Commission during
      his last government.”
“Penruddock will never give up Anglicanism while there is a chance of becoming a Laud. When
      that chance vanishes, trust my word, Penruddock will make his bow to the Vatican.”
“Well, I must say,” said Lord Roehampton, “if I were a clergyman I should be a Roman
      Catholic.”
“Then you could not marry. What a compliment to Lady Roehampton!”
“Nay; it is because I could not marry that I am not a clergyman.”
Endymion had taken Adriana down to dinner. She looked very well, and was more talkative than
      usual.
“I fear it will be a very great confusion—this general election,” she said. “Papa was
      telling us that you think of being a candidate.”
“I am a candidate, but without a seat to captivate at present,” said Endymion; “but I am not
      without hopes of making some arrangement.”
“Well, you must tell me what your colours are.”
“And will you wear them?”
“Most certainly; and I will work you a banner if you be victorious.”
“I think I must win with such a prospect.”
“I hope you will win in everything.”
When the ladies retired, Berengaria came and sate by the side of Lady Roehampton.
“What a dreary dinner!” she said.
“Do you think so?”
“Well, perhaps it was my own fault. Perhaps I am not in good cue, but everything seems to me
      to go wrong.”
“Things sometimes do go wrong, but then they get right.”
“Well, I do not think anything will ever get right with me.”
“Dear Lady Montfort, how can you say such things? You who have, and have always had, the
      world at your feet—and always will have.”
“I do not know what you mean by having the world at my feet. It seems to me that I have no
      power whatever—I can do nothing. I am vexed about this business of your brother. Our people
      are so stupid. They have no resource. When I go to them and ask for a seat, I expect a seat,
      as I would a shawl at Howell and James’ if I asked for one. Instead of that they only make
      difficulties. What our party wants is a Mr. Tadpole; he out-manoeuvres them in every
      corner.”
“Well, I shall be deeply disappointed—deeply pained,” said Lady Roehampton, “if Endymion is
      not in this parliament, but if we fail I will not utterly despair. I will continue to do what
      I have done all my life, exert my utmost will and power to advance him.”
“I thought I had will and power,” said Lady Montfort, “but the conceit is taken out of me.
      Your brother was to me a source of great interest, from the first moment that I knew him. His
      future was an object in life, and I thought I could mould it. What a mistake! Instead of
      making his fortune I have only dissipated his life.”
“You have been to him the kindest and the most valuable of friends, and he feels it.”
“It is no use being kind, and I am valuable to no one. I often think if I disappeared
      to-morrow no one would miss me.”
“You are in a morbid mood, dear lady. To-morrow perhaps everything will be right, and then
      you will feel that you are surrounded by devoted friends, and by a husband who adores
      you.”
Lady Montfort gave a scrutinising glance at Lady Roehampton as she said this, then shook her
      head. “Ah! there it is, dear Myra. You judge from your own happiness; you do not know Lord
      Montfort. You know how I love him, but I am perfectly convinced he prefers my letters to my
      society.”
“You see what it is to be a Madame de Sevigne,” said Lady Roehampton, trying to give a
      playful tone to the conversation.
“You jest,” said Lady Montfort; “I am quite serious. No one can deceive me; would that they
      could! I have the fatal gift of reading persons, and penetrating motives, however deep or
      complicated their character, and what I tell you about Lord Montfort is unhappily too
      true.”
In the meantime, while this interesting conversation was taking place, the gentleman who had
      been the object of Lady Montfort’s eulogium, the gentleman who always out-manoeuvred her
      friends at every corner, was, though it was approaching midnight, walking up and down Carlton
      Terrace with an agitated and indignant countenance, and not alone.
“I tell you, Mr. Waldershare, I know it; I have it almost from Lord Beaumaris himself; he
      has declined to support our man, and no doubt will give his influence to the enemy.”
“I do not believe that Lord Beaumaris has made any engagement whatever.”
“A pretty state of affairs!” exclaimed Mr. Tadpole. “I do not know what the world has come
      to. Here are gentlemen expecting high places in the Household, and under-secretaryships of
      state, and actually giving away our seats to our opponents.”
“There is some family engagement about this seat between the Houses of Beaumaris and
      Montfort, and Lord Beaumaris, who is a young man, and who does not know as much about these
      things as you and I do, naturally wants not to make a mistake. But he has promised nothing and
      nobody. I know, I might almost say I saw the letter, that he wrote to Lord Montfort this day,
      asking for an interview to-morrow morning on the matter, and Lord Montfort has given him an
      appointment for to-morrow. This I know.”
“Well, I must leave it to you,” said Mr. Tadpole. “You must remember what we are fighting
      for. The constitution is at stake.”
“And the Church,” said Waldershare.
“And the landed interest, you may rely upon it,” said Mr. Tadpole.
“And your Lordship of the Treasury in posse, Tadpole. Truly it is a great
      stake.”
</div></body></text></TEI>