<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Vice Versa, by F. Anstey
     </title><author>Anstey, F. [pseud.] (1856-1934)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1882</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
5. Disgrace

"Well had the boding tremblers learned to trace
The day's disasters in his morning's face."
Sleep came at last, and brought too brief forgetfulness. It was not till the dull grey light
     of morning was glimmering through the blinds that Mr. Bultitude awoke to his troubles.
The room was bitterly cold, and he remained
     shivering in bed for some time, trying to realise and prepare for his altered
     condition.
He was the only one awake. Now and then from one of the beds around a boy would be heard
     talking in his sleep, or laughing with holiday glee—at the drolleries possibly of some
     pantomime performed for his amusement in the Theatre Royal, Dreamland—a theatre mercifully open
     to all boys free of charge, long after the holidays have come to an end, the only drawbacks
     being a certain want of definiteness in the plot and scenery, and a liability to premature
     termination of the vaguely splendid performance.
Once Kiffin, the new boy, awoke with a start and a heavy sigh, but he cried himself to sleep
     again almost immediately.
Mr. Bultitude could bear being inactive no longer. He thought, if he got up, he might perhaps
     see his misfortunes shrink to a more bearable, less hopeless scale, and besides, he judged it
     prudent, for many reasons, to finish his toilet before the sleepers began theirs.
Very stealthily, dreading to rouse anyone and attract attention in the form of slippers, he
     broke the clinking crust of ice in one of the basins and, shuddering from the shock, bathed
     face and hands in the biting water. He parted his hair, which from natural causes he had been
     unable to accomplish for some years, and now found an awkwardness in accomplishing neatly, and
     then stole down the dark creaking staircase just as the butler in the hall began to swing the
     big railway bell which was to din stern reality into the sleepy ears above.
In the schoolroom a yawning maid had just lighted the fire, from which turbid yellow clouds
     of sulphurous smoke were pouring into the room, making it necessary to open the windows and
     lower a temperature that was far from high originally.
Paul stood shaking by the mantelpiece in a very bad temper for some minutes. If the Doctor
     had come in then, he might have been spurred by indignation to
      utter his woes, and even claim and obtain his freedom. But that was not to be.
The door did open presently, however, and a little girl appeared; a very charming little
     maiden indeed, in a neat dark costume relieved by a fresh white pinafore. She had deep grey
     eyes and glossy brown hair falling over her forehead and down her back in soft straight masses,
     her face was oval rather than round, and slightly serious, though her smile was pretty and
     gay.
She ran towards Mr. Bultitude with a glad little cry, stretching out her hands.
"Dick! dear Dick!" she said, "I am so glad! I thought you'd be down early; as you used to be.
     I wanted to sit up last night so very much, but mamma wouldn't let me."
Some might have been very glad to be welcomed in this way, even vicariously. As for boys, it
     must have been a very bad school indeed which Dulcie Grimstone could not have robbed of much of
     its terrors.
Mr. Bultitude, however, as has been explained, did not appreciate children—being a family man
     himself. When one sees their petty squabbles and jealousies, hears their cruel din, and pays
     for their monkeyish mischief, perhaps the daintiest children seem but an earthly order of
     cherubim. He was only annoyed and embarrassed by the interruption, though he endured it.
"Ah," he said with condescension, "and so you're Dr. Grimstone's little girl, are you? How
     d'ye do, my dear?"
Dulcie stopped and looked at him, with drawn eyebrows and her soft mouth quivering. "What
     makes you talk like that?" she asked.
"How ought I to talk?" said Paul.
"You didn't talk like that before," said Dulcie plaintively. "I—I thought perhaps you'd be
     glad to see me. You were once. And—and—when you went away last you asked me to—to—kiss you, and
     I did, and I wish I hadn't. And you gave me a ginger
      lozenge with your name written on it in lead pencil, and I gave you a
     cough-lozenge with mine; and you said it was to show that you were my sweetheart and I was
     yours. But I suppose you've eaten the one I gave you?"
"This is dreadful!" thought Mr. Bultitude. "What shall I do now? The child evidently takes me
     for that little scoundrel Dick." "Tut-tut," he said aloud, "little girls like you are too young
     for such nonsense. You ought to think about—about your dolls, and—ah, your needlework—not
     sweethearts!"
"You say that now!" cried Dulcie indignantly. "You know I'm not a little girl, and I've left
     off playing with dolls—almost. Oh, Dick, don't be unkind! You haven't changed your mind, have
     you?"
"No," said Paul dismally, "I've changed my body. But there—you wouldn't understand. Run away
     and play somewhere, like a good little girl!"
"I know what it is!" said Dulcie. "You've been out to parties, or somewhere, and seen some
     horrid girl ... you like ... better than me!"
"This is absurd, you know," said Mr. Bultitude. "You can't think how absurd it is! Now,
     you'll be a very foolish little girl if you cry. You're making a mistake. I'm not the Dick you
     used to know!"
"I know you're not!" sobbed Dulcie. "But oh, Dick, you will be. Promise me you will be!" And,
     to Paul's horror and alarm, she put her arms round his neck, and cried piteously on his
     shoulder.
"Good gracious!" he cried, "let me go. Don't do that, for Heaven's sake! I can hear some one
     coming. If it's your father, it will ruin me!"
But it was too late. Over her head he saw Tipping enter the room, and stand glaring at them
     menacingly. Dulcie saw him too, and sprang away to the window, where she tried to dry her eyes
     unperceived, and then ran past him with a hurried good morning, and escaped, leaving Paul alone
     with the formidable Tipping.


There was an awkward silence at first, which Tipping broke by saying, "What have you been
     saying to make her cry, eh?"
"What's that to you, sir?" said Paul, trying to keep his voice firm.
"Why, it's just this to me," said Tipping, "that I've been spoons on Dulcie myself ever since
     I came, and she never would have a word to say to me. I never could think why, and now it turns
     out to be you! What do you mean by cutting me out like this? I heard her call you 'dear
     Dick.'"
"Don't be an ass, sir!" said Paul angrily.
"Now, none of your cheek, you know!" said Tipping, edging up against him with a dangerous
     inclination first to jostle aggressively, and then maul his unconscious rival. "You just mind
     what I say. I'm not going to have Dulcie bothered by a young beggar in the second form; she
     deserves something better than that, anyway, and I tell you that if I once catch you talking to
     her in the way you did just now, or if I hear of her favouring you more than any other fellows,
     I'll give you the very juiciest licking you ever had in your life. So look out!"
At this point the other boys began to straggle down and cluster round the fire, and Paul
     withdrew from the aggrieved Tipping, and looked drearily out of the window on the hard road and
     bare black trees outside.
"I must tell the Doctor how I'm situated!" he thought; "and yet directly I open my
     mouth, he threatens to flog me. If I stay here, that little girl will be always trying to speak
     to me, and I shall be thrashed by the red-haired boy. If I could only manage to speak out after
     breakfast!"
It was not without satisfaction that he remembered that he paid extra for "meat for
     breakfast" in his son's school-bills, for he was beginning to look forward to meal-time with
     the natural desire of a young and healthy frame for nourishment.
At eight o'clock the Doctor came in and announced
      breakfast, leading the way himself to what was known in the school as the "Dining
     Hall." It scarcely deserved so high-sounding a name perhaps, being a long low room on the
     basement floor, with a big fireplace, fitted with taps, and baking ovens, which provoked the
     suspicion that it had begun existence as a back kitchen.
The Doctor took his seat alone at a cross table forming the top of one of the two rows of
     tables, set with white cups and saucers, and plates well heaped with the square pieces of bread
     and butter, while Mrs. Grimstone with Dulcie and Tom, sat at the foot of the same row, behind
     two ugly urns of dull block-tin.
But when Mr. Bultitude, more hungry than he had felt for years, found his place at one of the
     tables, he was disgusted to find upon his plate—not, as he had confidently expected, a couple
     of plump poached eggs, with their appetising contrast of ruddy gold and silvery white, not a
     crisp and crackling sausage or a mottled omelette, not even the homely but luscious rasher, but
     a brace of chill forbidding sardines, lying grim and headless in bilious green oil!
It was a fish he positively loathed, nor could it be reasonably expected that the confidence
     necessary for a declaration was to be forgotten by so sepulchral a form of nutriment.
He roused himself, however, to swallow them, together with some of the thin and tin-flavoured
     coffee. But the meal as a whole was so different from the plentiful well-cooked breakfasts he
     had sat down before for years as a matter of course, that it made him feel extremely
     unwell.
No talking was allowed during the meal. The Doctor now and then looked up from his dish of
     kidneys on toast (at which envious glances were occasionally cast) to address a casual remark
     to his wife across the long row of plates and cups, but, as a rule, the dull champing sound of
     boys solemnly and steadily munching was all that broke the silence.


Towards the end, when the plates had been generally cleared, and the boys sat staring with
     the stolidity of repletion at one another across the tables, the junior house-master, Mr.
     Tinkler, made his appearance. He had lately left a small and little-known college at Cambridge,
     where he had contrived, contrary to expectation, to evade the uncoveted wooden spoon by just
     two places, which enabled the Doctor to announce himself as being "assisted by a graduate of
     the University of Cambridge who has taken honours in the Mathematical Tripos."
For the rest, he was a small insignificant-looking person, who evidently disliked the notice
     his late appearance drew upon himself.
"Mr. Tinkler," said the Doctor in his most awful voice, "if it were my custom to rebuke my
     assistants before the school (which it is not), I should feel forced to remind you that this
     tardiness in rising is a bad beginning of the day's work, and sets a bad example to those under
     your authority."
Mr. Tinkler made no articulate reply, but sat down with a crushed expression, and set himself
     to devour bread and butter with an energy which he hoped would divert attention from his
     blushes; and almost immediately the Doctor looked at his watch and said, "Now, boys, you have
     half-an-hour for 'chevy'—make the most of it. When you come in I shall have something to say to
     you all. Don't rise, Mr. Tinkler, unless you have quite finished."
Mr. Tinkler preferred leaving his breakfast to continuing it under the trying ordeal of his
     principal's inspection. So, hastily murmuring that he had "made an excellent breakfast"—which
     he had not—he followed the others, who clattered upstairs to put on their boots and go out into
     the playground.
It was noticeable that they did so without much of the enthusiasm which might be looked for
     from boys dismissed to their sports. But the fact was that this
      particular sport, "chevy," commonly known as "prisoners' base," was by no means a
     popular amusement, being of a somewhat monotonous nature, and calling for no special skill on
     the part of the performers. Besides this, moreover, it had the additional disadvantage (which
     would have been fatal to a far more fascinating diversion) of being in a great measure
     compulsory.
Football and cricket were of course reserved for half-holidays, and played in a neighbouring
     field rented by the Doctor, and in the playground he restricted them to "chevy," which he
     considered, rightly enough, both gave them abundant exercise and kept them out of mischief.
     Accordingly, if any adventurous spirit started a rival game, it was usually abandoned sooner or
     later in deference to suggestions from headquarters which were not intended to be
     disregarded.
This, though undoubtedly well meant, did not serve to stimulate their affection for the game,
     an excellent one in moderation, but one which, if played "by special desire" two or three hours
     a day for weeks in succession is apt to lose its freshness and pall upon the youthful mind.
It was a bright morning. There had been a hard frost during the night, and the ground was
     hard, sparkling with rime and ringing to the foot. The air was keen and invigorating, and the
     bare black branches of the trees were outlined clear and sharp against the pale pure blue of
     the morning sky.
Just the weather for a long day's skating over the dark green glassy ice, or a bracing tramp
     on country roads into cheery red-roofed market towns. But now it had lost all power to charm.
     It was almost depressing by the contrast between the boundless liberty suggested, and the dull
     reality of a round of uninteresting work which was all it heralded.
So they lounged listlessly about, gravitating finally towards the end of the playground,
     where a deep furrow marked the line of the base. There was no attempt to play. They stood
     gossiping in knots, grumbling and
      stamping their feet to keep warm. By-and-by the day-boarders began to drop in one
     by one, several of them, from a want of tact in adapting themselves to the general tone,
     earning decided unpopularity at once by a cheerful briskness and an undisguised satisfaction at
     having something definite to do once more.
If Mr. Tinkler, who had joined one of the groups, had not particularly distinguished himself
     at breakfast, he made ample amends now, and by the grandeur and manliness of his conversation
     succeeded in producing a decided impression upon some of the smaller boys.
"The bore of a place like this, you know," he was saying with magnificent disdain, "is that a
     fellow can't have his pipe of a morning. I've been used to it, and so, of course, I miss it. If
     I chose to insist on it Grimstone couldn't say anything; but with a lot of young fellows like
     you, you see, it wouldn't look well!"
It could hardly have looked worse than little Mr. Tinkler himself would have done, if he had
     ventured upon more than the mildest of cigarettes, for he was a poor but pertinacious smoker,
     and his love for the weed was chastened by wholesome fear. There, however, he was in no danger
     of betraying this, and indeed it would have been injudicious to admit it.
"Talking of smoking," he went on, with a soft chuckle, as at recollections of unspeakable
     devilry, "did I ever tell you chaps of a tremendous scrape I very nearly got into up at the
     'Varsity? Well, you must know there's a foolish rule there against smoking in the streets. Not
     that that made any difference to some of us! Well, one night about nine, I was strolling down
     Petty Cury with two other men, smoking (Bosher of "Pothouse," and Peebles of "Cats," both
     pretty well known up there for general rowdiness, you know—great pals of mine!) and, just as we
     turned the corner, who should we see coming straight down on us but a Proctor with his
     bull-dogs (not dogs, you know, but the strongest 'gyps' in college). Bosher said, 'Let's cut
     it!' and he and
      Peebles bolted. (They were neither of them funks, of course, but they lost their
     heads.) I went calmly on, smoking my cigar as if nothing was the matter. That put the Proctor
     in a bait, I can tell you! He came fuming up to me. 'What do you mean, sir,' says he, quite
     pale with anger (he was a great bull-headed fellow, one of the strongest dons of his year,
     that's why they made him a Proctor)—'what do you mean by breaking the University Statutes in
     this way?' 'It is a fine evening,' said I (I was determined to keep cool). 'Do you
     mean to insult me?' said he. 'No, old boy,' said I, 'I don't; have a cigar?' He couldn't stand
     that, so he called up his bull-dogs. 'I give him in charge!' he screamed out. 'I'll have him
     sent down!' 'I'll send you down first,' said I, and I just gave him a push—I never meant to
     hurt the fellow—and over he went. I rolled over a bull-dog to keep him company, and, as the
     other fellow didn't want any more and stood aside to let me pass, I finished my stroll and my
     cigar."
"Was the Proctor hurt, sir?" inquired a small boy with great respect.
"More frightened than hurt, I always said," said Mr. Tinkler lightly, "but somehow he never
     would proctorise any more—it spoilt his nerve. He was a good deal chaffed about it, but of
     course no one ever knew I'd had anything to do with it!"
With such tales of Homeric exploit did Mr. Tinkler inculcate a spirit of discipline and
     respect for authority. But although he had indeed once encountered a Proctor, and at night, he
     did himself great injustice by this version of the proceedings, which were, as a matter of
     fact, of a most peaceable and law-abiding character, and though followed by a pecuniary
     transaction the next day in which six-and-eightpence changed pockets, the Proctors continued
     their duties much as before, while Mr. Tinkler's feelings towards them, which had ever been
     reverential in the extreme, were, if anything, intensified by the experience.


Upon this incident, however, he had gradually embroidered the above exciting episode, until
     he grew to believe at intervals that he really had been a devil of a fellow in his time, which,
     to do him justice, was far from the case.
He might have gone on still further to calumniate himself, and excite general envy and
     admiration thereby, if at that moment Dr. Grimstone had not happened to appear at the head of
     the cast-iron staircase that led down into the playground; whereupon Mr. Tinkler affected to be
     intensely interested in the game, which, as a kind of involuntary compliment to the principal,
     about this time was galvanised into a sort of vigour.
But the Doctor, after frowning gloomily down upon them for a minute or so, suddenly called
     "All in!"
He had several ways of saying this. Sometimes he would do so in a half-regretful tone, as one
     himself obeying the call of duty; sometimes he would appear for some minutes, a benignant
     spectator, upon the balcony, and summon them to work at length with a lenient pity—for he was
     by no means a hard-hearted man; but at other times he would step sharply and suddenly out and
     shout the word of command with a grim and ominous expression. On these last occasions the
     school generally prepared itself for a rather formidable quarter of an hour.
This was the case now and, as a further portent, Mr. Blinkhorn was observed to come down and,
     after a few words with Mr. Tinkler, withdrew with him through the school gate.
"He's sent them out for a walk," said Siggers, who was skilled in omens. "It's a row!"
Rows at Crichton House, although periodical, and therefore things to be forearmed against in
     some degree, were serious matters. Dr. Grimstone was a quick-tempered man, with a copious flow
     of words and a taste for indulging it. He was also strongly prejudiced against many breaches of
     discipline which others might have considered trifling, and whenever he had
     discovered any such breach he could not rest until by all the means in his power he
     had ascertained exactly how many were implicated in the offence, and to what extent.
His usual method of doing this was to summon the school formally together and deliver an
     elaborate harangue, during which he worked himself by degrees into such a state of indignation
     that his hearers were most of them terrified out of their senses, and very often
     conscience-stricken offenders would give themselves up as hopelessly detected and reveal
     transgressions altogether unsuspected by him—much as a net brings up fish of all degrees of
     merit, or as heavy firing will raise drowned corpses to the surface.
Paul naturally knew nothing of this peculiarity; he had kept himself as usual apart from the
     others, and was now trying to compel himself to brave the terrors of an avowal at the first
     opportunity. He followed the others up the steps with an uneasy wonder whether, after all, he
     would not find himself ignominiously set down to learn lessons.
The boys filed into the schoolroom in solemn silence, and took their seats at the desks and
     along the brown tables. The Doctor was there before them, standing up with one elbow resting
     upon a reading-stand, and with a suggestion of coming thunder in his look and attitude that,
     combined with the oppressive silence, made some of the boys feel positively ill.
Presently he began. He said that, since they had come together again, he had made a discovery
     concerning one among them which, astounding as it was to him, and painful as he felt it to be
     compelled to make it known, concerned them all to be aware of.
Mr. Bultitude could scarcely believe his ears. His secret was discovered, then; the injury
     done him by Dick about to be repaired, and open restitution and apology offered him! It was not
     perhaps precisely delicate on the Doctor's part to make so public an affair of it, but so long
     as it ended well, he could afford to overlook that.


So he settled himself comfortably on a form with his back against a desk and his legs
     crossed, his expression indicating plainly that he knew what was coming and, on the whole,
     approved of it.
"Ever since I have devoted myself to the cause of tuition," continued the Doctor, "I have
     made it my object to provide boys under my roof with fare so abundant and so palatable that
     they should have no excuse for obtaining extraneous luxuries. I have presided myself at their
     meals, I have superintended their very sports with a fatherly eye——"
Here he paused, and fixed one or two of those nearest him with the fatherly eye in such a
     manner that they writhed with confusion.
"He's wandering from the point," thought Paul, a little puzzled.
"I have done all this on one understanding—that the robustness of your constitutions,
     acquired by the plain, simple, but abundant regimen of my table, shall not be tampered with by
     the indulgence in any of the pampering products of confectionery. They are absolutely and
     unconditionally prohibited—as every boy who hears me now knows perfectly well!
"And yet" (here he began gradually to relax his self-restraint and lash himself into a frenzy
     of indignation), "what do I find? There are some natures so essentially base, so incapable of
     being affected by kindness, so dead to honour and generosity, that they will not scruple to
     conspire or set themselves individually to escape and baffle the wise precautions undertaken
     for their benefit. I will not name the dastards at present—they themselves can look into their
     hearts and see their guilt reflected there——"
At this every boy, beginning to see the tendency of his denunciations, tried hard to assume
     an air of conscious innocence and grieved interest, the majority achieving conspicuous
     failure.
"I do not like to think," said Dr. Grimstone, "that the
      evil has a wider existence than I yet know of. It may be so; nothing will surprise
     me now. There may be some before me trembling with the consciousness of secret guilt. If so,
     let those boys make the only reparation in their power, and give themselves up in an honourable
     and straightforward manner!"
To this invitation, which indeed resembled that of the duck-destroying Mrs. Bond, no one made
     any response. They had grown too wary, and now preferred to play a waiting game.
"Then let the being—for I will not call him boy—who is known to me, step forth and confess
     his fault publicly, and sue for pardon!" thundered the Doctor, now warmed to his theme.
But the being declined from a feeling of modesty, and a faint hope that somebody else might,
     after all, be the person aimed at.
"Then I name him!" stormed Dr. Grimstone; "Cornelius Coggs—stand up!"
Coggs half rose in a limp manner, whimpering feebly, "Me, sir? Oh, please sir—no, not me,
     sir!"
"Yes, you, sir, and let your companions regard you with the contempt and abhorrence you so
     richly merit!" Here, needless to say, the whole school glared at poor Coggs with as much
     virtuous indignation as they could summon up at such short notice; for contempt is very
     infectious when communicated from high quarters.
"So, Coggs," said the Doctor, with a slow and withering scorn, "so you thought to defy me; to
     smuggle compressed illness and concentrated unhealthiness into this school with impunity? You
     flattered yourself that after I had once confiscated your contraband poisons, you would hear no
     more of it! You deceived yourself, sir! I tell you, once for all, that I will not allow you to
     contaminate your innocent schoolmates with your gifts of surreptitious sweetmeats; they shall
     not be perverted with your pernicious peppermints, sir; you shall not deprave them by jujubes,
     or enervate them with
     Turkish Delight! I will not expose myself or them to the inroads of disease invited
     here by a hypocritical inmate of my walls. The traitor shall have his reward!"
All of which simply meant that the Doctor, having once had a small boy taken seriously ill
     from the effects of overeating himself, was naturally anxious to avoid such an inconvenience
     for the future. "Thanks to the fearless honesty of a youth," continued the Doctor, "who, in an
     eccentric manner, certainly, but with, I do not doubt, the best of motives, opened my eyes to
     the fell evil, I am enabled to cope with it at its birth. Richard Bultitude, I take this
     occasion of publicly thanking and commending you; your conduct was noble!"
Mr. Bultitude was too angry and disappointed to speak. He had thought his path was going to
     be made smooth, and now all this ridiculous fuss was being made about a few peppermint
     lozenges. He wished he had never mentioned them. It was not the last time he breathed that
     wish. "As for you, Coggs," said the Doctor, suddenly producing a lithe brown cane, "I shall
     make a public example of you."
Coggs stared idiotically and protested, but after a short and painful scene, was sent off up
     to his bedroom, yelping like a kicked puppy.
"One word more," said the Doctor, now almost calm again. "I know that you all think with me
     in your horror of the treachery I have just exposed. I know that you would scorn to participate
     in it." (A thrill and murmur, expressive of intense horror and scorn, went round the benches.)
     "You are anxious to prove that you do so beyond a doubt." (Again a murmur of assent.) "I give
     you all that opportunity. I have implicit trust and confidence in you—let every boarder go down
     into the box-room and fetch up his playbox, just as it is, and open it here before me."
There was a general fall of jaws at this very unexpected conclusion; but contriving to
     overcome their dismay, they went outside and down through the
     playground into the box-room, Paul amongst the rest, and amidst universal
     confusion, everyone opened his box, and, with a consideration especially laudable in heedless
     boyhood, thoughtfully and carefully removed from it all such dainties as might be calculated to
     shock or pain their preceptor.
Mr. Bultitude found a key which was labelled "playbox," and began to open a box which bore
     Dick's initials cut upon the lid; without any apprehensions, however, for he had given too
     strict orders to his daughter, to fear that any luxuries would be concealed there.
But no sooner had he raised the lid than he staggered back with disgust. It was crammed with
     cakes, butterscotch, hardbake, pots of jam, and even a bottle of ginger wine—enough to
     compromise a chameleon!
He set himself to pitch them all out as soon as possible with feverish haste, but Tipping was
     too quick for him. "Hallo!" he cried: "oh, I say, you fellows, come here! Just look at this!
     Here's this impudent young beggar, who sneaked of poor old Coggs for sucking jujubes, and very
     nearly got us all into a jolly good row, with his own box full all the time; butterscotch, if
     you please, and jam, and ginger wine! You'll just put 'em all back again, will you, you young
     humbug!"
"Do you use those words to me, sir?" said Paul angrily, for he did not like to be called a
     humbug.
"Yes, sir, please, sir," jeered Tipping; "I did venture to take such a liberty, sir."
"Then it was like your infernal impudence," growled Paul. "You be kind enough to leave my
     affairs alone. Upon my word, what boys are coming to nowadays!"
"Are you going to put that tuck back?" said Tipping impatiently.
"No, sir, I'm not. Don't interfere with what you're not expected to understand!"
"Well, if you won't," said Tipping easily, "I suppose we must. Biddlecomb, kindly knock him
     down, and sit on his head while I fill his playbox for him."


This was neatly and quickly done. Biddlecomb tripped Mr. Bultitude up, and sat firmly on him,
     while Tipping carefully replaced the good things in Dick's box, after which he locked it, and
     courteously returned the key. "As the box is heavy," he said, with a wicked wink, "I'll carry
     it up for you myself," which he did, Paul following, more dead than alive, and too shaken even
     to expostulate.
"Bultitude's box was rather too heavy for him, sir," he explained as he came in; and Dr.
     Grimstone, who had quite recovered his equanimity, smiled indulgently, and remarked that he
     "liked to see the strong assisting the weak."
All the boxes had by this time been brought up, and were ranged upon the tables, while the
     Doctor went round, making an almost formal inspection, like a Custom House officer searching
     compatriots, and becoming milder and milder as box after box opened to reveal a fair and
     innocent interior.
Paul's turn was coming very near, and his heart seemed to shrivel like a burst bladder. He
     fumbled with his key, and tried hard to lose it. It was terrible to have oneself to apply the
     match which is to blow one to the winds. If—if—the idea was almost too horrible—but if he, a
     blameless and respectable city merchant, were actually to find himself served like the
     miserable Coggs!
At last the Doctor actually stood by him. "Well, my boy," he said, not unkindly, "I'm not
     afraid of anything wrong here, at any rate."
Mr. Bultitude, who had the best reasons for not sharing his confidence, made some
     inarticulate sounds, and pretended to have a difficulty in turning the key.
"Eh? Come, open the box," said the Doctor with an altered manner. "What are you fumbling at
     it for in this—this highly suspicious manner? I'll open it myself."
He took the key and opened the lid, when the cakes and wine stood revealed in all their
     damning profusion.
      The Doctor stepped back dramatically. "Hardbake!" he gasped; "wine, pots of
     strawberry jam! Oh, Bultitude, this is a revelation indeed! So I have nourished one more viper
     in my bosom, have I? A crawling reptile which curries favour by denouncing the very crime it
     conceals in its playbox! Bultitude, I was not prepared for such duplicity as this!"
"I—I swear I never put them in!" protested the unhappy Paul. "I—I never touch such things:
     they would bring on my gout in half-an-hour. It's ridiculous to punish me. I never knew they
     were there!"
"Then why were you so anxious to avoid opening the box?" rejoined the Doctor. "No, sir,
     you're too ingenious; your guilt is clear. Go to your dormitory, and wait there till I come to
     you!"
Paul went upstairs, feeling utterly abandoned and helpless. Though a word as to his real
     character might have saved him, he could not have said it, and, worse still, knew now that he
     could not.
"I shall be caned," he told himself, and the thought nearly drove him mad. "I know I shall be
     caned! What on earth shall I do?"
He opened the door of his bedroom. Coggs was rocking and moaning on his bed in one corner of
     the room, but looked up with red furious eyes as Paul came in.
"What do you want up here?" he said savagely. "Go away, can't you!"
"I wish I could go away," said Paul dolefully; "but I'm—hum—I'm sent up here too,"
     he explained, with some natural embarrassment.
"What!" cried Coggs, slipping off his bed and staring wildly: "you don't mean to say you're
     going to catch it too?"
"I've—ah—every reason to fear," said Mr. Bultitude stiffly, "that I am indeed going to 'catch
     it,' as you call it."
"Hooray!" shouted Coggs hysterically: "I don't
      care now. And I'll have some revenge on my own account as well. I don't mind an
     extra licking, and you're in for one as it is. Will you stand up to me or not?"
"I don't understand you," said Paul. "Don't come so near. Keep off, you young demon, will
     you!" he cried presently, as Coggs, exasperated by all his wrongs, was rushing at him with an
     evidently hostile intent. "There, don't be annoyed, my good boy," he pleaded, catching up a
     chair as a bulwark. "It was a misunderstanding. I wish you no harm. There, my dear young
     friend! Don't!"
The "dear young friend" was grappling with him and attempting to wrest the chair away by
     brute force. "When I get at you," he said, his hot breath hissing through the chair rungs,
     "I'll jolly well teach you to sneak of me!"
"Murder!" Paul gasped, feeling his hold on the chair relaxing. "Unless help comes this young
     fiend will have my blood!"
They were revolving slowly round the chair, watching each other's eyes like gladiators, when
     Paul noticed a sudden blankness and fixity in his antagonist's expression, and, looking round,
     saw Dr. Grimstone's awful form framed in the doorway, and gave himself up for lost.
</div></body></text></TEI>