<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Vice Versa, by F. Anstey
     </title><author>Anstey, F. [pseud.] (1856-1934)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1882</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
9. A Letter from Home

"Here are a few of the unpleasantest words
That ever blotted paper....
And every word in it a gaping wound."
If it were not that it was so absolutely essential to the interest of this story, I think I
     should almost prefer to draw a veil over the sufferings of Mr. Bultitude during the rest of
     that unhappy week at Crichton House; but it would only be false delicacy to do so.
Things went worse and worse with him. The real Dick in his most objectionable moods could
     never have contrived to render himself one quarter so disliked and suspected as his substitute
     was by the whole school—masters and boys.
It was in a great measure his own fault, too; for to an ordinary boy the life there would not
     have had any intolerable hardships, if it held out no exceptional attractions. But he would not
     accommodate himself to circumstances, and try, during his enforced stay, to get as much
     instruction and enjoyment as possible out of his new life.
Perhaps, in his position, it would be too much to expect such a thing and, at all events, it
     never even occurred to him to attempt it. He consumed himself instead with inward raging and
     chafing at his hard lot, and his utter powerlessness to break the spell which bound him.


Sometimes, indeed, he would resolve to bear it no longer, and would start up impulsively to
     impart his misfortunes to some one in minor authority—not the Doctor, he had given that up in
     resigned despair long since. But as surely as ever he found himself coming to the point, the
     words would stick fast in his throat, and he was only too thankful to get away, with his tale
     untold, on any frivolous pretext that first suggested itself.
This, of course, brought him into suspicion, for such conduct had the appearance of a
     systematic course of practical joking, and even the most impartial teachers will sometimes form
     an unfavourable opinion of a particular boy on rather slender grounds, and then find fresh
     confirmation of it in his most insignificant actions.
As for the school generally, his scowls and his sullenness, his deficiency in the daring and
     impudence that had warmed their hearts towards Dick, and, above all, his strange knack of
     getting them into trouble—for he seldom received what he considered an indignity without making
     a formal complaint—all this brought him as much hearty dislike and contempt as, perhaps, the
     most unsympathetic boy ever earned since boarding-schools were first invented.
The only boy who still seemed to retain a secret tenderness for him, as the Dick he had once
     looked up to and admired, was Jolland, who persisted in believing, and in stating his belief,
     that this apparent change of demeanour was a perverted kind of joke on Bultitude's part, which
     he would condescend to explain some day when it had gone far enough, and he wearied and annoyed
     Paul beyond endurance by perpetually urging him to abandon his ill-judged experiment and
     discover the point of the jest.
But for Jolland's help, which he persevered in giving in spite of the opposition and
     unpopularity it brought upon himself, Mr. Bultitude would have found it impossible to make any
     pretence of performing the tasks required of him.


He found himself expected, as a matter of course, to have a certain familiarity with Greek
     paradigms and German conversation scraps, propositions in Euclid and Latin gerunds, of all of
     which, having had a strict commercial education in his young days, he had not so much as heard
     before his metamorphosis. But by carefully copying Jolland's exercises, and introducing enough
     mistakes of his own to supply the necessary local colour, he was able to escape to a great
     degree the discovery of his blank ignorance on all these subjects—an ignorance which would
     certainly have been put down as mere idleness and obstinacy.
But it will be readily believed that he lived in constant fear of such discovery, and as it
     was, his dependence on a little scamp like his son's friend was a sore humiliation to one who
     had naturally supposed hitherto that any knowledge he had not happened to acquire could only be
     meretricious and useless.
He led a nightmare sort of existence for some days, until something happened which roused him
     from his state of passive misery into one more attempt at protest.
It was Saturday morning, and he had come down to breakfast, after being knocked about as
     usual in the dormitory over night, with a dull wonder how long this horrible state of things
     could possibly be going to last, when he saw on his plate a letter with the Paddington
     post-mark, addressed in a familiar hand—his daughter Barbara's.
For an instant his hopes rose high. Surely the impostor had been found out at last, and the
     envelope would contain an urgent invitation to him to come back and resume his rights—an
     invitation which he might show to the Doctor as his best apology.
But when he looked at the address, which was "Master Richard Bultitude," he felt a misgiving.
     It was unlikely that Barbara would address him thus if she knew the truth; he hesitated before
     tearing it open.
Then he tried to persuade himself that of course she
      would have the sense to keep up appearances for his own sake on the outside of
     the letter, and he compelled himself to open the envelope with fingers that trembled
     nervously.
The very first sentences scattered his faint expectations to the winds. He read on with
     staring eyes, till the room seemed to rock with him like a packet-boat and the sprawling
     school-girl handwriting, crossed and recrossed on the thin paper, changed to letters of
     scorching flame. But perhaps it will be better to give the letter in full, so that the reader
     may judge for himself whether it was calculated or not to soothe and encourage the exiled
     one.
Here it is:

"My dearest darling Dick,—I hope you have not been expecting a letter from me
     before this, but I had such lots to tell you that I waited till I had time to tell it all at
     once. For I have such news for you! You can't think how pleased you will be when you hear it.
     Where shall I begin? I hardly know, for it still seems so funny and strange—almost like a
     dream—only I hope we shall never wake up.
"I think I must tell you anyhow, just as it comes. Well, ever since you went away, dear
     Father has been completely changed; you would hardly believe it unless you saw him. He is quite
     jolly and boyish—only fancy! and we are always telling him he is the biggest baby of us all,
     but it only makes him laugh. Once, you know, he would have been awfully angry if we had even
     hinted at it.
"Do you know, I really think that the real reason he was so cross and sharp with us that
     last week was because you were going away; for now the wrench of parting is over, he is quite
     light-hearted again. You know how he always hates showing his feelings.
"He is so altered now, you can't think. He has actually only once been up to the city since
     you left,
      and then he came home at four o'clock, and he seems to quite like to have us all
     about him. Generally he stays at home all the morning and plays at soldiers with baby in the
     dining-room. You would laugh to see him loading the cannons with real powder and shot, and he
     didn't care a bit when some of it made holes in the sideboard and smashed the
     looking-glass.
"We had such fun the other afternoon; we played at brigands—papa and all of us. Papa had the
     upper conservatory for a robber-cave, and stood there keeping guard with your pop-gun; and he
     wouldn't let the servants go by without a kiss, unless they showed a written pass from us! Miss
     McFadden called in the middle of it, but she said she wouldn't come in, as papa seemed to be
     enjoying himself so. Boaler has given warning, but we can't think why. We have been out nearly
     every evening—once to Hengler's and once to the Christy Minstrels, and last night to the
     Pantomime, where papa was so pleased with the clown that he sent round afterwards and asked him
     to dine here on Sunday, when Sir Benjamin and Lady Bangle and Alderman Fishwick are coming.
     Won't it be jolly to see a clown close to? Should you think he'd come in his evening
     dress? Miss Mangnall has been given a month's holiday, because papa didn't like to see us
     always at lessons. Think of that!
"We are going to have the whole house done up and refurnished at last. Papa chose the
     furniture for the drawing-room yesterday. It is all in yellow satin, which is rather bright, I
     think. I haven't seen the carpet yet, but it is to match the furniture; and there is a lovely
     hearthrug, with a lion-hunt worked on it.
"But that isn't the best of it; we are going to have the big children's party after all! No
     one but children invited, and everyone to do exactly what they like. I wanted so much to have
     you home for it, but papa says it would only unsettle you and take you away from your work.


"Had Dulcie forgotten you? I should like to see her so much. Now I really must leave off, as
     I am going to the Aquarium with papa. Mind you write me as good a letter as this is, if that
     old Doctor lets you. Minnie and Roly send love and kisses, and papa sends his kind regards, and
     I am to say he hopes you are settling down steadily to work.
"With best love, your affectionate sister, "Barbara Bultitude."       
"P.S.—I nearly forgot to say that Uncle Duke came the other day and has stayed here ever
     since. He is going to make papa's fortune! I believe by a gold mine he knows about somewhere,
     and a steam tramway in Lapland. But I don't like him very much—he is so polite."
It would be nothing short of an insult to the reader's comprehension, if I were to enter into
     an elaborate explanation of the effect this letter had upon Mr. Bultitude. He took it in by
     degrees, trying to steady his nerves at each additional item of poor Barbara's well-meant
     intelligence by a sip at his tin-flavoured coffee. But when he came to the postscript, in spite
     of its purport being mercifully broken to him gradually by the extreme difficulty of making it
     out from two undercurrents of manuscript, he choked convulsively and spilt his coffee.
Dr. Grimstone visited this breach of etiquette with stern promptness. "This conduct at table
     is disgraceful, sir—perfectly disgraceful—unworthy of a civilised being. I have been a teacher
     of youth for many years, and never till now did I have the pain of seeing a pupil of mine choke
     in his breakfast-cup with such deplorable ill-breeding. It's pure greediness, sir, and you will
     have the goodness to curb your indecent haste in consuming your food for the future. Your
     excellent father has frequently complained to me, with tears in his eyes, of the impossibility
     of teaching you to behave at meals with common propriety!"


There was a faint chuckle along the tables, and several drank coffee with studied elegance
     and self-repression either as a valuable example to Dick, or as a personal advertisement. But
     Paul was in no mood for reproof and instruction. He stood up in his excitement, flourishing his
     letter wildly.
"Dr. Grimstone!" he said; "never mind my behaviour now. I've something to tell you. I can't
     bear it any longer. I must go home at once—at once, sir!"
There was a general sensation at this, for his manner was peremptory and almost dictatorial.
     Some thought he would get a licking on the strength of it, and most hoped so. But the Doctor
     dismissed them to the playground, keeping Paul back to be dealt with in privacy.
Mrs. Grimstone played nervously with her dry toast at the end of the table, for she could not
     endure to see the boys in trouble and dreaded a scene, while Dulcie looked on with wide bright
     eyes.
"Now, sir," said the Doctor, looking up from his marmalade, "why must you go home at
     once?"
"I've just had a letter," stammered Paul.
"No one ill at home, I hope?"
"No, no," said Paul. "It's not that; it's worse! She doesn't know what horrible things she
     tells me!"
"Who is 'she'?" said the Doctor—and Dulcie's eyes were larger still and her face paled.
"I decline to say," said Mr. Bultitude. It would have been absurd to say 'my daughter,' and
     he had not presence of mind just then to transpose the relationships with neatness and success.
     "But indeed I am wanted most badly!"
"What are you wanted for, pray?"
"Everything!" declared Paul; "it's all going to rack and ruin without me!"
"That's absurd," said the Doctor; "you're not such an important individual as all that,
     Bultitude. But let me see the letter."
Show him the letter—lay bare all those follies of
      Dick's, the burden of which he might have to bear himself very shortly—never!
     Besides, what would be the use of it? It would be no argument in favour of sending him
     home—rather the reverse—so Paul was obliged to say, "Excuse me, Dr. Grimstone, it is—ah—of a
     private nature. I don't feel at liberty to show it to anyone."
"Then, sir," said the Doctor, with some reason, "if you can't tell me who or what it is that
     requires your presence at home, and decline to show me the letter which would presumably give
     me some idea on the subject, how do you expect that I am to listen to such a preposterous
     demand—eh? Just tell me that!"
Once more would Paul have given worlds for the firmness and presence of mind to state his
     case clearly and effectively; and he could hardly have had a better opportunity, for
     schoolmasters cannot always be playing the tyrant, and the Doctor was, in spite of his attempts
     to be stern, secretly more amused than angry at what seemed a peculiarly precocious piece of
     effrontery.
But Paul felt the dismal absurdity of his position. Nothing he had said, nothing he could
     say, short of the truth, would avail him, and the truth was precisely what he felt most unable
     to tell. He hung his head resignedly, and held his tongue in confusion.
"Pooh!" said the Doctor at last; "let me have no more of this tomfoolery, Bultitude. It's
     getting to be a positive nuisance. Don't come to me with any more of these ridiculous stories,
     or some day I shall be annoyed. There, go away, and be contented where you are, and try to
     behave like other people."
"'Contented!'" muttered Paul, when out of hearing, as he went upstairs and through the empty
     schoolroom into the playground. "'Behave like other people!' Ah, yes, I suppose I shall have to
     come to that in time. But that letter—— Everything upside down—— Bangle asked to meet a common
     clown! That fellow Duke letting me in for gold-mines and tramways! It's
      all worse than I ever dreamed of; and I must stay here and be 'contented!'
     It's—it's perfectly damnable!"
All through that morning his thoughts ran in the same doleful groove, until the time for work
     came to an end, and he found himself in the playground, and free to indulge his melancholy for
     a few minutes in solitude; for the others were still loitering about in the schoolroom, and a
     glass outhouse originally intended for a conservatory, but now devoted to boots and slates, and
     the books liberally besmeared with gilt, and telling of the exploits of boy-heroes so beloved
     of boys.
Mr. Bultitude, only too delighted to get away from them for a little while, was leaning
     against the parallel bars in dull despondency, when he heard a rustling in the laurel hedge
     which cut off the house garden from the gravelled playground, and looking up, saw Dulcie slip
     through the shrubs and come towards him with an air of determination in her proud little
     face.
She looked prettier and daintier than ever in her grey hat and warm fur tippet; but of course
     Paul was not of the age or in the mood to be much affected by such things—he turned his head
     pettishly away.
"It's no use doing that, Dick," she said: "I'm tired of sulking. I shan't sulk any more till
     I have an explanation."
Paul made the sound generally written "Pshaw!"
"You ought to tell me everything. I will know it. Oh, Dick, you might tell me! I always told
     you anything you wanted to know; and I let mamma think it was I broke the clock-shade last
     term, and you know you did it. And I want to know something so very badly!"
"It's no use coming to me, you know," said Paul. "I can't do anything for you."
"Yes, you can; you know you can!" said Dulcie impulsively. "You can tell me what was in that
     letter you had at breakfast—and you shall too!"
"What an inquisitive little girl you are," said Paul
      sententiously. "It's not nice for little girls to be so inquisitive—it doesn't
     look well."
"I knew it!" cried Dulcie; "you don't want to tell me—because—because it's from that other
     horrid girl you like better than me. And you promised to belong to me for ever and ever, and
     now it's all over! Say it isn't! Oh, Dick, promise to give the other girl up. I'm sure she's
     not a nice girl. She's written you an unkind letter; now hasn't she?"
"Upon my word," said Paul, "this is very forward; at your age too. Why, my Barbara——"
"Your Barbara! you dare to call her that? Oh, I knew I was right; I will see that
     letter now. Give it me this instant!" said Dulcie imperiously; and Paul really felt almost
     afraid of her.
"No, no," he said, retreating a step or two, "it's all a mistake; there's nothing to get into
     such a passion about—there isn't indeed! And—don't cry—you're really a pretty little girl. I
     only wish I could tell you everything; but you'd never believe me!"
"Oh, yes, I would, Dick!" protested Dulcie, only too willing to be convinced of her
     boy-lover's constancy; "I'll believe anything, if you'll only tell me. And I'm sorry I was so
     angry. Sit down by me and tell me from the very beginning. I promise not to interrupt."
Paul thought for a moment. After all, why shouldn't he? It was much pleasanter to tell his
     sorrows to her little ear and hear her childish wonder and pity than face her terrible
     father—he had tried that. And then she might tell her mother; and so his story might reach the
     Doctor's ears after all, without further effort on his part.
"Well," he said at last, "I think you're a good-natured little girl; you won't laugh. Perhaps
     I will tell you!"
So he sat down on the bench by the wall, and Dulcie, quite happy again now at this proof of
     good faith, nestled up against him confidingly, waiting for his first words with parted lips
     and eager sparkling eyes.


"Not many days ago," began Paul, "I was somebody very different from——"
"Oh, indeed," said a jarring, sneering voice close by; "was you?" And he looked up and saw
     Tipping standing over him with a plainly hostile intent.
"Go away, Tipping," said Dulcie; "we don't want you. Dick is telling me a secret."
"He's very fond of telling, I know," retorted Tipping. "If you knew what a sneak he was you'd
     have nothing to do with him, Dulcie. I could tell you things about him that——"
"He's not a sneak," said Dulcie. "Are you, Dick? Why don't you go, Tipping. Never mind what
     he says, Dick; go on as if he wasn't there. I don't care what he says!"
It was a most unpleasant situation for Mr. Bultitude, but he did not like to offend Tipping.
     "I—I think—some other time, perhaps," he said nervously. "Not now."
"Ah, you're afraid to say what you were going to say now I'm here," said the amiable Tipping,
     nettled by Dulcie's little air of haughty disdain. "You're a coward; you know you are. You
     pretend to think such a lot of Dulcie here, but you daren't fight!"
"Fight!" said Mr. Bultitude. "Eh, what for?"
"Why, for her, of course. You can't care much about her if you daren't fight for her. I want
     to show her who's the best man of the two!"
"I don't want to be shown," wailed poor Dulcie piteously, clinging to the reluctant Paul; "I
     know. Don't fight with him, Dick. I say you're not to."
"Certainly not!" said Mr. Bultitude with great decision. "I shouldn't think of such a thing!"
     and he rose from the bench and was about to walk away, when Tipping suddenly pulled off his
     coat and began to make sundry demonstrations of a martial nature, such as dancing aggressively
     towards his rival and clenching his fists.


By this time most of the other boys had come down into the playground, and were looking on
     with great interest. There was an element of romance in this promised combat which gave it
     additional attractions. It was like one of the struggles between knightly champions in the
     Waverley novels. Several of them would have fought till they couldn't see out of their eyes if
     it would have given them the least chance of obtaining favour in Dulcie's sight, and they all
     envied Dick, who was the only boy that was not unmercifully snubbed by their capricious little
     princess.
Paul alone was blind to the splendour of his privileges. He examined Tipping carefully, as
     the latter was still assuming a hostile attitude and chanting a sort of war-cry supposed to be
     an infallible incentive to strife.
"Yah, you're afraid!" he sang very offensively. "I wouldn't be a funk!"
"Pooh!" said Paul at last; "go away, sir, go away!"
"Go away, eh?" jeered Tipping. "Who are you to tell me to go away? Go away yourself!"
"Certainly," said Paul, only too happy to oblige. But he found himself prevented by a ring of
     excited backers.
"Don't funk it, Dick!" cried some, forgetting recent ill-feeling in the necessity for
     partisanship. "Go in and settle him as you did that last time. I'll second you. You can do
     it!"
"Don't hit each other in the face," pleaded Dulcie, who had got upon a bench and was looking
     down into the ring—not, if the truth must be told, without a certain pleasurable excitement in
     the feeling that it was all about her.
And now Mr. Bultitude discovered that he was seriously expected to fight this great hulking
     boy, and that the sole reason for any disagreement was an utterly unfounded jealousy respecting
     this little girl Dulcie. He had not a grain of chivalry in his disposition—chivalry being an
     eminently unpractical virtue—and naturally he saw no advantage in letting himself be
      mauled for the sake of a child younger than his own daughter.
Dulcie's appeal enraged Tipping, who took it as addressed solely to himself. "You ought to be
     glad to stick up for her," he said between his teeth. "I'll mash you for this—see if I
     don't!"
Paul thought he saw his way clear to disabuse Tipping of his mistaken idea. "Are you
     proposing," he asked politely, "to—to 'mash' me on account of that little girl there on the
     seat?"
"You'll soon see," growled Tipping. "Shut your head, and come on!"
"No, but I want to know," persisted Mr. Bultitude. "Because," he said with a sickly attempt
     at jocularity which delighted none, "you see, I don't want to be mashed. I'm not a potato. If I
     understand you aright, you want to fight me because you think me likely to interfere with your
     claim to that little girl's—ah—affections?"
"That's it," said Tipping gruffly; "so you'd better waste no more words about it, and come
     on."
"But I don't care about coming on," protested Paul earnestly. "It's all a mistake. I've no
     doubt she's a very nice little girl, but I assure you, my good boy, I've no desire to stand in
     your way for one instant. She's nothing to me—nothing at all! I give her up to you. Take her,
     young fellow, with my blessing! There, now, that's all settled comfortably—eh?"
He was just looking round with a self-satisfied and relieved air, when he began to be aware
     that his act of frank unselfishness was not as much appreciated as it deserved. Tipping,
     indeed, looked baffled and irresolute for one moment, but a low murmur of disgust arose from
     the bystanders, and even Jolland declared that it was "too beastly mean."
As for Dulcie, she had been looking on incredulously at her champion's unaccountable
     tardiness in coming to the point. But this public repudiation was too much for her. She gave a
     little low wail as she heard the
      shameless words of recantation, and then, without a word, jumped lightly down
     from her bench and ran away to hide herself somewhere and cry.
Even Paul, though he knew that he had done nothing but what was strictly right, and had acted
     purely in self-protection, felt unaccountably ashamed of himself as he saw this effect of his
     speech. But it was too late now.
</div></body></text></TEI>