<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER VI.
The winter advances; Christmas comes; comes, as it not infrequently now comes to
      the world's greatest city, in an almost total darkness; a choking yellow darkness. The gas has
      to be lit at ten o'clock in the morning. Drearily it flares, from the imperceptible dawn until
      the undiscriminated night. Under its and the fog's pestilent breaths the flowers in the stands
      wither; the carefully-cherished puny ferns shrink away into death. Through the suffocating
      obscurity the church bells ring muffled; the cabs crawl cautiously at a foot's pace, and the
      omnibuses cease to run. None of the Churchill family have been able to get
       to church; and either by that fact or by the fog their spirits and tempers are
      sensibly worsened.
Mrs. Churchill likes to go to church on Christmas Day; it is a sort of fetish, the loss of
      which may entail disadvantage upon her, either in this world or in the next.
"How anything short of absolute necessity can keep anyone in England during the winter
      months, passes my comprehension!" cries she, taking up her old cry, and pettishly clicking
      together the clasps of the prayer-book, in which she has been reading the lessons for the
      day.
Sarah, her only companion, makes no reply; not that she is absorbed in any occupation, but
      because the remark appears to her to be both old and worthless.
"And I am far from feeling sure that we shall ever get away after all," continues the elder
      woman, seeing that she may wait in vain for a sympathetic response. "I feel no sort of
      confidence in Belinda," in an exasperated voice; "she is quite capable of throwing him over at
      the last moment.
       What do you think? do not you hear that I am speaking to you? do not you think
      that she is quite capable of throwing him over at the last moment?"
"It shall not be for want of asking if she does not," replies Sarah surlily.
"I really do not see that you have any right to put pressure upon her," rejoins Mrs.
      Churchill crossly; "I cannot see that it is any business of yours. Because you
      behaved extremely ill to him, is no reason why you should incite your sister to do the same.
      In fairness to him, I must insist upon your not attempting to influence her one way or the
      other!"
"You may insist," replies Sarah undutifully, her soft round face growing dogged and
      hard; "but as long as I have one breath left, I shall spend it in trying to hinder her from
      such a monstrous suicide."
" Suicide !" repeats Mrs. Churchill angrily; "pooh! you may be very thankful if you
      ever get anyone to make as good a settlement upon you as he has done upon her!
       Suicide , indeed!"

"Why do you not marry him yourself, if you are so pleased with him?" asks Sarah cynically;
      "it seems all one to him which of us he marries, so as he gets one of the family; it seems to
      be the breed, not the individual, that he admires. Marry him yourself, and carry him off to
      Cannes; I assure you that I will not move a finger to prevent you!"
"He is a man not without distinction in his own line," pursues Mrs. Churchill, affecting not
      to have heard her grand-daughter's last ironical suggestion; "though it happens to be a line
      which you are quite incapable of appreciating. He is not handsome, certainly, but there is a
      good deal of —of," hesitating for an encomium—"of character in his face. He has made an
      excellent settlement upon her; it quite took me by surprise. She is twenty-one, and it is her
      first bonâ-fide offer; I think you will not be acting at all a friend's part in
      making her quarrel with her bread-and-butter."
"Whether I am acting the part of a
       friend or not," retorts Sarah obstinately, marching towards the door, "I promise
      you that I shall carry my remonstrances to the altar-foot; and so would you if you did your
      duty. You may like to know," firing a defiant parting shot from the door-way, "that I am going
      straight to her now to resume the subject."
She is as good as her word. She finds Belinda where she knew that she would find her, in her
      little back sitting-room, but not employed as she had expected. She had thought to come upon
      her stooping over her eternal copy-books; but for once they are laid aside. She is sitting on
      the hearthrug, the gas glaring above her and casting its ugly shadows upon her cheeks, making
      them look lined and hollow. Strewn about her is a small litter of old writing-desks, old
      workboxes, childish relics. On her lap lies open a morocco pocket-book, over which, on Sarah's
      entrance, she hastily puts her hands, as if to conceal it.
"I am setting my house in order," she
       says, looking up with a rather guilty smile. "Did you ever see such a squirrel's
      nest? Here is the case of court-plaister that you gave me on my eighth birthday. Do you
      remember how fond we were of giving each other court-plaister? Here is the lady's companion
      that granny brought me from Bath; I remember crying because she brought you such a much better
      one. Even as long ago as then," looking pensively at the little rusty old pair of scissors and
      the dim bodkin, "it began."
"What were you looking at when I came in?" asks Sarah brusquely, and dropping on her knees
      beside her sister.
Belinda starts. Her first impulse is to clasp her hands in still closer guardianship over
      her hid treasure; but her next corrects it.
"You are quite welcome to see them once more, before they go into the fire," she says
      quietly, though in the yellow gaslight her cheeks crimson. "I do not know why I should hide
      them; they are relics of an affection almost as warm and
       as steady as granny's. There!" picking up and holding scornfully between her
      finger and thumb for Sarah's inspection one withered flower after another. "That was once a
      gardenia; that was a Cape jessamine; that was a tuberose. How pretty they look! how sweetly
      they smell now! Have you looked enough at them? Off with them then!"
As she speaks, and despite Sarah's hand stretched out with involuntary eagerness to check
      her, she tosses the little dry skeletons into the fire, where, with a hardly perceptible
      shrivel and crackle, they for ever disappear.
Belinda watches them with a hard, dry eye.
"Are you satisfied?" she says, turning to her sister, and exhibiting the pocket-book
      extended empty from cover to cover. "There is nothing else in it except my love-letter; it is
      humiliating to have but one, is not it? Would you like to read it again before it follows
      those pretty flowers, or may it go at once?"

"Give it me!" cries Sarah, snatching the little sheet, which looks older than it really is
      from obvious hard wear, continual unfolding, blistering tears. "I will read it again. Perhaps,
      reading it in cold blood like this, the meaning may strike one differently!"
"If you wish I can spare you the trouble," says Belinda bitterly. "I can say it to you if
      you wish."
The fire burns low and dull; and Sarah rises and stands right beneath the gas, so that no
      lack of light may hinder her examination of the document in her hand. But the rays of a June
      sun would be in this case of no use.
"I can make nothing of it," she says dispiritedly, giving it back to its owner; "but do not—
       do not burn it!"
For a moment Belinda hesitates, considering with quivering eyelids and trembling lip the
      small and faded paper. Then in a moment it has followed the flowers!
At first it gives a curling writhe, as if it
       hurt it to be burnt; then one or two sentences come out very clear before flying
      in black film up the chimney. The one that lasts longest and disappears latest is, "Oh,
      forgive me!"
After that there is silence. Sarah has dropped sulkily into an armchair; and Belinda has
      turned again to her childish treasures, and is beginning to sort and part them. But her hands
      move mechanically of their own accord, and with that want of purpose which shows that they are
      not directed by the brain.
When a quarter of an hour has gone dumbly by, Belinda speaks, in that flat and spiritless
      voice which is now habitual to her:
"I wanted to ask your advice; I want you to give me your opinion. Is it necessary —am I
      bound in honour to tell Professor Forth?"
She stops with a sudden sobbing catch in her breath.
"If you think that your confidence will be in the least likely to make him break
       his engagement, tell him by all means!" replies Sarah surlily. "Not only tell him
      what there is to tell, but invent a great deal more besides. I promise you that I will aid you
      with all the powers of my imagination!"
"Must I really tell him?" groans Belinda, with an accent of such acute pain that Sarah's
      heart smites her.
"Tell him!" she cries compassionately. "My poor child, what is there to tell?"
"What indeed!" acquiesces Belinda, in bitter humility. But she looks relieved. "Even if
      there were anything to tell," she goes on a moment later—"but, as you justly say, there is
      nothing, for one is not answerable to anyone for the freaks of one's own imagination—but even
      if there were, he has no concern with my past, has he? It is only from the tenth of next month
      onwards that I am accountable to him for my actions!"
"The tenth of next month!" repeats Sarah fiercely. "What, is that still the
       day on which the gallows is to be erected?"
"If you think that by wording it so offensively, you will induce me to put it off, you are
      mistaken," answers Belinda, with an access of miserable, sore ill-humour; "and you know the
      sooner I am 'out of the way'—I am always in the way now— the sooner you can be off to the
      South!"
"Save your sneers for granny, who deserves them," answers Sarah, genuinely hurt. "I do
      not."
"I know you do not!" cries the other remorsefully; "but you were the nearest thing to me. It
      seems, nowadays, as if I must put my sting into whatever is nearest to me!"
"That is the right frame of mind in which to be led to the gal—to the altar, is not it?"
      retorts Sarah sarcastically; and again they are silent.
"I now wish to heaven," resumes Sarah devoutly, at the expiration of a heavy interval, "that
      I had married him myself. Intensely as I should have disliked it, he
       could not have made me as unhappy as he will you. A wineglass holds less than a
      hogshead; and the pious hope of an early widowhood, which you will be too conscientious to
      indulge, would have buoyed me up!"
Belinda's only answer is a sickly smile.
"You would have gone on living with granny and the dogs," pursues Sarah, in earnest
      narrative; "she would have grown civiller to you when she found that she had no one else to
      depend on, and she really is very good company when she chooses; and by-and-by, some fine day,
      Rivers might have come back. No, no!" resolutely catching and holding down with her small,
      strong wrists the hands that her sister is hurrying to her tortured face. "I do not care
      whether you wince or no! I do not care whether it hurts you or no; you must and
       shall hear. Some day— Rivers—might—have come back again ! He may come back
      still; but it may be after the 10th of January!"
She pauses dramatically, and fixes her
       eyes upon the poor quivering features, so barely exposed to her piercing
      scrutiny. There comes no answer but a moaning sigh.
"I can give you no reason for it," continues Sarah; "I know no more about him than you do;
      but I have a conviction— something tells me, that there has been some mistake, some hitch,
      some unavoidable delay!"
"An unavoidable delay of eighteen months!" says Belinda, with faltering irony. "How
      likely!"
"A letter has been lost."
"Letters are never lost," hopelessly.
"Well, have it as you like!" cries Sarah impatiently. "All the same, my conviction remains
      that some day he will come back again. How glad you will be to see him! How pleasant it will
      be for you to introduce him to your husband, Mr. Forth!"
By a great wrench, Belinda succeeds in loosing one hand; but it is a very insufficient
      shield, and she has failed in liberating
       the other, so sturdily held in Sarah's small but potent grasp.
"I see him coming into the room with those blazing eyes of his," goes on Sarah, in a sort of
      prophetic frenzy—"they were not much like Mr. Forth's eyes, were they?—and you introducing
      them to each other: 'My husband, Mr. Forth! Mr. Rivers!' I envy you that moment!"
But at this Belinda tears herself free.
"This is too much!" she says, in a suffocated voice, and struggling to reach the door. "Let
      me go! I must go! I can bear no more!"
But Sarah falls on her knees, and catches her sister's gown.
"Do you think it is as bad as the reality will be?" she asks, in a thrilling, clear voice.
      "And you will not be able to run away from it! Do you suppose that there will be a single
      corner in the whole earth in which you can take refuge from it?"
Something in Sarah's tone has, more than her detaining gesture, arrested Belinda's
       flight. Stock-still she stands, in a wretched irresolution, death-pale.
"It is too late!" she murmurs miserably.
"It is not too late!" cries Sarah in wild excitement, clasping her sister's knees;
      "it will be too late after the 10th, but it is not too late now. Give it up! Throw him over!
      What will he care? What harm will it do him? How much the worse is he for having been thrown
      over by me?"
Belinda still stands, white and trembling, her eyes staring stonily out into vacancy. Before
      them, though they seem to see nothing, stands that dreadful vision conjured up by her sister;
      and the sight of it makes every limb shake.
"It is impossible!" she says feebly.
"It is not impossible!" asseverates Sarah, in passionate heat. "Give me a chance,
      and I will show you whether it is possible or no! Let me tell him. Give me that commission as
      my Christmas-box; it would be the best I ever had! I will tell him," laughing rather
      hysterically, "that
       it is a constitutional peculiarity of our family!"
Perhaps it is Sarah's laugh that recalls her sister to a more normal condition of feeling.
      With a long sigh she comes back to reality.
"Who would tell granny?" she asks, with a sarcastic smile. "Who would dare break to her that
      she was not to be robbed of her darling after all?"
" I would!" cries Sarah, with delighted eagerness. "I know few things in the world
      that would give me a purer pleasure. Let me go now, at once! Strike while the iron is hot!"
      jumping up, and moving in her turn rapidly towards the door. But it is now Belinda
      who detains her.
"Pooh!" she says coldly; "it was only a flight of fancy on my part. It would be amusing to
      give her a fright; but she has no real cause for alarm. What change has happened that I should
      change?" in a lifeless tone. "Your word-painting was so vivid, that for one moment I thought
      he had come back; but it seems not. I think,"
       with a bitter smile, "that if I waited for him to come back to me, I should wait
      my life long."
"I do not ask you to wait your life long," cries Sarah, redoubling that energy of persuasion
      which, as she disppointedly sees, has been hitherto exercised in vain. "I only ask you to wait
       one month ! Surely," with a scathing sneer, "the joys that you expect are not so
      poignant but that you can afford to defer them for four weeks!"
"Why should I defer them?" asks Belinda, with a fierce restlessness in eye and gesture. "If
      I had had my will, I should have been married by now. It is this state of transition which is
      worst of all; one is unhinged; one is off one's balance."
Sarah has again fallen down on the floor before her sister, and is again suppliantly
      clasping her knees.
"One month! one month!" she cries beseechingly. "And before the month is out, you may be
      down on your knees as
       I am, thanking God and me for having saved you from perdition. One month! one
      month!"
She has pressed her head against her sister's gown, and through the woollen stuff her tears
      are soaking—Sarah's rare tears!
There is such a compelling ring in her voice that Belinda's cold, sick heart throbs beneath
      it. Again that vision rises before her, but changed and beautified. Rivers is coming into the
      room, but between him and her thrusts itself no chill, pedant figure.
As she so stands hesitating, thrilling, in a waking dream, the door of the room does in
      effect fly open, and some one enters. Is it Rivers? Alas, no!
"A merry Christmas to you!" bawls Miss Watson, noisily entering, and throwing her greeting
      at them like a paving-stone. "I have just been up to wish granny a merry Christmas, but she
      does not seem very bright, eh? Do you think she is breaking at all? She did not seem up to her
      usual mark!"

Sarah has sprung to her feet, her habitual aplomb gone, and her one impulse to
      hide, at any price, her tear-stained face from the horny eyes of the intruder.
"Why, you do not look very bright either!" cries the latter, looking inquisitively
      from one to the other of the girls' dismal faces. "What is it? Christmas bills? Colds? You
      look as if you had a cold!" concentrating her whole attention upon Sarah, whose face is so
      little used to being inundated with tears that it resents it, and shows the traces more
      plainly than does one that is frequently bewept.
"I have," she answers, snatching eagerly at the excuse, and violently resuming a part of her
      usual nonchalant self-command; "a terrific cold. I have had it for—for years ! If I
      were you, I would not come near me, or I shall give it you as soon as look at you!"
"Pooh!" replies Miss Watson doughtily. "You should take a cold bath all the year round, and
      wear flannel next your skin. Look at me!"

"Are you the result of taking a cold bath all the year round, and wearing flannel next the
      skin?" asks Sarah innocently, stealing a covert glance at her own foggy image in the little
      Chippendale mirror over the mantelpiece, to see how far she is recovered.
But Miss Watson does not hear.
"I am sure I do not know how I ever got here!" continues she, drawing up a chair to the
      fire, and setting her large feet on the fender; "there is not a cab to be had. I felt my way
      all round Berkeley Square by the railings. Five or six times I was as nearly as possible run
      over!"
"Just heavens, why not quite ?" murmurs Sarah under her breath.
"I never remember such a Christmas Day; do you ever remember such a Christmas Day?
      I have just been asking granny whether, in all her long experience, she ever
      remembers such a Christmas Day."
"If you have been appealing to granny's long experience," rejoins Sarah sarcastically,
       "no wonder you did not find her very bright; there is nothing in the world that
      she hates so much."
"I told her how ill I thought her looking," goes on the visitor comfortably, rubbing her
      knees, advanced in close proximity to the fire. "She tells me that it is the climate; that it
      is killing her by inches. She seems to have her heart set upon going to the Riviera; why does
      not she go?" with another look of acute inquisitiveness darted at her two companions. "She
      spoke of there being some tiresome hitch—something in the way; what is it—eh?"
"We cannot bear to go so far away from you," replies Sarah impudently, but with a nervous
      laugh and look towards her sister; "that is it."
But a curiosity so robust as Miss Watson's is not to be blunted by a jest. That great Toledo
      blade is not to be turned aside by a light rapier.
"No question of £ s. d ., eh?" says she persistently; "the Riviera grows dearer
       every year! No? Anything about either of you, then?" trying to get a better idea
      of Belinda than the rather drooped nape of her white neck and one homespun shoulder afford;
      "any little—little entanglement , eh?"
"You have hit it!" cries Sarah jeeringly; "it is useless to try and conceal anything from
      you: we are endeavouring to arrange a marriage between me and the Archbishop of Canterburry;
      and as he cannot conveniently leave his see, we think it as well that I should remain in the
      neighbourhood."
It is obvious that nothing is to be made of Sarah; the visitor turns her attention towards
      the other sister.
"Any more Latin exercises, Belinda?" she asks in a rallying voice; "has Professor Forth been
      helping you to do any more Latin exercises? does he often come? do you see much of him? does
      he ever ask you to go down to Oxbridge, eh?"
To these questions Belinda's answer is
       so unready that her junior has again to come to her aid.
"Of course," she answers ironically; "but he says he will not have us, unless we bring you
      too."
"As to that," replies Miss Watson, her rhinoceros-hide quite unpunctured by the pricks of
      this angry persiflage, "I can tell you I have a very good mind to take a run down there. What
      do you say to our making up a party? we would make him give us luncheon and take us about;
      they are always delighted to give one luncheon and take one about; and if we can get hold of
      Rivers, we will make him come too."
She looks triumphantly round to collect the suffrages of her companions as to this project;
      but neither is equal to giving utterance to any opinion upon it.
"Apropos of Rivers," continues the other, too happy in the sound of her own voice to miss
      the lacking response, and addressing the observation more especially to Belinda, "a very odd
      thing happened to me. I had not gone five yards from your
       house the other day, before I met him. I asked him at once whether he was on his
      way to call upon you."
"And he said what?" asks Sarah, trying to speak lightly, but with a hurry in her voice that
      she cannot still.
"He said 'No.'"
"That answer had at least the merit of brevity," replies Sarah, laughing forcedly and
      changing her position so as to interpose the slight bulwark of her girlish figure between her
      sister and their guest.
"I asked him why not. I said, 'Do go; they expect you.'"
"That did not show a rigorous attention to truth on your part," rejoins Sarah sharply: "we
      did not expect him. But what did he say to that? was his answer marked by the same courteous
      diffuseness as before?"
"He did not say anything; he walked on very fast and hailed a hansom; but I should not
      wonder if he did come after all," consolingly. "I called out to him, just as he was driving
      off, to be sure not to forget.
       Is that the luncheon-bell? Dear me! how the morning has run away! I suppose,"
      with her loud assured laugh, "that you will give me a slice of beef and plum pudding, will not
      you, eh?"

</div></body></text></TEI>