<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
CHAPTER VIII.
Belinda has been married three days. We are creatures of habit, as everyone knows;
      and it is surprising with what quick pliability we find ourselves cutting off and tucking in
      whatever angles prevent our fitting into any new niche that it may be our fate to occupy. But
      this process, though rapid, is usually of somewhat longer accomplishment than three days. At
      all events, Belinda has not yet got into the habit of being married. There still seems to her
      something improbable—nay, monstrous—in the fact of herself sitting opposite to Professor Forth
      at breakfast in their Folkestone lodgings, pouring weak tea for him out of
       a Britannia metal teapot, and sedulously recollecting how many lumps of sugar he
      likes, as she has already discovered that he has an objection to repeating the information.
      Nor is it less monstrous to be warming his overcoat, and cutting his newspapers, and ordering
      his dinners with that nice attention to digestibility and economy which she finds to be
      expected of her. They have been enormously long, these three days. It seems to her as if for
       months she has been looking at those hideous ornaments on the drawing-room
      chimney-piece, and trying to draw the skimp summer curtains that will not draw across the
      shutterless windows, rattled by the wind. For months she has been listening to the eternal
      sighing, sobbing, whistling, howling of that same wind, and to the sea banging on the cold
      shore. For months she has been walking with Professor Forth up and down, up and down the Leas,
      six turns this way, six turns that way. For months she has been writing his letters till her
      hand ached, and reading aloud to him till her
       voice cracked. As for the reading and writing, she cannot have too much of them
      —the more the better! There is nothing like occupation—a continuous, settled occupation—
      nothing like occupation for keeping out of one's head those words of Sarah's that ring so
      foolishly dinning in her ears, "There is no sense in it! there is no sense in it!" She will
      not listen to them. Even if they are true, of what profit to hearken to them now? And reading
      and writing render conversation, too, less necessary. It is certain that, however
      determinately anyone may have confined his or her contemplation of another person's character
      to the intellectual side of it, it is impossible to live with that person without discovering
      that he or she has another side. Belinda has already discovered that her Professor has
      another. It is surprising how much less of his conversation has turned during the last three
      days upon the problems of the mind and the sayings of the mighty dead, than upon the price of
      coals and the wickedness of lodging-house servants. The
       first of these topics has led to the proposal that he and his bride shall
      henceforth content themselves with one fire, to be fed with (if possible) not more
      than two coal-boxes per day; and the second is at present employing his tongue, his eyes, his
      thoughts. They are at breakfast, Belinda seated behind the Britannia metal teapot, her husband
      facing her, a dish of fried bacon before him, which latter object is monopolizing the whole of
      his attention.
"It is beyond the range of possibility," he is saying slowly, "that you and I can have eaten
      a pound and a half of bacon in three days, and I think I noticed that you did not take any
      yesterday."
"Did not I?" replies Belinda indifferently; "I am sure I forget."
"And if," pursues Mr. Forth, his eyes ranging with severe scanning from the bacon-dish to
      the sugar-basin—"if, as Maria just now told us, those few lumps are all that remain of the
      pound of sugar purchased by me yesterday, it is obvious that there must be wholesale theft
      somewhere!"

"It is very dishonest of them," replies Belinda carelessly, putting up her hand to her hair,
      which, no longer tended by a maid, feels oddly loose and uncomfortable. "If you had allowed me
      to bring Jennings, she would have looked after everything."
"I discouraged the idea of your bringing a maid," replies he, nettled; "because I
      considered, and still consider, that it would have made a most unnecessary addition to our
      expenses. And as to our provisions," looking carefully round the room, "I see that there are
      several cupboards; there is no reason why they should not be kept—"
" Bacon kept in a cupboard in one's only sitting-room!" cries Belinda, breaking
      into an indignant laugh; "you cannot be serious!"
"If you are able to suggest any better way of preventing their depredations, I shall be
      happy to hear it," he answers tartly.
"If they ate a flitch a day," replies
       Belinda hotly, and lifting her disdainful fine nose contumaciously into the air,
      "I should say that it was a small evil compared to our living in the atmosphere of a
      chandler's shop."
She rises precipitately as she speaks—to her , at least, Folkestone has not given
      an appetite—and walks to the window, where, for the rest of the breakfast hour, she presents a
      sociable homespun back to the economist at the breakfast-table. It is not the first time
      during these three days that she has discovered that his standpoint with regard to little
      social possibilities or impossibilities is different from her own. She had known that she did
      not love him, but she had not known that he wore carpet slippers in the drawing-room. A
      tendency towards slippers in the drawing-room, a passion for high tea, accompanied by no
      change of dress, are not these sufficient to wreck a bride's happiness upon? But worst of all,
      perhaps because latest of all, has jarred upon her this final instance of how widely asunder
      are their points of
       view. It jars upon her still as she stands by the window after breakfast,
      sullenly drumming on the pane.
In the night snow has fallen, a thin sprinkling meeting even the sea's lip, advancing even
      to where the dull little grey waves set their chill feet; a shabby sprinkling everywhere: not
      a good thick cloak of snow, deep and pure, but a scanty rag, through which every footstep
      shows the hard dark ground. It jars upon her still, as she walks to church alone—it is Sunday
      morning—trying to persuade herself that she had not felt a movement of gladness on discovering
      that he had no intention of accompanying her. She walks along the windy cliff to where the
      church and the red vicarage look out seawards, falling in, as she goes, with a stream of
      people bound to the same goal. It is a well-fed, comfortable-looking stream flowing
      prosperously to God's house; smart furry mothers holding the hands of smart furry little
      children, fathers and tall young daughters, husbands and wives.
       There is scarcely one, as young as Belinda, who is companionless. But she does
      not think of this.
Her eyes are turned towards the ocean, that ocean for the most part hugged by a close mist,
      with only one patch of faintish glory—a pale dazzle of dim gold—on which a small fishing-boat
      comes sailing, its homely sails transfigured as it goes. She is saying to herself, with a
      heart sinking so deep that she dare not gauge its profundity:
"Is this the man whose mind I have married? Is this the man who is to
      teach me to live by the intellect? Is this the scholar and the sage, whose teaching was to
      lift me out of the circle of my narrow interests into the sphere of the Universal?" she asks
      with contemptuous misgivings; " this , whose whole soul is occupied by mean
      parsimonies, and economies of cheese-rinds and candle-ends?"
She has reached the church, but even inside the consecrated door she finds that it is still
      with her. It comes between her
       and the Christmas decorations; between her and the bowing congeeing clergy;
      between her and the prayers. A poor starling has found its way into the building. All through
      the service it is flying from side to side, above the heads of the congregation, under the
      arched roof from window to window. Children turn their heads and their eyes, idly curious to
      look after it. All through the sermon she hears the agonized pecking of its poor beak against
      the pane, in its efforts to escape. She says to herself that it is in the same plight as she.
      It, too, entered prison of its own accord. When the service is ended, Belinda loiters behind
      the rest of the congregation, in order to press half-a-crown into the pew-opener's hand—(what
      would Professor Forth say to such extravagance?)—and to pour into his ear an eager prayer that
      he will set all the church doors and windows open, to give her starling a chance of escape.
      But, alas! what pew-opener can ever let her out?

As she passes homewards, she finds that the day has bettered. The sun has swallowed up the
      mist, and now shines steadily bright, and even sensibly warm. The little waves are small and
      mild as summer ones, though the air is still full of penknives. Perhaps it is the increased
      brightness upon Nature's face; perhaps it is the two quiet hours of her own society, that have
      braced her to face with a greater courage the lot she has chosen, and the fried bacon that
      typifies it.
"I would do it!" she says to herself sternly, "and now it is done; now there is
      nothing for it but to put the best face upon it, and never to own to anyone that I would have
      it undone. There can never again be so bad a piece of my life as this!" (shuddering); "it is
      well to have the worst over first, it will be more endurable when we get to Oxbridge. I must
      try to learn how to look at things from his point of view, to count the grains of rice for a
      pudding, and save the old tea-leaves!" with a curling lip; "but I

will not have the bacon kept in the drawing-room!"
Her resolutions in both respects outlast the day. That to make the best of things has body
      enough to withstand even the close examination to which her husband subjects the Sunday
      roast-beef, in order to discover whether it has been robbed of any of its native suet. He has
      a slow munching way of eating, which fidgets her inexpressibly; but she bears that too. She
      even resists the temptation to look away from him. Since he is to munch opposite to her till
      death do them part, would it not be wiser to accustom herself to the sight? Her resolution
      withstands also stoutly all the little trials attendant on their afternoon constitutional.
      When they emerge upon the Leas, they see a broad highway of molten copper stretching across
      the sea to the lowering sun. Belinda asks leave to run down the many steps on the clift's face
      to the water's edge, to set her feet in the foam fringe, and watch the long swell heaving
      ocean's sullen
       breast; but the Professor will not hear of it. A certain number of brisk turns
      on the Leas—always the same number—is the kind of walk to which alone he gives his
      approbation. No stopping to look at the copper sunset, or the fair ships riding past; nothing
      more likely to arrest the circulation and chill the liver. They meet the same people as they
      met yesterday and the day before, and as they will meet to-morrow and the day after; the same
      bath-chairs, the same dogs. The sick, white woman with her attentive burly husband; the
      deformed child; the frolic-some colley dogs; the frivolous Spitzes; the little blithe Scotch
      terriers.
Her resolution outlasts even the twilit hour, to her the most trying of the day. If she were
      to consult her own wishes, there would be no such hour; no space interposed between the fading
      of the day-light and the lighting of the gas. But it is in Professor Forth's programme that
      there shall be such an interval when he leans back in his armchair, with his eyes
       closed, and does not wish to be spoken to; whether in meditation or in sleep she
      cannot tell. There is nothing for her but to sit opposite to him, with his idleness, but
      without his repose. The lowered blinds prevent her looking out upon the first sunset-reddened,
      and by-and-by moon-silvered sea. She cannot even distinguish the lustres and the vulgar vases
      on the chimney-piece. She cannot even stir the fire into such a blaze as to enable her strong
      young eyes to read by it; for to stir the fire makes the coals burn quicker. It is the hour
      when the happy young build love-arbours out of, and see brave sweethearts in, the red coals.
      What love-arbour dare she build? What sweetheart dare she see? Then come the
      long hours of reading aloud. They are the most bearable of the day. It does her resolution the
      less credit to hold out through them. However, it does hold out. But will it endure through
      the next day? If it does, it must indeed be of a stout fibre. For no sooner has the next
       day risen, than it is clear that there has come one of those rare scourge-days
      with which God sometimes lashes His world; one of those days whose date is remembered, which
      is held up as a standard in after years for other fell days to measure themselves by; a day
      that wrecks ships by fleets; that strikes down centenary oaks by scores; that whelms trains in
      its snowdrifts; that stiffens into frozen death the sheep on the mountain-side, and the
      traveller fate-overtaken in the snow-choked country lane.
Snow often comes stilly; but to-day it is blowing—blowing mercilessly: not a bluff west
      wind, good-humouredly roistering, but an inhuman north-easter, the furious sleet driven,
      raging and sweeping, by its hellish lash.
When Belinda comes down to breakfast, there is not a soul on the Leas, but the luckless
      baker's boy butting with bent head against the razor-edged blast. It is scarcely the day which
      one would have chosen to spend in a flimsily-built seaside
       summer lodging-house. The Forths' lodgings are no better and no worse than most
      others of the class; with walls about as puny, with woodwork about as warped, with gaps
      between door and carpet about as wide, with curtains as miserably insufficient as most of
      their brethren. Though every door and window is religiously closed, there is the feeling of
      being sitting out of doors, only more draughty. Even in a warm, stoutly-built house one would
      shiver; but here! Well, here the cold is so marrow-piercing, that it usurps to itself the
      whole attention of the mind. It is not a subordinate, governable cold that by an effort of the
      will one may forget. It can never be out of the thoughts for one moment; from the hour of
      rising, until that of shuddering back to bed again.
The Professor, always a chill-blooded creature, sits all day with his knees within the
      fender, piled with every article of his own, and several of Belinda's wardrobe. Throwing
      economy to the winds, he has lit the gas, and piled the fire half-way up
       the chimney; though whenever fresh coals are put on, a great gust of greenish
      smoke, furiously beaten back by the blast, comes pouring down the chimney, and suffocatingly
      flooding the room.
Belinda, cold as she undoubtedly is, is not near the fire. She is standing by the window,
      with a pot of paste and some strips of paper in her numbed hands, pasting up the apertures in
      the ill-seasoned shrunk window-frames, through which the wind comes icily whistling and
      piping. Now and again she appeals for directions to the heap of wraps beside the hearth,
      trying to still her chattering teeth as she does so, to keep out of her tone the intense
      dispiritedness which has invaded her whole being; not to listen to the ironical demon voice
      that whispers in her ear:
"This is the honeymoon; that is the bridegroom of your own choosing!"
All day—all day the snow swirls past. All day the sea—dimly seen, sometimes seen not at all,
      through the white hurricane
       —booms and thunders on the shore. The snow cleaves to the window-panes, freezes
      there, darkens yet more the dismal room. Not a soul puts nose out of doors from the dark dawn
      to the soon-falling night. When at length Belinda has finished her pains-taking pasting-up of
      the windows, she asks in a voice of would-be cheerfulness whether the blast is not sensibly
      lessened; but receives for answer a melancholy negative. The whirlwind from under the door is
      such as to laugh to scorn all remedies applied elsewhere. And one cannot paste up the
      door.
"But one may put sand-bags beneath it," suggests Belinda, still with that same desperate
      cheerfulness. "They may have sand-bags in the house! she will ring and ask!"
But there are no sand-bags, and the landlady, embittered like everyone else by the weather,
      tartly replies that such a thing has never before been asked for in her house!
      However, Belinda is not yet at the end of her resources.

"I think," she says, "if you would allow me to fold up all the newspapers in a tight roll,
      it might keep out some of the wind. Can you spare them all?— Pall Mall, Spectator,
       Academy, Times ?"
Having received permission, she begins to turn them over, in order to select those most
      suitable for her purpose; her careless eye unintentionally alighting on a word here and there.
      The first two that she catches are her own late and present surnames. "Forth—Churchill." It is
      the announcement of her marriage in the Daily News . She drops it as if it had bitten
      her. The roll of newspapers is about as effective a bulwark against the wind as a child's
      sand-rampart is against the sea. But since she has at least done her best, Belinda considers
      that she has earned the right to sit down by the fire, with her fur-coat hoisted to her ears.
      She offers to read aloud.
"I am obliged to you," replies the Professor morosely, "but, in the present
       condition of my temperature, it would be perfectly impossible for me to
      concentrate my attention."
He even looks rather injured when she herself takes up a book. But neither can she
      concentrate her attention. Her mind strays from the dreary wonder as to whether this enormous
      day will ever end, to the still more dreary wonder why she should wish it to end, seeing that
      it will only lead to another like it. There has been no break since breakfast-time, with the
      exception of the laying and removing of their early dinner, and the altercation about the
      sand-bags. No one has been near them, not even the postman! Doubtlessly every line is blocked,
      and all traffic suspended. The dark has long fallen; if that, indeed, can be said to have
      fallen which has reigned more or less all day. The gas has been turned up higher; the thin
      curtains drawn, with many futile jerks to the rings that will not run; the fire is new-built,
      and a sort of air of pseudo-evening-comfort
       diffuses itself. Belinda's slow pulse begins to beat, and her blood to circulate
      a little more briskly. It quickens its pace perceptibly, when—oh blessed sight!—the
      lodging-house servant enters with a pile of letters in her chappy hand. Thank God, the line is
      not blocked after all! These are the London morning letters that should have come at 8 a.m.
      She snatches at them eagerly. They can bring her no great good news, but they make an
      unspeakably welcome interruption to the uniform dismalness of the long day. They remove the
      terrible feeling of isolation from all humankind, which hour by hour has been gaining ground
      upon her. There is a pile for the Professor; and for her a large fat envelope, bulging with
      enclosures, and directed in Sarah's hand. She draws her chair more closely to the hearth, and
      folds her soft furs warmlier about her. She will enjoy her letters at luxurious leisure. She
      unfastens the cover, and the enclosures fall out, six in number;
       a note from Sarah herself, four letters addressed in well-known and on this
      occasion warmly-welcomed female hand-writings, and one in an unknown male hand. Is it
       unknown ?

</div></body></text></TEI>