<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER XIV.
" How can I ever thank you enough for having paved the way for me?" says Sarah next
      morning, as the two sisters sit awaiting breakfast. "I awoke to-day in such a humble, grateful
      frame of mind. I said to myself, 'Thanks to God and my good sister, I am out of my
      difficulty!' "
"Did you happen to mention that it was your seventeenth?" asks Belinda grimly.
"I said to myself," continues Sarah, feigning deafness, "I will put on a clean calico gown,
      and ask granny to let us have some champagne for dinner, to celebrate my little innocent
      festival. Really, joking apart, it was almost worth while to be
       engaged to him, for the pleasure of having it broken off. Cannot you understand
      that?"
"I have already explained to you several times that I would rather have been burnt alive
      than be engaged to him at all," replies Belinda trenchantly.
But the snub, like many kindred predecessors, passes airily over Sarah's yellow head, and
      leaves no mark upon her satisfied serenity.
"Punch," she says, taking the two dogs' forepaws in her hands, and looking gravely in their
      black faces, "Punch, I am free! Slutty, I am free! Go and tell the cats and the parrot!"
Belinda has sunk back into herself. She is wondering feverishly what is making the letters
      so late.
"I have not even made an enemy of him," pursues Sarah, loosing the dogs' paws, and sinking
      back with a sigh of complacency in her chair. "I believe that in his heart he was quite as
      glad to be out of it as I. He was the first of them,"
       with a slight regretful pout, "who was glad to be off!"
"I think he was very glad!" says Belinda spitefully.
"Say one word more, and I will have him back again," cries Sarah, roused by this
      challenge.
But Belinda makes no rejoinder. To her, Sarah and her light loves have become distant and
      insignificant things. Her strained ears have caught, or she thinks so, the sound of a
      footstep. Of course it is only Tommy bringing in the breakfast; but he may be bringing her
      death-warrant or her evangel, too. It is the first day on which, according to her calculation
      of distances, it would be possible for her to receive a letter from Rivers.
"If you had heard," continues Sarah, smiling rosily to herself, "the masterly way in which I
      indicated to him that it was only my consciousness of inadequacy to fill that high post, which
      made me regretfully retire from it, I think that even you would have admired me."

"Should I?" quite inattentively.
"He swallowed it all," continues Sarah, growing grave. "Good heavens!" throwing up her eyes,
      "what will not they swallow?"
The sound has died away again. It could not have been even Tommy.
"I cried a little," resumes Sarah, with that glow of modest retrospective satisfaction still
      diffused all over her, extending even to her pink cambric gown. "Do not ask me how I did it; I
      could not even engage to do it again were the same situation to return; these strokes of
      genius do not repeat themselves."
She stops, her attention diverted into a fresh channel, for at this moment Gustel throws
      open the door, and Tommy enters, his childish arms extended to their widest stretch to embrace
      the breakfast tray, upon which, beside coffee-pot and rolls, lies a heap of letters and
      papers. Belinda does not stir now that the moment so breathlessly longed for has come; she
      would fain put it off again, shove it away a little further.

A paralysis of fear nails her to her chair. She feels an impulse of anger-against Sarah for
      doing what she herself is incapable of; for her quick movement towards the tray, her hasty
      turning over of the family's correspondence. There is a second's pause—a pause during which
      hope still lives: then in a moment it is dead. Sarah's voice would tell her that, even if her
      words did not.
"I am afraid there is nothing very interesting for you," she says reluctantly, tossing her
      three or four letters without looking at her. Belinda's heart dies; then suddenly there flares
      up a tiny flame of hope in it again. Possibly Sarah may not recognise his handwriting.
      Probably it is so disguised and disfigured by trouble and emotion as to be unrecognisable. Was
      not this the case with her note? She snatches at the letters and looks dizzily from one to the
      other of the superscriptions. Alas, no! they are all in the handwriting of familiar and
      habitual correspondents. She has told herself all night that her expectations
       were not highly raised for today; that to-day is the first day on which it would
      be possible to hear; that, being only possible, it is not also probable; that her chances are
      better for to-morrow or the day after. And yet, now that the disappointment has come, it seems
      to her ruinous and final. Her first movement is to dash the letters down on her lap; then,
      with that instinct of self-respect which parts us from the savage and the beast, remembering
      that Tommy's round gaze is upon her, she picks up one, and shakily unfolding it, lets her
      misery-shaded eyes fall on the page. Only for a moment, however; a fresh thought makes her
      drop it and fly to the papers.
In a second she has torn open one of the English journals, the Standard ; and
      seizing the advertisement sheet, greedily turns to the column of births, deaths, and
      marriages. She runs her eye down the names; she will not allow this horrible swimming to blind
      her; she will read for herself.

"Abbots, Ackers, Anson, Baker, Callcott, Frith, Forly, Harper, Key—when do the R's come?
      what a long, long list! Ah! here they are! Raby, Rashleigh, Retford—what a number of R's are
      dead! Yes, here it is! Rivers !" The swimming is gone. She can see it clearly; there
      is no mistake. "On the 24th inst., at Denver Hall, Yorkshire, John Appleby Rivers, M.P., aged
      54."
At the same moment, Tommy, his functions ended, shuts the door behind him. For a moment or
      two Belinda stares dully at the announcement, then silently holds it out to her sister. But
      Sarah does not see it; her head is buried between the other sheets of the paper, which she has
      been too impatient even to cut.
"I knew it," she says, speaking suddenly in a voice that is a little tremulous, a little
      awed, and yet triumphant. "I knew it was his father; he is dead; he has committed suicide.
      Poor David! no wonder he looked odd. There is a paragraph about it."

"Committed suicide!" repeats Belinda with a gasp, turning as white as the table-cloth, and
      her great grey eyes dilating, while the image of her poor boy-lover and his whole-hearted
      devotion to, his innocent enthusiasm about his father, at which she had sometimes smiled,
      superior yet envious, darts painfully back upon her memory.
Sarah has snatched a table-knife and is rapidly and jaggedly cutting the paper. " 'We regret
      to announce the death, under peculiarly painful circumstances, of Mr. John Appleby Rivers, of
      Denver Hall, Yorkshire, who for the last ten years has represented the Borough of Denver in
      the Conservative interest in Parliament. The deceased gentleman had retired to rest on the
      night of the 25th in his usual health, but on the following morning his valet, on going to
      call him at the accustomed hour, found his door locked, and could obtain no answer to his
      repeated knocks. The family becoming alarmed, an entrance was effected through the window,
      when the unfortunate gentleman was found extended
       lifeless on the floor, with his throat cut from ear to ear. Medical assistance
      was at once procured, but in vain, as life had evidently been extinct for some hours.' " Sarah
      pauses with a shudder of disgust, even her blooming cheek a little paled. "Why will
      people cut their throats," she says complainingly, "when there are so many clean ways of
      dying?"
"Perhaps he did not do it himself," cries Belinda, catching breathlessly at this hope. "Who
      knows? Perhaps he was murdered!"
"Wait a bit!" replies Sarah, putting up her hand in prohibition. "Where was I? Let me go on:
      'Been extinct for several hours. The razor with which the deed had been accomplished lay on
      the floor beside the corpse!' " Again she shudders. "Grisly word! why will they use
      it? Why do all newspaper-writers love it? 'It is surmised that distress of mind, arising from
      pecuniary embarrassment, was the immediate cause of the rash act.' " She stops for a few
      moments, and there is
       silence. Belinda has put her hands over her eyes, before which the ghastly sight
      is conjured up in its red horror.
This, then, is what has robbed her of him! This is the spectacle for which he has exchanged
      the spring-dressed, sun-warmed Grosse Garten. This is the errand, falsely and cruelly supposed
      by her to be a feigned one, which has torn him away. She shivers, and the shiver is followed
      by a warm rush of passionate pity.
"What will he do? How will he bear it? Will he ever get over it?" We ask ourselves and each
      other this senseless question, as often as an affliction a little severer than common alights
      upon one that is known to us; although experience, a thousand times repeated, has taught us
      its folly. But below the horror and the compassion, though both are genuine, there lies in
      Belinda's mind a thick, deep stratum of inexpressible relief and joy. It is explained then!
      Suspense is ended; at least for the moment it seems so. There
       may be a cessation of that weary sum-doing. She may think again of the wood at
      Wesenstein without writhing. Her past is restored to her. Surely she can live upon it until he
      comes back to give her a present and a future.
"Pecuniary embarrassments!" says Sarah thoughtfully. "I do not much like that. However,"
      with a more cheerful air, "it is better than having insanity in the family. "Poor man! it was
      a cowardly way of cutting the knot!"
"The 25th," says Belinda, dropping her hands into her lap, and staring, with eyes still
      dilated, straight before her; "that was the day we went to Wesenstein!"
"There is more about him—another little paragraph!" says Sarah, resuming her reading. "Oh,
      now we shall find out whom he married. 'Mr. Rivers was born on the 1st of May, 18—' (Ah! Ten
      and ten, twenty, and ten thirty, forty—that would make him just fifty-four)—'and was the
      eldest son of the late Mr. Rivers, of Denver Hall, at whose death the property
       was sold, in consequence of pecuniary embarrassments.' (Hem! they seem to be
      addicted to pecuniary embarrassments.) 'It was repurchased, five years ago, by Mr. Rivers, who
      had amassed a large fortune in the iron trade. He married, on the 3rd of June, 18—,the Lady
      Marion Lovell, third daughter of the late, and sister of the present, Earl of Eastwood'
      (bravo, David! I knew that he was not undiluted iron), 'by whom he has left issue'—(a good
      deal of issue, I am afraid). 'He was an enlightened patron of agriculture, and belonged to
      several agricultural societies. His death will be widely and deeply deplored.' " She lays down
      the paper. "That is all."
" All !" repeats Belinda in an awed voice; "and enough too!"
"What a mercy for David that he was not at home!"
"He will not think so," replies Belinda sadly.
"He will avoid most of the horrors— coroner's inquest and all!" says Sarah,
       with a shiver of disgust. "I wonder what day the funeral was? You could not
      expect him to write before that. I am afraid that now you must not hope to hear before we
      leave."
"Of course not—of course not!" feverishly. "Poor boy! I do not want him to think of me at
      all!"
"I expect that you are the one pleasant thing he has to think about," replies Sarah drily.
      "I hope to heavens that the money—"stopping abruptly. "Will you believe it? There she is! I
      hear her voice. She has come to tell us. Tommy, Tommy!" flying headlong into the passage, "we
      are not at home—we are not at home to anybody ."
But, as usual, it is too late. Punch, indeed, gallops out in aid, barking irefully. It is
      not that bark of boisterous compliment which he addresses to most people, but one of a
      different character—one not unfrequently accompanied by a nip at the heels of the person
      indicated; a bark which he reserves exclusively for tramps
       and Miss Watson. Slutty has instantly crawled on her stomach under the settee.
      To do Tommy justice, he has opened the door as little as he possibly could; but by thrusting
      her person into the aperture Miss Watson has succeeded in considerably widening it, and now
      stands in it, talking loudly and brandishing a newspaper. As soon as she catches sight of
      Sarah—
"Have you heard?" she cries eagerly. "Have you seen it? Young Rivers' father's
      death?—suicide? I thought you might not have seen it."
"Of course we have," replies Sarah curtly; "of course we have our papers as usual. I am
      sorry I cannot ask you to come in this morning; we are so—"
"Do you think he was off his head?" asks the other, interrupting. "Do you think there is
      madness in the family? If so, no doubt they got it from the Lovells; there is mostly scrofula
      of one form or another in all those old families."
"What a comfort for the new ones!" answers Sarah with a sneer. "Well, I
       am afraid that we are so busy packing—"
"Were not you surprised to hear that he had married one of the Lovells? I had not an idea
      that he had married one of the Lovells. He did not get a penny with her, I will answer for it;
      they are as poor as Job. Eastwood is mortgaged up to the hall-door."
"Is it? Well, as we have already heard your news," taking hold of the door with a determined
      air—"come in, Punch, or you will be shut out!"
"What papers have you seen?" asks the other inquisitively. "I wonder is the account the same
      in them all. Would you mind my having a look at yours?"
Sarah shakes her head.
"Impossible! Granny has not seen them!"
"I would lend you mine with all the pleasure in life, only that I am just going to run round
      with it to the Freres and Gay-hursts; they take only the Times ; there are not so
      many details in the Times ."

A surly silence is the only response.
"Poor fellow! it is too sad, is it not?" continues Miss Watson, her large face beaming with
      pleasurable excitement. "I do not know when I have felt so cut up about anything! I shall make
      a point of writing to him; shall not you?"

"She is going to make a point of writing to him," says Sarah with a grimace, rejoining her
      sister a moment or two later, a judiciously placed hint as to the probability of some one
      being beforehand with her at the Gayhursts and Freres having rid her of her visitor. "It may
      be a bad thing to lose a father, but it is very much worse to be consoled for him by Miss
      Watson. By-the-bye," with a change of tone, "David has your address, has not he— your London
      address—you gave it him, eh?"
"Yes."
"Ah," with a little sigh of satisfaction, "that is all right then! The sooner
       we get to England the better, for all reasons."
Belinda echoes the sentiment. What is there to keep her or her heart here now? In the place
      of the drag which a while ago she would have put upon the days, she would now use whip and
      spur to them. If Time were to obey our impulses, in what a strange jerky manner would he
      proceed! It is beyond the range of possibility that she should receive a letter from him here.
      It would be the height of filial impiety. How dare she thrust her trivial self between him and
      the grandeur of his grief? How dare one thought of her cross his mind ere yet his father is
      laid in his bloody and dishonoured grave? But by the time that they have reached England, four
      more days will have elapsed.
Mrs. Churchill has stipulated that the journey shall be accomplished leisurely. Once in
      England, he and she will at all events be separated by only one day's post, less than a day's
      journey. In London there are so many posts in the day. Every two
       hours does not there come a double knock? and may not any one of these double
      knocks possibly—nay, why be irrationally down-hearted? —probably bring her salvation? By dint
      of continued cherishing, her hopes soar higher still. Why should he write? what is there to
      hinder his coming himself? In her heart she hears his footfall on the stairs; it will fall
      more softly on the carpeted London steps than on these bare stone ones. Perhaps it will be
      less springy than of yore; grief may have made it heavier and slower. He will enter in his
      black clothes; she has never seen him in black, and tries to reconstruct him in this sombre
      habit. He will not smile, it would not be right that he should; but he will stretch out his
      arms to her—Tommy being gone.
At this point her face always falls forward into her hands, and the carnations overrun their
      borders. She can no more look at that picture than she can stare unwinking at the mid-day sun.
      But though she struggles earnestly to keep hope sober
       and low, it is with an elastic step and a bright face that she treads the
      platform of the Dresden railway station on the day and at the hour of their departure. The
      tickets have been taken; their own, that of the luggage, Punch's. Slutty is small enough to
      defraud the revenue by travelling in an ingeniously constructed house of her own, which has
      the air of a large dressing-bag, and under which Belinda, Sarah, and the maid take turns to
      stagger. And now Mrs. Churchill and Belinda have already seated themselves and arranged their
      packages. Sarah still loiters on the step, half the German army gathered round her. She has
      asked them all to come and see her off, and not one but has answered to the call. Her hands
      are full of great bouquets that they have not stretch enough to hold. She is distributing more
      addresses than she has time rapidly to pencil. Apparently, every one of them is to correspond
      with her.
Belinda has no bouquet, and no one has asked for her direction. Even her last
       view of the fair city is obstructed by Sarah, who has monopolised the window to
      lean out and kiss her fingers, crying, "Auf Wiedersehen!" until the last glimpse of her
      dark-blue, light-blue, and green admirers is lost to sight. And yet it is with a light heart,
      that sometimes even dances, that Miss Churchill steams away towards her native shores.

</div></body></text></TEI>