<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Folle-Farine : VWWP edition </title><author>Ouida, [pseud.] (1839-1908)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
CHAPTER VI.
“WHAT has come to that evil one? She walks the land as though she were a queen,”
      the people of Yprès said to one another, watching the creature they abhorred as she went
      through the town to the river‐stair or to the market‐stall.
She seemed to them transfigured.
A perpetual radiance shone in the dark depths of her eyes; a proud elasticity replaced the
      old sullen defiance of her carriage; her face had a sweet musing mystery and dreaminess on it;
      and when she smiled, her smile was soft, and sudden, like the smile of one who bears fair
      tidings in her heart unspoken.
Even those people, dull and plodding and taciturn, absorbed in their small trades or in
      their continual field labour, were struck by the change in her, and looked after her, and
      listened in a stupid wonder to the sonorous songs in an unknown tongue that rose so often to
      her lips as she strode amongst the summer grasses or led the laden mules through the
      fords.
They saw, even with their eyes purblind from hate, that she had thrown off their yoke, and
      had escaped from their narrow world, and was happy with some rich, mute, nameless happiness
      that they could neither evade nor understand.
The fall of evening always brought her to him; he let her come, finding a certain charm in
      that savage temper which grew so tame to him; in that fierce courage which to him was so
      humble; in that absolute ignorance which was yet so curiously blended with so strong a power
      of fancy and so quick an instinct of beauty. But he let her go again with indifference, and
      never tried by any word to keep her an hour later than she chose to stay. She was to him like
      some handsome, dangerous beast that flew at all others and crouched to himself. He had a
      certain pleasure in her colour and her grace; in making her great eyes glow, and
       seeing the light of a wakening intelligence break over all
      her beautiful, clouded, fierce face.
As she learned to hear more often the sound of her own voice, and to use a more varied and
      copious language, a rude eloquence came naturally to her; and, when her silence was broken, it
      was usually for some terse, vivid, picturesque utterance which had an artistic interest for
      him. In this simple and monotonous province, with its tedious sameness of life and its green
      arable country that tired a sight fed in youth on the grandeur of cloud‐reaching mountains and
      the tumults of ice‐tossing seas, this creature so utterly unlike her kind, so golden with the
      glow of tawny desert suns, and so strong with the liberty and the ferocity and the dormant
      passion and the silent force of some free forest animal, was in a way welcome.
All things were so new and strange to her; all the common knowledge was so utterly unknown
      to her; all other kinds of life were so unintelligible to her; and yet with all her ignorance,
      she had so swift a fancy, so keen an irony, so poetic an instinct, that it seemed to him when
      he spoke with her that he talked to some creature from another planet than his own.
He like to make her smile; he liked to make her suffer; he liked to inflame, to wound, to
      charm, to tame her; he liked all these without passion, rather with curiosity than with
      interest, much as he had liked in the season of his boyhood to ruffle the plumage of a
      captured sea‐bird; to see its eye sparkle, and then grow dull and flash again with pain, and
      then at the last turn soft with weary, wistful tenderness, having been taught at once the
      misery of bondage and the tyranny of human love.
She was a bronzed, bare‐footed, fleet‐limbed young outcast, so he told himself, with the
      scowl of an habitual defiance on her straight brows, and the curl of an untamable scorn upon
      her rich red lips, and a curious sovereignty and savageness in her dauntless carriage; and yet
      there was a certain nobility and melancholy in her that made her seem like one of a great and
      fallen race; and in her eyes there was a look repellant yet appealing, and lustrous with
      sleeping passion, that tempted him to wake what slumbered there.
But in these early spring‐tide days he suffered her to
       come and go as she listed, without either persuasion or
      forbiddance on his own part.
The impassioned reverence which she had for the things he had created was only the
      untutored, unreasoning reverence of the savage or of the peasant; but it had a sweetness for
      him.
He had been alone so long; and so long had passed since any cheek had flushed and any breast
      had heaved under the influence of any one of those strange fancies and noble stories which he
      had pictured on the walls of his lonely chamber. He had despaired of and had despised himself;
      despised his continual failure, despaired of all power to sway the souls and gain the eyes of
      his fellow‐men. It was a little thing—a thing so little that he called himself a fool for
      taking any count of it; yet the hot tears that dimmed the sight of this young barbarian who
      was herself of no more value than the mill‐dust that drifted on the breeze, the soft vague
      breathless awe that stole upon her as she gazed at the colourless shadows in which his genius
      spent itself, these were sweet to him with a sweetness that made him ashamed of his own
      weakness.
She had given the breath of life back to his body by an act of which he was ignorant; and
      now she gave back the breath of hope to his mind by a worship which he contemned even whilst
      he was glad of it.
Meanwhile the foul tongues of her enemies rang with loud glee over this new shame which they
      could cast at her.
“She has found a lover,—oh ho!—that brown wicked thing. A lover meet for her;—a man who
      walks abroad in the moonless nights, and plucks the mandrake, and worships the devil, and
      paints people in their own likeness, so that as the colour dries the life wastes!” So the
      women screamed after her often as she went; she nothing understanding or heeding, but lost in
      the dreams of her own waking imagination.
At times such words as these reached Claudis Flamma, but he turned a deaf ear to them: he
      had the wisdom of the world in him, though he was only an old miller who had never stirred ten
      leagues from his home; and whilst the devil served him well, he quarrelled not with the devil.
      In a grim way, it was a pleasure to him to think that the thing he hated might be accursed
      body and soul: he had never
       cared either for her body or her soul; so that the first
      worked for him, the last might destroy itself in its own darkness:—he had never stretched a
      finger to hold it back.
The pride and the honesty and the rude candour and instinctive purity of this young life of
      hers had been a perpetual hindrance and canker to him: begotten of evil, by all the laws of
      justice, in evil she should live and die. So Flamma reasoned; and to the sayings of his
      country‐side he gave a stony ear and a stony glance.
She never once, after the first day, breathed a word to Arslàn about the treatment that she
      received at Yprès. It was not in her nature to complain; and she abhorred even his pity.
      Whatever she endured, she kept silence on it; when he asked her how her grandsire dealt with
      her, she always answered him—“it is well enough with me now.” He cared not enough to doubt
      her.
And in a manner she had learned how to keep her tyrant at bay. He did not dare to lay hands
      on her now that her eyes had got that new fire, and her voice that serene contempt. His
      wolf‐cub had shown her teeth, at last, at his lash; and he did not venture to sting her to
      revolt with too long use of scourge and chain. So she obtained more leisure; and what she did
      not spend in Arslàn’s tower she spent in acquiring another art—she learned to read.
There was an old herb‐seller in the market‐place who was not so harsh to her as the others
      were, but who had now and then for her a rough kindly word out of gentleness to the memory of
      Reine Flamma. This woman was better educated than most, and could even write a little. To her
      Folle‐Farine went.
“See here,” she said: “you are feeble and I am strong. I know every nook and corner in the
      woods. I know a hundred rare herbs that you never find. I will bring you a basketful of them
      twice in each week, if you will show me how to read those signs that the people call
      letters.”
The old woman hesitated. “It were as much as my life is worth to have you seen with me. The
      lads will stone my window. Still—.” The wish for the rare herbs and, and the remembrance of
      the fatigue that would be spared to her rheumatic body by compliance, prevailed over her
      fears. She consented.
Three times a week Folle‐Farine rose while it was still dark,
       and scoured the wooded lands and the moss‐green orchards
      and the little brooks in the meadows in search of every herb that grew. She knew those green
      places which had been her only kingdom and her only solace as no one else knew them; and the
      old dame’s herb‐stall was the envy and despair of the market‐place.
Now and then a labourer earlier than the rest, or as a vagrant sleeping under a hedge‐row,
      saw her going through the darkness with her green bundle on her head, or stooping amongst the
      water‐courses ankle deep in rushes, and he crossed himself and went and told how he had seen
      the Evil Spirit of Yprès gathering the poison‐weeds that made ships founder, and strong men
      droop and die, and women love unnatural and horrible things, and all manner of woe and
      sickness overtake those whom she hated.
Often, too, at this lonely time, before the day broke, she met Arslàn.
It was his habit to be abroad when others slept: studies of the night and its peculiar
      loveliness entered largely into many of his paintings; the beauty of water rippling in the
      moonbeam, of grey weeds blowing against the first faint red of dawn, of dark fields with
      sleeping cattle and folded sheep, of pools made visible by the shine of their folded white
      lilies, these were all things he cared to study. The earth has always most charm, and least
      pain, to the poet or the artist when men are hidden away under their roofs. Then they do not
      break its claim with either their mirth or their brutality; then the vile and revolting
      coarseness of their works, that blot it with so much deformity, is softened and obscured in
      the purple breadths of shadow and the dim tender gleam of stars; and it was then that he loved
      best to move abroad.
Sometimes the shepherd going to his flocks, or the housewife opening her shutter in the
      wayside cabin, or the huckster driving early his mule seawards to meet the fish that the
      night‐trawlers had brought, saw them together thus, and talked of it; and said that these two,
      accursed of all honest folk, were after some unholy work—coming from the orgy of some witches’
      sabbath, or seeking some devil’s root that would give them the treasured gold of misers’
      tombs, or the powers of life and death.
For these things are still believed by many a peasant’s
       hearth, and whispered darkly as night closes in and the
      wind rises.
Wading in the shallow streams, with the breeze tossing her hair, and the dew bright on her
      sheaf of herbs, Folle‐Farine paid thus the only wages that she could for leaning the art of
      letters.
One day he had said to her, half unconsciously, “If only you were not so ignorant!”—and
      since that day she had set herself to clear away her ignorance little by little, as she would
      have cleared brushwood with her hatchet.
It was the sweetest hour which she had ever known when she was able to stand before him and
      say, “The characters that men print are no longer riddles to me.”
He praised her; and she was glad and proud.
It was love that had entered into her, but a great love, full of intense humility, of
      supreme self‐sacrifice; a love that unconsciously led her to chasten into gentleness the
      fierce soul in her, and to try and seek light for the darkness of her mind.
He saw the influence he had on her, but he was careless of it.
A gipsy‐child working for bread at a little mill‐house in these Norman woods,—what use would
      be to her beauty of thought, grace of fancy, the desire begotten of knowledge, the poetry
      learned from the past?
Still, he gave her these; partly because he pitied her, partly because in his exhaustion and
      solitude this creature, in her beauty and her submission, was welcome to him.
And yet he thought so little of her, and chiefly, when he thought of her, chose to perplex
      her or to wound her, that he might see her eyes dilate in wondering amaze, or her face quiver
      and flush, and then grow dark, with the torment of a mute and subdued pain.
She was a study to him, as was the scarlet rose in the garden ways, or the purple‐breasted
      pigeon in the woods; he dealt with her as he would have dealt with the flower or the bird if
      he had wished to study them more nearly, by tearing the rose open at its core, or casting a
      stone at the blue‐rock on the wing.
This was not cruelty in him; it was only habit—habit, and the callousness begotten by his
      own continual pain.
The pain as of a knife for ever thrust into the loins, of a
       cord for ever knotted hard about the temples, which is the
      daily and nightly penalty of those mad enough to believe that they have the force in them to
      change the sluggard appetites and the hungry cruelties of their kind into a life of high
      endeavour and divine desire.
He held that a man’s chief passion is his destiny, and will shape his fate, roughhew his
      fate as circumstance or as hazard may. His chief, his sole passion was a great ambition—a
      passion pure as crystal, since the eminence he craved was for his creations, not for his name:
      yet it had failed to compel the destiny that he believed to be his own; and every hour he
      seemed to sink lower and lower into oblivion, further and further from the possibility of any
      fulfillment of his dreams; and the wasted years of his life fell away one by one into the gulf
      of the past, vain, unheard, unfruitful, as the frozen words on the deck of the ship of
      Pantagruel.
“What is the use?” he muttered, half aloud, one day before his paintings. “What is the use?
      If I die tomorrow they will sell for so much rubbish to heat a bakery store. It is only a mad
      waste of hours—waste of colour, of canvas, of labour. The world has told me so, many years.
      The world always knows what it wants. It selects unerringly. It must judge better than I do.
      The man is a fool, indeed, who presumes himself to be wiser than all his generation. If the
      world will have nothing to do with you, go and hang yourself—or if you fear to do that, dig a
      ditch or a grave for a daily meal. Give over dreams. The world knows what it wants, and if it
      wanted you would take you. It has brazen lungs to shout for what it needs; the lungs of a
      multitude. It is no use what your own voice whispers you unless those great lungs also shout
      before you, Hosannah.”
So he spoke to himself in the bitterness of his soul, standing before his cartoons in which
      he had put all the genius there was in him, and which hung there unseen save by the spider
      that wove and the moth that flew over them.
Folle‐Farine, who was that day in his chamber, looked at him with the wistful far‐reaching
      comprehension which an unerring instinct taught her.
“Of a winter night,” she said, slowly, “I have heard
       old Pitchou read aloud to Flamma, and she reads of their
      God, the one they hang everywhere on the crosses here; and the story ran that the populace
      scourged and nailed to death the one whom they knew afterwards, when too late, to have been
      the great man that they looked for, and that, being bidden to make their choice of one to
      save, they chose to ransom and honour a thief: one called Barabbas. Is it true?—If the world’s
      choice were wrong once, why not twice?”
Arslàn smiled; the smile she knew so well, and which had no more warmth than the ice floes
      of his native seas.
“Why not twice? Why not a thousand times? A thief has the world’s sympathies always. It is
      always the Barabbas—the trickster in talent, the forger of stolen wisdom, the bravo of
      political crime, the huckster of plundered thoughts, the charlatan of false art, whom the vox
      populi elects and sets free, and sends on his way rejoicing. ‘Will ye have Christ or
      Barrabas?’ Every generation is asked the same question, and every generation gives the same
      answer; and scourges the divinity out of its midst, and finds its idol in brute force and low
      greed.”
She only dimly comprehended, not well knowing why her words had thus roused him. She
      pondered awhile, then her face cleared.
“But the end?” she asked. “The dead God is the God of all these people round us now, and
      they have built great places in his honour, and they bow when they pass his likeness in the
      highway or the market place. But with Barabbas—what was the end? It seems that they loathe and
      despise him?”
Arslàn laughed a little.
“His end? In Syria maybe the vultures picked his bones, where they lay whitening on the
      plains—those times were primitive, the world was young. But in our day Barabbas lives and dies
      in honour, and has a tomb that stares all men in the face, setting forth his virtues, so that
      all who run may read. In our day Barabbas—the Barabbas of money greeds and delicate cunning,
      and the theft which has risen to science, and the assassination that kills souls and not
      bodies, and the crime that deals moral death and not material death—our Barabbas, who is
      crowned Fraud
       in the place of mailed Force—lives always in purple and
      fine linen, and ends in the odours of sanctity with the prayers of priests over his
      corpse.”
He spoke with a certain fierce passion that rose in him whenever he thought of that world
      which had rejected him, and had accepted so many others, weaker in brain and nerve, but
      stronger in one sense, because more dishonest; and as he spoke he went straight to a wall on
      his right where a great sea of grey paper was stretched, untouched, and ready to his hand.
She would have spoken, but he made a motion to silence.
“Hush! be quiet,” he said to her, almost harshly, “I have thought of something.”
And he took the charcoal and swept rapidly with it over the dull blank surface till the
      vacancy glowed with life. A thought had kindled in him; a vision had arisen before him.
The scene around him vanished utterly from his sight. The grey stone walls, the square
      windows through which the fading sun rays fell, the level pastures and sullen streams, and
      paled skies without; all faded away as though they had existed only in a dream.
All the empty space about him became peopled with many human shapes that for him had breath
      and being, though no other eye could have beheld them. The old Syrian world of eighteen
      hundred years before arose and glowed before him. The things of his own life died away, and in
      their stead he saw the fierce flame of eastern suns, the gleaming range of marble palaces, the
      purple flush of pomegranate flowers, the deep colour of oriental robes, the soft silver of
      hills olive crested, the tumult of a city at high festival. And he could not rest until all he
      thus saw in his vision he had rendered as far as his hand could render it; and what he drew
      was this.
A great thirsty, heated, seething crowd; a crowd that had manhood and womanhood, age and
      infancy, youths and maidens, within its ranks; a crowd in whose faces every animal lust and
      every human passion were let loose; a crowd on which a noon sun without shadow streamed; a sun
      which parched and festered and engendered all corruption in the land on which it looked. This
      crowd was in a city, a city on whose flat roofs the myrtle and the cistus bloomed;
       above whose walls the plumes of olives waved; upon whose
      distant slopes the darkling cedar groves rose straight against the sky, and on whose loft
      temple plates of gold glistened against the shining heavens. This crowd had scourges, and
      stones, and goads in their hands; and in their midst they led one clothed in white, whose head
      was thorn‐crowned, and whose eyes were filled with a god’s pity and a man’s reproach; and him
      they stoned, and lashed, and hooted.
And triumphant in the throng, whose choice he was, seated aloft upon men’s shoulders, with a
      purple robe thrown on his shoulders, there sat a brawny, grinning, bloated, jibbering thing,
      with curled lips and savage eyes, and satyr’s leer: the creature of greed, of lust, of
      obscenity, of brutality, of avarice, of desire. This thing the people followed, rejoicing
      exceedingly, content in the guide whom they had chosen, victorious in the fiend for whom they
      spurned a deity; crying, with wide‐open throats and brazen lungs, “Barabbas!”
There was not a form in all this close‐packed throng which had not a terrible irony in it,
      which was not in itself a symbol of some appetite or vice, for which women and men abjure the
      godhead in them.
A gorged drunkard lay asleep with his amphora broken beneath him, the stream of the purple
      wine lapped eagerly by ragged children. A money‐changer had left the receipt of custom, eager
      to watch and shout, and a thief clutched both hands full of the forsaken coins and fled.
A miser had dropped a bag of gold, and stopped to catch at all the rolling pieces,
      regardless in his greed how the crowd trampled and trod on him. A mother chid and struck her
      little brown curly child, because he stretched his arms and turned his face towards the
      thorn‐crowned captive.
A priest of the temple, with a blood‐stained knife thrust in his girdle, dragged beside him,
      by the throat, a little tender lamb doomed for the sacrifice.
A dancing woman with jewels in her ears, and half naked to the waist, sounding the brazen
      cymbals above her head, drew a score of youths after her in Barabbas’ train.
On one of the flat roof tops, reclining on purple and fine linen, looking down on the street
      below from the thick
       foliage of her citron boughs and her red Syrian roses, was
      an Egyptian wanton; and leaning beside her, tossing golden apples in her bosom, was a young
      centurion of the Roman guard, languid and laughing, with his fair chest bare to the heat, and
      his armour flung in a pile beside him.
And thus, in like manner, every figure bore its parable: and above all was the hard, hot,
      cruel, cloudless sky of blue, without one faintest mist to break its horrible serenity, whilst
      high in the azure ether and against the sun, an eagle and a vulture fought, locked close, and
      tearing at each other’s breasts.
Six nights this conception occupied him. His days were not his own, he spent them in a rough
      mechanical labour which his strength executed while his mind was far away from it; but the
      nights were all his, and at the end of the sixth night the thing arose, perfect as far as his
      hand could perfect it; begotten by a chance and ignorant word as have been many of the
      greatest works the world has seen;—oaks sprung from the acorn a careless child has let
      fall.
When he had finished it his arm dropped to his side, he stood motionless; the red glow of
      the dawn lighting the depths of his sleepless eyes.
The artist, for one moment of ecstasy, realises the content of a god when, resting from his
      labours, he knows that those labours have borne their full fruit.
It is only for a moment; the greater the artist the more swiftly will discontent and
      misgiving overtake him, the more quickly will the feebleness of his execution disgust him in
      comparison with the splendour of his ideals; the more surely will he—though the world ring
      with applause for him—be enraged and derisive and impatient at himself.
But while the moment lasts it is a rapture; keen, pure, intense, surpassing every other. In
      it, fleeting though it be, he is blessed with a blessing that never falls on any other
      creature. The work of his brain and of his hand contents him,—it is the purest joy on
      earth.
Arslàn knew that joy as he looked on the work for which he had given up sleep, and absorbed
      in which he had almost forgotten hunger and thirst and the passage of time.
He had known no rest until he had embodied the shapes
       that pursued him. He had scarcely spoken, barely slumbered
      an hour; tired out, consumed with restless fever, weak from want of sleep and neglect of food,
      he had wrought on, and on, and on, until the vision as he had beheld it lived there, recorded
      for the world that denied him.
As he looked on it he felt his own strength, and was glad: he had faith in himself, though
      he had faith in no other thing; he ceased to care what other fate befell him, so that only
      this supreme power of creation remained with him.
His lamp died out; the bell of a distant clock chimed the fourth hour of the passing
      night.
The day broke in the east, beyond the grey levels of the fields and plains; the dusky
      crimson of the dawn rose over the cool dark skies; the light of the morning stars came in and
      touched the visage of his fettered Christ;—all the rest was in shadow.
He himself remained motionless before it.
He knew that in it lay the best achievement, the highest utterance, the truest parable, that
      the genius in him had ever conceived and put forth;—and he knew too that he was as powerless
      to raise it to the public sight of men as though he were stretched dead beneath it; he knew
      that there would be none to heed whether it rotted there in the dust, or perished by moth or
      by flame; unless illness should befall him, and it should be taken with the rest to satisfy
      some petty debt of bread, or oil, or fuel.
There, on the wall, he had written with all the might there was in him, his warning to the
      age in which he lived, his message to future generations, his claims to men’s remembrance
      after death: and there were none to see, none to read, none to ratify his heirship.
Great things, beautiful things, things of wisdom, things of grace, things terrible in their
      scorn and divine in their majesty, rose up about him, incarnated by his mind and his hand—and
      their doom was to fade and wither without leaving one human mind the richer for their story,
      one human soul the nobler for their meaning.
A year of labour, and the cartoon could be transferred to the permanent life of the canvas;
      and he was a master of colour, and loved to wrestle with its intricacies as the mariner
      struggles with the storm.

“But what were the use?” he pondered as he stood there. “What the use to be at pains to give
      it its full life on canvas? No man will ever look on it.”
All labours of his art were dear to him, and none wearisome: yet he doubted what it would
      avail to commence the perpetuation of this work on canvas.
If the world were never to know that it existed, it would be as well to leave it there on
      its grey sea of paper, to be moved to and fro with each wind that blew through the broken
      rafters, and to be brushed by the wing of the owl and the flittermouse.
The door softly unclosed: he did not hear it.
Across the chamber Folle‐Farine stole noiselessly. She had come and gone thus a score of
      times through those six nights of his vigil; and he had seldom seen her, never spoken to her;
      now and then she had touched him, and placed before him some simple meal of herbs and bread,
      and he had taken it half unconsciously, and drunk great draughts of water, and turned back
      again to his work, not noticing that she had brought to him what he sorely needed, and yet
      would not of himself have remembered.
She came to him without haste and without sound, and stood before him and looked;—looked
      with all her soul in her awed eyes.
The dawn was brighter now, red and hazy with curious faint gleams of radiance from the sun,
      that as yet had not risen. All the light there was fell on the crowed of Jerusalem.
She stood and gazed at it. She had watched it all grow gradually into being out from the
      chaos of dull spaces and confused lines. This art, which could call life from the dry wastes
      of wood and paper, and shed perpetual light where all was darkness, was ever to her an alchemy
      incomprehensible, immeasurable; a thing not to be criticised or questioned, ut adored in all
      its inscrutable and majestic mystery.
To her it could not have been more marvellous if his hand had changed the river sand to
      gold, or his touch had wakened the dead cornflowers to bloom afresh as living asphodels. But
      now for once she forgot the sorcery of the art in the terror and the pathos of the story it
      told; now for once she forgot, in the creation, its creator.

All she saw was the face of the Christ,—the pale bent face, in whose eyes there was a
      patience so perfect, a pity so infinite, a reproach that had no wrath, a scorn that had no
      cruelty. She had hated the Christ on the cross, because he was the God of the people she
      hated, and in whose name they reviled her. But this Christ moved her strangely—there, in the
      light, alone; betrayed and forsaken, while the crowd rushed on, lauding Barabbas.
Ignorant though she was, the profound meaning of the parable penetrated her with their
      ironies and with their woe—the parable of the genius rejected and the thief exalted.
She trembled and was silent; in her eyes sudden tears swam.
Arslàn turned and looked at her.
“Does it move you so?” he said, slowly. “Well—the world refuses me fame; but I do not know
      that the world could give me a higher tribute than yours.”
“The world?” she echoed. “The world? You care for the world—you?—who have painted
       that?”
Arslàn did not answer her: he felt the rebuke.
He had drawn the picture in all its deadly irony, in all its pitiless truth, only himself to
      desire and strive for the wine streams, and the painted harlotry, and the showers of gold, and
      the false gods, of a worldly success.
Was he a renegade to his own religion; a sceptic of his own teaching?
It was not for the first time that the dreamy utterances of this untrained and imperfect
      intelligence had struck home to the imperious and mature intellect of the man of genius.
He flung his charcoal away, and looked at the sun as it rose.
“Care? I?” he answered her. “We, who call ourselves poets or painters, can see the truth and
      can tell it—we are prophets so far; but when we come down from our Horeb we hanker for the
      flesh‐pots and the dancing women, and the bags of gold, like all the rest. We are no better
      than those we preach to; perhaps we are worse. Our eyes are set to the light; but our feet are
      fixed in the mire.”
She did not hear him; and had she heard, would not have comprehended. Her eyes were still
      fastened on the picture, and the blood in her cheeks faded and glowed at every
      breath she drew, and in her eye there was the wistful
 wondering, trustful reverence, which shone in those of the
      child, who, breaking from his mother’s arms, and regardless of the soldier’s stripes, clung to
      the feet of the scourged captive, and there kneeled and prayed.
Without looking at her, Arslàn went out to his daily labour on the waters.
The sun had fully risen; the day was red and clear; the earth was hushed in perfect
      stillness, the only sounds there were came from the wings and voices of innumerable birds.
“And yet I desire nothing for myself,” he thought. “I would lie down and die to‐morrow,
      gladly, did I know that they would live.”
Yet he knew that to desire a fame after death, was as idle as to desire, with a child’s
      desire, the stars.
For the earth is crowded full with clay gods and false prophets, and fresh legions for ever
      arriving to carry on the old strife for supremacy; and if a man pass unknown all the time that
      his voice is audible, and his hand visible, through the sound and smoke of the battle, he will
      dream in vain of any remembrance when the gates of the grave shall have closed on him and shut
      him for ever from sight.
When the world was in its youth, it had leisure to treasure its recollections; even to pause
      and look back; and to see what flower of a fair thought, what fruit of a noble art, it might
      have overlooked or left down‐trodden.
But now it is so old, and is so tired; it is purblind and heavy of foot; it does not notice
      what it destroys; it desires rest, and can find none; nothing can matter greatly to it; its
      dead are so many that it cannot count them; and being thus worn and dulled with age, and
      suffocated under the weight of its innumberable memories, it is very slow to be moved, and
      swift—terribly swift—to forget.
Why should it not be?
It has known the best, it has known the worst, that ever can befall it.
And the prayer that to the heart of a man seems so freshly born from his own desire, what is
      it on the weary ear of the world, save the same old, old cry which it has heard through all
      the ages, empty as the sound of the wind, and for ever—for ever—unanswered?
</div></body></text></TEI>