<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">
CHAPTER III.
And what was it Mrs. Forth saw over Bellairs' shoulder? What is the sight that, now
      that the temporary call upon her attention is withdrawn, is riveting into such an agony of
      search the lovely cold eyes, to which so few things seem worth looking at? Fortunately for
      her, a new batch of under-graduates has hurried up to be presented to Sarah. Never since the
      days of Dresden and the German army has Miss Churchill had her hands so full. Belinda is free
      to send her gaze unnoticed round the hall, in a silent, breathless, passionate quest. Quest of
      what? She does not ask herself how much the better off she will be if she
       succeeds in finding the object of that quest. To find it! to find it! Come what
      may of the finding, to find it! Most people would feel sure that she has been deceived by an
      accidental resemblance to Rivers in some stranger; men of his size, complexion and bearing
      being, though unhappily in a minority, yet still numerous among two thousand youths of the
      English upper classes. But Belinda would laugh to scorn the suggestion that at any distance,
      or in any glimpse however momentary, she could have mistaken any other for him.
There exists in her mind no smallest doubt that the face seen in that one lightning-flash,
      and then instantly hidden by twenty other intervening faces, was his— his or his angle's!
      Perhaps he is dead, and that he has come to tell her. A mute sob rises in her throat. Whether
      in the spirit or the body, she must find him! At intervals of every few minutes she is
      interrupted in her search by the greetings and observations of passing acquaintances. She
      answers them politely and connectedly, but
       with a brevity that does not encourage a prolongation of their civilities; a
      brevity that will the sooner leave her free.
The room is thinner than it was, or rather the crowd is distributed more evenly over its
      whole area. Since the suppertables sprang into sight—even loyalty giving the pas to
      hunger; the uncertain hope of a bow from the Duke, to the sober certainty of lobster-salad—the
      packing about H.R.H. is less dense. The guests are extended along the line of tables. Of
      Sarah, indeed, scarcely a vestige is to be seen, so closely is she hedged in by a wall of
      boys. At something she has just said they all laugh rapturously; those who did not hear it—so
      firmly assured already in her character as a wit—as well as those who did.
The signalman's biographer has descended from his estrade , and is talking as
      commonplacely to his hostess as if he wotted nothing of parental agonies or points, and as if
      the rosy babe had been sent to bed with the whipping it deserved.
       Through the slackening of the press it has surely become easier for one seeking
      to discover the person sought; and yet for a while she seeks in vain. How many heads there
      are! heads bald as Cæsar's; heads thickly clad as Absolom's; heads white, heads brown; sandy
      heads, pepper and salt heads, gold heads; long heads, round heads, knobby heads! And how they
      shift and move! Will they never stay quiet for a moment? And among them all he is not! He must
      have gone—gone without ever conjecturing her nearness!
Again that mute sob rises chokingly. Why should he not be gone? Why should she wish that he
      were not gone? Why should she wish to see him? What has she to say to him when they meet? But
      she pushes roughly aside Reason's cool pleading. Why does she wish it? Why —
       why? There may be no why , but she does wish it; wishes it with
      such a compelling frenzy of wishing, as seems as if it must produce the fulfilment of that
      wish. And it does. Its might prevails. Ah—h—h!
       For in a moment she has seen him again. He is nearer now; so near as to be
      recognizable past mistake or misgiving, even by eyes less acquainted than hers with every
      trick of lip and brow. If he continues to advance in the direction at present taken by his
      steps, it is impossible but that in one minute or less—in perhaps fifty seconds, perhaps
      forty—she will come within the range of his vision. He will be aware of her as she is aware of
      him.
"Are you ready to go home?" says a voice at her elbow.
She turns suddenly; eyes alight, and heart madly bounding, to find her husband at her elbow.
      The revulsion is so hideous that speech wholly fails her.
"I should be obliged if you would tell me where I am likely to find your sister," he
      continues, taking her silence for assent, since she is never very prodigal of her words to
      him; "so that I may let her know that we are going."
But at that she finds voice.
" Going !" she says, flashing one look of
       passionate dissent at him. "Why should we go? Impossible!"
"I see no impossibility," he answers captiously; "we have already amply satisfied the claims
      of civility. The impossibility, as you are perfectly aware, lies in combining such late hours
      with early rising in the morning."
"Then why should you rise early?" answers she, with tremulous rebellion. "It is no use
      talking—I cannot come away. You forget Sarah; it—it would not be fair upon Sarah; I have
      neither the wish nor the right to spoil her enjoyment."
"I should imagine that nothing would be easier than to find a chaperon in whose charge to
      leave her," rejoins he persistently; "if indeed," with a slightly venomous look in the
      direction of his sister-in-law, "she considers one necessary."
But Belinda only observes a silence which he divines to be mutinous. He is accustomed in her
      to sullen compliance, uncheerful acquiescence, loth obedience; but to open revolt he is not
      accustomed,
       and, on the spur of the moment, and in so public a place, he is not prepared to
      deal with it.
"Since you manifest such an avidity in the pursuit of pleasure," he says resentfully, "I
      will indulge you with another half-hour, at the end of which time I must beg that you and your
      sister will be prepared to accompany me without further remonstrance."
He does not await the answer, which perhaps he knows he would not receive; but turns on his
      heel and leaves her—leaves her free to pursue that feverish search which his coming had so
      rudely interrupted.
It is some moments before she again finds the object of that search; moments long enough for
      her to tell herself in heart bitterness that she has pushed against her fate in vain. But
      then, all in a moment, she has found him again. He is further off, indeed, than he was: some
      trifle must have diverted his steps from the direction then pursued by them; and he is still,
      in
       his unconsciousness, slowly widening the distance between them.
Is it possible that he is tending towards the door? that she, unable by word or sign to
      arrest him, will see him go? Oh, but life is a hard thing! Knowing as she does that at one
      lightest cry from her he would turn; to be no more able to utter that cry than if a real
      material gag were choking her utterances! Can it be, then, that her soul's cry has reached his
      soul's ears? for he does turn suddenly and smiling. Has he seen her, that he smiles? Ah no!
      Would he indeed smile if he saw her? She has not given him much cause to smile at the sight of
      her. Well, he is wise. He has again averted his look. And the half-hour, the inexorable
      half-hour is passing! How much of it has already gone? Ten minutes, at least, must by this
      time have passed.
There are only twenty minutes for hope to work upon. Twenty minutes!—and then the close fly,
      the Early English Villa, Professor Forth, and the Fragments of
       Menander! To the end of time Professor Forth, and the Fragments of Menander!
Again her thoughts are broken in upon by a voice—Sarah's this time; Sarah having shaken
      herself free of her disciples; Sarah with a solicitous look and an anxious eye.
"I think it best to tell you," she says hurriedly, and narrowly watching the effect of her
      words upon her sister's face; "I was afraid lest you might hear it suddenly from some one
      else—some stranger. I suppose you have not seen him yet, but he is here!"
"I know it," answers Belinda shortly, and very low.
"You—you are not going to faint?"
" Faint ! why should I faint?" with an accent of intense impatience, her eyes still
      riveted on the now again approaching figure; "do I ever faint?"
"Would you like to go home?"
"Go home!" echoes Belinda, in an accent of fierce desperation; "why do you all
       sing the same song? why are you all determined that I must go home?"
"I thought you would wish it," replies Sarah anxiously. "I should if I were in your place.
      Do not you think it would be better?"
But she speaks to deaf ears. Her eyes, still fastened on her sister's face, see that face's
      lilies suddenly dyed with a most happy and loveliest flush.
The sun has risen: he has touched the sunless snow on the Jungfrau's crest, and all the
      world is rosy red. So then he has seen her! There is now no longer any fear of his departing
      unintentionally ignorant of her neighbourhood.
There is indeed time for one short pang of alarm lest he should do what in her heart she
      knows if he were wise he would do— and who knows how much of wisdom these two years may have
      lent him?—turn away, and knowingly avoid her! But apparently he is not wise.
In a moment he has pierced the small portion of crowd that still separates them;
       pierced it with a goodwill that would not have disgraced Miss Watson. She has
      one instant of such blissful anticipation—only a thousandfold intensified—as used to be hers
      in the Lüttichau Strasse, at the sound of Tommy's childish foot pattering up the stone stairs,
      and her love's firm and eager tread behind it.
The next moment they have met. Their unfamiliar right hands lie in one another; and they
      say—nothing. Of what use to have mesmerized him hither by her eyes, and the insanity of her
      voiceless prayers, if she have nothing to say to him now that he has come? But happily, though
      she and he are speecheless, Sarah is not.
"So it is you, is it?" she says in a dry voice. "Now what eccentric wind has blown you
      here?"
He does not answer at once. Evidently, as of old, he has forgotten her presence.
"I see that you still have your old trick of not answering me," pursues she, running quickly
      on with a fightiness that conceals a good deal of real nervousness; "but
       never mind: there 'are places where I also am admired,' as Goldsmith said.
      Belinda, do you know that twenty-five young gentlemen of different colleges are going to be so
      good as to call upon you between the hours of three and seven to-morrow?"
Belinda is struggling to rouse herself out of her intoxication; already so far unintoxicated
      as to know that it is intoxication.
"Are they?" she says, with a weakly laugh; "I am sure that I am very much obliged to
      them."
"And meanwhile what has brought you here?" asks Sarah persistently, carrying on her
      determined talk as a shield to her sister's emotion.
Her speech has the effect of making Rivers, too, put down the wine-cup; of bringing him also
      back to the bald, sober, morning prose of life.
"I have come to take my degree," he answers; "I have been prevented by—by circumstances from
      taking it before."
So now she has heard his voice! To
       have touched his hand; to have met his eye; to have heard his speech! Is not
      this to have had her wish? Surely now she is content. Surely now she will go home at ease and
      satisfied. But who was ever satisfied with one wish? What wish ever died barren,
      without engendering a hundred more?
"The half-hour is expired!" says a voice.
The Dresden quartette is complete. Perhaps it is this thought that, rushing simultaneously
      into three out of the four minds, strikes them momentarily mute. Sarah is, of course, the
      first to recover herself.
"What a mysterious utterance!" she says, with rather a forced gaiety; " what
      half-hour? any particular half-hour? You remember Mr. Rivers, do not you? Mr. Rivers, you know
      Mr. Forth, my—my brother-in-law?"
There is a slight unintentional hesitation before pronouncing, and a perhaps intentional
      slight stress in pronouncing, the last word. Rivers has stepped back a pace or
       two, isolating himself from the augmented group; but at this summons he again
      advances, and, except by the two signs of a sheet-white face and set teeth, is not to be
      distinguished from any other well-mannered young man making a bow. But the Professor would be
      slow indeed to mark the hue of any undergraduate's, or ex-undergraduate's face, or to note
      whether his mouth were open or shut.
"The fly is waiting," he says, returning Rivers's salutation with cursory indifference.
      "Belinda, I must beg you to accompany me at once, and not keep it waiting."
As he speaks, he looks at his wife, as one expecting and braced for fresh rebellion. But he
      meets with none.
"Come along!" cries Sarah with alacrity; "we are quite ready, are not we, Belinda? Enough is
      as good as a feast; and we have supped full of pleasure. Good-bye!" nodding with cool
      friendliness over her shoulder, and taking her sister's hand.
Belinda offers no resistance; flaccidly she complies, and without one look at
       Rivers, with only a faint bend of her head in his direction, begins to follow
      the Professor of Etruscan out of the room. Rivers stands stupidly looking after them. The tart
      imperativeness of her husband's tone; his employment of her Christian name; her own dull
      docility—which of these is it that makes him feel as if some one had given him a great blow
      over the head with a club? Presently he begins, mechanically and purposelessly, to follow
      them.
The crowd is thick at the entrance and on the stone stairs—the departing crowd. The
      quadrangle is full of vehicles. Footmen are few in Oxbridge; but such as there are, are
      shouting their mistresses' carriages: the humbler multitude are pushing, asking, struggling
      for their flies. Lucky ones are finding them and driving off: unlucky ones are vainly striving
      to identify horse or driver. Among the latter are the Forths. In coming out, they have been
      parted by the press—that is to say, the sisters have lost each other—the younger loitering in
      injudicious dalliance with some
       of her new sweethearts; the elder plodding on in dull and woolly oblivion of all
      but the iron necessity of following that cap and gown ahead of her.
It is not till the elusive fly is at length found—till her foot is on the step, and
      Professor Forth is sharply urging her in by the elbow from behind, that she becomes aware of
      having mislaid her junior.
"Get in—get in!" cries he crossly; "what are you waiting for?"
"But Sarah!" she says, awaking from her unconsciousness and looking hastily round; "what has
      become of Sarah? we cannot go without Sarah!"
He makes an irritated gesture.
"No doubt she has joined some other party; no doubt she will do very well: at all events, in
      this confusion it is impossible to attempt to find her!"
"It is much more impossible to go without her!" replies she firmly, withdrawing her foot
      from the step; "I wonder that you should propose such a thing!"
"She is perfectly well able to take care
       of herself!" retorts he, recurring to his old and spiteful formula; "she will
      find her own way home!"
"Then I will find my own way home, too!" answers she indignantly, and resolutely
      turning her back upon him and the open fly-door. She is too indignant even to deign to observe
      whether he takes her at her word.
The crowd is still issuing, issuing; crossing the moonlit square on foot; nodding good-night
      out of carriage windows; away they go! She retraces her steps to the stair-foot. It is not
      pleasant work pushing against a human tide; and so she finds. It is bewildering to be staring
      into every face; peering under all the hoods and mufflers. And among all the faces, under all
      the hoods and mufflers, is no Sarah to be found. It is obvious that the Professor is right.
      She has found her own way home.
The company is melting away so rapidly that, unless she wishes to be shut into the college
      for the night, she must needs follow
       her example. Well! there is no great hardship in that! She is in the mood when
      the abnormal, the unusal, seems more tolerable to her than the accustomed, the everyday. Half
      an hour of solitude and midnight! Half an hour in which to be Belinda only—not Belinda Forth
      at all! Half an hour in which to reckon with this night and its work! She has already made
      half a dozen steps along the stone flags of the quadrangle, when some one comes up behind her.
      Had she known that he would come up behind her, that she makes no sign of surprise, nor any
      pause in her walk?
"You are alone?" he says with agitation.
"It seems so," she answers. It is the same dry voice with which she had so often galled and
      chilled him at Dresden.
"You have lost your—your party?"
"I have lost Sarah."
"And your—and Professor Forth?"
"He could not wait, and I could not go without Sarah."
"And he has left you behind— alone ?"

She is silent, still speeding along in the moonlight.
"And how do you propose to get home?" he asks, keeping up with and determinately addressing
      her.
"I am getting home as fast as I can."
"You mean to walk?"
"It looks like it."
Her tone is brusque and dogged; but if she hopes by its means to rid herself of her
      companion she is mistaken.
"In evening dress?"
"Pooh!" she says, with a hard laugh; "we are not so fastidious here, nous autres ;
      I walk out to dinner every night of my life!"
"But not alone?"
Her face darkens. "No, not alone."
They have reached the gateway and Wren's domey tower. She has stopped in her resolute walk;
      but in the stopping there is as much resolution as there was in the hurrying.
"Here we part," she says shortly; "good-night!"

"You must allow me to see you home," he answers firmly.
"I have already told you that it is absolutely unnecessary," retorts she roughly.
There is an instant's interval before his rejoinder. They are putting out the lights in the
      hall; the great building is greedily devouring half the moonlight in the quad, with its raven
      shadow. It has embraced the fountain in the middle. It is not much of a fountain, but how
      pleasantly its little voice pierces through the noise of rolling wheels and human shoutings.
      For how many centuries could she gladly stand here listening to it!
"You must allow me!" with perfect respect, but obstinately.
"I must not !" Is the night-wind heady, like wine? Her tone changes to one that is
      almost entreaty. "I had rather you did not; I ask you not!"
Her incivilities had left him iron; to her pleading he is as wax.
"It shall be as you wish," he says, gravely bowing.

There is nothing now to detain her, and yet she lingers an instant, as though expecting him
      to say something more. But he adds nothing. She turns out of the gateway and into the street,
      and walks fast and steadily up it. There are not many towns through which it would be
      judicious for a young and solitary woman to take her way, bare-headed and in flimsy ball-gown,
      at midnight; but about Oxbridge, Una, without her lion, might have strayed unassailed from
      sunset to sunrise. Involuntarily she slackens her speed a little, from the almost run with
      which she had begun her course, though still keeping at a moderately rapid walk. What cause is
      there for hurry? There is nothing now to hasten from; and Heaven knows there is nothing to
      hasten to!
She did well to be peremptory; but, after all, he was not very much in earnest; he did not
      press the point. It is much better that it should be so; but still, as a mere matter-of-fact,
      he did not. She looks up at the sky, which is spreading out the jewels
       it has kept hidden through the staring day, spreading them out for "The fair
      city with her dreaming spires," to look up at and admire; all its bright belts and bears; its
      gods and goddesses. Then she looks suddenly round. There are still a good many people about,
      but no undergraduates; for the University mother has gathered her curled darlings to her bosom
      for the night.
The man, then, who is keeping pace with her, footstep for footstep, twenty yards behind, is
      no undergraduate. She redoubles her speed again. Pooh! his presence has no reference to her.
      He is only taking the natural road to his hotel. But she does not look round again until the
      more bustling streets lie behind her; until she has reached the broad still thoroughfare where
      a range of grey colleges and a row of sentinel elms hold quiet converse with the stars.
Then, as if the muscles of her neck had been moved by some one else, she not
       consenting, once again she turns her head. The hotels are long passed. If he is
      still following, it is she whom he is following. And lo! twenty yards behind her, there he is,
      stepping through the moonlight!
She gives a low, excited laugh. Well, they have both had their will then: he has not walked
      home with her; she has not walked home alone. It is a compromise. Again she looks up to the
      heavens. What a lovely, lovely vault! What seed-pearl of constellations! What great
      planet-diamonds!
The clocks have just beun to strike midnight; the city's innumerous clocks, cathedral,
      college, church; the booming bell, the sharp strike, the melodious chime! How nobly their loud
      wedded harmony floods the night! And is there one of the gardens—she has reached the suburb of
      villas and gardens by this time—that has not contributed the breath of its gillyflowers to
      make the boon air so sweet?
She walks on with her strong elastic tread. After all, it is good to be young:
       to have a fine ear for sound; a nostril sensitive to fragrance; and—the
      consciousness that behind you there is one protecting you where there is nothing to be
      protected from —guarding you where there is nothing to be guarded against.
She has reached her own gate, and at it halts, her hand upon the latch. Here surely, under
      the ægis of her own roof-tree —here, where that twinkling night-light shows the exact spot
      where her husband is addressing himself to his slumbers—she may abate a little of her
      rigidity.
Seeing her arrived, he too has halted; nor is it until by a faint motion of her hand she
      gives him leave to approach, that he ventures to draw near her.
"Thank you!" she says with a smile, to which it is perhaps the moonlight that lends its
      quivering uncertainty; "but it was not necessary."
He neither disclaims nor accepts her acknowledgments. Gravely he unfastens the iron gate for
      her; while above his gold head the laburnum droops her gold
       curls. The moon has taken their colour out of both, and substituted her own. Is
      he then still going to say nothing? But as she passes through, he speaks:
"I—I—am not leaving Oxbridge to-morrow. I shall be in Oxbridge all to-morrow."
"Shall you?" she says faintly.
"I have not done anything to forfeit your friendship, have I?" he asks, while in the
      moonlight she sees his right hand tighten its nervous clasp on one of the spiked iron uprights
      of the gate.
She is quite silent.
"Have I?" he repeats, in a tone as of one who, though patient, will not go without his
      answer. (Is truth always the best to be spoken? Then let it be spoken!)
"Nothing!"
"Is there then any reason why I should not come and see you to-morrow?"
Silence again; her look wandering undecidedly over her flower-bed.
"Is there?"

Her eye has caught the Professor's night-light again—that ill-favoured Jack-o'-Lantern that
      is to dance for ever across the morass of her life.
"None!" she answers firmly; and with that firm "None!" she leaves him.

</div></body></text></TEI>