<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER I.
It is November; the second November since the Churchills' return from Dresden. A
      second summer has raced after a second spring; and a second autumn is pursuing both. The full
      tale of eighteen months is complete. Time has swung by on his mighty wings, which all the
      centuries are power-less to tire, bearing in his arms diverse gifts. To some he has brought
      satisfied ambition; to some grinding poverty; to some a surfeit of pleasure; to some a
      mad-house; and to some a grave. To many only a bundle of little nagging cares and pigmy
      pleasures, that passed without much heeding.

To the Churchills he has brought— what? To Mrs. Churchill a beautiful new râtelier
      ; to Sarah, six new lovers and one new dog; and to Belinda, a knowledge of the postman's step,
      whether distant or near, that she might defy any inhabitant of this or any other street to
      rival. Before her return home, she had congratulated herself upon the convenience and number
      of the London posts. Ere six months are out, she execrates their frequency.
For eighteen months Belinda has been listening, and not once have her ears been filled with
      the sound that they are ever strained to catch. Not once has Rivers written. Not once has he
      come in person to explain his silence. He is gone— simply gone out of her life. That is
      all!
He was free, of course, to come or to go; as she tells herself, she cannot quarrel with him
      for that. The why she is at issue with him is that he has taken the taste out of her life with
      him. For her he has taken the colour out of the sunsets, and the music out of the larks. She
      looks
       at the beauty of our mother earth with a grudging, sullen eye. The summers with
      the glories of their roses, the autumns with the glories of their sheaves, are to her
      absolutely waste and worthless.
"Even if he came back to me," she says to herself; "even if I lived to be ninety, and saw
      him henceforth every day, every minute, until I die, I could never fill the emptiness of these
      days; they will always have been dead, dead loss!"
Now and again she rises up in revolt against the tyranny of the idea that is eating into and
      corroding her prime. She will cut him out of her life; will cut off that portion of her life
      in which he had concern, sheer away, like a precipice.
"I did well before I knew him," she says to herself, with a sort of indignation. "He was in
      the world, and so was I; he smiled as he does now—does he smile now, I wonder?—and I was none
      the worse for it. He did not blot out the sun; he did not make it uphill work to eat, to
      speak, to breathe. Let things be as they were
       then. Why cannot they be? They shall be!"
For a moment she is strong and light-hearted; sings a gay verse of a song; feels the
      goodliness of youth. Then a sick qualm comes over her. It is gone, done with! and the whole
      earth, the whole of life, is empty, hideous, void!
It is November; the afternoon is drawing towards its close. Tea has been drunk, and visitors
      are gone. The hour of dressing draws nigh. This, however, is a fact that neither Mrs.
      Churchill nor Sarah are willing to admit; Mrs. Churchill because her drive has made her
      sleepy, and fire and owl-light are drowsy and soothing; Sarah because she is absorbed in the
      ingenious, if not useful, employment of painting the large white terrier lately added to the
      establishment, in coloured stripes and spots to represent a clown. Jane is, happily for
      herself, not a sensitive dog, and submits with stolid good-humour to a process that would
      penetrate Slutty's heart with agonies of undying shame.

"Belinda is late," says Mrs. Churchill, drawing herself up into a sitting posture, the first
      preparatory step towards the unavoidable, dreaded move upstairs.
"I hope she will not come back until Jane is finished," answers Sarah warmly, hesitating for
      an instant in the choice of a pigment; while Jane opens her mouth in a large, bored, patient
      yawn.
"Perhaps she did not find it so tiresome as she expected," says Mrs. Churchill, reluctantly
      taking the second step towards departure, and rising to her feet.
"Perhaps not," replies Sarah absently, drawing back her head the better to judge of the
      effect of a large splash of gamboge, just applied upon Jane's right cheek.
"What an object you are making of that poor dog!" laughing lazily.
"She likes it!" replies Sarah gravely. "She thinks it is becoming. Do not tell her it is
      not. If she is a success, I mean to paint the others as Harlequin and Columbine!"
"I wish Belinda would come," says Mrs.
       Churchill, with a little comfortable curiosity in nowise akin to the loving,
      foolish solicitude that thinks that some unlikely misfortune must have happened to its
      beloved, if he or she be detained five minutes beyond his or her usual time.
"I hope she will not come until Jane is finished!" repeats Sarah seriously, working away
      with redoubled ardour.
"I think she must have been amused."
"H'm!" replies Sarah dubiously. "If she is, she is the first person in whom that emotion was
      ever provoked by an afternoon drum; and Belinda is not easily amused. I think," with quiet
      pride, "that Jane will amuse her. Ah, how provoking! Here she is!"
In effect, as the last words leave her lips the door opens, and her sister enters. If your
      eyes were shut, or if you were blind, your ear would never have told you that it was a young
      person's entrance, so measured and unelastic is her step.
"Do not come here! Do not look at Jane!" cries Sarah in an agonized voice,
       hastily throwing the cloth on which she has been wiping her brushes over Jane's
      long-suffering back. "Stay where you are! No! Now you may come!"
"Which am I to do?" asks Belinda; and her voice has as little spring in it as her step.
"Well?" cries Mrs. Churchill in a voice of cheerful expectancy, ready to abridge her
      dressing-time, to sit down again and be amused.
"Well?" replies Belinda unresponsively.
She has advanced to the fire, and now stands there, a foot on the fender, for the evening is
      chill; while the cheerful flames, upspringing, play upon the uncheerful beauty of her face,
      and lend a little of their own dancing to the "Eyes too expressive to be blue, Too lovely to
      be gray," that have no dancing of their own in them.
"You are the worst person in the world to send out," says Mrs. Churchill, disappointed
       and cross; "for all the news you bring back, you might as well stay at
      home."
A couple of years ago, Belinda would have pleasantly acquiesced in her own lack of
      observation; would have cheerfully tried to remedy it. Now she only answers, with a sullen
      look:
"What is there to tell? What is there ever to tell about a drum? There was a mob of women,
      and a smell of hot seal-skins!"
"Not a man, of course?" asks Sarah from the distant corner of the room, whither she has
      retired with the inchoate Jane, to pursue her artistic labours unseen.
"How glad I am I did not go!"
Belinda smiles. When she smiles, you see even more clearly than when she is grave the
      inexpressible hardening which has happened to her face.
"There were two or three men."
"The usual refuse that you meet in a second-class literary salon, I suppose," rejoins Sarah
      contemptuously. "Dirty little poets, and greasy little positivists?"

Belinda still smiles a smile that is without gaiety, but is not without satire.
"There was one man there whom you did not think too grimy to bestow a good deal of your
      notice upon at one period of your history."
"Who?" asks Sarah, pricking up her ears with awakened yet puzzled interest. "You would not
      be likely to meet any of my friends there, I should hope."
"Guess!"
"Je vous le donne en trois; je vous le donne en dix; je vous le donne en mille!" says Mrs.
      Churchill, who at the unsealing of her granddaughter's lips has recovered her good-humour.
      "Was it— pooh! what a memory I have—Signor Valetta, the singing-master, who went down on his
      knees in the middle of the lesson?"
"No."
"I have it! It was the German who wrote 'Ich liebe dich!' on the fly-leaf of the
      grammar!"
"It was not!"

Sarah has paused, brush in hand, her brows furrowed by her efforts to repass in her mind's
      eye the crowded phalanx of her suitors.
"They were the nearest approach to literature I ever made," she says doubtfully; "except"—a
      sudden rush of colour and animation into face and eyes—"except —no! it could not have been; it
      was not —was it— Professor Forth ?"
"It was Professor Forth."
"How awkward for you!" cries Mrs. Churchill, interested; "and of course he is not man of the
      world enough to carry off the gêne of such a meeting!"
In the emotion of the moment, Sarah has unintentionally released Jane, who now trots
      composedly back to the fire, her incomplete face white on one side and garishly painted on the
      other—a fact which, even when taken in connection with the distrustful and angry wonder of the
      other dogs, is powerless to rob her of her stoic calm.
"Did he speak to you? Did you speak
       to him?" cries Sarah in high excitement, running back to the hearth.
"I talked to him for a good half-hour."
"He accepted the situation, in short," says Mrs. Churchill. "Well, that was more than I
      should have expected of him."
"Did he mention me? Of course he mentioned me?" asked Sarah eagerly.
"He inquired after granny; and then he put you in as an afterthought."
"I dare say that he could not command his voice to ask after me at first?" cries the other,
      laughing. "Did his voice tremble at all? I hope it trembled."
"Not in the very least."
"You talked to him for half an hour? What did you talk about?"
"We talked about Browning's poetry."
" Browning's poetry !" with a disgusted accent. "What a bore for you! I thought
      that of course you would have talked about me!"
"Bore!" repeats Belinda, with a sort of bitter animation. "I thought it such a
       blessing. I did not want to talk about you, or myself either, or granny; we are
      always talking about you and myself and granny. It was such a relief to get away once in a
      while from people, and turn to things!"
"I must say that Browning is a great deal too clever for me," puts in Mrs. Churchill
      contentedly. "I am very fond of poetry; but I like something that I can understand."
"But did you talk about nothing but Browning's poetry?" inquires Sarah, incredulously
      lifting her eyebrows. "Did you talk about it the whole time?"
"We had hardly exhausted the subject in half an hour," replies Belinda, with a disagreeable
      sneer. "And then he read aloud; he was asked to read aloud!"
"And you all sat round worshipping!" exclaims Sarah, breaking into new laughter.
"That is exactly what they did at the house I first met him at. You may not credit it, but I
      sat round worshipping too!"
"They were rather fulsome!" replies
       Belinda, her lip curling at the recollection.
"And what did he read? Did he read anything amusing? But of course he did not!"
"He read 'The Grammarian's Funeral."'
" ' The Grammarian's Funeral '!" repeats Mrs. Churchill with a shrug. "What a name
      for a poem!"
" 'The Grammarian's Funeral'!" echoes Sarah, but with an emotion different from her
      grandmother's colouring her tone. "That was the very poem he read the night I first met him. I
      could not make head or tail of it; but I pretended that I thought it very fine. Belinda,
      beware! or this family may have a second time cause to rue that that Grammarian ever was
      buried!"
"How curious, your meeting him!" said Mrs. Churchill, with an amused, leisurely smile. "How
      it must have reminded you of Dresden!"
Belinda shudders a little. There is so much need to remind her of Dresden! And
       yet she herself has been surprised at the extra vividness with which the sight
      and bodily presence of one of the subordinate actors in the little drama enacted there has
      brought it back to her. Is her memory growing habitually dull? Oh, if it but were so!
"Is his mother alive still?" asks Sarah, striking hastily in to divert the conversation from
      the channel into which her grandmother seems disposed to direct it. "I hope you were not
      behindhand in civility; and that as he remembered to ask after our old lady, you remembered to
      ask after his."
"I did not; I thought she might be dead, but I do not think she is. He mentioned her; he
      said something about 'My mother."'
"Then of course she is not dead!" answers Sarah decisively; "if she had been he would have
      said, 'My poor mother!' Granny, when you are dead, I mean always to talk of you as 'my poor
      granny!"'

"Do you indeed, my dear!" rather sharply. "Let me tell you that I have no intention of
      giving you the opportunity just yet."
"Did he say anything about coming to call?" asks Sarah, with an interested look.
"Not a word."
"Did he give you the impression that he was contemplating it?"
"Not in the least."
"Do you think that he will?"
"I should think certainly not; indeed he is going back to Oxbridge to-morrow. I wish I were
      going to Oxbridge to-morrow! I wish," restlessly, "that we lived at Oxbridge."
"To be near him?" asks Sarah, laughing.
Her sister joins in the laugh, but without heartiness.
"Not exactly; but from what he says— from what everyone says—there must be such a continual
      stir of intellectual life going on there."
"Good Heavens!" cries Sarah, shocked;
       "what has happened to you? You are growing to talk just as he does; those are
      the kind of things he used to say to me, and expect me to provide them with suitable
      answers!"
"It does sound high falutin'," answers Belinda, rather ashamed; "but it is not, really: it
      is only that I would give anything to get out of our own little groove into any other."
"I like our little groove," says Sarah contentedly; "by-the-bye, that reminds me— Jane,
      where are you? Jane, how dare you? How can you be so indelicate as to present yourself half
      dressed to Punch and Slutty? Come here this instant."
But Jane, though giving a slavish leer and a sycophantic wag of her disfigured tail, makes
      no movement towards exchanging her warm couch on the deep rug for the uncomfortable glories of
      the palette and the brush.
"It may not be a bad little groove for those who like it," rejoins Belinda discontentedly;
       "but it is pleasant to get a glimpse beyond it now and then. I do not know when
      I have been so little bored as I have been this afternoon."

</div></body></text></TEI>