<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Folle-Farine : VWWP edition </title><author>Ouida, [pseud.] (1839-1908)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER I.
NIGHT had come; a dark night of earliest spring. The wild day had sobbed itself to
      sleep after a restless life with fitful breath of storm and many sighs of shuddering
      breezes.
The sun had sunk, leaving lone tracks of blood‐red light across one‐half the heavens.
There was a sharp crisp coldness as of lingering frost in the gloom and the dulness. Heavy
      clouds, as yet unbroken, hung over the cathedral and the clustering roofs around it in dark
      and starless splendour.
Over the great still plains which stretched eastward and southward, black with the furrows
      of the scarce‐budded corn, the wind blew hard; blowing the river and the many streamlets
      spreading from it into foam; driving the wintry leaves, which still strewed the earth thickly,
      hither and thither in legions; breaking boughs that had weathered the winter hurricanes, and
      scattering the tender blossoms of the snowdrops and the earliest crocuses in all the little
      moss‐grown garden ways.
The smell of wet grass, of the wood‐born violets, of trees whose new life was waking in
      their veins, of damp earths turned freshly upwards by the plough, were all blown together by
      the riotous breezes.
Now and then a light gleamed through the gloom where a little peasant boy lighted home with
      a torch some old priest on his mule, or a boat went down the waters with a lamp hung at its
      prow. For it grew dark early, and people used to the river read a threat of flood on its
      face.

A dim glow from the west, which was still tinged with the fire of the sunset, fell through a
      great square window set in a stone building, and striking across the sicklier rays of an oil
      lamp reached the opposing wall within.
It was a wall of grey stone, dead and lustreless like the wall of a prison‐house, over whose
      surface a spider as colourless as itself dragged slowly its crooked hairy limbs loaded with
      the moisture of the place, which was an old tower, of which the country folk told strange
      tales, where it stood among the rushes on the left bank of the stream.
A man watched the spider as it went.
It crept on its heavy way across the faint crimson reflection from the glow of the sunken
      sun.
It was fat, well‐nourished, lazy, content; its home of dusky silver hung on high, where its
      pleasure lay in weaving, clinging, hoarding, breeding. It lived in the dark; it had neither
      pity nor regret; it troubled itself neither for the death it dealt to nourish itself, nor for
      the light without, into which it never wandered; it spun and throve and multiplied.
It was an emblem of the man who is wise in his generation; of the man whom Cato the elder
      deemed divine; of the Majority and the Mediocrity who rule over the earth and enjoy its
      fruits.
This man knew that was wise; that those who were like to it were wise also; wise with the
      only wisdom which is honoured of other men.
He had been unwise—always; and therefore he stood watching the sun die, with hunger in his
      soul, with famine in his body.
For many months he had been half famished, as were the wolves in his own northern mountains
      in the winter solstice. For seven days he had only been able to crush a crust of hard black
      bread between his teeth. For twenty hours he had not done even so much as this. The trencher
      on his tressel was empty; and he had not wherewithal to refill it.
He might have found some to fill it for him no doubt. He lived amidst the poor, and the poor
      to the poor are good, though they are bad and bitter to the rich. But he did not open either
      his lips or his hands. He consumed
       his heart in silence; and his vitals preyed in anguish on
      themselves without his yielding to their torments.
He was a madman; and Cato, who measured the godliness of man by what they gained, would have
      held him, accursed;—the madness that starves and is silent for an idea is an insanity, scouted
      by the world and the gods. For it is an insanity unfruitful; except to the future. And for the
      future who cares,—save these madmen themselves?
He watched the spider as it went.
It could not speak to him as its fellow once spoke in the old Scottish story. To hear as
      that captive heard, the hearer must have hope, and a kingdom,—if only in dreams.
This man had no hope; he had a kingdom indeed, but it was not of earth; and, in an hour of
      sheer cruel bodily pain, earth alone has dominion over power and worth.
The spider crawled across the grey wall; across the glow from the vanished sun; across a
      coil of a dead passion‐vine, that strayed loosed through the floor; across the classic shapes
      of a great cartoon drawn in chalks upon the dull rugged surface of stone.
Nothing arrested it; nothing retarded it, as nothing hastened it. It moved slowly on; fat,
      lustreless, indolent, hueless; reached at length its den, and there squatted aloft, loving the
      darkness; its young swarming around, its prey held in its forceps, its nest cast about.
Through the open casement there came on the rising wind of the storm, in the light of the
      last lingering sunbeam, a beautiful night‐moth, begotten by some cruel hot‐house heat in the
      bosom of some frail exiled tropical flower.
It swam in on trembling pinions, and alighted on the golden head of a gathered crocus that
      lay dying on the stones—a moth that should have been born to no world save that of the summer
      world of a Midsummer Night’s Dream. 
A shape of Ariel and Oberon; slender, silver, purple, roseate, lustrous‐eyed, and
      gossamer‐winged.
A creature of woodland waters and blossoming forests; of the yellow chalices of kingcups and
      the white breasts of river lilies, of moonbeams that strayed through a summer world of
      shadows, and dewdrops that glistened in the deep folded hearts of roses. A creature to brush
      the dreaming eyes of a poet, to nestle on the bosom of a young girl
       sleeping: to float earthwards on a fallen star, to slumber
      on a lotus life.
A creature that amidst the still soft hush of woods and waters still tells, to those who
      listen, of the world when the world was young.
The moth flew on, and poised on the faded crocus leaves which spread out their pale gold on
      the level of the grey floor.
It was weary, and its delicate wings drooped; it was storm‐tossed, wind‐beaten, drenched
      with mist and frozen with the cold; it belonged to the moon, to the dew, to the lilies, to the
      forget‐me‐nots, and to the night; and it found that the hard grip of winter had seized it
      whilst yet it had thought that the stars and the summer were with it. It lived before its
      time,—and it was like the human soul, which being born in the darkness of the world dares to
      dream of light, and, wandering in vain search of a sun that will never rise, falls and
      perishes in wretchedness.
It was beautiful exceedingly; with the brilliant tropical beauty of a life that is
      short‐lived. It rested a moment on the stem of the pale flower, then with its radiant eyes
      fastened on the point of light which the lamp thrust upward, it flew on high; and, spreading
      out its transparent wings and floating to the flame, kissed it, quivered once, and died.
There fell among the dust and cinder of the lamp a little heap of shrunken fire‐scorched
      blackened ashes.
The wind whirled them upward from their rest, and drove them forth into the night to mingle
      with the storm‐scourged grasses, the pale dead violets, the withered snow‐flowers, with all
      things frost‐touched and forgotten.
The spider sat aloft, sucking the juices from the fettered flies, teaching its spawn to prey
      and feed; content in squalor and in plentitude; in sensual sloth, and in the increase of its
      body and its hoard.
He watched them both: the success of the spider, the death of the moth; trite as a fable;
      ever repeated as the tides of the sea; the two symbols of humanity; of the life which fattens
      on greed and gain, and the life which perishes of divine desire.
Then he turned and looked at the cartoons upon the wall; shapes grand and dim, the children
      of his genius, a genius denied by men.

His head sank on his chest, his hand tore the shirt away from his breast, which the pangs of
      a bodily hunger that he scorned, devoured, indeed, but which throbbed with a pain more bitter
      than that of even this lingering and ignoble death. He had genius in him, and he had to die
      like a wolf on the Armorican wolds, yonder westward, when the snows of winter hid all offal
      from its fangs.
It was horrible.
He had to die for want of the crust that beggars gnawed in the kennels of the city; he had
      to die of the lowest and commonest need of all—the sheer animal need of food.
“J’avais quelque chose là!” was, perhaps, the most
      terrible of all those death‐cries of despair which the guillotine of Thermidor wrung from the
      lips of the condemned. For it was the despair of the bodily life for the life of the mind
      which died with it.
When a man clings to life for life’s sake, because it is fair and sweet, and good to the
      sight and the senses, there may be weakness in his shudder at its threatening loss. But when a
      man is loth to lose life, although it be hard and joyless and barren of all delights, because
      this life gives him power to accomplish things greater than he, which yet without him must
      perish, there is the strength in him, as there is the agony, of Prometheus.
With him it must die also: that deep dim greatness within him which moves him, despite
      himself; that nameless unspeakable force, which compels him to create and to achieve; that
      vision by which he beholds worlds beyond him not seen by his fellows.
Weary of life indeed he may be; of life material, and full of subtlety; of passion, of
      pleasure, of pain; of the kisses that burn, of the laughs that ring hollow, of the honey that
      so soon turns to gall, of the sickly fatigues and the tired cloyed hunger that are the portion
      of men upon earth. Weary of these he may be; but still if the gods have breathed on him and
      made him mad, with the madness that men have called genius, there will be that in him greater
      than himself, which he knows,—and cannot know without some fierce wrench and pang,—will be
      numbed and made impotent, and drift away, lost for evermore, into that eternal Night which is
      all that men behold of death.
It was so with this man now.

Life was barren of all delight for him, full of privation, of famine, of obscurity, of
      fruitless travail and of vain desire; yet because he believed that he had it in him to be
      great, or rather because, with a purer and more impersonal knowledge, he believed that it was
      within his power to do that which, when done, the world would not willingly let die, it was
      loathsome to him to perish thus of the sheer lack of food, as any toothless snake would perish
      in its swamp.
He stood opposite to the great white cartoons on which his soul had spent itself; creations
      which seemed but vague and ghostly in the shadows of the chamber, but in which he saw, or at
      the least believed he saw, the title‐deeds of his own heirship to the world’s kingdom of
      fame.
For himself he cared nothing; but for them—he smiled bitterly as he looked: “They will light
      some bakehouse fire to pay those that may throw my body in a ditch,” he thought.
And yet the old passion had so much dominion still that he instinctively went nearer to his
      latest and best‐beloved creations, and took the white chalks up and worked once more by the
      dull sullen rays of the lamp behind him.
They would be torn down on the morrow and thrust for fuel into some housewife’s
      kitchen‐stove. What matter?
He loved them; they were his sole garniture and treasure; in them his soul had gathered all
      its dreams and all its pure delights: so long as his sight lasted he sought to feed it on
      them; so long as his hand had power he strove to touch, to caress, to enrich them.
Even in such an hour as this, the old sweet trance of Art was upon him.
He was devoured by the deadly fangs of long fast; streaks of living fire seemed to scorch
      his entrails; his throat and lungs were parched and choked; and ever and again his left hand
      clenched on the bones of his naked chest as though he could wrench away the throes that gnawed
      it. He knew that worse than this would follow; he knew that tenfold more torment would await
      him; that limbs as strong, and muscles as hard, and manhood as vigorous as his, would only
      yield to such death as this slowly, doggedly, inch by inch, day by day. He knew; and he knew
      that he could not trust himself to go through that uttermost torture without once lifting his
      voice to summon
       the shame of release from it. Shame—since release would
      needs be charity.
He knew full well; he had seen all forms of death; he had studied its throes, and portrayed
      its horrors. He knew that before dawn—it might be before midnight—this agony would grow so
      great that it would conquer him; and that to save himself from the cowardice of appeal, the
      shame besought alms, he would have to use his last powers to drive home a knife hard and sure
      through his breast‐bone. Yet he stood there, almost forgetting this, scarcely conscious of any
      other thing than of the passion that ruled him.
Some soft curve in a girl’s bare bosom, some round smooth arm of a sleeping woman, some
      fringe of leaves against a moonlit sky, some broad‐winged bird sailing through shadows of the
      air, some full‐orbed lion rising to leap on the nude soft indolently‐folded limbs of a
      dreaming virgin, palm‐shadowed in the East;—all these he gazed on and touched, and looked
      again, and changed by some more inward curve or deepened line of his chalk stylus.
All these usurped him; appealed to him; were well beloved and infinitely sad; seemed ever in
      their whiteness and their loneliness to cry to him,—“Whither dost thou go? Wilt thou leave
       us alone?”
And as he stood, and thus caressed them with his eyes and touch, and wrestled with the
      inward torment which grew greater and greater as the night approached, the sudden sickly
      feebleness of long hunger came upon him; the grave‐like coldness of his fireless chamber
      slackened and numbed the flowing of his veins; his brain grew dull and all its memory ceased,
      confused and blotted. He staggered once, wondering dimly and idly as men wonder in delirium,
      if this indeed were death: then he fell backwards senseless on his hearth.
The last glow of day died off the wall. The wind rose louder, driving in through the open
      casement a herd of withered leaves. An owl flew by, uttering weary cries against the
      storm.
On high the spider sat, sucking the vitals of its prey, safe in its filth and darkness;
      looking down ever on the lifeless body on the hearth, and saying in its heart,—“Thou
      Fool!”
</div></body></text></TEI>