<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="36">
CHAPTER II.
The Professor's room, as well as Belinda's own, is at the top of the house.
      Economy, as is well known, has to be sought in hotels by climbing; and the Professor has
      pursued her to the leads.
At their first coming, indeed, the numerous flights of stairs to be surmounted ere attaining
      her sloped roof and her trucklebed, had proved a severe tax upon Mrs. Forth's enfeebled
      strength; but use and returning health have made them easy. At all events, Belinda does not
      now think twice about climbing them, even if no absolute necessity prompt the assent. Is it
       absolute necessity that, half an hour after Sarah's return, finds her first
      faintly knocking, and then looking uncertainly into her husband's room.
"Who is there? who is keeping the door open, and creating a draught? Pray shut it at once!"
      cries a crabbed voice from the interior.
She complies by entering. Owing to the confined space allotted to him, the Professor has to
      use some nicety of management in the disposition of his property —a disposition which entails
      the entire going to the wall of his toilette arrangements. Both bed and floor are strewn with
      folios and MS., which are piled, to the exclusion of basin and ewer, even upon the cramped
      washhand-stand.
Upon the one chair the occupant of the attic is seated: a fur-coat wrapped about his thin
      figure, a skull-cap on his head, his feet aloft upon a hot-water bottle, a writing-case upon
      his meagre knees and an ink-horn in his left hand.

"Pray be careful where you step!" he says sharply, looking up and becoming aware of the
      tall, fair presence that has enriched his neighbourhood. "Do not you see that you are treading
      upon Tertullian?"
She had not seen it; but she at once corrects her error.
"I believe that I expressed a wish not to be intruded upon this afternoon," he continues,
      since she does not at once speak or explain her entrance; "owing to having to support the
      whole weight of my work single-handed" (with a resentful glance at her idle and obviously
      convalescent beauty), "I am very much pressed for time. No doubt you have some good reason to
      give for infringing my injunctions."
"I thought that you might be surprised if you did not see me at the table-d'hôte ,"
      replies she coldly; "so I came to tell you that I do not mean to appear at it to-night, and to
      ask whether you have any objection to my staying away?"

"Is it possible that you are threatened with a return of indisposition?" he asks, with a
      sudden, quick look of peevish anxiety.
She shakes her head, smiling suddenly and bitterly. It is so apparent that his solicitude is
      due, not to care for her health, but to apprehension of a new doctor's bill.
"Thanks, no."
"You appear to be unaccountably out of breath," he says, in a vexed voice.
"Not more than anyone must be, in climbing to this cock-loft," replies she sullenly.
Perhaps his examination of her face has reassured him as to her soundness, for once more he
      dips his pen into the ink-horn.
"You have not answered my question," says she brusquely, perceiving in him a deliberate
      intention of henceforth ignoring her.
He makes a gesture of annoyed impatience.

"It scarcely appeared to me to require an answer; I suppose you gave notice this morning to
      the manager of your intention to be absent?"
"No, I did not."
"Then of course it is out of the question; according to the rules of the hotel, every meal
      not expressly countermanded is charged for; and I am really not in a position to countenance
      such irrational waste."
At the contempt and churlishness of his tone, her cheek burns.
"It would be no waste if I ordered nothing instead," she answers, doggedly; "and I am more
      than willing to fast."
"And incur the risk of a relapse?" cries he, in hasty displeasure. "I must imperatively
      forbid your exposing yourself to any such hazard!"
"I could have a cup of tea in granny's sitting-room; I am sure that she would not grudge me
      one."
"I request that you will do nothing of
       the kind," rejoins he, nettled, whether at his interrupted work, or at the
      accent, which she has taken small pains to render slight, laid by her upon the personal
      pronoun. "Your grandmother is, of course, mistress of her own actions; but since it is a
      well-known fact, that if you once indulge in such senseless luxuries as a private
      sitting-room, and meals served separately, the rate of charges in your case is instantly and
      exorbitantly increased, I must beg you at least to conform to the ordinary rules of the
      house."
He is so surprised by the entire silence in which she accepts his fiat, that he looks up
      irritatedly at her, standing in sullen, motionless loveliness beside him; looks up to find her
      regarding him with a smile hard to qualify.
"It is by your express with, then, that I dine," she says, with a low emphasis; "you
       insist upon my dining."
"I see no reason for an arbitrary departure from your usual habits," replies he,
       with ill-humour; "you are obviously perfectly restored to your normal state of
      health; anyone," with a recurrence of that streak of resentment, "would be surprised now to
      learn that you were regarded as an invalid; there is nothing that gains upon a person more, by
      indulgence in them, than valetudinarian fancies."
The singular smile still stays, as it were stereotyped upon her features.
"You speak from experience?" she says, in a tone of quiet insolence.
The colour mounts to his parched face.
"You are implying," he says, with deliberate anger, "as you have frequently and offensively
      implied before, that I am a malade imaginaire ."
She shrugs her shoulders carelessly.
"I do not think—I have never thought —that you are nearly so ill as you imagine yourself to
      be."
"Do not you?" he answers. "Possibly some day you may be undeceived."

There is such a pregnant weight of solemn meaning in his look and words, that, for a moment,
      she glances at him, staggered and half-frightened; he waving her, in a displeasure too deep
      for further speech, to the door. But the impression does not last beyond the first flight of
      stairs.
"Pooh!" she says, reaching the landing, "he will see us all out!"

The table-d'hôte bell has rung, and, answering its call, the visitors at the Lowood
      Hotel have poured into the large, light dining-room, and quickly filled up the two long
      tables, where, as the season advances to its height, elbow-room becomes daily scarcer. The
      established visitors have made their way to their habitual places, and the new ones been
      ushered to theirs. The oldest inhabitant, who always says grace, has said it, and the landlord
      is ladling out the soup. Belinda is in her
       usual seat, between her husband and her sister. It is a situation of her own
      choosing —as far as regards her sister, at least. The Professor is not a good person to depend
      upon for general conversation through a long dinner; the almost insoluble problem of how to
      obtain his full pennyworth—how to eat so much as to ensure that no extortionate profit shall
      accrue from him to the proprietors of the hotel, and yet how to eat so little and so lightly
      as not to alarm his coy and skittish digestion—keeping him for the most part wholly silent.
      But Sarah is royally indifferent as to what pecuniary advantage may be derived from her, and
      has no more consciousness of digestion than an emu; so, upon her sprightly comments on their
      fellow-diners, Belinda has usually relied to drag her through the ennui of the long
      and weary courses.
To-day she lends them but an abstracted ear. Though she has entered and taken her place
      without once looking up, she yet knows at once that for her the full room is
       empty. Gradually she allows her eyes to steal round a glance, in confirmation of
      that of which she is already sure. Here are the forms and faces that a week's fellow-eating
      has made rather more familiar to her than her own. Here are the usual vis-à-vis , the
      stockbroking family: jocose red father, aiming side-hits of well-meant pleasantry at herself
      and her sister; full-blown, hearty mother; elaborately elegant daughter. At the far end of the
      board a few insignificant novelties. That is all! It is true that he may be placed at the
      other table, to which her back is turned; but this, a guilty consciousness prevents her moving
      her head to ascertain. Were he there, however, it is certain that he would be seen by Sarah,
      who is constantly throwing restless glances over her shoulder, in pursuit of the object of her
      own interest.
"Here they come!" she cries, jogging her sister's elbow; "here they all come!— all but the
      girl in red! all but Bellairs! Is it possible that they can be out in the
       dinghey still? I shall complain to the manager!"
Belinda smiles faintly. The soup-plates are vanishing. It is evident that he is not
      coming. Her compromising concession has been made in vain. It was her part to shun him; and
      she has forced him to shun her.
Probably she will never now have an opportunity of exculpating herself, even to the extent
      of making her lame explanation of the way in which it came about.
How these people opposite stare!
She has begun desperately to fan herself; but the Professor at once requests her to stop, as
      the current of air produced by her fan makes him sneeze.
"He must have upset her, and drowned her!" says Sarah, in her sister's ear. "I hope he has;
      it would serve her quite right!— God bless my soul !"
This last ejaculation is uttered in a key differing so widely from the cold-blooded
       calm of her former aspirations, that Belinda gives an involuntary start—a start
      that may or may not be observed by him who has just quietly entered the room, and is having a
      reversed chair at the other table obsequiously set on its legs for him.
"Did you know that he was here?" asks Sarah, very low.
But Belinda does not answer. A mad relief—a lunatic joy is choking her throat.
"Did you?" repeats the other urgently; "is it possible—"
"Do you think that I sent for him?" says Belinda, in a suffocating whisper. "How can I help
      his being here?"
There is so much of the lion-at-bay in her lightning eyes, that Sarah wisely desists from
      further questioning.
"It is an odd coincidence that they should both have turned up again on the same day," she
      says; her mind reverting to the truant Bellairs.
Happily for Belinda, that culprit now
       appears on the scene, shortly followed by his companion in guilt; and for the
      rest of dinner Miss Churchill's conversation becomes an indignant recitative, a running
      commentary upon their actions.
"I never saw such a brazen pair in my life! how little he thinks that I can see him! Very
      odd that he has not yet caught my eye! Ah! there, he sees me! 'How do you do? how do you do?'
      Extraordinary! he has not turned a shade paler; he must have gone to the devil altogether.
      They are so much interested: they are asking who we are, and whether we are any
      relation to the Duke of Marlborough. He is swaggering about us, and promising to introduce us
      after dinner. If he dares!"
Belinda is well content to allow the stream of soliloquy beside her to flow on unchecked. A
      silent husband—ever tussling with his economico-sanitary problem; a self-absorbed sister; what
      better neighbours could she wish for? Even
       the family opposite, whose notice had before annoyed her, immersed in good
      cheer, have forgotten her. She can lean back unnoticed, and sun herself in the feeling—not
      recognised nor formulated enough to constitute a relfection—that though he is lost to her
      sight, so is she assuredly not to his. He is probably wondering why her hair is cut short.
Does he think it an improvement? Possibly it may appear to him in a high degree disfiguring.
      It is the first time that the question of the becomingness or unbecomingness of her crop-head
      has presented itself to Mrs. Forth's mind. She is not one of those happy women whose beauty is
       per se , and to themselves as good, for pleasure and profit, as an estate in the
      Three per Cents. She has never cared for it except as it affected him. Is she much disfigured?
      She lifts one hand and passes it over her shining tendrils, as if to obtain an answer by
      touch. In so doing, and in consequence of the small space allotted to
       each diner, her lifted elbow comes into momentary contact with her husband's
      sleeve.
"I beg your pardon!" she says, starting.
No galvanic shock sent with uncomfortable sense of dislocation along bone and joint could
      have brought her down more suddenly from that vision-world through which, happy and
      crop-headed, she has, during three courses, been walking.
"You eat nothing!" says the Professor, glancing upbraidingly at her empty plate, and
      contrasting resentfully in his mind his own heroic efforts with her supine and culpable
      abstinence; "it is a mere farce —a throwing away of money—to set good food before you!"
"It would be a worse throwing away of it, if I were to gorge myself when I was not hungary,"
      replies she surlily; and with that their conjugal dialogue ends.
The dinner, too, has ended by-and-by. The oldest inhabitant has given vent to his
       second grace; and there is a rustling and streaming through the passage into the
      hall, and out upon grass-plat and pier.
Usually the Churchill party do not participate in this latter outward movement. To watch the
      humours of the company from the privacy of their sitting-room window has, on previous
      evenings, seemed to them better than mingling with them. But to-night Belinda lingers. She
       must speak to him. In justice to herself, to him, to her husband even, she must
      speak to him. It would be impossible to leave him in that misapprehension about her, under
      which he must necessarily now be lying.
"Are you going out?" asks Sarah, with a sharp look in her sister's agitated face. "So will
      I. She has actually had the bad taste to whip him off to their balcony again. After all, they
      were not in the least anxious to be introduced to us. Pr-r!" (shivering), "it is cold; I will
      go and fetch my little French hood; if that will not bring him down, nothing
      will!"

She runs off, and Belinda, with as composed an air as she can muster, strolls towards the
      pier, and, leaning her arms upon the rail, looks down into the troubled lake water. It is a
      chill and unsummerlike night; raw-aired and boisterous. The clouds hug the hills and smother
      the struggling moon. Many people, feeling the nipping breeze, have hastened indoors again.
      Others come out, fortified by Newmarket coats or fur capes. How can they find it
      cold? To her it seems to be torrid. Her eyes are fixed upon the angry little waves, sucking,
      and fighting, and dashing themselves against jetty and shore; and the steps of the
      promenading, cigarette-smoking, chatting idlers, pass to and fro behind her. They do not all
      pass her. Two feet pause hesitatingly beside her.
"Did you get my note?"
His face may be older than it was, and his handwriting steadier, but at all events his voice
      trembles quite as much as ever it
       did. What sense is there in being glad at that? And yet she is
      glad.
"Yes," she answers whisperingly, neither looking up, nor expressing any surprise at his
      presence, nor at his omitting all the forms of conventional greeting; "but you must not draw
      any inference from my being here."
She pauses; but, except that she hears his quick breathing beside her, he may be gone: in so
      entire a silence does he await her explanation.
"My—my—Mr. Forth insisted upon my dining," she says, growing burning red at what she feels
      must appear the wretched inadequacy of this explanation. "It—it— is a very prosaic reason,"
      breaking into a nervous laugh, "but he did not wish my dinner to be wasted!"
Still silence. Has he nothing to say? not even one poor word of pleasure? Probably he is
      nerving himself up to exact an answer to that question of his, which she has virtually never
      answered. Probably
       he is going—oh, barbarous!—to throw the decision again upon her. But perhaps he
      has learned, within the last hour, to let sleeping dogs lie. At all events, when his speech
      comes, it is not the one she had dreaded to hear.
"You have been ill?"
"You judge by my hair, I suppose," replies she, laughing again; "otherwise, as Mr. Forth
      says, it would certainly never occur to anyone that I was an invalid."
It is the second time within two minutes that she has quoted her husband. Does she feel a
      sort of chaperonage in his very name? At that name a slight shudder passes over Rivers's
      frame.
"But you have been ill?"
"Nothing interesting," she says, with a cynical shrug; "no brain fever, or charming hectic.
      I simply—a very common complaint in Oxbridge, you know—broke down from overwork. I always tell
      everyone I broke down from overwork; it sounds so well."

In his ears, possibly, it does not sound so well.
" Overwork !" he repeats, shocked. "Has your—who has been overworking you?"
"Nobody; I myself!" replies she, quoting Desdemona, and with about as much truth in her
      speech as there was in that of the Moor's wife. How loud and restless is the waves' wash
      beneath them! "And you?" she says softly; "how has it been with you? At all events," with a
      melancholy smile, "however hard you may have been working, you have not broken
      down!"
"No," he answers, with a sort of humility, as if he were ashamed of having to make the
      admission; "I have not broken down."
"It would take a great deal to break you down," she says, glancing at him with a
      sort of reproach for his health and vigour; "and yet, in point of fact, men die more easily
      than women; you die when you do not want to die, and we cannot die when we wish: that is about
      the state of the case in this best of all possible worlds."

She has raised herself from her bent posture, and has lifted that face, whose character
      seems to be changed and gentled by her babyish hair, to the sky. What strange clouds, like
      giant curls and columns of sacrificial smoke from the altar of some dark God! and the bright
      gibbous moon shouldering her way through a sullen pile before she can reach a clear sky-space,
      and make the dark mere chastely splendid. How few people are left upon the pier! By what right
      is she left? They have closed the windows of her grandmother's sitting-room. She can see the
      silhouette of Mrs. Churchill's cap upon the blind. Why is not her own silhouette there too?
      Alas! in five minutes it must be!
"Do you wish to die?" he says, in a shaken, low voice.
(Can this wonder desire that the world should be made dark by her extinction?)
"Yes," she answers dreamily. "No— yes—on condition that I might come back if I found it even
      worse than this; and
      
you ?" looking at him with a moonlit wavering smile—"but no; you would not leave your
      'rabble,' and your patent. By-the-bye, how is the patent? is it taken out yet?"
"The patent !" he cries, breaking into a sudden, unsteady, tender laugh; "is it
      possible that you remember about the patent?"
"Do I remember it?" returns she, in a kind of scorn; "then, if I had taken out a
      patent, you would not have remembered it?"
"It is an old story now," he answers, still with that tremulous, unglad laugh; "it was taken
      out some months ago. Our firm has adopted it with success; others have followed their example,
      and—"
"And you are on the highroad to fortune," interrupts she, with a quivering lip; "to the gilt
      coach and the Lord Mayor's gown. I have always told you that you would end by being Lord
      Mayor! Yes," dragging out the slow syllables one
       after another, "on the highroad to fortune."
"On the highroad to fortune!" repeats he after her, with something not unlike a sob in his
      voice; "so you used to tell me at Oxbridge; is it such a good joke that it is worth
      repeating?"
There is not a soul remaining on the pier beside themselves. Even Mrs. Churchill's shadow
      has disappeared from the blind. It is clear that she has had the fire lit, and has drawn up
      her chair to it. Has no one, then, a glance for the black and silver water? for these great
      cloud-bulks, and this victorious maiden moon? Not a soul! It is all their own, his and hers!
      all the night's cold steely splendour! all the wind's wintry song, and the waves' loud lap!
      Surely their voices are no sadder than his—his, with that sob in it! How easily she could sob
      too! Perhaps her spirits are weakened by recent sickness.
"There is no pleasing you!" she says, half hysterically; "what would you have?"
       "What would I have?" cries a high, matter-of-fact voice, striking suddenly in;
      "why I would have a warming-pan, and a fur coat, and some mulled claret: that is what I would
      have. Oh, it is you, is it?" with a very slight and cursory recognition of Mrs. Forth's
      companion. "Belinda, are you quite out of your senses?"
There is something in Miss Churchill's tone, and in the decision of the way in which she has
      put her arm under her sister's, and is leading her away, that it would require a clearer
      conscience than Belinda's to resist.
"I—I—was waiting for you," she stammers.
"And David was helping you? Well" —shrugging her shoulders, and relapsing into a lighter
      tone—"I was detained; he waylaid me on the landing; I never knew that little capote
      fail. He has been telling me about them; she plays the banjo: that seems the great feature! I
      will play the banjo too!"

</div></body></text></TEI>