<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER XI.

"The flower that smiles to-day,
   To-morrow dies;
All that we wish to stay
   Tempts, and then flies.
What is this world's delight?
Lightning that mocks the night,
   Brief even as bright."
Had Miss Watson's eye been glued to her spy-glass, as for six or eight out of the
      twenty-four hours it invariably is, and as, strange to say, it is not about four o'clock in
      the ensuing afternoon, she would have seen Belinda Churchill setting off for a walk alone.
      Humanly speaking, not thirty seconds would have elapsed before that lady would have been
      across the
       street and down it to ask why alone? why not with her sister? and why not with
      the dogs? The dogs ask the same question. A Dresden walk indeed, with their poor little snouts
      embedded in muzzles, is not by any means the same thing as an English one—free to dogs and men
      as English air; but such as it is, it is better than nothing. With a muzzle one can still
      scamper, and even give mutilated sniffs here and there. The prospect of a walk is the one
      thing that restores to its pristine hyacinthine curl Slutty's tail, which ever since the
      arrival of Punch has limply drooped in envy and dejection; and as for Punch, there is no
      number of times that he would not bark for the Queen, for Mr. Gladstone, for the devil if
      required, in order to attain it. To-day they both meet with an abstracted yet peremptory
      refusal.
"I am going to the Grosse Garten, Sarah," says Belinda, giving this piece of information in
      a not very assured voice, and apparently grateful to the numberless
       buttons of her gloves for giving her an excuse for bending her head over
      them.
"Are you?" answers the other carelessly; then, as something in her sister's manner reveals
      to her how pregnant with import is the walk of which she speaks, adds in quite another tone,
      and with an accent of the liveliest sympathy: "My blessing go with you. How I wish I could be
      behind a tree to hear how he does it! But, after all," with a shrug, "in these cases there is
      never much variety; they all say pretty much the same thing; they have no imagination."
As Belinda reaches the door it is opened by Tommy, for whom Sarah has just rung.
"Now, Tommy," says she, addressing the boy with an extremely admonitory air, "if three
      German gentlemen come to call this afternoon, mind that you do not admit them all at once. If
      a second comes before the first is gone, you must tell him that I am engaged, and that he must
      call again later. Do you understand?—one at a time."

She is still impressing upon the page's ductile mind the all-importance of letting in her
      admirers singly, when Belinda passes out of hearing.
Along the street she goes. One side of it is in burning sunshine, the other in deep shadow.
      It seems to her an emblem of the difference between her life before and after yesterday. Why
      did not she bring the dogs? So royally rich in happiness herself, why should not she toss what
      crumbs she can to any such of God's poor creatures as ask her?
The memory of Slutty's eyes imploringly bulging, and of Punch's disappointed back as he
      trotted tamely away to his cushion, returns to her with a sort of remorse. She is glad when
      she has passed through the town and reached the Grosse Garten; glad to see the long, broad,
      green drives quietly stretching away; glad to have left the city noises behind her. And yet
      even they have sounded melodiously to her to-day. There is perhaps only one sound in the whole
      world that would not now
       echo agreeably on her ear—viz., Miss Watson's voice; and even toward Miss Watson
      how faint and lessening is her ill-will. It is true that she continued to bestow her company
      upon them yesterday for the remainder of the afternoon; it is true that by her tyrannic
      overruling they were sent home in different vehicles; but could even she prevent their one
      moment snatched at parting, with time for but a sentence in it—and that sentence such
      a prayer to her to meet him here to-day? After to-day she will give Miss Watson leave to
      thrust herself and her importunities between them if she can. As she makes this reflection she
      smiles. I think she walks along smiling.
The Grosse Garten is not very frequented; but now and then she passes a couple of loiterers,
      a single man or woman, a nurse and child. She pities them all from the bottom of her heart:
      not one of them is going to a tryst with Rivers. She has reached the rendezvous now, a bench
      beside the Teich; the dull and stagnant
       pool where the swans are royally riding in the sunshine. He is not here, he has
      not come yet. She is the first at the tryst. A slight pang of disappointment shoots across
      her; but in a moment is stilled again. Probably in her eagerness she has walked more quickly
      than is usual with her. Probably she has taken less time than she calculated for. She looks at
      her watch. It still wants five minutes to the appointed hour. She sits down on the bench to
      wait, and her eyes fall on the pool. How crowded with green reflections it is; how different
      from the weak and pinched leafage of three weeks ago, when she and Sarah last sat here! It has
      gathered all the horse-chestnuts into its bosom; fans and bloom-spikes, you can see them all
      again as plainly as, sometimes more plainly than in the reality; wherever, that is to say, the
      swans' webs' oaring has not broken up the mirror into bright shivers. The remembrance of her
      last walk here with Sarah brings back also the remembrance of their talk; of Sarah's advice to
      her to
       hurry the pace. The recollection brings a smile of happiness, and of pride too,
      over her face. She has used no manoeuvres, she has descended to no tricky coquetries; and yet
      could even Sarah have won him more wholly than she?
It must be half-past four now. Again she takes out her watch. Yes, it is now five minutes
      over the half-hour; but then probably her watch is fast. It always gains. Reassured afresh,
      she patiently resumes her waiting. The bench on which she is sitting is almost exactly
      opposite the spot where on the first of May he had thrown her his intercepted nosegay. At the
      thought she smiles again; and this time it must be broadly, for a stranger passing by looks
      hard and inquiringly at her, as though imagining that her smile was a recognition of and
      greeting to himself.
In a second she is grave again. This place is too public; when he comes they will seek one
      of the more private paths. When he comes? But he is not come yet!. Why does not he come?

She turns her head anxiously in the direction whence she expects him to appear, a creeping
      disquietude beginning, despite herself, to invade her heart. Is it possible that she can have
      mistaken his directions? Is it possible that, as she is waiting expectantly for him here, so
      may he be waiting expectantly for her in some other corner of the large pleasure-gardens? But
      she dismisses the idea. Did not his few words drop, distinct and clear as articulate words
      could do, into her ear? Has not she been saying them over to herself ever since? There is
      nothing for it but patience.
Again she fixes her eyes, not so untroubled as at first, upon the Teich, the swan-house, the
      swans. To the latter a child is throwing bread; a homely burgher couple have stopped to
      applaud. In the fostering sunshine the horse-chestnut leaves seem to grow momently larger and
      greener as she looks. Why does not he come? A sense of hurt maiden dignity, of hot and cruel
      shame at being thus made to
       appear so far the more eager of the two, at being kept thus long and unworthily
      waiting at her first love-rendezvous, has come to complicate and intensify her anxiety. In all
      the mental pictures that through her disturbed and tossing night she has drawn of this
      meeting, the one contingency that has never crossed her mind as most distantly possible, is
      that he should be a defaulter from it; he, whose mad over-eagerness to fulfil any engagement
      in which she is to have a part, has over and over again kept him raging up and down the
      Lüttichau Strasse for hours and hours in rain and shine, in fervid waiting, until the time has
      come when he may decently make his appearance. And to-day he is already half an hour late! It
      is impossible—incredible! And yet if any untoward accident had occurred to prevent him, surely
      he would have written! Perhaps even now there is a note awaiting her at home. Goaded by this
      thought, she takes two feverish steps in the direction of a return; then, arrested by the
      reflection
       that he may arrive in her absence and find her gone, she stops in painful
      irresolution. To sit still and look at the swans any longer is at all events impossible.
She walks—but with how different a tread to that with which she had at first approached the
      spot!—she walks a little away; not so far as to lose the bench, to which her hopes still
      cling, from sight, but far enough to get a good view down the great main drive. With her
      trembling hand lifted to shield her eyes, she strains her gaze eagerly down it. Oh, if she
      could but catch the most distant glimpse of him! Under the trees spreads in glory the dazzling
      strong spring grass, with its brightness toned down here and there by the shadows of the dark
      tree-trunks, that in their afternoon quiet lie stilly on it. There is nothing!
With a sort of sob in her throat that shocks herself, she is turning away, when, at the very
      other end of the avenue, she becomes aware of a man's figure that has suddenly come within
      eye-range. It is so
       distant that it is no taller than a pin; but surely it has something of his walk
      and gait.
Catching at this new hope, she advances quickly to meet the figure. Yes; it certainly has a
      look of him. Well, she will not upbraid him. No hurt self-love nor petty sulks shall be
      permitted to mar the heavenly harmony of the first outpouring of their hearts into each other.
      She will not even ask him why he is late. No doubt he has some good reason, which in his own
      time he will tell her. But, alas! she may keep her high resolves for another occasion. She
      will not need them now. It requires no very near approach to the stranger to reveal that he is
      not Rivers; that he is not even, when you come close to him, in the very least like him.
It is such a bitter disappointment that she turns into a side alley to hide her tears; but
      quickly drying them again, hastily returns to the meeting-place, in the panic fear that he may
      have appeared there from some unexpected point of the compass.
       But he is not there; and as she ascertains this, with a blank heart-sinking, the
      city clocks strike the half-hour. It is half-past five! For a whole hour she has been dancing
      attendance on his pleasure; waiting here, ridiculous and befooled.
With a movement of strong indignation she begin to walk swiftly homewards; but before she
      has gone five yards, her purpose slacks. She cannot yet bear to face the fact that this is
      what her day's splendid and apparently so sure promises are to end in—this humiliated,
      baulked, back- coming! She will give him five minutes more. Possibly, not very
      improbably even, he may have mistaken the appointed hour, and have thought that it was
      half-past five instead of half-past four. In that case he would be scarcely at all late, even
      now.
A little recovered by this new flicker of hope, she sits down. Yes; she will give him five
      minutes more, and during all these five she will not look round once, or send her eyes in
      search of him. Perhaps that will bring her luck. But it does not. The
       five minutes are gone, and he is not here. She gives him ten more, and then five
      again. Twice she repeats her little feverish excursion to the head of the main avenue; these
      times she is not even deluded by the will-of-the-wisp of a possible resemblance in any of the
      few saunterers that occupy it, to him whom she, with a now so evident hopelessness, seeks.
It is only the clocks striking six that at length makes her really and desperately turn
      homewards. Each one of their tranquil strokes seems to her the beat of a cruel hammer on her
      heart. But putting out of the question the bootlessness of any further delay, self-respect, at
      length aroused, forbids her to add any more moments to the humiliating and miserable hour and
      a half she has already spent.
"If I had had any proper pride, I should have gone home an hour ago," she says to herself in
      bitterest dejection, as she passes along. She holds her head, usually carried a little
      loftily, well down. It seems to her as if everybody who meets her must read
       in her face her deep discomfiture, and the fool's errand on which she has been.
      She quickens her pace to get away from them; to be safe out of the streets so full of gaudy
      light, where at any time she may meet an acquaintance—worse still, one of their yesterday's
      party; worst of all, Miss Watson.
As she nears the Lüttichau Strasse her distress lightens a little; the hope of finding there
      a note, a message, some solving of this most inhuman riddle, buoys up her steps and gives life
      again to her looks. It cannot be but that there must be some clearing up of this wretched
       contretemps . It will have, as she says to herself, to be a very bright clearing up
      indeed, to indemnify her for the sufferings of the afternoon—that very afternoon whose
      anticipated joys she had pitied every chance passer-by that she met, for not being about to
      share.
"Well," cries Sarah, standing in the open salon door, and looking expectantly beyond her
      sister's figure for another,
       "where is he? what have you done with him? I want to fall on his neck and kiss
      him. I have long," laughing, "been wishing for an excuse to do it, and now I have an excellent
      one."
Belinda had not meant to have entered the salon. She had hoped to have slunk unperceived to
      her room; for has not Tommy, in answer to her fevered questions, philosophically assured her
      that there has been neither note nor message left for her in her absence?
"Do not," she says hoarsely; "do not laugh. I cannot bear it. He was not there; he never
      came."
"Never came!" echoes Sarah in a tone of bottomless wonder, her pretty eyes and mouth opening
      with a stare and a gape. "Then," gradually recovering the power of speech, "then where have
      you been, may I ask—what have you been doing all this time?"
"I have been waiting for him," answers Belinda, trying to speak steadily, though at that
      humiliating confession such a tide
       of crimson rushes over her poor proud face as one would think must leave all the
      rest of her body bloodless.
"But it is monstrous!" cries the other in a tone of the wildest excitement; "ca n'a pas de
      nom; there is some mistake. He is a man, he is a gentleman; of course he has written—he has
      sent?"
Belinda shakes her head.
"No; I asked Tommy."
" Tommy !" repeats Sarah in a tone of the most contemptuous indignation. "
       Tommy , indeed! That boy is ripening for the tread-mill or the gallows, or both, as
      fast as he can. You will hardly believe that after what I said to him—you heard me—he showed
      them all up at once."
Then, ringing the bell violently, "Tommy," she says very sharply, "how dare you say that
      there is not a note for Miss Churchill? Of course there is a note. Go this moment to look for
      it, and do not come back without it!"
Paying no attention whatever to his asseverations, she waves him from the
       room; and then follow a few moments of painful waiting. At the end of them Tommy
      returns with, sure enough, a missive of some kind on a salver.
"I told you how it would be!" exclaims Sarah, triumphantly pouncing upon it and the unlucky
      child at once. "How dare you tell such a story, you naughty boy? Do you know where liars go
      to?"
And he may pour into her unheeding ear his faltering attempt to lay the blame on Gustel, who
      answers the bell when he is out; she does not hear a word he says. In a fury of impatient
      anxiety, she is stooping over Belinda's shoulder: Belinda, whose shaking fingers can scarcely
      tear the envelope asunder.
A thin blue paper falls out. It is the bill from a Porzellan Handlung for a couple of
      Meissen figures purchased there a week ago. In an uncontrollable spasm of misery, she throws
      it on the floor and bursts into tears.

</div></body></text></TEI>