<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="28">
CHAPTER V.
It is Miss Churchill's maxim always to make herself as comfortable, under any given
      circumstances, as those circumstances will permit; nor has she failed on the present occasion
      to live up to her own precept. Beneath the garden wall, where the shade spreads coolest, a fur
      rug, filched from the drawing-room floor, is extended; cushions, unlawfully thieved from the
      drawing-room sofa, mollify the hardness of back of the garden-chairs. Upon the unlikely
      hypothesis of her conversation running short, she has unearthed all the novels she can find.
      At her feet the dogs alternately sleep, and gnash their teeth—rarely successful—at the flies.
      In
       the sun, close by, stands the parrot's gilded cage; so that, if other resources
      fail her, she may fall back upon his loquacity. In addition to the dogs, at her feet also lies
      Rivers, unworthily occupied in tickling the inside of the dozing Slutty's ear with a
      flower-stalk. This is the tranquil Arcadian picture that salutes Mrs. Forth's eyes as she
      issues from the house. He has his back turned towards her! He has not cared enough for her
      coming, even to place himself so as to watch for it! How is she to know that it was only a
      moment ago, in obedience to Sarah's orders, and in dread of the remembered penetration of her
      eyes, that he had adopted his present position? How cool they look! How much at ease! What a
      pity to disturb them! After all she might as well have finished the proofs. As she draws near
      them, walking so softly over the turf that they are not immediately aware of her, a new burst
      of laughter fills and grates upon her ears.
"You seem very merry," she says drily. Sarah exhibits no surprise—as why indeed
       should she?—at her sister's advent. With her head thrown back comfortably over
      her chair, she finishes her laugh luxuriously out, but of Rivers' mirth Belinda need no longer
      complain. There is not much that could be called mirth in the face that—suddenly leaping to
      his feet—he turns towards her. What a death's-head she must be to work such an instantaneous
      transformation in him!
"You seem to be very merry," she repeats.
She is conscious of the resentful dryness of her tone; of the fagged flush upon her cheeks;
      and the sullenness that she has not quite been able to banish from her eyes; but she is as
      powerless to correct the one as the others. What has he done to deserve that tone? Beneath it
      he stands tongue-tied.
"May not I know what your joke was?" she says, struggling not very successfully for a
      greater amenity of manner; "why should not it amuse me, too?"
"It—it was nothing much!" he answers deprecatingly; "I do not know why I
       laughed; it was only"—looking unhappy and ashamed—"that Miss Churchill was
      telling me that Punch had once been engaged to the parrot, and that it was broken off because
      she bit his tail to the bone!"
There is such a contrast between the very mild waggery of this anecdote, and the deep
      humiliation of the tone in which he narrates it, that Sarah sets off laughing helplessly
      again; but not a muscle of Belinda's face moves.
"That respectable old jest," she says, with a slight shrug; "it has been for many years a
      family Joe Miller!"
"It was not a Joe Miller to him!" replies Sarah, standing up in indistinct defence—
      indistinct through much laughing—of her pleasantry; "he may pretend now that he did not like
      it—but he did!"
Belinda sits down; but the cloud still lowers on her brow. To her own heart she says that
      she does well to be angry. That here, for the first time face to face with the tragedy of
      their two lives, he should be in a condition to be genuinely
       amused by so miserable a jest—by any jest! Nor does the crushing of his
      merriment please her any better. She, then, is the wet blanket who stifles his jollity. Times
      are indeed changed! If she were to leave them, no doubt the peals of laughter would at once
      break out afresh. But for the present they are effectually stilled. Painfully and sorely
      conscious of this, she makes another difficult effort to recover her good temper.
"I think I am losing my sense of humour," she says awkwardly; "it must be the effect of
      Oxbridge air. Punch, will you, too, lose your sense of humour?"
She has lifted the lively little dog up on her knees, and is half hiding her hot face
      against his.
"He is losing something else, is not he?" says Rivers, made bold by her gentler tone
      diffidently to draw a little nigher to her, and to raise his eyes in painful questioning to
      hers.
As he speaks, he lifts his hand and touches the locket habitually worn round
       the neck, and as habitually tried to be scratched off by Punch; and from which a
      lock of hair is at present obviously escaping.
"Why, Punch, do you wear locks of hair?" asks the young man, laughing nervously.
      "Whose is it? Slutty's, let us hope!"
"It is always coming out," interposes Sarah in a disgusted voice; "the fact is," lazily
      drawing herself up into a sitting posture, and looking round explanatorily, "that people have
      a way of giving me locks of their hair—I am sure I do not know why—and as I cannot possibly
      wear them all, Punch is good enough to wear some of them for me! Punch has worn a great deal
      of hair in his day, have not you, Punch?"
As she speaks, she calls the dog to her; and becomes absorbed in the contemplation of his
      jewellery.
"Is it German or English hair, should you think?" asks Rivers, almost under his breath.

There is a smile on his face as he puts this question; but a smile with whose mirth she need
      not quarrel. In a moment how the Hussars and Uhlans are clanking round her again! How the soft
      wind is pelting her with cherry flowers! How the old Schloss is towering up against the German
      sky! She cannot answer him; but those few words seem to have given them back something of
      their former intimacy.
"Now whose is it?" says Sarah reflectively, having taken out the little lock, and being now
      contemplatively eyeing it with her head on one side; "what a memory I have! Belinda, can you
      help me? whose is this lock of hair of Punch's? Oh, but it must have been since your day; it
      is not unlike yours " (turning to Rivers, and coolly setting the little tendril
      against his hair to compare them). "Did you ever give me a lock of your hair?"
He turns with a start. He has been unwisely allowing himself to drift into one of his old
      speculations, as to whether
       any woman's ear had ever sat so daintily close to her head as does that of the
      wife of Professor Forth.
"A lock of my hair!" he cries, jumping up, and falling on his knees before Sarah, with an
      air of exaggerated playfulness; "if I have not, I am quite ready to supply the omission;
      whereabouts will you have it from?" passing his hand over his own crisp curls. "May I take
      your scissors, Mrs. Forth?"
It is the first time that he has so addressed her. It is with untold difficulty that the
      name crosses his lips, and consequently he enunciates it with unusual distinctness. It is in
      reality a cudgelling that he is administering to himself for his late lapse, but to her it
      seems a wanton cruelty.
"May I take your scissors, Mrs. Forth?"
Mrs. Forth's head is, however, bent so low over her work-basket, that apparently she does
      not hear. Behind the shelter of that convenient receptacle for tapes and
       needles, her hands are trembling and writhing. At Dresden would he have talked
      even in joke of giving Sarah a lock of his hair? Why, he never even heard her when she spoke
      to him! Happily for Belinda, at this point, she is summoned to the house on some trifling
      errand, which detains her for ten minutes—ten minutes in which she is able to resume some hold
      upon herself; and it is well that it is so, for the sight which greets her is one not
      calculated to promote her equanimity. Sarah has abandoned her lazy reclining, and is sitting
      up, and holding Rivers' hand; not indeed, when one comes to observe closely, in any very
      lover-like manner, but as one who is examining it with an air of the liveliest interest and
      curiosity.
"I should be ashamed to own such a hand," she is saying, with her accustomed candour; "it is
      like a workman's hand."
"But I am a workman," he answers bluntly.
And then he is suddenly aware of Belinda's presence, and snatches it away.

"It really is quite a curiosity in its way," says Sarah in a pleased voice; "it is as hard
      and horny as a day-labourer's. Do show it to Belinda!"
He looks towards her, hesitating and uncertain. She has resumed her former seat, and her
      work-basket.
"Do!" she says, trying to speak with her newly summoned tranquillity; and he holds it out to
      her, palm upwards.
It is a beautiful hand still, shapely and vigorous, but on it are disfiguring evidences of
      hard, coarse toil. There is nothing particularly affecting in a work-roughened palm: it is a
      condition to which are subjected the hands of ninety-nine out of every hundred of the human
      race; and yet, as she looks at it, she has much ado to prevent the tears from springing to her
      eyes.
"You know," he says, "I told you that I could not stand the confinement of an office
      life!"
" We know ?" cries Sarah, pricking up her ears. " You told us ? What do
      you
       mean? When have you ever had the chance of telling us?"
He stops—staggered and white. He had forgotten the presence of an auditor. Nor is Belinda in
      a plight to help him.
"I mean," he says floundering, "that I—I intended to tell you; and so," hurriedly resuming
      his narrative, "I—I went as an ordinary hand in the iron-works; and was set to work at the
      puddling-furnace."
"The puddling-furnace!" cries Sarah, delighted with the sound; "and what is a
       puddling-furnace , pray?" repeating the phrase with emphatic relish.
"A puddling-furnace is a furnace where the pig-iron from the smelting-furnace is worked
      about at a great heat with iron rakes— rabbles , they call them—and I had the honour
      and pleasure," with a shy laugh, "of working one of these rakes, until the iron became
      malleable."
Belinda's pretence of work has dropped unheeded on the grass beside her.
"H—m!" says Sarah, still agreeably interested;
       "no wonder that your hands are not so pretty as they might be. And was it very
      hard work?"
"It was not exactly child's play," he answers drily; "but they gave us high wages; they were
      glad to get hold of a good strong chap like me. We had need to be pretty strong!"
"And did you work at it all day?"
"We were relieved every six or eight hours. We could not have stood it longer on account of
      the heat; that was pretty bad!"
He pauses a moment, passing his disfigured hand, half in absence, half in kindness, along
      Slutty's roomy back; then adds:
"It is the heat that does it! As a rule, puddlers do not live long; it is the heat that does
      it."
He says it with complete simplicity, neither expecting nor wishing for compassion; as if to
      spend eight hours a day in a puddling-furnace were the natural and ordinary sequel of an
      education at Eton and Oxbridge.

So this is how he has spent the twenty months, passed by her in listening for the postman's
      knock—in this life-shortening, mind-deadening brute toil! Well, even so, he has had the best
      of it!
There is a silence of some moments' duration, broken by Sarah, whose sharp ear has caught a
      sound of footsteps.
"Ha!" she cries with animation, "here comes my little flock; and, as ill-luck will have it,
      I have forgotten every one of their names. Belinda! quick! help me!— which is which?"
Belinda lifts her downcast eyes: lifts them to see three young gentlemen, whom apparently
      the parlour-maid, with that contempt for undergraduates inherent in the native Oxbridge mind,
      has left to announce themselves, timorously advancing. They are evidently not very easy in
      their minds, and are somewhat obviously each pushing the other to the front.
Clearly, Professor Forth's house is no habitual lounge for undergraduates. A
       movement of irrational relief thrills through Rivers' heart as he realizes
      this.
"They must indeed be fond of you, Sarah, to have faced me!" says Mrs. Forth, with a dry
      smile. "How frightened they look! as frightened," with one quick glance at Rivers, "as
       you used to be!"
She does not pause to see the effect of her words; but, rising, walks with her long slow
      step to meet her guests.
"I do not wonder that they are frightened," says Sarah in a stage aside to the young man.
      "Does not she look as if she were going to ask them to what she owes the pleasure of their
      visit? If I do not fly to the rescue, even now they will turn tail and run!"
But Sarah for once is mistaken. They have no desire to turn tail and run. It is doubtful,
      indeed, whether, on their home-ward way, and over their evening cigars, their limited and
      artless vocabulary of encomium is more strained to find epithets of approval for Miss
      Churchill than for her
       austerer sister. But indeed, to-day, Belinda is not austere.
"Why should she snub them?" she asks herself sadly; "has not she had enough of snubbing
      people for all her lifetime?"
And so she is kind to them—too kind, Rivers begins presently to think with a jealous pang,
      as he sees her pouring out tea for them with her all-lovely hands; endowing them with her
      heavenly smile; lightening their darkness with her starry eyes. Nor is he, even yet, wise
      enough in love's lore, or coxcomb enough, to suspect that it is he himself—he sitting by,
      apparently neglected and overlooked—who has lit the eyes and carved the smile.
Sarah is very kind, too; but they are rather hurt at the hopeless muddle into which she has
      got their names.
By-and-by, when well be-tea'd and becaked, they are embarked upon a game of tennis, and the
      sound of callings and laughings, of balls struck and racquets striking, breaks the Arcadian
      silence of that hitherto virgin enclosure—Professor Forth's tennis-ground.
       It is too small to admit of more than one set at a time; and Belinda, as a good
      hostess, despite the warm urgencies of the now tamed and happy strangers, retires in favour of
      her visitors. It boots little to inquire whether the sacrifice cost her much.
"Do you play?" cries Sarah nonchalantly, flourishing her racquet under Rivers'
      nose. "No? Ah!" with an impudent smile, "you are more at home with your rake !"
Though it is morally impossible that they could have understood it, both Bellairs and
      Stanley are contemptible enough to laugh at this sally; a fact which would no doubt have made
      Rivers disposed to punch their heads, had he heard them; but the jest and its prosperity both
      fall upon deaf ears. Sight and hearing are stopped by the anxious fear:
"Is she displeased with him for refusing to play? Ought he to have played? Will she now
      expect him to go? At parting, will she say any word of further meeting?"

A lump rises in his throat. Not presuming again to take up his place on the grass at her
      feet—though, after all, it is a privilege that no one grudges even to the dogs—he stands,
      uncertain and unhappy, before her. If she so wills it, this must be the end. Nor does she seem
      in any hurry to put him out of his incertitude.
Upon her the day's earlier mood is returning. In what life-giving whiffs comes the kindly
      wind! Did ever homely coated bird say such sweet things as does the blackbird from among the
      cherry-boughs? and the little vulgar villa-garden has grown like that of which Keats spake:
      "Where the daisies are rose-scented, And the rose herself has got Perfume that on earth is
      not!" He is here before her, waiting one lightest sign from her to lie down at her feet and be
      trampled on. Is it any wonder that, being a woman, she lets three minutes elapse before she
      gives that sign?
At the end of that time, "Are you at it still?" she asks abruptly.

It is half an hour since the subject was dropped, and a dozen others have intervened
      between; yet he seems to have no difficulty in understanding at once to what her speech
      alludes.
"No," he answers, with a sigh of relief (for it is evident that had she wished to be rid of
      him, she would not have introduced a new, or resumed an old, topic), taking possession as he
      speaks of Sarah's forsaken chair; "I am promoted to be foreman."
He pauses for her to comment or congratulate; but she does neither. She only stitches
      feverishly on.
"It struck me that the same thing might be done, with much less expense of labour, by
      machinery," he continues, with the hurry of one who has no assurance that he is not wearying
      his listener; "and in consequence of this—this invention of mine, which our firm has taken up,
      I have been promoted to the rank of foreman."
He stops so decidedly that she is compelled to make an observation of some kind.

"And in due time, of course, you will be taken into partnership, and marry your master's
      daughter," she says with a difficult flippancy.
The blood rushes to his face. He had expected a kinder commentary. Surely no jest ever so
      ill became her whom, in his eyes, all becomes. There is a silence. The sun's rays are less
      vertical, and the dogs have awoke. Punch indeed, under the mistaken idea of being obliging, is
      officiously retrieving the tennis balls, and being warmly slapped by the heated players for
      his good nature.
"Well," says Belinda, with nervous asperity in her tone, "is there nothing more? Go on."
"Others have invented machines of the same kind," he continues spiritlessly, for her jest
      has taken the heart out of his narration, "but they have turned out either complete failures,
      or only very partial successes; if mine has better luck, our firm holds out hopes of taking
      out a
       patent, and giving me a small share of the business."
"Did not I tell you so?" cries she, laughing rather stridently; "why, my prophecy is already
      half-way towards fulfilment."
Again his face burns, but he deigns her no answer. If she can stoop to so unworthy a
      merriment, she shall at least enjoy it alone.
"It is evidently all for the best," he says, trying to catch her callous tone; "it seems
      that I have a kind of turn for mechanics. It was news to me that I had a turn for anything
      convertible into money. If—if things had gone smoothly, I might have lain down in my grave
      without finding out where the bent of my genius lay: and that would have been a thousand
      pities, would not it?"
He ends with a laugh. Her mirth, which had offended him, has long died; nor has she any
      answer ready to his question. Her long arms (even arms can look sad) lie listless on her lap,
      and her
       great veiled eyes see visions. Vanished from before them are the little square
      garden and the tennis-players. They see only his future life-path stretching before her; his
      life growing ever fuller, fuller, fuller of busy, prospering, eager work, with ever less and
      less room in it for the gap left by her. By-and-by that gap will close altogether. The sooner
      the better for him!
But for her ? Over her there pours a rush of frantic longing to tear it wide; to
      keep it ever, ever yawning. But it will not so yawn always. It will close so that scarce a
      scar will be left to show where it once was. He is fond of his work already. In how different
      a spirit he addresses himself to it from that in which, sulky and half-hearted, she turns to
      her hated toils. A sense of injury and offence against him rises in her heart. He can never
      have suffered as she has suffered; his meat has never been ashes, nor his drink tears!
"It is clear that you are Fortune's favourite," she says in a hard voice; "I congratulate
      you."

"Thank you," he answers, deeply wounded; "you have hit upon the exact phrase that describes
      me."
There is such a sharp pain in his tone, that, though she has been anxiously averting her
      eyes from him, they must needs seek his in apology.
"Forgive me," she says with a remorseful watery smile; "you know that I was always bitter;
      and somehow," her lip trembling, "time has not improved me!"
Seeing the sorrowful twitching of that lovely and beloved mouth, he loses his head for a
      moment.
"It would have been nothing from anyone else," he says, murmuring under his breath; "but it
      came ill from you."
She offers no denial. Only she drops her eyes; and a stealing selfish sweetness laps her
      senses. Not yet, then, is the gap filled.
"Belinda!" cries the voice of Sarah, suddenly striking in, high and mirthful; of Sarah,
      returned, hot and boastful, from
       her finished game. "Cheer up! I have some good news for you!"
Belinda gives a great start.
"Have you indeed?" she says hurriedly; "so much the better for me."
"Mr. Staveley and Mr. Bellairs and Mr. —" (she has not yet mastered the name of her third
      young friend, but audaciously mumbles something that is to stand for it), "and I have
      concocted a little junket for to-morrow. If it is not your birthday it ought to be! You are
      going to be taken on the river, and treated to cakes and ale at a pot-house, and towed back by
      moonlight. Come now, what do you say? are not you grateful?"
Belinda laughs nervously.
"Grateful! of course I am!"
She has risen from her chair and begun to walk about upon the sward. Perhaps by changing her
      position she may the sooner be free of the heady fumes of this mandragora that she has been
      drinking; may the more easily shake off this divine drowsiness, that yet leads to death.

"It strikes me that you are not listening to a word I say," says Sarah, darting a dry look
      from one to the other of the culprits.
"Not listening?" repeats Belinda, with a feverish gaiety; "am I not? Judge for yourself
      whether I am listening! I am to be taken on the river, and treated to cakes and ale, and towed
      home by moonlight; come, now!"
"Well, is not it a nice plan? are not you grateful to us?" cries Sarah, again appeased and
      jubilant.
"It would be delightful!" replies Mrs. Forth, still with that same factitious liveliness. "I
      should enjoy it of all things; I am so fond of the water, only—"
She stops abruptly; her rebellious eye wandering to where Rivers—he, too, has risen—stands
      aloof, out in the cold; obviously uninvited, unincluded in the joyous programme.
"Only Menander, I suppose," says Sarah, making a face; "really, at his age, he ought to be
      able to shift for himself for one day."

"It is not Menander," replies Belinda with embarrassment; "as it happens, I have a whole
      holiday to-morrow. Mr. Forth is going to London for the day, to take the chair at an
      archæological meeting."
"Only what, then?" looking at her with a point-blank directness that puts her out of
      countenance.
"Only," she says, and stops again, irresolute.
Reason is pouring her cold douche over her, and asking: "Why should he be invited? What
      sense would there be in it? unreason rather, and madness. Has not she supped enough of hemlock
      for one while? With how many dreary days and weeks of flat revolt and saltless labour will she
      already have to expiate this one drunken hour? Let this be the end! let this be the end!"
"Only nothing," she says, with awkward gaiety.
"I wonder why you hesitated?" asks Sarah inquisitively. "I cannot fancy ever
       hesitating when there is any question of amusing one's self. Do not you often go
      on the water?"
"Never; I am never asked; you never ask me," turning with a sort of spurious coquetry to the
      enraptured young men.
"We should be only too delighted," cries Bellairs; he, by right of his one minute's priority
      of introduction, having constituted himself spokesman and old acquaintance; "only we—we—were
      afraid, we—we—did not venture!"
"You must venture for the future, then," replies she with a flighty laugh. "You must take me
      often! I want to go! I want to enjoy myself!"
Her eye sparkles, and her cheek flames, as she speaks. Is it indeed the expectation of
      pleasure that has set them both so bravely alight? She throws herself with such a fury of
      interest into all the details of the excursion, that she has hardly time or attention to spare
      for bidding good-bye to Rivers, who presently comes up to make his adieux.

"Are you going?" she asks indifferently. "Good-bye."
As she speaks, she lays for one instant her hot dry hand in his cold one. She would have
      bidden even Bellairs good-bye more warmly. None but herself knows the strength of the
      temptation that assails her to clutch that poor slighted hand before them all; to lay it on
      her miserable heart; to drown it in her tears, smother it with her kisses, and pay it any
      other tribute of extravagant passionate homage.
Least of all does he suspect it, as he walks away, decently strangling his sick despair till
      he is out of sight. No sooner is he gone, and the need for defence ended, than she throws away
      her weapons. Her attention flags so obviously; her manner relapses so patently from its short
      summer of animation into its normal frost, that it dawns at length upon the three boys'
      intelligence that they are running a good chance of outstaying their welcome, and forfeiting
      the place that they flatter themselves they have won in Mrs. Forth's esteem.
       They take leave as precipitately as Sarah's many last words, commands,
       espiègleries , jokes, will let them. She accompanies them to the door; and Belinda,
      since it is more tolerable to move about than to sit still, accompanies her.
The sisters lean on the low iron gate, and the bland spring evening wraps her arms around
      them.
Belinda has lifted her gloomy eyes to the laburnum gloriously pendent above her head. Which
      happy cluster was it that brushed against his hair last night in the starlight?
"He is not gone yet!" says Sarah, in that voice of shrewd, dry sense which would surprise
      the admirers of her butterfly phase, could they hear it. "What is he hanging about for?"
She has desisted rather suddenly from her occupation of kissing her fingers to her three
      adorers, who, reluctant to lose one of her last glances, are backing down the road away from
      her. Belinda's heart gives a bound. Not quite the end yet, then!
       She has done her best! Her conscience is clear! but it is not quite the end yet,
      then! Can she be blamed because he still loiters near?
"I suppose the road is public property," she says doggedly; but her voice shakes.
"You did not ask him to join us tomorrow, did you?" asks Sarah, with dry rapidity.
"No."
"Ah!" (drawing a long breath), "that is right!"
"It would have been the merest civility to have invited him," says Mrs. Forth sullenly. A
      frown less of ill-humour than of perplexed uneasiness has gathered on Miss Churchill's satin
      brow.
"It is no case of civility between you and him," she says curtly.
The flush on Belinda's fagged face grows hotter.
"I am at a loss to understand what you mean," she says angrily.
"I mean," replies Sarah shrewdly, and
       enunciating with the greatest clearness, "that discretion is the better part of
      valour —that is what I mean!"
"Thank you!" cries the other fiercely, and trembling like a leaf from head to foot. "Thank
      you for us both for your good opinion of us!— Mr. Rivers !"
At the last two words she raises her voice into a call; but it is so unsteady and
      ill-modulated, and he is so comparatively distant, that one would hardly expect the sound to
      carry so far; but apparently it does, for he starts and looks uncertainly towards her,
      distrusting his own ears.
Is it likely that she should have called him? she—his high proud lady—after such a careless
      cruelty of good-bye too!
"Mr. Rivers!" she repeats, in a voice that is as unsteady as before, but louder. There can
      be no mistake this time. He can no longer distrust his good-luck; and in one second, as if he
      could not obey her quickly enough, he is hurrying back.
Sarah lifts her arms deliberately from the gate, and rubs them gently to remove the
       slight numbness produced by contact with the cold iron.
"Blessed are they who let well alone!" she says, gently raising her shoulders, and turning
      towards the house. "I have disqualified myself for that benediction; have not I, Slutty?"
So saying, she disappears. Belinda would have liked to ask her to stay, but her pride
      forbids it. Long before Rivers has reached her, she has repented of her perverse and
      devil-born impulse. Why has she called him? What has she to say to him when he comes? For the
      first moment she says nothing.
"You—you called me?" he asks, faltering, surprised at her silence and her strange look.
"Did I?" she says, stammering. "Yes —of course I did! I—I—you leave Oxbridge to-morrow?"
"Do I?" he answers blankly.
Is this, then, what she has called him back for? To tell him that he must not venture into
      her presence again?

"You must know your own plans best," she says, with a forced laugh; "do not you leave
      Oxbridge to-morrow?"
"There is no need that I should," he answers diffidently; "I have a week's holiday!"
Her rebel pulses leap. A week! A whole week! She lifts her face, on which the sunset is
      mirrored, and looks towards the west. On what a couch of fiery damask roses, dying into
      daffodil, the sun is laying himself down! What a treble sweetness the throstle is putting into
      his song as he addresses himself to his rest!
"A week!" she says aloud.
"Does a week in two years seem to you such a long holiday?" he asks, rather wounded by what
      sounds to him the cold wonder of her tone; "it need not be spent here, if—"
He stops abruptly. " If you do not wish it ," would be the sentence's natural
      ending; but so to conclude it would be to suppose an interest, with which he has no
       right nor any reason to credit the wife of Professor Forth, in him and his
      affairs.
She does not ask him how he had meant to finish his phrase. She does not finish it for him.
      She only stands staring, beneath the level penthouse of her milky hands, at the blinding
      sunset. What a curve her lifted elbow makes! From what a marvel of wrist and forearm does the
      lawny sleeve fall back!
"Is this what you called me for?" he asks abruptly; "to tell me that I am to go
      to-morrow?"
For a minute she stands irresolute, still looking sunwards; her outward woman a lovely
      pattern of harmony, grace, and quiet; her inward woman, ugly chaos and dark fight. Shall she
      say "Yes"? To say so would be to more than retrieve her late error. Dimly she feels that if
      she has one ray of sober reason left her, she will say "Yes." She heaves a sigh, and lets fall
      her hands. Her lips have all but framed the fateful word, when:
"Belinda! Belinda!" comes an old voice,
       calling imperatively peevish from the house.
A week! One poor week! Only a week! What can one week matter? Her manner has suddenly
      changed.
"It is Mr. Forth!" she says hurriedly. "I called you back," reddening like the western
      cloud-fleeces, and throwing a guilty look over her shoulder, "to ask you whether, if you were
      not going to leave Oxbridge to-morrow, you—you would join our party on the water?"

</div></body></text></TEI>