<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">
CHAPTER I.
The winter, with its terrible stress and fury, is over and past. People sitting in
      blooming spring gardens or by widely-opened windows, talk comfortably, with lips no longer
      chapped, of the great snow-storm, and compare notes as to the amount of personal inconvenience
      and discomfort to which it had exposed them. Anecdotes of the awful night spent in
      snow-stopped trains have formed the convenient opening for many a dinner talk; the anxiety on
      the part of each interlocutor to prove that he or she had suffered more than the other,
      leading to intimacy before soup is well over. Of its ferocity and its devil-work few overt
      traces now remain,
       except killed laurel bushes and rare thrushes. Out of how many sweet little
      throats full of music has it pinched the tender life! But over its wrecks the sea rolls; and
      in the bottomless sea of mothers' hearts its drowned sailors lie buried. And does the analogy
      between the material and the spiritual world hold good? Does the sea of oblivion smoothly
      heave and largely sweep above the soul that went down on that dread night? Does no spar pierce
      the flood to show where that good ship foundered?

It would be the opinion of outsiders, who have not visited Oxbridge—if they had formed an
      opinion at all upon the subject, and were asked for it—that the inhabitants of that university
      town dwell in grey and ancient houses, time-coloured, and with flavours of old learning still
      hanging about their massy roof-trees. In point of fact, their lives are passed for the most
      part in flippant spick and span villas
       and villakins, each with its half acre of tennis-ground and double daisies, all
      so new that scarcely anyone has had time to die there, though numerous people have taken leave
      to be born there, and forming in their ensemble an ugly, irrelevant, healthy suburb,
      that would not disgrace a cotton city of to-day.
It is mid-May, and the hour is one of the afternoon ones; an hour at which luncheon is
      already forgotten, though tea still smiles not near. Along the shining river, a mile away,
      eight-oars, four-oars, skiffs are flashing. Scores of happy boys are tearing down the path
      alongside, keeping company with their boats, exhorting, admonishing, shouting themselves
      hoarse. But their noise, though strong are their young lungs, does not reach in faintest
      echoes to the quiet drawing-room, where the as quiet lady sits, head on lily hand, beside the
      window, staring out at her plot of forget-me-nots and the gold shower of her two laburnum
      trees.
Warm as the day is, a fire burns on the
       hearth; a fire whose inconvenient heat Belinda is languidly trying to counteract
      by the agency of the fan, slowly waving in her unoccupied hand. It is too hot even for Slutty,
      who, shortly panting in her sleep, lies cast on her fat side in a cool corner. Upon Slutty's
      figure, an academic life, and the total absence of the thinning emotion of envy, and of the
      bad but emaciating passion of jealousy (an absence caused by the fact of her being sole dog of
      the establishment, and having no longer any cause for suffering from Punch's tinselly
      accomplishments) has begun to tell. She could not well look stouter or less intellectual if
      she were one of the old Fellows of St. Bridget's.
When last we saw Belinda, she was lying grovelling among cinders and fire-irons in a fender.
      Now she is sitting placid and upright on a window-seat. Is the change that has taken place in
      her soul's attitude as much to her advantage as that which has effected itself in her body's?
      Who can tell? She is past the age when a smeared
       face, puckered lips and bawling cries mean grief; when ruddy cheeks and shouting
      laughter mean joy. She does not look particularly happy, perhaps, but which of us is conscious
      of looking specially radiant as he or she sits alone, with no one to summon to the surface of
      the skin that latent cheerfulness, of which few have enough to spend it on ourselves alone?
      And yet, at this moment, the thoughts passing through her mind are not disagreeable ones;
      scarcely thoughts indeed, lazy summer impressions rather, of the pleasantness of the tiny
      sky-coloured meadow that lies, all turquoise, under her eyes, and calls itself her
      forget-me-not bed; of the round mother-swallow's head, peeping over the nest beneath the
      eaves. At some further thought or sensation, a slight but definite smile breaks up the severe
      lines of her young yet melancholy mouth. At the sound of the opening door, however, in one
      instant it is dead.
"I find you unoccupied!" says her husband, entering and advancing towards her,
       with that shuffling gait which plainly tells of slippers (she has not then been
      able to break him of carpet slippers).
"If I am unoccupied it is for the first time to-day!" she answers coldly.
"Since you are at leisure," he pursues— his want of surprise at her frigid tone betraying
      that it is her habitual one—" I have the less scruple in claiming your services."
"What is it that you want?" she asks, lifting her eyes to his face. It is pleasant to be
      looked full at by a handsome woman; but if she has, before looking at you, taken care to put
      as much frost as they can hold into her fine blue eyes, the pleasure is very sensibly
      lessened. "What do you want? We cannot surely be going to have any more Menander to-day; and I
      have written all your letters—they lie on your study-table, and I have exactly followed your
      directions as to each."
"It is precisely upon that subject that I wished to speak to you," rejoins he, glancing at a
      paper in his hand. "You have
       by no means succeeded in expressing the exact shade of meaning I wished to
      convey in this letter to Herr Schweizer of Göttingen, with regard to the new 'Fragment of
      Empedocles;' and I am afraid that I must trouble you to re-write it."
"And I am afraid that I must trouble you to excuse me," replies she quietly, but with
      asperity; "my tale of bricks for today is really complete."
There is a moment's silence, during which Belinda turns her head pointedly away towards the
      laburnum tree and the emerald grass; but the Professor shows no signs of retreating.
"If I were taking you from any other employment, I might hesitate," he says, with peevish
      pertinacity; "but since you are wholly unoccupied—"
"I am unoccupied at this particular moment," answers she, with an accent of carefully
      elaborated patience, which, to the meanest observer, would betray the depths of her
      impatience; "but in five minutes I shall not be unoccupied; in five minutes I
       set off to the station to meet Sarah, who, as you are aware, is to arrive by the
      4.35 train. You do not, I suppose, wish me to take a hansom?" (with a faint sarcastic smile of
      a very different quality from that little one lately addressed to the swallow and the
      flowers), "and the day is too warm for it to be possible to walk fast."
At the mention of Miss Churchill, a distinct new crumple of ill-humour has added itself to
      the already numerous wrinkles of Mr. Forth's face.
"I am unable to see that any obligation to meet the train lies upon you," he says
      obstinately; "your sister is eminently well able to take care of herself!"
Belinda shrugs her shoulders.
"It is a mere matter of habit, of course," she says in a key of low resentment. "If you have
      been born in a walk of life in which it is habitual to you to push and elbow for yourself, of
      course there is no reason why you should not enjoy it; but you must remember that this is not
      Sarah's case; and since you declined to extend
       your hospitality to her maid, she is alone."
At the end of this conciliatory speech she stops, and there is a pause, which the Professor
      shortly breaks.
"If you think it necessary," he says grudgingly, "I am willing to send a servant to meet
      your sister; but I must request you to abandon the idea of going yourself, by which means you
      will be left free to render me the trifling service I require of you."
"You insist upon your pound of flesh, in fact!" cries she, rising suddenly; her body
      trembling, and her great eyes lightening with anger and disappointment. "Well, you are more
      fortunate than your prototype! You will get it."
To his death-day, the German savan will never suspect with what hotly raging and rebellious
      fingers were penned those polite, lucid, and erudite lines upon Empedocles' newly-discovered
      "Fragment," which he shortly received.
It is long before the Professor can satisfy
       his own fastidious ear and captious mind as to the fitness of the phrases to be
      employed. Many a sheet is angrily torn across by Belinda; many a fresh one is sullenly begun
      before her task is ended— before her "guide, philosopher, and friend," induing, with her
      aid—aid given grudgingly and not unasked—his cap and gown, leaves her side to attend a college
      meeting. Not until the banging of the house-door tells her that he is really gone, does she
      give herself the indulgence of an enormous sigh.
Throwing herself back in the leathern chair, in which she has been sitting at the
      writing-table, with weary long arms clasped behind her neck, and dogged eyes staring at the
      flies on the ceiling—
"God loveth a cheerful giver!" she says aloud. " He is not much like God!" (to a
      woman, the man that she loves and the man that she hates are equally nameless, equally
       he ). "So as he gets his pound of flesh, his tale of bricks, what does he care?"

As she speaks, acrid tears issue from their hidden ducts, and brim her eyes; but she shakes
      them vehemently away. She will not give to Sarah's penetrating eye the chance of seeing that
      she has wept.
"I will not be pitied!" she says, rising, and pulling herself together; "she
       shall not pity me! no one shall!"
She goes away to her own room, changes her gown for a fresher one, dresses her hair more
      becomingly, and practises looking happy in the glass. Before she has nearly perfected herself
      in this accomplishment, she is driven from it by the sight and sound of a slow fly, rocking
      top-heavily under a gigantic dress-basket, which is making for her gate. Sarah is here, and
      she will not be at the door to welcome her. The thought lends wings to her young heels, and
      the colour and the smile that she has been vainly aiming at, to her cheeks and lips. Five
      minutes ago she did not think that anything could have caused her such a throb of pleasure as
      the dear old sound of that jovial high laugh, as
       the sight of that Dresden china face and of those monstrously irrational shoes
      are now giving her. When they lived together, they seldom or never kissed each other. Now they
      cannot hold each other tight enough. Is it only Sarah that Belinda is kissing? Is not it dead
      youth, dear love, sweet Wesenstein, too, that she is so straitly embracing?
Over the souls of both sisters—the sad elder and the radiant younger—the recollection of
      their last miserable parting on that hideous January morning has poured! For a moment or two
      neither of them could have uttered a syllable, had you paid them a thousand pounds a word.
      They are brought back to common life by the sound of very small jingling bells, and by a
      sensation as of something tightly wound round their legs. It is Punch, who, unmindful of the
      chain that has bound him all the way down from London, and delighted to be again in the fresh
      air and among friends, is tearing wildly round, offering eager but unreciprocated greetings to
       Slutty, who, dodging away from him, shrewish and snarling, practically refuses
      to admit him as an acquaintance at all.
"Why, Punch!" says Belinda, with a rather unsteady laugh, dropping on her knees, taking the
      excited little dog under the arms, and looking kindly in his Ethiop face; " you here?
      and who invited you , pray?"
"I am afraid that nobody invited him," replies Sarah demurely; "but he was so sure that it
      was an oversight, and he says Jane is no companion, and he sent so many messages to Slutty,
      that I thought it was the simplest plan to bring him; do you mind?" with the old wheedling in
      her voice and her saucy eyes.
"Do I mind?" repeats Belinda, with a reproachful yet apprehensive stress upon the
      pronoun, passing her lips lightly over the top of his tawny head. "Punch! is it likely
       I should mind?"
"Will he mind?" inquires Sarah, speaking very low, and mouthing a good deal, as
      though labouring under a misgiving that
       the person of whom she speaks is in hiding behind the door.
"He is not fond of dogs," answers Belinda evasively, her face suddenly darkening as if a
      light had been blown out in it. "Slutty exists only on sufferance, do not you, Slutty?"
"Whew—w!" says Sarah, pulling a long face, and with a low whistle; "and shall I, too, exist
      only on sufferance, pray?"
Belinda is saved from the necessity of answering a question, her reply to which must have
      been either an incivility or a lie, by the fact that they have now entered the house, and that
      her sister's roving eyes and attention are claimed by other objects. Preceded by the dogs,
      Slutty churlishly growling, and Punch animatedly sniffing, they reach the drawing-room.
"Not such a bad room!" says Sarah patronizingly, looking round; "better than I expected;
      only it wants pulling about."
"Mr. Forth does not like rooms pulled about."
The other breaks into a laugh.

" Mr. Forth ! Is it possible that after six months he is still Mr. Forth
      ?"
"What else should he be?" says Belinda, with stiff embarrassment; "he has not yet been
      raised to the peerage. He is not 'Lord Forth'!"
"I shall call him 'James'!" says Sarah firmly; "I am sure that he will wish me to call him
      'James'!"
Mr. Forth's wife laughs grimly.
"It will at least have the charm of novelty for him!"
There is such a bitter dryness in the quasi-playfulness of her tone that Sarah stops
      suddenly short in her critical survey of the early English chairs, and the Albert Düurer
      etchings, in which Oxbridge drawing-rooms delight; and focussing her elder with her two
      insistant eyes, says, taking her the while firmly by both wrists:
"Come now; we are alone; tell me, how does it work? has it answered?"
But Belinda shakes off the small strong hands as Samson shook off the tough withes.

"You must see the rest of the house," she cries, beginning to talk rapidly and rather
      loudly, and absolutely ignoring the question addressed to her; "you must see my room; your own
      room—yours looks upon the tennis-ground. Have you brought your racquet and your shoes? we must
      have some tennis!"
Sarah does not press the subject so obviously avoided, but as she follows her sister
      upstairs she repeatedly shakes her head.
"This is my room," says Belinda, as they reach the landing, throwing open doors as she
      speaks. "This is— his " (with a slight hesitation before the pronoun, that shows that
      only the dread of a repetition of her sister's ridicule has kept her from designating her
      husband by the formal style and title which she habitually employs towards him); "and this!"
      (not opening, but simply indicating a third door), "this is old Mrs. Forth's."
"Oh, do take me in! do introduce me!" cries Sarah eagerly; "it has been the
       dream of my life to see his mother! You will not mind my saying so, but there is
      something so humorous in his having a mother."
"It would be no use," replies Belinda, not offering to comply with this request; "she would
      probably mistake you for her son."
"Well, we have a look of each other," cries Sarah delightedly; "but is she as bad
      as that?" arching her eyebrows till they almost meet, and are lost in her hair.
Belinda nods in acquiescence,
"And does she never stop asking questions?"
"Never."
"And do you always answer them?"
"Poor old woman! why not? if I were not answering hers I should only be answering some one
      else's."
There is such a weary, devil-may-carishness in her tone, that again her sister's eyes flash
      investigatingly upon her; but this time Belinda has been too quick for her,
       and, avoiding their scrutiny, is doing the honours of a fourth room.
"And this is yours," she says, a smile such as the one with which she had welcomed her
      sister sweetening and gentling the now habitual sullenness of her face; "it smells good, does
      not it?"
"Why, you have given me all your flowers!" cries Sarah, burying her face in a bowl of
      freshly picked narcissus. "I noticed that there was scarcely one in the drawing-room."
"Mr. Forth dislikes the smell of flowers," replies Belinda. She says it in a tame level
      voice; not as making a complaint, but simply as stating a fact.
"He seems to have a good many dislikes," says Sarah drily.
Belinda lets the remark fall upon silence.

</div></body></text></TEI>