<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">
CHAPTER VII.
After that Christmas morning Sarah spends her eloquence in vain. She may draw what
      pictures and practise what oratory and cry what tears she chooses. Of what use is it to draw
      pictures for, or address appeals to, or weep tears over a stone? And as far as any
      malleability or power of receiving impressions from without goes, Belinda is henceforth a
      stone. She accepts all her sister's appeals in a sullen, dogged silence. Whether she ever even
      hears them, Sarah is ignorant. She gives no sign of having done so by any least emotion
      produced by them. She listens, or seems to listen, with phlegmatic indifference to the
      sarcasms,
       vituperations, witticisms, poured from Sarah's cornucopia upon her future
      husband. They awake in her neither anger nor pain. She makes no effort to check them.
      Apparently she would as soon hear them as not. But at the end of them, when Sarah, from pure
      loss of breath— not, heaven knows, from any lack of goodwill—has paused, things are at
      precisely the same point as they were when she began.
Beaten and discouraged, she desists at last. Not, indeed, that she ever constrains herself
      so far as to omit tacking on some abusive adjective to the name of her future brother-in-law
      whenever she has occasion to mention him. Nor is it until she has exhausted every possible
      expletive that, as far as she knows, the English language contains, and applied them not only
      to him, but to his mother, that she desists at all. She relieves her feelings by putting all
      the dogs into mourning, tying a piece of black crape round each of their tails; a proceeding
      which fills Punch with fury, Slutty
       with mauvaise honte , and Jane with pride. Jane has that love for finery
      which is implanted in many plain persons.
With a face set like a flint, Belinda marches to her doom. And neither dogs nor men can
      retard the approach of the date of that doom. There are no preparations to delay it. She has
      steadfastly adhered to her determination to have no new clothes.
"A wilful woman will have her way!" Mrs. Churchill says, shaking that head whose eyes seem
      to grow brighter and her cheeks pinker and smoother as each day brings her nearer to the 10th
      of January and the South of France. "I suppose you know your own affairs best; and I fancy
      that you will not have much need for dress at Oxbridge. The only time that I was there I
      thought all the women shockingly fagoté !"
She stops and shrugs her shoulders at the recollection; but even as she shrugs a smile
      hovers across her lips. She is thinking that her French tour will be none the
       worse for having her purse made heavier by the weight of Belinda's trousseau.
"I am too annoyed about Belinda," she says on another occasion to her younger
      granddaughter; "but you know how useless argument is! She is as obstinate as a mule; and since
      she is determined to be no expense to me, I was thinking," her eye lightening, "of getting one
      or two things for ourselves. I should not wonder if, after all, I might manage to let you have
      that plush cloak trimmed with fishertails that you asked me for at Coralie's the other day.
      Come! what do you say?" tapping her cheek with an air of fond friskiness.
"I say that I will not have it!" replies Sarah doggedly; "it is blood-money!"
The settlements are drawn up. Belinda's widowhood and her younger children are provided for.
      Bought are license and ring. The latter Professor Forth brought one day to be tried on; and
      Belinda, with white, shut lips, pallidly essayed it. There is no bustle of arriving parcels,
       no wedding presents to be displayed. Miss Churchill has sternly insisted upon an
      absolute secrecy being observed as regards her engagement. She can bear to be married, but
      gifts and congratulations upon her marriage she could not bear. So that the comers and goers
      to the little house in — Street still come and go, without suspicion that anything out of the
      ordinary course is brewing beneath its modest roof.
Mrs. Churchill would have preferred that the betrothal should be proclaimed from the
      housetops. It would give it a body and solidity that just at first she fears it lacks. An
      engagement known to all the world is much more difficult of rupture than one to which only the
      three or four persons most nearly concerned are privy.
"Belinda is so odd and crotchety," she says one afternoon, as she and Sarah are driving home
      through the Park together; "why, if she is in earnest, should she object to people being told?
      Do you think there would be any harm in my just giving a hint of it to the Crawfords, and
      Dalzells,
       and Lady Hunt, and—and just our own intimates? They will be so hurt at being left
      out in the cold; and I am sure that they would give her something handsome. Even if she does
      not care for personal ornaments, they might give her plate; I do not suppose," with an amused
      smile, "that there is likely to be much plate in the Forth family!"
"And you think," retorts Sarah, with a fiery eye and a curling lip, "that the more people
      you tell about it the more Belinda will be nailed to keeping it! Do you think that, after all
      these years, I do not understand you?"
The elder woman looks rather foolish, and does not repeat her suggestion.
And now, indeed, all necessity for it is at an end. There is obviously no need to tie
      Belinda with the cords of convention and public opinion to her faggot and stake. The 10th of
      January has come, and she has as yet shown no sign of flinching. To ensure the greater
      privacy, the marriage is to take place at nine o'clock in the morning.
       Not a soul is bidden to it. There are no bridesmaids or groomsmen, no train of
      wedding guests.
Even Mrs. Churchill, on hearing of the earliness of the hour, has, like those wedding guests
      that Scripture speaks of, begged to be excused. Perhaps it is not only the raw winter morning
      from which she shrinks. Perhaps she is not particularly anxious to be an ocular witness of
      that ceremony which she has certainly speeded with her prayers.
"I hope you do not think it unkind of me, my child," she says, appearing at her
      dressing-room door in a pretty laced dressing-gown as she hears her granddaughter descending
      the stairs to the brougham; "but you know what a London church is, and you know what my
      neuralgia is. How nice you look!" smilingly surveying the dark, homespun suit, so dark and
      brown as in the shabby light to look quite black, and the rigidly plain close bonnet which her
      granddaughter has chosen for her wedding garments.

Belinda smiles too—a smile of which her grandmother is not particularly fond of thinking
      afterwards.
"Yes, do not I?" she says—"so like a bride!"
"In point of fact," continues the old lady rather hurriedly, and not much relishing the tone
      of this acquiescence in her compliment, "I shall be far more useful at home; I shall ensure
      the house being thoroughly well-warmed for you when you come back; you shall find roaring
      fires in every room!"
"We shall not come back," replies Belinda quietly.
"Not come back?" (with an accent of extreme surprise). "Your are going abroad then?"
"No; but there is nothing to come back for."
"And whose fault is that, pray?" asks her grandmother with an uncomfortable laugh. "If I had
      had my way, there would have been plenty to come back for: a good breakfast; a score of
      people; speeches!"

"But that was not my way," replies Belinda, again faintly smiling; "and, as you say
      sometimes, tous les goûts sont respectables . I am afraid that I shall be late if I
      delay any longer; good-bye, granny."
She speaks the two last words quite gently and friendly, and holds out her fair cold cheek
      to be kissed. Mrs. Churchill is afterwards not much fonder of thinking of the feel of that
      cheek, than of the look of that smile before spoken of.
"I wish I had not kissed her," she says to herself fretfully afterwards, as she sits with
      her still pretty feet resting on the well-warmed fender in the privacy of her dressing-room,
      when the brougham has rolled away; "it was almost like kissing a dead person!"
And meanwhile, through the dismal morning streets, dirty with that worst of all dirtiness,
      dirty snow, and where the lamp-lighters have only just put out the lamps, and would have done
      better not to put them out at all, Belinda drives, her
       sister by her side. The angry tears are raining down Sarah's face, encouraged
      rather than checked by their owner. In her small warm hands (for even on a bitter January
      morning wrath is warming) lie tightly clasped Belinda's cold ones. The shop-boys are only just
      beginning to take down the shutters; in the haberdashers' underessed windows, instead of
      costly fabrics and dainty webs, are to be seen nothing but bare boards and skeleton stands.
      The blue-armed housemaids are scrubbing the door-steps; through the squares the milk-carts
      rush.
"I wish you would cry," says Sarah presently, from among her sobs.
"Why should I?" replies Belinda calmly; "it is my own doing."
"That is the worst of it!" cries Sarah passionately.; "if you were doing it for some great
      cause—to save granny from the workhouse, or me from the scaffold— there would be some sense in
      it! there is no sense now!"
There is no sense in it! The words
       keep echoing, dancing—set to a teasing tune—in Belinda's head for the rest of the
      way. They reach the church-door. The carriage stops.
"We have got to the gallows, it seems!" says Sarah, with a fresh burst of sobs; then,
      vehemently wringing her sister's hands, she cries desperately: "Belinda! it is not too late
      yet! there is still time! it is not too late yet to go back!"
"I have no wish to go back," replies Belinda firmly, though her voice is low and weak, and
      her lips are white; "why should I wish to go back, when it is my own doing?"
So they get out. At the door they are received by a Churchill cousin, who, summoned as
      Belinda's nearest male relative to give her away, stands awaiting them, cross and
      shivering.
"Has he come? is he here? I do not see him!" says Sarah, with a last flare-up of hope,
      peering eagerly into the church, where here and there (only here and there, for they are not
      nearly all lit) a gas-lamp
       displays its dreary yellow flicker on the background of thick morning fog. "Yes;
      then"—with a sudden collapse into disappointment— "then he has not had a paralytic stroke at
      the last moment, worse luck!"
They walk up the aisle; a snuffy old pew-opener in a black crape bonnet preceding them;
      Belinda on her cousin's arm; Sarah, in her ostentatiously paraded grief, bringing up the rear.
      They have arrived at the altar, the candles upon which are lit, their wavering light falling
      upon an impatient clergyman and two elderly men; for the bridegroom has brought with him a
      friend of his own age and calling, whom he has summoned from Oxbridge to support him. The
      Churchill cousin has never before seen the bridegroom, nor has the bridegroom's friend ever
      before seen the bride. The opposing parties now stare at each other in unaffected
      astonishment. All through the service, the young Churchill, who had once himself thrown out
      feelers in the direction of Belinda, and had them
       civilly and firmly at once returned to him, is setting himself angrily in
      imagination by the side of the bridegroom, and wondering what the devil Belinda can have seen
      in this ugly old curmudgeon to prefer to himself.
All through the service, the bridegroom's supporter is staring in gaping wonder at the
      beautiful broken-hearted-looking girl, who has mysteriously elected to unite her fate with
      that of his old friend; ruefully reflecting that she will bring certain death to the
      constitutionals, and the pipes, and the discussions on the Enclitic de , and
      such-like light subjects, which they have been in the habit of sharing for the best part of
      the last forty years. All through the service the bridegroom is peevishly glancing over his
      shoulder to see whence comes the draught of raw air that, despite the black velvet skull-cap
      with which he has furnished himself, he feels at baleful play about his ears.
Belinda alone looks neither to the
       right nor to the left. If she were really the statue which her fair, still body
      so closely resembles, she could not be less conscious than she is of dank nipping air or
      curious look. She appears to listen with close attention, or is it indeed not attention, but
      the impassiveness of stone? Only once through all the service does her face come to life; and
      then it is stabbed into life, as one has heard in the grisly dissecting-room tale, of him who,
      thought dead, was brought back to agonizing momentary life by a knife-thrust! The knife-thrust
      that brings Belinda back to life lies in the words, "Forsaking all other, keep thee only unto
      him so long as ye both shall live."
"Forsaking all other!" She has been spared the trouble of forsaking that other. Has not he
      been beforehand with her? Has not he forsaken her?
Sarah, closely watching her, sees her ashy features contract in such a spasm of mortal pain,
      that she involuntarily starts forward. Is she going to faint? If she
       faint, and is carried out of church, may not she be saved even yet? She is not
      yet married! The service is not yet ended! But the next glance at her face dispels the
      momentary hope. Belinda is not going to faint; she has gained back her rigidity. She is dead
      again.
It is over now; over—even to the signing of names in the vestry. The clergyman offers his
      congratulations, but he does it hastily and abstractedly. He is thinking whether he will have
      time for a good warming and breakfasting before setting off for the funeral at Kensal Green,
      at which he has to assist. The bridegroom's friend and the Churchill cousin also offer theirs;
      but those of the first sound incredulous, and those of the latter ironical. Sarah alone keeps
      utter silence. The brougham stands at the door, the horse fidgety and stung by the cold. A
      crossing-sweeper and two pinched street children are watching the strange wedding-party's
      exit. The bridegroom, great-coated and comfortered to the end of his long nose, is
       bidding adieu to his ally. The bride turns to her sister:
"It is done now!" she says pantingly; "there is no going back from it now!"
"None!" replies Sarah dully.
"Say something to me, Sarah; wish me something good!"
She has flung her arms round her sister in an épanchement most unusual with her.
      Her icy cheek is hard pressed against her sister's hot and tear-reddened one.
"I wish you—I wish you—" cries Sarah, stammering, what between her sobs, the almost
      ungovernable impulse to invoke upon her sister a speedy widowhood, and the hopelessness of
      finding any other wish that will not sound a mockery.
"You—you cannot find anything to wish me!" says Belinda tremulously. "You are right; there
      is nothing."
"I—I wish you," says Sarah, driven to desperation by this tone, and clinging convulsively to
      her sister as though ten bridegrooms should not force them apart—"I wish you many happy
      returns of the day!"
       breaking into an hysterical laugh. "That is ambiguous! I may attach what meaning
      I choose to it."
These are the last words Belinda Forth hears, before the brougham whirls her away. The
      Churchill cousin takes Sarah home in a hansom, and a very unpleasant drive he has, as she
      cries violently the whole way, in passionate self-reproach at having found nothing kinder to
      say.

</div></body></text></TEI>