<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
CHAPTER V.
DURING that last month at school Anne was indefatigable: in the face of the vague
      future which was so rapidly approaching, she felt bound to clutch hold of the present,
      thinking that time which was employed in some way went less quickly. The fact was that she was
      in a state of great excitement—half impatience and half terror; she wished the days to go by
      quicker, and she wished them to go by slower; she was at once dragged wearisomely, and hurried
      along. At length it became a question no longer of weeks but of days. And then came another
      letter from Hamlin. He remembered the desire she had once expressed to go down the Rhine, to
      be on the sea: he proposed that she should come through Belgium and cross from Antwerp to
       London. “I am sure you will enjoy it much more than the
      vile, vulgar, usual route,” he wrote. But he did not tell her that he was unwilling she should
      get any impressions of England before meeting him, however slight they might be; that he
      preferred to meet her, in the evening, on the Thames wharf, to receiving his Amazon Queen, his
      mysterious and tragic Madonna, rather than in the shed at Victoria or Charing Cross. Anne did
      not care how she was to go: she was to go, to embark on a new life, to see him, to be seen by
      him. This thought, which had never struck her before, began to haunt her now: if he should be
      disgusted with her? if he should recognise that he had been mistaken in his choice?
The morning before her departure, Mrs Sireson handed Anne a letter at breakfast.
“Mr Hamlin has sent a girl to fetch you, dear,” she said.
“To fetch me?” cried Anne, in astonishment.

Mrs Simson opened the door—“Pray, come in,” she said.
A young woman entered, whose immaculate smartness and cheerful alertness never would have
      let one guess that she had just been travelling twenty‐four hours.
“This is Miss Brown,” said Mrs Simson. The girl curtsied, and waited for Miss Brown to
      speak. But Anne could not utter a word.
“Mrs Macgregor, Mr Hamlin’s aunt, engaged me as your travelling‐maid, miss,” said the young
      woman, handing a note to Anne.
It was from Hamlin, and ran briefly—
“MY DEAR MISS BROWN,—My aunt is unfortunately too delicate to admit of my asking her to
      fetch you from Coblenz; but she has engaged the bearer to be your maid, unless you have some
      previous. choice at Coblenz, in which case, please forgive our interference. She is highly
      recommended, and seems a good girl, and accustomed to travel. She will telegraph me how you
      are from Cologne and Antwerp
      . I shall await you Thursday evening on the wharf. Till
      then, farewell.—Your sincere and impatient friend,
“WALTER HAMLIN.”
For some unaccountable reason Anne felt quite angry. She did not require any one to travel
      with her; she did not want a maid. The very word maid seemed to bring up her whole
      past.
“You had better go and rest yourself,” she said to the girl coldly.
“How sweet and considerate!” said Mrs Simson, reading Hamlin’s note.
“I don’t want a maid!” cried Anne, angrily.
“A young lady of your age cannot travel alone, my dear,” answered Mrs Simson, blandly. But
      Anne felt miserable, she knew not why, and hated the maid.
Presently she went up to her room to pack her trunk. On opening the door she discovered the
      maid—her maid—on her knees, emptying
       the chest of drawers, and folding thing after thing.
“Please don’t do that!” cried Anne, turning purple. “I will do it myself, please.”
The girl stared politely, and answered in a subdued, respectfully chiding tone—
“I was only packing your trunk, miss.”
“I will do it myself!” cried Anne, excitedly.
“As you wish, madam,” was the maid’s icy answer; and she rose.
“Can I do nothing for you?” she said, standing by the door, with a reproachful, prim little
      face.
Anne was ashamed.
“You can help me if you like,” she answered, rather humbled; and she began folding her
      things. But the girl was much quicker than she, and Anne soon remained with nothing to do,
      looking on vacantly. She felt as if she would give worlds to get the girl away; she felt as if
      she ought to say to her, “Don’t do that for me; I am not a real lady; I am no better than you;
      I am a servant, a maid, myself
      ,”—and as if every moment of silence were a kind of deceit.
      At last she could bear it no longer—
“Please,” she cried, “let me pack my things myself; I have always packed them myself; I
      should be so glad if you would let me.”
The girl rose and retired.
“As you like, miss,” she replied, fixing her eyes on Anne’s strange excited face.
“She knows I am only a servant like herself, and she thinks me proud and ungrateful,”
      thought Anne.
The next evening, among the lamentations of Mrs Simson’s establishment, Anne Brown set off
      for Cologne. This first short scrap of journey moved her very much: when the train puffed out
      of the station, and the familiar faces were hidden by outhouses and locomotives, the sense of
      embarking on unknown waters rushed upon Anne; and when, that evening, her maid bade her good
      night at the hotel at Cologne, offering to brush her hair and help her to undress, she was
      seized with intolerable homesickness
       for the school,—the little room she had just left,—and she
      would have implored any one to take her back. But the next days she felt quite different: the
      excitement of novelty kept her up, and almost made it seem as if all these new things were
      quite habitual; for there is nothing stranger than the way in which excitement settles one in
      novel positions, and familiarises one with the unfamiliar. Seeing a lot of sights on the way,
      and knowing that a lot more remained to be seen, it was as if there were nothing beyond these
      three or four days—as if the journey would have no end; that an end there must be, and what
      that end meant seemed a thing impossible to realise. She scarcely began to realise it when the
      ship began slowly to move from the wharf at Antwerp; when she walked up and down the deserted
      and darkened deck watching the widening river under the clear blue spring night, lit only by a
      ripple of moonlight, widening mysteriously out of sight, bounded only by the shore‐lights,
      with here or there the
       white or blue or red light of some ship, and its long curl
      of smoke, making you suddenly conscious that close by was another huge moving thing, more
      human creatures in this solitude,—till at last all was mere moonlight‐permeated mist of sky
      and sea. And only as the next day—as the boat cut slowly through the hazy, calm sea—was
      drawing to its close, did Anne begin to feel at all excited. At first, as she sat on deck, the
      water, the smoke, the thrill of the boat, the people walking np and down, the children
      wandering about among the piles of rope, and leaning over the ship’s sides—all these things
      seemed the only reality. But later, as they got higher up in the Thames, and the unwonted
      English sunshine became dimmer, a strange excitement arose in Anne—an excitement more physical
      than mental, which, with every movement of the boat, made her heart beat faster and faster,
      till it seemed as if it must burst, and a lot of smaller hearts to start up and throb all over
      her body, tighter and tighter, till she had to press her
       hand to her chest, and sit down gasping on a bench.
The afternoon was drawing to a close, and the river had narrowed; all around were rows of
      wharves and groups of ships; the men began to tug at the ropes. They were in the great city.
      The light grew fainter, and the starlight mingled with the dull smoke‐grey of London; all
      about were the sad grey outlines of the old houses on the wharves, the water grey and the sky
      also, with only a faint storm‐red where the sun had set. The rigging, interwoven against the
      sky, was grey also; the brownish sail of some nearer boat, the dull red sides of some steamer
      hard by, the only colour. The ship began to slacken speed and to turn, great puffs and pants
      of the engine running through its fibres; the sailors began to halloo, the people around to
      collect their luggage: they were getting alongside of the wharf. Anne felt the maid throw a
      shawl round her; heard her voice, as if from a great distance, saying, “There’s Mr Hamlin,
      miss;” felt herself walking
       along as if in a dream; and as if in a dream a figure come
      up and take her hand, and slip her arm through his, and she knew herself to be standing on the
      wharf, in the twilight, the breeze blowing in her face, all the people jostling and shouting
      around her. Then a voice said—“I fear you must be very tired, Miss Brown.” It was at once so
      familiar and so strange that it made her start; the dream seemed dispelled. She was in
      reality, and Hamlin was really by her side.
</div></body></text></TEI>