<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="39">
CHAPTER III.
THE Leigh girls never discovered which of them was in the right; and as Anne never
      made any further allusion to Cold Fremley, they concluded that she had not spoken to Hamlin
      about it. Hamlin noticed no change in her, but then he never expected to see one: Anne became
      gradually more silent, more indifferent, more abrupt in her answers. Some people said, “She is
      getting spoilt by being made too much of;” and others, like Thaddy O’Reilly, hinted that the
      vagaries and splendours of æsthetic society, the poems and music and improprieties of Chough
      and Dennistoun, the nudities and Elizabethan dramatists of Lewis, were beginning to pall upon
      Miss Brown. “I’ll bet anything,” said Thaddy
       O’Reilly, “that as soon as they are married, the new Mrs
      Hamlin will abandon Mantegnesque costumes, will open a bill with Worth, and insist upon hiring
      a house in Belgravia for at least one season.” So said Thaddy O’Reilly; but it must be added
      that he said it to Mrs Spencer, to alarm and anger whose hereditary high‐art passions was the
      little journalist’s great delight. Anne still went out into æsthetic society, she still
      listened to new poems and to literary discussions, she still sat to Hamlin and to half‐a‐dozen
      other painters; but when people at concerts or the play used to point out Miss Brown as the
      queen of æstheticism, they little guessed how far removed were the thoughts of this queen from
      her realm and her subjects. Ever since that memorable conversation about Cold Fremley,
      beautiful things,—all the things—poetry, painting, music, romance—which had originally
      surrounded Hamlin with a sort of luminous emanation in Anne’s eyes,—had grown loathsome to
      her. She knew that it was unfair
       and absurd, but she could not resist the feeling that all
      the fair forms and sound patterns and imaginary passions of poetry—nay, that the very beauty
      of nature, where any existed—were foul; and her soul shrank from them as from contamination.
      She began to take a grim pleasure in that sordid ugliness which had, on her arrival in London,
      given her such a shock, and to which Hamlin and his friends were always shutting their eyes.
      The fog, the black ooze, the melancholy monotony of griminess, the hideousness of the men and
      women in the streets, jarred upon her much less than the beautiful pictures of Italian scenery
      which Hamlin hung up at Hammersmith,—than the lovely, mysterious creatures in jewel‐coloured
      robes, wandering in distant countries of bliss and romance, which Hamlin painted. The poetry
      of pure beauty sickened her; and she could not take up even the purest poems of that school,
      not even the mere charming pieces of decoration of Morris, without putting them down with
      disgust. She began to feel a vague
       nostalgic longing after her own past: faint recollections
      of her father’s grimy, workshop at Spezia, of the poor little room where her mother had sat
      doing cheap dressmaking, returned to her. The life at Florence, the sordid life with the
      Perrys, the tattered furniture and ill‐swept rooms, the dirty and noisy kitchen with the
      haunting smell of sink; the dull routine of washing and ironing and mending, of dressing and
      undressing the refractory children, of teaching them their letters and trying to keep them
      tidy; the ill‐will, the muttered anger, the jeering scraps of song of the other servants, who
      resented Anne’s superiority,—all these recollections which had almost been effaced during her
      happy new life at Coblenz and in London, returned to her, vivid as reality, and filled her
      with unaccountable yearning. And yet, when she asked herself what this meant, she could not
      but confess that she was different from what she had then been; that she had absorbed too much
      of the new life ever to be happy in the
       old one—nay, that that very indignation with the mere
      selfish worship of beauty which made all things seem black in her eyes, would never have been
      possible had she remained a mere servant. Hamlin had redeemed her soul; he had made her a
      thinking and feeling being—but what for? She dared not admit to herself that it was merely in
      order that she should despise him.
But Anne pushed aside these thoughts. She felt that she had no right to indulge in them—that
      she must give her mind to other things, her heart and her energy. Without exactly knowing what
      she could do, or even whether she could do anything at all, she felt that she must work—work
      with all her might; for it seemed as if all the thoughts which the people about her refused to
      think, all the sympathy which they refused to feel, all the work which they refused to do, and
      all the sacrifices which they refused to make, must all be taken upon herself—as if she alone
      must bear this terrible weight of rejected responsibilities. So Anne
       worked. Her cousin Dick had said that no one could do any
      good in ignorance; and she felt herself shamefully ignorant of all but useless things. She got
      together a whole heap of books and pamphlets on every possible kind of grievance and evil in
      the world; she made Marjory Leigh tell her all the dreadful things which she knew, show her
      all the dreadful things which she had seen. Of such things Marjory and her young man, the East
      End curate, could tell her but too many; yet Anne was not satisfied. She sought the
      acquaintance of Marjory’s colleagues in the work of helping the poor, and of Harry Collett’s
      fellow‐workers—older men and women, whose account of the evil of the world, less exaggerated
      and poetical than Marjory’s and Harry’s, was still more grimly tragic. They were hopeful
      nevertheless; but Anne, returning home from her attendance on lectures, her ghastly rounds in
      the slums,—home to the lovely house, with the Persian carpets, the 18th‐century hangings and
      furniture, the old majolica and Japanese
       ware, the flowers and the books of music,—returning home to
      the discussions on art and literature in Hamlin’s studio and at her own dinner‐table,—Anne
      felt mere despair. For, it must be remembered, Anne had none of those consoling thoughts to
      fall back upon which religion, however conventional, affords. Her father, a Radical workman of
      the French school, had brought her up with a few elementary ideas of right and wrong, and the
      faith that all priests, like all kings, were the curse of the world. Miss Curzon, the
      kind‐hearted old prima donna who had taken charge of her in
      her earliest girlhood, had given her examples of only the most frivolous Voltairianism; from
      the servants and the Italians who surrounded her at the Perrys, she had learned only a
      contempt for the conscienceless mummeries of the lowest Catholicism; from Mrs Perry only a
      contempt, as great in its way, for the heartless conventionalism of mere social Protestantism;
      and from Hamlin himself, and Hamlin’s friends (for at Coblenz he had stipulated
       that Miss Brown was not to be bored with
       religion), she had heard only of the religion of beauty. Of the men and women who used
      to come to Hammersmith and to Wotton, some, like Chough, professed Catholicism, and wrote
      mystical rhapsodies to the Virgin Mary; others, like Dennistoun, called the Virgin a
      prostitute, and God a highway murderer: some went in for imitating the näiveté of medieval Christianity; yet others filled their books with hymns to the
      gods, clean and foul, of paganism. There was a deal of vociferating on the subject; a deal of
      abusive language both of the religious and the irreligious; a deal of exhortation on the part
      of men like Hamlin not to have the bad taste to muddle religion with poetry; and on the whole,
      there was an atmosphere of absolute insincerity, in which, as in abstract politics (for
      certain æsthetes were extreme retrogrades, and loathed civilisation; while others would pour
      out by the hour revolutionary tirades of the most blood‐thirsty description), it appeared that
      religion
       was a mere personal hobby or poetical fiction: the usual
      conclusion being simply that the world was too disgusting a place for a well‐constituted soul;
      that the century was empty, and heartless, and emasculate; and that, as the people in the
      ‘Decameron’ fled from the plague, and told stories and sang songs in a pleasant villa all by
      themselves, so also must superior men and women fly from the sordidness, the
      uninterestingness, the mediocrity, and incapacity for passion of reality, and entertain one
      another with tales of romance and wonder in a fairy land, where the sole divinity was beauty,
      and where alone, among the lovely and noble things left by the past, noble natures could
      develop uncramped, according to the ideal of the Greeks, of medieval men, or of that most
      elevated genius, the late Théophile Gautier.
To meet the terrible realities which were now being revealed to her, to answer her own
      painful craving after usefulness, Anne had therefore only a vain negative belief—the pessimism
      which
       is at the bottom of all æstheticism, the belief in the
      fatal supremacy of evil and ugliness. But in Anne this purely negative creed speedily became
      positive; pessimism produced not a desire to abandon the odious reality and take refuge in
      mere imaginary happiness, but a frightful moral tension, a constant battle of her aspirations
      with her belief, of her conscience with her reason, a strain of rebellion against the
      inevitable. So, to the weight of the knowledge of evil, to the weight of the consciousness of
      the deadness of soul which surrounded her, was added in Anne the terrible sense of the
      injustice and callousness of nature and of fate, of the groundlessness of those instincts of
      good which left her no peace.
But all this no one ever guessed. She despised indulging her own wretchedness. She went on,
      behaving as usual, goading herself to practical concerns silently, letting no one know of her
      misery, letting no thought of it waste a moment of her time. Her longing was to break the
      hateful solidarity between
       herself and the school of æsthetic indifferentism; her
      instinct was, since she (dependent as she felt herself on a man’s charity) could not
      practically help others, at least to understand and feel about all these subjects which Hamlin
      and his friends tabooed. And with this haunting desire, she turned not merely to Marjory Lee
      and Harry Collett, but instinctively also to her cousin Dick.
“I have read the books you lent me to take into the country,” she said, giving him back the
      various primers and pamphlets on economical subjects. “Thank you so much for them, Dick.”
They were sitting alone in the drawing‐room at Hammersmith. Richard Brown had called only
      once before, ceremoniously and briefly, and he would not have come this time either, if Anne
      had not written expressly to beg him to fetch back the books. He looked at her in his
      incredulous, contemptuous way.
“Really,” he said, “my shabby old books are very much flattered by having been permitted
       to sojourn so long among such an assemblage of lovely
      things;” and he looked round the room at the pieces of embroidery and the Eastern carpets, the
      pictures and drawings, the quantities of Japanese porcelain and lacquer all round. “How much
      out of place they do look, and how queer they must have felt among their companions! Let me
      see: two volumes on artistic furniture—‘Ballads of Old France’—‘Rossetti’—‘Contes de Gautier.’
      I see—”
“Those are Mr Hamlin’s books,” said Anne, quickly; “he must have taken them out of the
      library, or brought them up from the studio. I am not reading any of them.”
“You are reading nothing but sociology and political economy; I understand,” went on Brown,
      with his placid sneer, which seemed, in this frightfully masculine man, to condemn in Anne her
      mind, her person, her manner, her character, and even her sex. “Ah, well, I can understand
      that; it must be refreshing. Who is it—Mr Pater, or some such great gun of yours—who says that
      the object of the wise
       man is to make his life consist in as many moments of
      thrilling impressions as possible; that the very wise people get them out of art and song, and
      the less wise out of vice or out of philanthropy? You must know the passage better than I.
      Well, I suppose you have got as many impressions out of art and song as possible, and (being
      far too delicate in taste to try vice) you are seeing what can be got out of philanthropy. Is
      that it?”
Anne frowned.
“Of course,” she said, “you think it very clever to snub me, Dick, and very manly; just to
      treat me as if I could not possibly have either heart or brains. Maybe; but it is a very cheap
      sort of sarcasm, and to make which a man like you is not at all required.”
Richard Brown bit his black beard, and looked at Anne from beneath his beetle brows; he
      threw himself a little back on his chair, and with his head on one side, he said, with
      affected indifference—
“You don’t mean to tell me that you
       have read those books except as you would read—what shall I
      say?—the ‘History of Furniture,’ or the ‘Contes de Gautier,’ Anne?”
“Were you ever ignorant about important vital subjects, Richard—ever conscious that it was
      your duty as a rational creature to know something about them, and then snubbed by a man who
      knew all about them, and to whom you had applied to help you?”
Brown was silent for a moment.
“I was a poor lad, working in a factory, and refusing myself food and coals in order to buy
      books and papers”—he said crushingly—“and I never had an opportunity of asking any one’s
      assistance.”
“I don’t see why there should be salvation only for people who have gone through hardships,
      nor why only you and those who have acted like you should be treated sincerely and seriously.
      Do you think that because I am a woman who has been brought up among Persian rugs and Japanese
      pots and Burne Jones’s pictures,—because I have gone to dinner‐parties
       three times a‐week, and read Pater and Rossetti and
      Gautier,—that I may not therefore be as honestly anxious to know about the serious things of
      the world as you were when you worked in a factory, and went without dinner and without
      coals?” and she fixed her eyes on her cousin’s ugly and powerful face, in which, for all its
      ugliness, one might have fancied one saw something not wholly unlike that magnificent
      sibyl‐like face which pre‐Raphaelite artists had immortalised and caricatured. “Seriously, and
      in your heart,” she went on, as Brown made no reply, “are you unable to understand that
      perhaps it may require more real determination to try and learn such things when one is
      brought up in luxury in an æsthetic house, than when one has to buy books at the price of food
      and fire?”
Richard Brown did not answer. He was a frank man, and he frankly faced Anne’s look, and in
      return looked long and searchingly at her; and as the habitual look of bantering contempt had
      given way to a serious scrutiny,
       so now he gradually grew more gentle and earnest.
“Forgive me, Anne,” he said, after a moment; “I think I may have been doing you injustice,
      and that I may, to some degree, have been disgracing myself. But, you see, I am a plain
      self‐made man, and it is difficult for me to understand how . . .”
Brown rarely hesitated for the end of his sentence, but this time he did.
“To understand how there can be any conscience or seriousness in a woman who has been
      willing to owe everything to the generosity of an æsthete like Mr Hamlin”—Anne finished his
      sentence bitterly. She went on—“Well, I know you could not believe that an æsthete could be
      generous and noble and chivalrous; and now you cannot understand how a woman who has accepted
      his generosity can be anything better than—than a piece artistic embroidery, or a Japanese
      cup, or a green tree,” and Anne pulled the long pliable leaves of a palm passionately through
      her fingers.

Brown’s suspiciousness had tried to return; but it was routed by Anne’s firm look, by Anne’s
      frank words.
“It is terrible to think how prejudiced, how inaccessible to truth, one allows one’s self to
      become,” answered Brown, “even though, Heaven knows, one tries to be fair. What you say is
      true. I couldn’t understand your not being a mere frivolous girl, Anne; and I can’t well
      understand it yet. But what you tell me I will believe.”
“Thank you, Dick,” said Anne, stretching out her hand. “I don’t think we are made to like
      each other much: you are too prejudiced, and haughty, and contemptuous; and I am too proud and
      too stiff‐necked. But we are both honest, so we might as well deal honestly and openly with
      each other, and try and understand each other’s good points.”
“I am not accustomed to deal with semi‐professional beauties, to do the Petrarch to æsthetic
       Madonna mias,” said Brown—that sneer of conscious
      masculinity and conscious
       self‐madeness coming over him again; “you must excuse my
      manner, Anne.” But he met Anne’s glance, and his tone changed once more.
“I will bring you some more books when I return,” he said. “By the way, have you ever read
      any psychology?”
“What is psychology? Is it metaphysics? I have read Hegel—” Anne stopped short, and then
      boldly added—
“ But it was only Hegel’s æsthetics, you know.”
Brown smiled. “Hegel’s æsthetics are not—well—not Posthlethwaite’s æsthetics,” he said;
      “this is not much more difficult. It is Spencer’s sociology. I will bring it you.
      Good‐bye.”
After that visit, Anne began to see more of her cousin. He came sometimes to Hammersmith,
      and he met her frequently at the Leighs. Anne did not feel that she completely liked him. He
      was pure‐minded, certainly, and generous, a man devoted to progress even in
       its humblest forms; he had a powerful intellect and a more
      powerful will. But, somehow, there was in him an indefinable coarseness of fibre, a want of
      appreciation, of sympathy with other people’s ideals, a tendency to despise all those around
      him, and to see meanness in all those who were not in the same position, or who had not the
      same views and aims as himself; above all, an unconscious desire to domineer—a brutal, almost
      animal wish for supremacy, which his knowledge of his own purity and rectitude and
      self‐sacrificing power made him accept and cherish as if it were a kind of holy spirit
      dwelling within himself, and not merely the product of a brutal temperament, which a noble
      intellect and a generous heart had severed from all brutish interests, but which remained
      brutal none the less. Anne’s pride, her consciousness of finer fibre than her cousin’s, made
      her shrink from seeking in Richard Brown for assistance in her arduous task of freeing her
      spirit from the slough of æsthetic selfishness; his suspiciousness of her motives, his
      sarcasms,
       his blindness to her purity of impulse, all this galled
      her; but she submitted to be galled. She wished her soul at least to be free, though her body
      might remain, as it were, in bondage, and Richard stood at the door of that world of nobler
      endeavour which she longed to enter; moreover, her stern spirit made her take a sort of
      pleasure in the very bitterness which she had to taste. If Richard had been sympathising, if
      he had met her half‐way and tried to help her on, she would have felt that she was bound to
      him, that she was battering her liberty once more; and vaguely Anne knew that she must never
      be bound to any one save Hamlin—that little as he could understand her, she was obliged, for
      ever, to try and understand him. And sometimes even, though the sense of Hamlin’s baseness, of
      his selfish æstheticism and his untruthful morbidness, weighed more upon her day by day, Anne
      would elaborately go over all that he had been to her—nay, all that, to the best of his power,
      he still was: she would sit for hours reading
       and re‐reading those treasured‐up letters whose arrival had
      made her so strangely happy at Coblenz; (how long, long ago it seemed, and how little that
      schoolgirl seemed to share of her identity!) and Anne, reading over those letters, carefully
      collecting together all the stances of Hamlin’s generosity and delicacy and gentleness which
      she could remember—nay, mere looks and tones which had brought home formerly her love for
      him—made up out of them a simulacrum of Hamlin, and persuaded herself that she loved it, and
      that it was Hamlin’s real reality, the reality which had become spoilt by the horrible moral
      atmosphere, distorted, warped, but a reality nevertheless. Nay, sometimes the sense of
      Hamlin’s weakness would come home to her, and with a pang make her feel how much she was bound
      to suffer, how much she was bound to do for him.
</div></body></text></TEI>