<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="44">
CHAPTER II.
WHILE Anne was being indoctrinated with her cousin’s philosophical theories, Hamlin
      had little by little let himself be drawn into the little clique of more mystical and Bohemian
      pre‐Raphaelites whom Edmund Lewis had collected round Madame Elaguine. The old‐fashioned,
      long‐established æsthetes, who believed that artistic salvation resided solely in themselves
      and their kith and kin, and who strangely muddled together the theories of an esoteric school
      and the prejudice of the untravelled Briton, decidedly set their face against Madame Elaguine.
      They had not liked Anne Brown
       because she was not sufficiently engaging; but they
      thoroughly hated Sacha Elaguine because she was too fascinating.
“A nasty, ignorant, frivolous little woman,” said Mrs Spencer, who was the spokeswoman of
      the party; “a woman with no sense of responsibility whatever. Did you hear the way in which
      she spoke of those horrible French painters? That she actually dared to talk to papa about
      that Monsieur Page, vulgar, base creature that he is!”
And the older people, and the women of the æsthetic world—the spinsters with dishevelled
      locks and overflowing hearts, who kept little garlanded lamps before the photographs of puny
      English painters and booted and red‐shirted American poets, all agreed with her. But the
      younger men merely laughed, and neglected the solemn, smut‐engrained parlours of Bloomsbury,
      the chilly, ascetic studios of Hampstead, for Madame Elaguine’s curious, disorderly, charming
      house in Kensington—the house patched up with old lodging‐house
       furniture and all manner of Eastern stuffs and brocades,
      crowded with a woman’s nick‐nacks, strewn with French novels and poems, and redolent of
      cigarettes and Russian perfumes. For there was in this delicate, nervous little creature,
      eaten up with love of excitement, something which acted as a spell upon most men; and it was
      curious to see how she managed to make them all in love with her, and at the same time excite
      no jealousy.
“Do you think Circe’s pigs were jealous of each other?” asked Mrs Spencer, when this
      peculiarity was pointed out to her by Chough. “Reduce people to a certain level, and they will
      be satisfied with equality.”
Lewis explained it as being due to Madame Elaguine’s magnetic power. Whether the Russian had
      been fully converted to his spiritualistic theories, or, indeed, whether it was possible to
      make her believe seriously in anything, it is impossible to say. But she had caught the
      spiritualistic infection from Lewis as a tinder catches fire. Nothing in the world
       could suit her better: spiritualism appealed to her love of
      excitement and mystery, to an idealistic and mystical strain which made her hanker after
      strange supersensuous contacts and occult affinities; moreover, if ever there was a woman of
      whom one might believe that she could vibrate with disembodied passion, and come in contact
      with an uncorporeal world, it was this emaciated, nervous, hysterical creature, who lived off
      coffee and cigarettes, and lived, as it seemed, only with her restless mind, and not at all
      with her frail, incapable body.
“I feel sometimes,” she would say to her friends, “as if I mixed with the living as smoke
      mingles with air—seeing them move before me, but unable to clutch them or be clutched by them,
      coming in contact only with their passions. I feel as if I could more easily live with the
      dead—mix more easily with them. It is terrible. I sometimes fancy that I shall fall in love
      with some dead creature, and my life be sucked away by him,”—and she gave a little
      shudder.

Cosmo Chough listened spell‐bound with admiration, twisting and untwisting his long black
      whiskers. What a woman was this! And he ruminated over a new chapter of his Triumph of
      Womanhood, of which Sacha Elaguine—“Sacha quite short,” as she bade her friends call
      her—should be the heroine.
Edmund Lewis smiled his sensual lazy smile, which one knew that he imagined to be the
      prototype of the cruel and lustful mysterious smile of the men and women, and creatures
      neither one nor the other or both, who came from beneath his fantastic pencil.
“Has it never occurred to you,” he said, in his luscious voice, stooping over Madame
      Elaguine’s chair, “that you may rather be a dead creature yourself—a vampire come to suck out
      some one’s life‐blood?”
“Confound that Lewis!” thought Chough. “Why must such ideas occur to him, a mere damned
      painter, and not to me, who am a poet?” and he made a note of the vampire.
Hamlin was standing by, smoking his cigarette
       sullenly. He did not like these sort of liberties which Lewis
      took with his cousin; he had even of late warned her that, although his friend was an
      excellent fellow, too great intimacy with him might prove disagreeable to her.
“What a carrion‐feeding fancy you have, Lewis!” he exclaimed, frowning. “One would think you
      lived on corpses, in order to be more in harmony with those beasts of spirits of yours.”
Lewis laughed triumphantly; but Madame Elaguine, to his amazement, cut him short by
      saying—
“Your idea may be very amusing, Mr Lewis; but I don’t think it is exactly the style of thing
      for a man to say to a woman.”
Lewis, who was never abashed, merely raised his eyebrows.
“I thought you were superior to your sex,” he answered.
“If Lewis dare to talk to you like that,” whispered Hamlin to Sacha, “I shall horsewhip him
      one of these days.”

Madame Elaguine pressed his fingers in her little hot hand.
“You are good,” she answered, in what was like the buzz of a gnat, but infinitely caressing;
      “but poor Lewis means no harm: he is very bon enfant. You
      are too pure and proud to understand other men. Ah, Anne is a happy woman!”
The last words were scarcely more than a little sigh to herself; but Hamlin caught them, and
      reddened.
“Anne is very cold,” he said briefly; then added, as if to justify himself in his own
      eyes—“I suppose all very passionate natures are.”
Sacha shook her little thin childish head.
“Oh no—not all.”
Miss Brown went but rarely to the house of Hamlin’s cousin. She was extremely sorry for the
      poor little woman’s misfortunes; and asking herself what she would have been had she had
      Madame Elaguine’s past, she often admired how the Russian had kept her independence and
      self‐respect, and serenity and cheerfulness.
       Yet, while she believed herself fully to appreciate Sacha,
      and invariably defended her against the jealous prudery of Mrs Spencer and her clique, Anne
      somehow felt no desire to see much of her. She set it down to her own narrowness and coldness
      of temper. “I am too one‐sided to have friends,” she used to say to Mary Leigh; “I feel that I
      don’t do justice enough to people, however much I try, and that my heart does not go out to
      meet them enough. I think I would do my best for them; but I can’t love them or be loved.”
Poor Mary Leigh was silent. Anne—this beautiful noble, distant, somewhat inscrutable
      Anne—was the idol of the enthusiastic Irish girl. She had often longed to tell her so; she
      longed, at this moment, to put her arms round Anne’s neck, and say quite quietly—“I love you,
      Anne;” but she had not the courage. How much may this sort of cowardice, called reticence,
      cheat people of? The knowledge that there is a loving heart near one, that there is a creature
      whom one can trust, that the world
       is not a desert,—all this might be given, but is not. And
      the other regrets, perhaps throughout life, that word which remained unspoken, that kiss which
      remained ungiven, and would have been as the draught of water to the wearied traveller.
Anyhow Anne, while thinking that she liked Madame Elaguine, somehow did not care to see much
      of her. What she could do for her she did willingly. Madame Elaguine wanted the child to learn
      English, but made a fuss about letting her have a governess.
“My child’s mind must be my own mind,” she said. But as she went on grieving at little
      Helen’s ignorance, and her own incapacity, from want of schooling and want of strength, to
      teach her, Anne offered to teach the child together with the little Chough girls, who were
      still her pupils. Madame Elaguine was rapturously grateful; but Helen was so completely
      spoilt, that she could be brought to Anne only when she fancied it herself, and Anne found her
      so demoralised that she really
       did not like to bring her in contact with the Choughs. “When
      poor little Helen is ten, then you must moralise her,” Madame Elaguine would say; and Helen
      was within week of being ten, and Anne, much as she disliked asking Madame Elaguine anything,
      urged that she should begin to be taught. Moreover, Anne’s time was too much taken up reading
      under Richard Brown’s directions, and her thoughts were too much preoccupied to make her feel
      at all sociable, even had she not felt an instinctive repugnance to the sort of company,
      headed by Edmund Lewis, which she knew she would meet at Madame Elaguine’s.
However, one evening she could not refuse Sacha’s invitation, more especially as the latter,
      evidently to please Anne, had invited her friends the two Leighs. It was a grand
      spiritualistic séance. Madame Elaguine was in great
      excitement, and Edmund Lewis was radiant. But Hamlin looked bored and pressed.
“I hate all this vulgar twaddle of spiritualism
      ,” he said impatiently to Anne. Anne loathed it: the
      triviality disgusted her, the giving up of one’s will to another revolted her, and she could
      not understand how a woman could endure to be handled and breathed upon by a man like Lewis.
      Mary Leigh was half excited and half amused; Marjory, the strong‐minded scoffer, had
      determined to unmask some sort of trickery. The séance, to
      which Edmund Lewis had brought a famous professional medium, was very much like any other
       séance: a darkened room, a company of people partly
      excited, partly bored; expectation, disappointment, faith, incredulity; moving of tables and
      rapping, faint music, half visible hands.
“The whole boxful, machinery complete, all the newest tricks, eighteenpence,” as little
      Thaddy O’Reilly fiippantly remarked to Anne. How could Madame Elaguine have patience with such
      rubbish? wondered Miss Brown. What excitement could that excitement‐loving little woman, with
      a real mystery in her own life, find in all this stale shibboleth?

“You can’t think what a strange, delightful sensation I have at these moments,” said Sacha
      to Hamlin, as her little soft hand touched his. “I seem to feel the whole current of your life
      streaming through me, and mingling with mine. It is like an additional sense. Do you
      understand that, Anne?”
“No,” answered Anne, briefly. “I feel Mr Hamlin’s fingers touching mine, and that’s
      all.”
Hamlin somehow admired Anne’s answer; he was glad it was so,—had she felt like his cousin,
      something would have spoilt in an ideal of his; and yet Anne’s coldness annoyed him.
“The spirits are reluctant; there are too many sceptics in the room,” said Edmund Lewis,
      angrily. “Great as is the power of some of us—as, for instance, of Madame Elaguine—I feel that
      there is something acting as a non‐conductor,—some very chilly nature here.”
But nevertheless, when the company was giving up the séance as spoilt, mysterious sounds were heard, and something luminous, which was
      immediately identified as a pair
       of spirit‐hands, was seen to float over the table.
“Spirit‐hands!” whispered Edmund Lewis.
“Wash‐leather gloves painted over with luminous paint,” whispered Thaddy O’Reilly.
“A wreath!” whispered Madame Elaguine.
Something round, like a wreath, did seem to float, supported by the spirit‐hands. Some said
      it was oak, others cypress, others myrtle; but it soon became apparent that it was bay.
“For Hamlin!” whispered the guests to each other.
The wreath floated unsteadily over the heads of the party; but, as it passed Marjory Leigh,
      that evil‐minded young materialist quickly snatched at it, but it was whisked away by the
      indignant spirits. There was a murmur of indignation; but indignation turned into triumph when
      suddenly the wreath reappeared, and hovered for two good minutes over Hamlin’s head. There was
      a cry of admiration, and Madame Elaguine clapped her hands.

But Marjory Leigh struck a light, and lit the candle by her side. She could see faintly the
      excited faces all round, and among them the pale face of Anne Brown, scornful and angry, fixed
      upon that of Hamlin, who was flushed, hesitating, surprised.
“I am glad the spirits have such good taste in poetry,” said Marjory Leigh, quietly; “but it
      is a pity that they should not have crowned Mr Hamlin, like Petrarch and Corinne, with real
      laurels.” And she stretched out something in the palm of her hand. Every one crowded round,
      and took it up by turns.
It was a leaf, torn and broken, of green laurel which she had pulled off when the crown had
      passed over her; but the green laurels were masses of stamped paper, and left a green stain in
      the hand.
“It does smack a little of a French pensionnat de
       demoiselles distribution of prizes; you will get the little book dorésur tranches, ‘Avec l’approbation de Monseigneur l’Archevêque de
      Tours,’ and ‘Prix décerné à M. Walter Hamlin
      ,’ written inside, at the next séance,” cried Thaddy O’Reilly. “Well, it is consoling to see how our beloved dead
      keep up the simple habits of the living.”
There was a titter. Madame Elaguine burst out laughing. Hamlin laughed, but he looked black
      as thunder.
“You brought that piece of green paper with you!” cried Lewis furiously at Marjory Leigh.
      “You brought it to insult and delude us! It is disgraceful.”
“My dear Lewis,” said Thaddy O’Reilly, gently, “remember that you are still a gentleman, and
      not yet a spirit.”
“Had I known that there was to be any crowning, I should certainly have brought something
      better than paper laurels,” said Marjory, fiercely. “I never thought spirits were reduced to
      such expedients as these.”
The séance came to an end. The lamps were lit. The medium
      dismissed with considerable contumely. Edmund Lewis went away in a huff; and Madame Elaguine,
      who
       cared in spiritualism only for those strange thrills which
      she had before described, laughed a great deal about the matter, and settled down to make
      music with Cosmo Chough.
Hamlin looked as if he wished himself a thousand miles away. He would speak with no one; he
      was angry with his cousin for having let him in for such a ridiculous scene, and angry with
      the rest of the company for having witnessed it; he had no command over his looks; and while
      Madame Elaguine’s curious, warm, childish voice throbbed passionately through Schumann’s
      songs, or while people took their tea and talked, he sat aside, in the doorway of the next
      room, like a whipped child.
“What a baby Walter is!” whispered Madame Elaguine, laughing, to Chough.
But Anne did not laugh. She felt the humiliation not of the paper laurels, but of that
      radiant look which she had seen in Hamlin when the lights had first been lit. And she was
      indignant with Hamlin for taking
       this ridiculous business so tragically, and at the same time
      sorry for his poor, wounded, unsympathised‐with vanity. She left the piano, where she had been
      sitting near Sacha, and went to him where he sat disconsolately looking over a heap of
      newspapers in the next room.
She did not allude to the scene. What use was it chiding him? He could never understand. She
      talked to him about the picture which he was painting, about the people, anything to make him
      feel that she was sorry for him. Hamlin was bitter against his friends; he began once more his
      tirades against modern art and poetry, its lifelessness and weakness; he again declared
      himself longing for a different life; he again, passionately and delicately, called upon Anne,
      in his veiled way, to redeem him. Anne listened sadly. She knew it all so well by heart, this
      vain talk which was to be the daily bread of her soul.
Suddenly Hamlin’s eye fell upon Marjory
       Leigh, who was seated talking with Thaddy O’Reilly in the
      recess of a window.
“I wonder you can endure that girl, Miss Brown!” he cried, “much less make her your
      friend.”
“Marjory may sometimes be rude, and it was perhaps not very good manners to interrupt the
       séance as she did, although I quite sympathise with her;
      but she is a capital girl, and just one of the most trustworthy persons I know.”
“She is a humbug!” exclaimed Hamlin, crossly and violently. “Doesn’t she set up for
      philanthropy, and self‐sacrifice, and all that? and then she goes to parties dressed in that
      way—a fit beginning for the wife of an East End curate, for a man like Harry Collett!”
“Marjory’s dress does not cost more than Harry Collett’s coats,” answered Anne, quietly.
      “You men never understand such things, and think because a girl’s dress is showy that it is
      expensive. Of course Marjory doesn’t wear æsthetic things, and it would be absurd if she
       did; but I happen to know that she made that particular
      dress entirely with her own hands.”
“I know nothing about the dress, except that a wife of Harry Collett’s should not go about
      like a peacock. But I do know,” cried Hamlin, fiercely, “that it is disgraceful for a girl
      engaged to marry, and to marry a man like Harry, to sit the whole evening in a corner, letting
      a jackanapes like O’Reilly make love to her.”
“Marjory has been sitting with Mr O’Reilly only about ten minutes,” answered Anne,
      indignantly, “and she has known him ever since they were babies. I think it is too ridiculous
      if a girl can’t talk to a young man at a party without being treated as if she were committing
      an infidelity.”
“I don’t say that any other girl talking to any other young man is to blame,” said Hamlin,
      still hotly; “but I say that a woman who can let O’Reilly flirt with her throughout the
      evening is no wife for Collett; and I have
       a good mind to write and tell him so,” and Hamlin looked
      dignified.
Anne did not answer at first. She was filled with contempt for this vain childish
      ill‐humour, which was taking the proportions of rabid hatred.
“Marjory is my friend,” she at last said, “and I think that the less you talk such nonsense
      as about writing to Mr Collett, the better.”
“I will, upon my word!” exclaimed Hamlin. “Marjory Leigh is a friend of yours, but she is an
      infamous flirt all the same!”
“Why does Mr Hamlin glare at me like that?” asked Marjory of Anne a little later. “One would
      think it was my fault that the spirits crowned him with paper laurels and not with
      bay‐leaves.”
</div></body></text></TEI>