<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">
CHAPTER I.
IT is sad to think how little even the most fervently loving among us are able to
      reproduce, to keep within recollection, the reality of the absent beloved; certain as we seem
      to be, living as appears the phantom which we have cherished, we yet always find, on the day
      of meeting, that the loved person is different from the simulacrum which we have carried in
      our hearts. As Anne Brown sat in the carriage which was carrying her to her new home, the
      feeling which was strongest in her was, not joy to see Hamlin again, nor fear at entering on
      this new phase of existence, but a recurring shock of surprise at the voice which was speaking
      to her, the voice which she now recognised as that of the real Hamlin, but
       which was so undefinably different from the voice which had
      haunted her throughout those months of absence. Hamlin was seated by her side, the maid
      opposite. The carriage drove quickly through a network of dark streets, and then, on, on,
      along miles of embankment. It was a beautiful spring night, and the mists and fogs which hung
      over river and town were soaked with moonlight, turned into a pale‐blue luminous haze, starred
      with the yellow specks of gas, broken into, here and there, by the yellow sheen from some open
      hall‐door or lit windows of a party‐giving house: out of the faint blueness emerged the
      unsubstantial outlines of things—bushes, and overhanging tree‐branches, and distant spectral
      towers and belfries.
“You must be very tired,” said Hamlin.
“Oh no,” answered Anne, that repeated revelation of the real voice still startling her—“ not
      at all.”
He asked her how she had left those at Coblenz, and about her journey; she had to
       tell him about every picture and church she had seen at
      Cologne, Brussels, Bruges, and Antwerp. It is strange how people whose hearts have seemed full
      to bursting with things they have so long been waiting to say, will talk, when they meet
      again, like persons introduced for the first time at a dinner‐party. On they rolled, and on,
      through the pale moonlight mist by the river.
“I hope,” said Hamlin, when they had done discussing Van Eyck, and Rubens, and Memling—“I
      hope you will like the house and the way I have had it arranged; and,” he added, “I hope you
      will like my aunt. She is rather misanthropic, but it is only on the surface.”
His aunt! Anne had forgotten all about her; and her heart sank within her as the carriage at
      last drew up in front of some garden railings. The house door was thrown open, and a stream of
      yellow light flooded the strip of garden and the railings. Hamlin gave Anne his arm; the maid
      followed. A
       woman‐servant was holding the door open, and raising a lamp
      above her. Anne bent her head, feeling that she was being scrutinised. She walked speechless,
      leaning on Hamlin’s arm, and those steps seemed to her endless. It was all very strange and
      wonderful. Her step was muffled in thick, dark carpets; all about, the walls of the narrow
      passage were covered with tapestries, and here and there came a gleam of brass or a sheen of
      dim mirror under the subdued light of some sort of Eastern lamp, which hung, with yellow sheen
      of metal discs and tassels, from the ceiling. Thus up the narrow carpeted and tapestried
      stairs, and into a large dim room, with strange‐looking things all about. Some red embers sent
      a crimson flicker over the carpet; by the tall fireplace was a table with a shaded lamp, and
      at it was seated a tall, slender woman, with the figure of a young girl, but whose face, when
      Anne saw it, was parched and hollowed out, and surrounded by grey hair.

“This is Miss Brown, Aunt Claudia,” said Hamlin.
The old lady rose, advanced, and kissed Anne frigidly on both cheeks.
“I am glad to see you, my dear,” she said, in a tone which was neither cold nor insincere,
      but simply and utterly indifferent.
Anne sat down. There was a moment’s silence, and she felt the old lady’s eyes upon her, and
      felt that Hamlin was looking at his aunt, as much as to say, “Well, what do you think of her?”
      and she shrank into herself.
“You have had a bad passage, doubtless,” said Mrs Macgregor after a moment, vaguely and
      dreamily.
“Oh no,” answered Anne, faintly, “not at all bad, thank you.”
“So much the better,” went on the old lady, absently. “Ring for some tea, Walter.”
Hamlin rang. In a moment tea‐things were brought. Hamlin handed a cup to Anne, and offered
      her some cake.
“It is a long drive,” said Mrs Macgregor—
       “a long drive—all the way from Charing Cross.”
“Miss Brown came by the Antwerp boat—St Catherine’s Wharf—in the City, aunt,” corrected
      Hamlin.
“Ah, yes, to be sure—perhaps she would like some more milk in her tea. There is always such
      a delay at Charing Cross, isn’t there, Walter?”
But while Mrs Macgregor’s mind and words seemed to ramble vaguely about, her eyes were fixed
      upon Anne—large, melancholy dark eyes.
“You are glad to be back in London, aren’t you?” she asked.
“This is the first time I am in England,” answered Anne, shyly; all this dim room, with its
      vague sense of beautiful things all round, this absent‐minded lady, all seemed to harmonise
      with her own dreamlike sensations.
“Miss Brown was born in Italy,” explained Hamlin, probably for the hundredth time.
“Oh yes, of course; how stupid I am! And,
       Walter, there are some letters for you on the hall table,
      and Mr Chough came while you were out, and a man from—what’s his name—the upholsterer who
      writes poetry.”
“All right,” interrupted Hamlin.
“Won’t you have another cup, Margaret?” asked Mrs Macgregor.
“Her name is Anne, auntie—”
“Of course—I don’t know whether you take sugar in your tea or not, Rachel.”
Thus they went on for another half‐hour; Mrs Macgregor calling Anne by one wrong name after
      another, alluding to things which she could not possibly know anything about, and Hamlin
      trying to set matters right and induce Anne to talk.
“It is getting late,” he said, “and I fear Miss Brown must be tired after her long journey.
      I think you had better not keep her up any longer, aunt.”
“I am not tired,” protested Anne.
“You will be tired to‐morrow,” said the old lady.

“Yes,” added Hamlin, “and I must go. Good‐bye, aunt. Good night, Miss Brown; I hope you will
      have good dreams to welcome you home to England. I shall come in for lunch to‐morrow, Aunt
      Claudia. Good night. Good night, Miss Brown,” and he kissed her hand. “Good night, buon riposo e sogni felici.”
The few words of Italian almost brought the tears to Anne’s eyes; she felt so strange here,
      so far from everything—and yet what had she left behind? nothing, and no one who loved her,
      except that little girl from New Zealand. She felt terribly alone in the world.
Hamlin had evidently not trusted to his aunt to send Anne to bed, for the maid came in
      uncalled, and asked whether Miss Brown would not like to go up to her room.
“Of course,” said Mrs Macgregor; and taking a heavy old‐fashioned silver candlestick, she
      led Anne to her room. The poor girl was too weary and dazed to see what it was like. She sank
      on to a chair, and
       passively let the maid take off her hat and cloak.
“Shall I undress you, ma’am?” she asked.
Anne shook her head. “No, thanks.”
The girl retired, but Mrs Macgregor remained standing by Anne’s side, looking at the
      reflection in the glass of her pale, sad, tired face. “Undo your hair, Eliza dear,” said Mrs
      Macgregor.
Anne mechanically pulled out the hair‐pins, and the masses of iron‐black crisp hair fell
      over her shoulders.
The old lady looked at her for a moment.
“You are a beautiful girl, Anne,” she said, at last hitting the right name, “and,” she
      added, with a curious compassionate look, as she kissed the girl’s forehead, “are you really
      in love with Watty?”
Anne did not answer; but she felt herself redden.
“Marriage without love is a terrible thing,” said the old lady, “and in so far love is a
      mitigation of evil; but at the best it is only
       delusion. People must marry, but it is the misfortune of
      their lives. Good night, my dear.”
The words went on in Anne’s head, but she was too worn out to understand them. She soon fell
      asleep, and dreamed that Melton Perry had painted a picture, and that in a storm the ship’s
      crew said it must be used as a raft; and somehow it all took place at Florence, in the large
      pond in the Boboli Gardens.
</div></body></text></TEI>