<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="36">
CHAPTER VIII.
THREE days later, Chough and Lewis returned to town, and Hamlin went with them. The
      weather had broken up, and it was time to settle for the winter. Aunt Claudia and Anne were to
      stay on another fortnight, in order to give Hamlin time to make some alterations in the house
      at Hammersmith. Such at least was the pretext; but Anne knew that Madame Elaguine had arrived
      in London, and she guessed that Hamlin would wish to transact whatever business there might
      be, before exposing to Mrs Macgregor’s wrath the Cousin Sacha of former days—before, perhaps,
      refusing to let Anne Brown meet a woman whose past spoke little in her favour, and of whose
      present he knew absolutely nothing.

“How I dread seeing that woman!” he exclaimed the evening before his departure, as he walked
      up and down the hall with Anne, while the rest of the company was listening to Cosmo Chough,
      shrilly piping eighteenth century music in the drawing‐room.
“Has Aunt Claudia ever told you anything of our life when Cousin Sacha was here with us,
      years ago?” he asked.
Anne nodded.
“Aunt Claudia told me the whole story.”
“Then you can understand,” cried Hamlin, almost convulsively, “how the mere thought of Sacha
      is loathsome to me; and yet, I must behave decently towards her—don’t you think?”
“Of course you must; and I can’t help thinking that perhaps—well, that your aunt and you may
      be a little unjust towards her—I don’t think that a child really could be so bad.”
“Oh, a child may be as bad as a woman if she have evil blood in her! and just think, if
       Sacha was like that as a child, what must she not be as a
      woman?”
There was something odd in his tone; something not of indignation, but of a kind of clinging
      curiosity.
“I daresay,” said Anne, “that as a woman she may be much better than as a child. Her eyes
      may have been opened to her own unworthiness, and she may have struggled out of the influence
      of bad examples. I am sure many, many people are much better as men and women than as
      children. To know, to feel responsible, means so much.”
“That may be.” There was some disappointment in Hamlin’s tone.
Anne laughed.
“You want to find a fiend, a lamia, a vampire,” she said—“something hateful and picturesque.
      Fancy if your cousin should turn out a most prosaic and ultra‐respectable woman, given up to
      her children, and coffee‐taverns, and women’s suffrage!”
Hamlin could not help laughing.

“I fear there’s not much chance of that. Anyhow, I must see whether she is fit for you to
      receive, and whether Aunt Claudia can be mollified towards her, supposing she is the exemplary
      piece of prose which you imagine.”
Anne had induced Cosmo Chough to leave his little girls in her charge; and the Leighs were
      to return to London with her and Aunt Claudia. The big house seemed very empty without Hamlin
      and his friends; but the quiet was pleasant. Somehow, when he was away, when she could no
      longer see him perpetually sitting and walking with Edmund Lewis, Anne’s love for Hamlin
      became much stronger. In her recollection he existed only with reference to herself; she felt
      his goodness, she believed in his nobility, she felt sure that some day he would become more
      manly, healthy, and resolute. If only she could enter into his confidence, instead of men like
      Lewis and Dennistoun; if only she could make him see all that there was in the world besides
      mere art and poetry. Perhaps she was unworthy to
       do it. This thought spurred her on, redoubled Anne’s
      restless desire to know, to sympathise, and to help.
Marjory Leigh had, soon after her arrival at Wotton, made acquaintance with the wife of the
      vicar, a simple, energetic, rather narrow‐minded but boundlessly unselfish woman, all whose
      thoughts were given to improving the condition of the neighbouring poor. To tell the whole
      truth, the vicar had a son, a young man entirely belying the usual saying about clergymen’s
      sons, who had renounced a good living in the neighbourhood in order to become a curate in the
      East End of London.
Harry Collett had been at Oxford at the same time as Hamlin; he had even, for some time,
      belonged to the æsthetic set of which Hamlin and Melton Perry had been the heads: but he had
      soon become a religious enthusiast; and, his religious enthusiasm cooling down, he had
      remained an ardent philanthropist. Hamlin had a liking for Harry Collett. He was handsome,
      tall, and emaciated, like a St John
       the Baptist by Donatello; he was in his own style poetical;
      he was a dreamer and an enthusiast. Hamlin used to call him Francis of Assisi. He did several
      sketches of him, and asked him several times to Wotton Hall. Anne also liked and admired him;
      but there was something exaggerated, narrow‐minded, in him, which shocked her Italian
      temperament. What she wanted was secular energy, not priestly devotion.
“He is a monk,” she used to say; “he ought to have lived in the middle ages. What we want
      nowadays are disagreeable, rough‐and‐ready men like Cousin Dick—men who don’t merely feel
      sorry for vice, but who try to understand its scientific reason.”
Marjory Leigh, who declared herself to belong to the most advanced of all advanced parties,
      and to whom Richard Brown was little less than a god, perfectly agreed in Anne’s verdict. But
      being of a proselytising temper, and having a special love for proselytising among the young
      men of her acquaintance, she immediately
       set about enlightening the rather High Church benevolence
      of Harry Collett, as soon as he came to spend at Wotton his summer holidays. Anne and Mary
      Leigh used often to laugh over the intensely serious flirtations which were carried on between
      Marjory and the East End curate—flirtations of which both parties were perfectly
      unaware—earnestly discussing charity reorganisation, ventilation, primary instruction, and so
      forth; but which was nevertheless destined to result, soon after the general return to town,
      in a long engagement between Marjory and Harry Collett. Harry was already back at his post in
      the East End; but Marjory, being unable to discuss philanthropy with him, went daily to help
      his mother in her work. Thus it was that Anne gradually became acquainted with the petty
      miseries of village life, its dull indifference, mistaken by poets for innocence, and beneath
      which lies so much possibility of stupid misery and stupid crime. “All that must be improved
      some day,” Anne used to say; and
       she determined to ask Cousin Dick’s advice, for she
      believed in radical measures rather than in the small palliations of the vicar’s wife.
One afternoon—they were within three or four days of return to London—Marjory Leigh returned
      more than usually excited from a visit to the vicarage.
“What’s the matter?” asked Anne, as the three girls sat alone in Hamlin’s empty studio.
Marjory threw her hat on the floor. “Give me some tea,” she said, “I feel quite sick; I
      never thought I should come across such horrors. Of course,” she added quickly, before Anne or
      her sister had time to exclaim, and as if to reclaim her reputation for omniscience—“of course
      I knew that such things existed—oh dear, yes—in big towns and so forth; but still,”—and poor
      Marjory fairly burst into tears,—“I never, never thought that—I should come so near them.”
Finally, when she had had some tea, Marjory, all blushing and stammering, and in a
       hesitating, roundabout way, which curiously belied her
      usual affectation of cynical omniscience, proceeded to explain what had just happened. A girl
      with an illegitimate baby—a very common occurrence in those parts—had turned up for assistance
      at the vicarage, and, while deprecating the wretched creature’s fault, the vicar’s wife had
      revealed to Marjory Leigh a jealously hidden stain in her parish; namely, that in the hamlet
      to which the girl belonged, a mishap, as she termed it, like hers was a trifle, and indeed
      could scarcely be considered a fault at all, compared with the condition of brutish sin in
      which rolled, cynically huddled together in cabins no better than sties, the whole small
      population of that foul little fen village.
“It appears it’s been going on for generations,” cried Marjory, “and that there’s no hope of
      remedying things unless the miserable creatures be removed into more decent dwellings. It’s
      useless trying to teach them to live decently as long as they live there, in
       those hovels in the fen, where half of them are ill of
      fever every autumn, and they herd together like cattle. Oh, it’s sickening to think of
      Christian people being so sinful close by one!” and Marjory burst into hysterical sobs.
Mary Leigh had exclaimed in horror as soon as Marjory’s meaning had become plain to her.
“Oh, don’t cry, don’t cry, Marjory darling!” she exclaimed, throwing herself on her knees
      and clasping her sister’s waist. “You can’t do anything, my love—and you’ll only
      make yourself ill if you let yourself brood on such things.”
Anne had not exclaimed. She sat perfectly still, and said nothing. Most persons would have
      deemed her very callous, she looked so calm.
“Are you quite sure, Marjory,” she asked, after a minute—“are you quite sure you did not
      misunderstand, or that Mrs Collett did not exaggerate?”

“I couldn’t misunderstand; and Mrs Collett gave me ever so many details—such dreadful
      details;” and interrupted by her sobs, Marjory repeated scraps of what she had heard.
“Where is the place?” asked Anne, after another pause.
“It’s that cluster of houses half‐way to Eggleston, in the middle of the fen, by the
      river—they call it Cold Fremley. Don’t you remember our going down there once in the break,
      with the Spencers and Chough, and your saying you wished Hamlin would paint that sort of fiat
      green country, and Mrs Spencer saying it was unpoetical?”
Anne remembered. The recollection of that moment came like a vision; she saw the wide river,
      between its low sedgy banks of boggy green; the reddish storm sunset reflected in clotted
      flame‐coloured masses in its thick grey waters; the moon rising, a spectral crescent on the
      blue evening sky; she heard the quail of the frogs, the cries of the water‐fowl: the Spencers
      and Chough on ahead with the two
       Leighs and Harry Collett; and she and Hamlin lingering
      behind, watching the reddened stream—and the cattle, dark outlines on the flat green banks
      opposite; Hamlin scrambling down the bank to get a tuft of willow herb growing half in the
      water. She was feeling so happy; Hamlin was so good and gentle and handsome, and she loved him
      so; and they two had stood by the river alone, until the little Spencer children had run back
      and taken her hand, and begun asking a hundred questions in their shrill baby lisp. It was so
      lovely and peaceful and good, this green country, this quiet evening, with Hamlin by her side
      and the children holding her hand. She had felt a painful longing to impress the place and the
      moment on her mind, to keep this happy present. “What is this called?” she had asked; and
      Hamlin had answered “Cold Fremley.” Cold Fremley! Anne went on repeating to herself all that
      afternoon: the recollection of that beautiful scene, become hideous like a nightmare,
       haunted her. The huddled roofs dark in the distance, the
      curl of smoke—that was the place. Anne felt dizzy. She had read enough about shame and sin,
      heaven knows; the poems of the poets of the set were full of allusions to such things. But she
      had never realised that they could be realities; they had been so many artistic dabs of
      horror, imaginary, or belonging vaguely to some distant, dim world, as unreal as the beautiful
      haunted woods and mysterious castles, the pale unsubstantial gods and heroes, and men and
      women of the pictures of Rossetti and Burne Jones, of the poems of Swinburne and Morris, and
      Hamlin and Chough. But that abominations like these should be here, close at hand, in sordid,
      filthy reality, reality under this same sun, swept by this same wind, reality through which
      she had unconsciously walked; this seemed impossible. A strange thing happened: the thought of
      what she had heard haunted her so persistently, loomed before her in such ever‐changing
      horror, that Anne at
       last felt like one drunk or half asleep, and began to doubt
      whether it was not all a horrible nightmare. Had Marjory really told her these things? Before
      a court of justice Anne would have been unable to say whether she had or not. It was so unreal
      to her that she could not accept it as a reality; the more she brooded, the more did it seem a
      hallucination.
“Marjory,” said Anne the next day, suddenly, “is it true that you told me some dreadful
      things which you had heard from Mrs Collett about the people at Cold Fremley?”
Marjory looked up in astonishment.
“Of course it is,”—she had half forgotten it herself.
“I cannot get it out of my mind,” said Anne, passing her hand over her eyes, as if to
      disperse some black mist; “it is too horrible. Everything in the world seems tarnished, don’t
      you know, and a sort of horrible clamminess all round.”
Marjory looked at Anne. She was very pale, and her big, greyish‐blue, onyx‐coloured
       eyes were wide with a fixed stare. She looked as if she did
      indeed see the tarnish on the world, and felt the clamminess; as if, like a person taken with
      some fever, she tasted copper on her tongue.
Marjory was a sensible girl. She had studied medicine, and knew an appalling amount about
      direction of the will, expectant attention, and other psychological and physiological matters.
      “Anne,” she said, “you are making yourself ill about this matter. Of course you couldn’t help
      being shocked; but you take it too much to heart. You are going to let these horrible things
      haunt you; it is a great temptation to do so. Take care; it won’t do any good, and you will
      merely get quite unstrung. I warn you against it. You mustn’t let such things get the better
      of your will: it’s morbid, and dangerous, and unworthy,”—and Marjory completely forgot how she
      herself had entered the room in hysterics the previous day.
Anne took no notice of her speech. “You say nothing can be done until these people be
       given better dwellings?” she asked, after a pause.
Marjory nodded. “So Mrs Collett says, and I’ve read that repeatedly in books also—for, of
      course, such things have happened elsewhere. At all events, the children might be brought up
      to live more decently, if they were not all huddled up together like that.”
A thought seemed to flash across Anne’s darkened mind. Her maid had just brought in the
      tea‐things.
“Laura,” she asked, “do you know to whom Cold Fremley—those cottages by the river, half‐way
      to Eggleston—belongs?”
“I can ask Mr Hamlin’s steward, miss—he’s just in the housekeeper’s room,” answered
      Laura.
“Run and ask,” ordered Anne.
“Good heavens, Anne!” cried Mary Leigh, “what are you going to do! You surely
      aren’t going to talk about such things and try to interfere! What can you do, when Mrs Collett
      has failed?”

“The houses must be rebuilt,” answered Anne, quietly and firmly; “to whomsoever they belong,
      they must—they shall be rebuilt.”
“Nonsense!” cried practical Marjory; “how can you talk like that? Are you going to apply to
      the neighbouring squires and tell them about such matters?”
“They must rebuild the houses if once they understand,” repeated Anne. “I don’t care to whom
      they belong—they shall be rebuilt. I will write and speak to every one and any one on the
      subject, until the thing has been done.”
“It’s all very well, but when it comes to the point, you wouldn’t venture to mention such a
      thing to a man,” cried Marjory, contemptuously—“I—wouldn’t.”
At this moment the maid entered.
“The steward says that Cold Fremley—those houses by the river, leastways—belong to Mr
      Hamlin, and as it’s he that lets them out.”

Marjory and her sister looked at each other and then at Anne, as much as to say, “Well, you
      see now what it would be.” Anne flushed scarlet, but her face brightened.
“I will speak to Mr Hamlin,” she said, as soon as the maid’s back was turned. Her voice
      faltered a little; but it was from sudden surprise, not from hesitation.
“Oh, Annie, dear, you’ll find that you can’t!” exclaimed Mary Leigh; “you’ll find it
      impossible.”
“At all events, you’ll have to put it through your aunt,” suggested Marjory.
“Through Aunt Claudia?” cried Anne. “Do you think she will make him feel it? Why, she will
      answer that such things are going on all round us, and worse ones. No; I shall speak to Mr
      Hamlin himself: he is the proprietor of Fremley; and he is responsible.”
“You’ll never be able to do so,” insisted Mary; “you think you will, but you can’t. Fancy
      saying all that to a man—and to a man who is in love with you!”

“What must be done, must be done,” answered Anne. “It’s not a question of liking or
      disliking. Mr Hamlin’s a man, and I am a woman, and I daresay men and women don’t talk about
      such things. But Mr Hamlin is the proprietor of Cold Fremley, and that’s all I have to do
      with.”
The Leighs looked at her with incredulous astonishment. It seemed so simple to her.
</div></body></text></TEI>