<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="33">
CHAPTER V.
ONE morning Hamlin received two unexpected letters at breakfast. From his looks,
      which he was at all times quite unable to control, it was clear that one of them brought good
      news, while the other must be about some disagreeable matter.
“Edmund Lewis is coming the day after to‐morrow,” announced Hamlin to his aunt, to Anne, and
      to his guests.
There was a chorus of exclamations of surprise, sprinkled with pleasure.
“Who is Edmund Lewis?” asked Anne. “He is an old friend of mine, a charming fellow whom I
      have not seen for some years. Some of the drawings in the drawing‐room at Hammersmith are by
      him.”

Anne remembered the name, and the strange, beautiful, cruel, mysterious, out‐of‐drawing
      heads in crayon, which had curiously impressed her the first morning after her arrival in
      England, rose before her eyes; since then she had seen so many similar things, had got to
      understand so completely that mysterious, beautiful faces, with combed‐out hair, big weird
      eyes, and cruel lips, were so much school property, that she had become quite indifferent to
      them.
“I thought you told me that something strange had happened to him—that he had left England
      for good,” remarked Anne.
“Oh, it was nothing particularly strange,” interrupted little O’Reilly—“only a German lady
      whom he met one day, blond, fat, thirty‐five, who was nothing but a soul—you know the sort of
      thing—with a husband who was a great deal besides a soul (a charming man, for the rest, and
      quite wildly in love with the Gnädige Frau). The excess of soul having induced
      acute neuralgia in the lady,
       poor Teddy Lewis, who is a tremendous magnetiser, was
      called in to soothe her agonies, during which process the lady discovered that the soul‐sorrow
      and consequent neuralgia from which she suffered was due to the soullessness of her husband,
      and that only the brotherly affection of Ted could cure her. The difficulty was the husband,
      who loved the lady fervently, and she him, but not in a way which should satisfy her soul.
      Hence struggles, agonies, etc.—you’ve read it all in the ‘Wahlverwandschaften’—finally
      ended by the husband being implored to sacrifice himself to the spiritual exigencies of his
      adored wife, which absolutely required that he should divorce her and let her marry Lewis.
      That’s all.”
“How can you talk in such a flippant way, Mr O’Reilly?” cried Mrs Spencer. “You have a way
      of making the most serious things seem ridiculous. Poor Mrs Lewis! she’s dead now; you needn’t
      make fun of her.”
“Poor Mrs Lewis!” laughed O’Reilly;
       “well, you know you wouldn’t receive her, Mrs Spencer, when
      she first came to England.”
“I thought her a designing woman then; I didn’t know all the circumstances.”
“Come now, Edith,” interrupted her father, in his broad Scotch; “I think the
      less ye knew those circumstances the better it was for all concerned.”
“I don’t see that at all, papa. I don’t see why a woman’s happiness should be sacrificed,”
      and Mrs Spencer, who was the most devoted of wives and mothers, tossed her head rebelliously.
      “I don’t see why the world should insist that a woman is to be satisfied with a husband who is
      good to her and her children. After all, she has a soul, and that requires response.”
“Would you behave as Mrs Lewis did?” asked O’Reilly, “If—well—let me see—Mr Spencer were
      suddenly to develop an overpowering belief in the Royal Academy and in Zola?”

“Papa would never have let me marry a man who could ever develop such
      beliefs.”
At this perfectly solemn answer there was a general laugh; even poor Mr Spencer, who was the
      most timid of æsthetical persons, joining.
“I think it was rather hard on poor Ted Lewis,” remarked Hamlin, “to become necessary to the
      soul of a lady whether he liked it or no.”
“Oh, Lewis liked it well enough, be sure of that,” answered Chough, bitterly.
“Don’t you think it was rather hard upon the husband,” suggested Anne, “since he really
      cared for his wife? Fancy being abandoned like that, and his children left without a
      mother!”
“He was at liberty to marry again,” replied Mrs Spencer sharply, still thinking of what she
      would do if by any chance Mr Spencer were to suddenly disbelieve in her father and his
      school.
“What would you have had Lewis, or rather
       the poor Baroness, do, Miss Brown?” asked O’Reilly.
“Why, I would have them never dream of each other; but if they had been so foolish, be
      ashamed as soon as possible, and each go his and her way, and attend to his and her proper
      concerns.”
Dennistoun, who had sat silent at the other end of the table, propped up on his chair,
      suddenly stretched out his long neck, and gobbled out—
“Love permits no man or woman to resist: it is imperious, irresistible, dragging us along to
      happiness, or misery, or shame, whether we will or not. Love is the extinction of the reason,
      the extinction of the will, or rather the merging of the whole individuality in one mysterious
      desire. Those who can talk of resistance have never experienced love. Woe to them! their hour
      is coming!”—and he tried to fix his weak eyes on Anne.
“Well,” she answered quickly, “I hope I may never make such a disgusting fool of myself
       as you describe, Mr Dennistoun; but as I think that not
      everybody is liable to go mad, so also I think that not everybody is liable to falling in love
      in your sense of the word.”
O’Reilly leaned over the back of her chair.
“It happens only to those who want to write about it, Miss Brown,” he whispered.
“Anyhow,” remarked Hamlin, “Lewis is a charming fellow, and I am sure you will appreciate
      him, Miss Brown. He is, moreover, the most backbitten man in creation,” and Hamlin glanced
      round the table; “but you must never believe any harm of him.”
Perhaps, thought Anne, Edmund Lewis was disliked by this set for the same reasons which, she
      could not help understanding, were beginning to make her vaguely unpopular. Still, she did not
      like the story of his marriage, she did not like the recollection of his morbidly beautiful
      drawings.
“It’s good news about Lewis,” said Hamlin to her after breakfast; “but unfortunately
       there’s been rather a bothering letter also. Did I ever
      mention a cousin of mine, the daughter of papa’s sister and of a horrible Russian creature
      called Polozoff? She was brought up with us as a child, and is connected with a great many
      painful circumstances. I have completely lost sight of her since she was about fifteen, and
      now I suddenly get a letter from her telling me that her husband is dead, and that she is
      coming to England. I rather loathe the idea of her, and if you knew the part she played in
      this house fifteen years ago, you could understand it. But the worst is that Aunt Claudia
      perfectly abhorred her—I will tell you the horrible, prosaic, tragic story some day—and that I
      perfectly dread having to break the news to her. I do hate a scene so! There she is; I suppose
      I’d better tell her.”
Mrs Macgregor was walking slowly up and down the gravel walk before the house.
“Do come and keep me in countenance.
       It really is no fault of mine, but I know my aunt will be
      furious.”
“What’s the matter?” cried Mrs Macgregor suspiciously, as if expecting to be told something
      disagreeable.
“I wanted to tell you, Aunt Claudia,” said Hamlin, “that I had a letter this morning.”
“Yes, I know, from your dear Lewis,” interrupted Mrs Macgregor. “What’s that to me?”
“I don’t mean that one. I had a letter from—guess from whom?” and Hamlin tried to
      smile—“from Cousin Sacha.”
Mrs Macgregor recoiled as if she had trodden on a toad.
“From whom?”
“From Cousin Sacha. Sacha Polozoff—Madame Elaguine, I suppose I ought to call her.”
For a moment there was a dead silence. The old lady’s face, usually so vacant, was lit up
      into a terrific energy of anger.
“ What business has she to write to you?”
“Well, really, aunt, I don’t see why she shouldn’t,” answered Hamlin. “After all,
       we are cousins, and we have never openly quarrelled.
”My aunt,“ he explained, turning to Anne, ”has got a tremendous aversion—a prejudice—towards
      this one and only cousin of mine. She disliked her father, very reasonably, and I think she
      has let her dislike descend to the second generation rather unreasonably.“
”Unreasonably!“ exclaimed Mrs Macgregor; ”you know it was not unreasonable,
      Walter—you know what that Cousin Sacha of yours was in this house.“
”I know nothing of the sort,“ cried Hamlin, angrily. ”I know that Sacha lived in this house
      as a child; I know she left it as a child; I know we all hated her and hers, and that perhaps
      they deserved it; but I know that we have no right to hate a woman of whom we know nothing,
      because she happened to have been a badly brought up child, years ago.
“At all events,” went on Hamlin, “I insist upon her being properly treated as a lady, and a
      relation.”

“Properly treated!” almost foamed out his aunt. “Do you mean to say that she is coming
       here?”
“Not here; but to London. Her husband is dead; and she writes to me that she thinks she had
      better send her boy to an English school; and as the only person in England upon whom she has
      a claim—”
“A pretty claim!” interrupted Mrs Macgregor.
“As her first cousin, she has written to me for information and assistance.”
“And you are going to give it her, Walter?”
“Of course I am. And I hope, Aunt Claudia, that you will remember that I won’t be disgraced
      towards a lady who has done us no harm. She will be in London, most likely, when we return at
      the beginning of winter.”
Anne had heard many allusions to this Cousin Sacha, and they belonged to that class of
      cynical hints which always made her indignant with Mrs Macgregor. She instinctively took part
      with this unknown woman,
       and she admired Hamlin’s decision and generosity. Why did
      he not always act like this?
“That child—that Sacha,” said Mrs Macgregor, when Hamlin had left them, “was the evil genius
      of his house. She was sent as if to embody all the bad tendencies of the family. It was a
      miserable house at best, my brother‐in‐law’s, for he was a weak, vicious, violent man. But
      just when this wretched child was brought to us my sister had died, Mr Hamlin was very much
      shaken and repentant for the life he had led her, and I really believe that he had made up his
      mind to live decently for the sake of his children. The two boys were growing up, and there
      seemed some chance of things going quietly and happily. Then Mr Hamlin thought fit to invite
      home his sister, who was a widow; she had married a horrible Russian, a sort of indecent
      madman, with every possible vice under the sun. She was an odious woman herself, the regular
      slave‐driving type of the Hamlins. Oh, you can’t judge of them from
       Walter; he’s like my sister, not like them. Well, she was
      violent, and overbearing, and tyrannical, and lazy, and hysterical, like a regular Jamaica
      woman. She was enough in the house; but then she had this child of hers, this Sacha, with
      her—a wretched, neglected creature, brought up by French servants, who were her father’s
      mistresses, and literally with no more idea of right and wrong than any of the little heathens
      whom they pick out of gutters in the East End and send to reformatories.”
“Poor child!” said Anne. She shuddered at this glimpse into Hamlin’s early life; it had a
      horrible attraction for her, and yet she felt that she would far rather know nothing about it.
      All this filth seemed to cling to her mind and soil it. “How horrible for her!”
“She was about twelve when she came to us,” went on Mrs Macgregor meditatively, “and you
      couldn’t believe that such a child could exist in Christendom. She could no more spell the
      simplest word than I can speak
       Arabic; she spoke an awful jargon of English and French and
      Russian and German, and she used to talk about things, and repeat stories which she had heard
      from her nurses, or her father, or her father’s friends—I don’t know whom—that were enough to
      make your hair stand on end. Mr Hamlin was in perfect despair; because, although he was a
      vicious sort of man himself, and quite did my poor sister to death with his bad conduct, he
      was awfully strict about all his kith and kin, and kept the boys as tight as if he had been a
      Puritan. What we all had to go through, you have no idea. At first I was quite ashamed to let
      any governess see such a little heathen as that child was, and we had to pay the governesses
      double wages to keep them on. Then, every time that they tried to break Sacha off some one of
      her disgusting ways, her mother, who was always moaning and groaning with imaginary maladies
      on her sofa, and no more thought of her daughter than of the man in the moon, would go into
      hysterics
       and throw things in their face, and have them turned away,
      and keep Sacha for a day in her room, kissing her and giving her sweets. Well, we thought we
      were little by little getting the better of her; and then, thank goodness, Madame Polozoff,
      that was Mr Hamlin’s sister, died. Sacha learned a few things, and began to behave a little
      more like a Christian child; but it was only on the surface. She was utterly and thoroughly
      corrupt. When the boys returned from school (Arnold was sixteen, and Walter seventeen), the
      mischief began. That wretched Sacha fell madly in love with Walter, and began running after
      him; but Walter perfectly loathed the sight of her: he was always the cold, moral,
      irreproachable sort of creature that he is. Then she went after Arnold. Arnold was much the
      livelier of the two: he was a dear, warm‐ hearted, simple sort of boy, a perfect scapegrace,
      always in pickles, but we only liked him the better. But that wretched Sacha (he didn’t care a
      rap about her either,
       for she was a horrid, lying, sickly, stunted little thing),
      in order to curry favour with him, put him up to all sorts of mischief, which I suppose she
      had learned from her precious father and his servants. What was poor Arnold to know? The nasty
      little fiend used to get out of bed and unlock the house‐door for him, so that he might go in
      and out at night and get into scrapes with the village girls, and drink at the pot‐house; and
      she used to steal the wine and the brandy out of the cupboards for him, and teach him all
      sorts of ungentlemanly, knavish, lying ways; I believe she used even to give him money out of
      her savings, just for him to go to the pot‐house. If ever a boy was ruined by a woman, poor
      Arnold was ruined by that miserable Sacha. Then, in return for her assistance and her lies and
      her money, he had to pretend to like her, to kiss her, and call her his darling little cousin,
      and promise to marry her, whom he abominated. Meanwhile Walter went dreaming on as he always
       has, avoiding Sacha like the plague, and not perceiving any
      of the pretty doings of his brother; and Mr Hamlin, who thought that his house, just because
      it was his house, must be the palace of virtue, and his son, because he was his son, must be
      the most obedient and austere boy in the world, took to liking Sacha and her pretty, foreign
      little ways, and to think her quite a nice little girl, just the wife for one of his sons.
      Then one day (I suppose Sacha thought that poor Arnold did not kiss her and darling
       little Sacha her enough, or got jealous or something) they had a great row, and Arnold
      called her a liar, and said that if she were not a girl he would thrash her well. So Sacha
      rushed off sobbing to Mr Hamlin, and told him that Arnold had called her a liar, and had
      threatened to beat her; and Mr Hamlin called Arnold, and struck him in the face till his nose
      bled, and called him a coward and a brute, and swore he would cut him off with a shilling.
      Then it all came out about Arnold’s escapades,
       his nights at the pot‐house, and so forth; and of course
      his father said that all he said about Sacha’s putting him up to it was a pack of lies, and
      finally it ended with Mr Hamlin behaving in such a way that poor Arnold ran away to America.
      Then we had no news of him for about six months, and Mr Hamlin wanted to take Walter into his
      good graces, although he had never cared for him, and Sacha tried to make up to Walter. But
      Walter also ran away to his uncle, because he said he would not stay unless Arnold was
      recalled, or at least money were sent to him. So Mr Hamlin had to give in and send for Arnold;
      but meanwhile he had quarrelled with Sacha, and packed her off to her Russian relatives, who
      sent her to some German deaconesses on the Rhine—a nice child to bring up! Walter returned,
      and began to prepare for the university; then Arnold was got back from America; but he had
      only got into worse and worse ways—he was always drunk, and finally his mind began to give
       way. Poor Arnold! he was much, much nicer than Walter—such
      a bright, good‐humoured, manly fellow—and now . . .”
“Now?” repeated Anne in astonishment; she had listened without saying a word to this
      horrible page of family history. “Now? Do you mean that Mr Hamlin’s brother is alive?”
Mrs Macgregor looked at her with strange wide eyes. “Of course he is. We say he is dead; or
      if not dead, mad. Well, he might as soon be either, poor boy. He wanders about with a servant.
      Walter allows him some money. We never talk of him. Ah!” cried Mrs Macgregor, and it was a
      kind of suppressed cry of pain—“and that it is all, all owing to Sacha Polozoff; and she has
      the insolence to write to Walter!”
Anne did not know what to say.
“But,” she could not help saying after a minute, for it seemed to her as if the whole story
      were so unjust, so one‐sided, as if there were so much too much laid at the door of
       the unhappy, neglected, corrupt child—so much too little
      pity or indignation shown at her having been thus neglected and corrupted,—“but, Aunt
      Claudia—is it fair to put it all down to Sacha? After all, Arnold was sixteen, he was a man,
      he had been decently brought up—and she, she was an ignorant child, brought up as you say
      without idea of right or wrong. Don’t you think—oh, don’t you think, auntie dear, that it was
      mainly the fault of old Mr Hamlin, and his bad example, and his closing his eyes to his boy’s
      behaviour?” It seemed to her so frightful that a girl, a child, a victim, just because she was
      a victim, should have such a weight of guilt thrown upon her.
“She was a woman, and he was a man,” said Mrs Macgregor fiercely, her love for her lost
      nephew, and her strange theories of sexual influences mixing grotesquely and tragically—“and a
      woman can always do what she will with a man; a woman can always, unless she be as weak as my
      poor
       sister, ruin or save a Hamlin, ever since Walter’s
      great‐uncle Mordaunt went to the bad, even worse than poor Arnold.”
“Some of them,” she said after a moment, “are good, and some are bad: my brother‐in‐law was
      bad—Arnold was good, and Walter is good; but they are all as weak as water, these Hamlins—weak
      in goodness or badness, every one of them.”
Anne sighed. And as she walked through the big, stately rooms of Wotton House, she thought
      of the horrible scenes which had happened in there; of the waste of life by violence and vice
      and neglect which they had witnessed; especially of that wretched, vicious child, held so
      terribly responsible for the folly and wickedness of others. And the sense of the terrible
      power of circumstances, of the degradation into which others may lead one, or out of which
      others may raise one, which had been silently growing in her as she watched the world in her
      tragic way, came over her with a terrifying rush;
       and she felt, half in anxiety at scarcely escaped danger,
      half in joy at safety, a tumult of gratitude when she remembered how Walter Hamlin had raised
      her up, led her out of the way of all temptation and evil contact, and left her safe and
      strong as she knew herself to be.
</div></body></text></TEI>