<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="40">
CHAPTER IV.
HAMLIN had forgotten all about the business of Cold Fremley, except that he had
      stopped the printing of his book, and set to work remodelling the “Ballad of the Fens,” to the
      immense admiration of Chough and Dennistoun, who were quite reconciled to realism now that it
      was allied with horrid sin. But that Anne was at all alienated from him, never once entered
      his mind. He noticed, indeed, that Anne had grown much more serious of late, that she seemed
      less happy than some months before; but for that he had his explanation. He believed that her
      character was suddenly maturing (for he never guessed that Anne’s nature was one of those
      which mature rapidly, and whose maturity means
       responsibility), and that there was brewing beneath that
      sombre exterior a storm of passion of which he was the object. That such a storm would come
      had been his persuasion from the very beginning of his acquaintance with Anne; he had guessed
      in her some strange latent force, and to see it develop had been his wish. That long
      courtship, that purely Platonic familiarity, giving scope to so much poetic devotion, poetic
      gratitude, was always to end, in Hamlin’s expectation, with a sudden burst of passion, which
      should envelop him, give his cold nature the exquisite sensation of being fired, carried off
      by a more powerful temperament than his own. Hamlin had had many love‐affairs in his day, more
      or less pure or base; he had, once or twice, been mastered by the stronger nature of a woman,
      but that had been mere brute passion, and what he desired was to rouse a passion terrifically
      overwhelming, but pure, intellectual, and with all the fearful violence of merely intellectual
      passions: a passion like
       that, which he always admired more than any other in
      literature, of Heathcliff for Catharine in ‘Wuthering Heights,’—a passion such as some men
      have felt for a dead woman. This he had always hoped from Anne, and in the expectation of this
      he had been confirmed by every new revelation of her character. Sometimes, when Anne sat
      listless in the midst of their guests, her mind for away, her tragic face more sombre for the
      blackness that was in the world around her and in her own soul, Hamlin would watch her, and
      feel, with a pang of satisfaction, that he had not been mistaken in her.
“She is not a woman, she is a mere splendid statue!” Lewis had once exclaimed angrily, as he
      felt how utterly all that kind of occult sensual fascination, which his pale mysterious face,
      his vermilion lips, his cat‐like green eyes, his low droning voice, his sultan‐like freedom of
      manner, his sense of omniscience and omnipotence, his own nature, strangely compounded of the
      beast and of
       the dreamer, indubitably exercised over many women, how
      utterly it trickled off Anne—
“She is not a woman, Hamlin,—she has an intellect and a will, but she has no soul; and one
      day you will discover it.”
“She is not a woman in the sense in which you conceive a woman,” answered Hamlin,
      contemptuously; “and she is as incapable of what you and most of us call passion, as is a
      statue. She has not one fibre of what you could call womanhood in her—not one shred of the
      beast which lies at the bottom of all our natures has entered into hers; she is a woman of
      mere stone and ice and snow for men like you. But just for that reason has she got a capacity
      for passion—for a passion which you can never understand—such as no other woman ever had. What
      are all those precious women—Cleopatras and Mary Stuarts—call them whatever you like, whom we
      think so poetical? Mere common harlots, decked out in poetical gewgaws, at bottom nothing
      better than a Madame Bovary, not so much as a Manon Lescaut
      . Mere filthy clay shaped into something comely. What is it
      to be loved by one of them? You might as well be loved by a barmaid.”
Edmund Lewis’s lip curled.
“Certainly Miss Brown suits you in your present mood, Walter; I don’t say not. But you will
      find out later what it is to be in love with a woman who is stone and ice and snow for men
      like me. Madonna Laura and Beatrice are all very fine; but your ideal lady, I repeat it, is no
      woman at all, but a mere sexless creature, something like Victor Hugo’s handsome Enjolras in
      petticoats. Passion for humanity, for fame, for abstract excellence‐oh, as much of that as you
      like; but passion for so humble a thing as a living man! Never!”
“Please leave the subject alone, Lewis,” said Hamlin. “I don’t care to have slugs creeping,
      even only in imagination, over my lilies. Talk about your women, other men’s
      women, as much as you choose, but spare me your remarks about Miss Brown.”
Chough had been listening. The excitable
       little poet of womanhood detested Lewis, whose arrogance
      grated upon him, and whose impurity of nature unconsciously offended the real innocence which
      underlay all his grandiloquently improper verses. And Chough adored Anne; she was, he often
      said, a quite new revelation of womanhood; and he believed that, as passion was the one noble
      thing in the world, and as Miss Brown was the noblest woman that had ever lived, that there
      must be a deal of passion in Anne.
“There is passion of all sorts,” said Chough, pulling his long black whiskers; “the passion
      of the pure animal, the passion of the mere human creature, and the passion of divine
      essences: the first is like a lush tropical country; the second is like the manifold sea; the
      third is like the high Alps, the highest strata of air, the purest light. The passion of
      divine essences is more terrible than any other, exactly because of its external nature: it is
      tragic. Miss Brown has that sort of passion—”

“Idiot,” muttered Hamlin ; and yet he felt pleased at Chough’s mystical corroboration of his
      ideas.
Meanwhile there was one subject upon which Anne sympathised warmly with Hamlin, and that was
      his cousin Sacha. For all her evident theatricalness, Anne warmed towards Madame Elaguine. She
      saw in her something frank and fearless which appealed to her, and a pathetic helpless desire,
      as of a child which has been naughty but wants to learn how to be good, to retrieve her own
      wasted life, to save her children from what she had undergone herself; above all, a wish to be
      in earnest without well knowing how to, a strain to be a serious woman in the midst of the
      habits of a spoilt child and of a flirt. For a spoilt child, unaccustomed to self‐control,
      impatient of small sacrifices, avid of excitement and novelty, avid of constant attention and
      admiration, Madame Elaguine certainly was; and a flirt as certainly also. She flirted with
      every one, with Hamlin, with as many of his
       friends—Chough, Lewis, and Dennistoun—as he took to her;
      with Anne, with the Leigh girls, with the solemn schoolmasters and schoolmistresses, whom she
      interviewed for the benefit of her children; she flirted—you saw it by her smile and her
      little childish laugh of recognition—with the very housemaid who opened the door; she flirted
      with every man, woman, and child, with every dog or cat that she came across.
“What a flirt that woman is, to be sure!” cried Hamlin, as he saw every one of his and
      Anne’s friends subjugated in an hour’s visit by Madame Elaguine. And to be a flirt was no
      recommendation to Hamlin; he wanted to absorb all admiration, he wanted to inspire love;
      flirts were his particular aversion.
“What harm does her flirting do?” answered Anne; “it merely makes her and those about her a
      little happier.”
“I thought you cared only for serious, for intense people, Miss Brown—you who are so serious
      and intense yourself.”

“Perhaps I am too serious”—and poor Anne felt at the moment that she certainly was too
      serious to be very happy; “but, however that may be, that is no reason why your cousin should
      not be a flirt. As long as a person can feel strongly and seriously on serious subjects, why
      quarrel with him or her for being childish about childish matters?”
For experience had taught Anne the bitter truth that people could be serious—heaven knows
      how serious!—like the odious Lewis and like Hamlin himself, and yet have no fibre of sympathy
      or indignation; and her experience of flippant little Chough, with his tenderly cared for
      wife—of flirtatious Marjory Leigh and her humanitarian labours—had made her hope most from the
      very people whose light nature she, so earnest and tragic, could understand least. And to this
      category she added Madame Elaguine.
“Your cousin has strong sides to her nature, I am quite persuaded,” she said.
Hamlin shrugged his shoulders; but nevertheless
      , though he highly resented Madame Elaguine’s all‐round
      flirtatiousness, he was forced to admit to himself that the little woman had, when you were in
      her presence, a sort of magnetic fascination.
What moved Anne was Madame Elaguine’s vehement passion for her children, the long schemes
      which, to Hamlin’s ennui, she would enthusiastically dilate
      upon for their future; and somehow, from words which she used to drop, it would seem that she
      had been in danger of losing those children—that she was still exposed to having them taken
      from her, or to being in some way separated from them. Anne did not absolutely formulate to
      herself a hope of helping Madame Elaguine; but she felt vaguely that perhaps she, with her
      seriousness and determination, might help the excitable and decidedly vague‐minded little
      woman to persist in and carry out her ideas; that here she had at last a chance of being
      useful. The first thing, Anne felt, was to bridge over the gulf of past animosity which still
      separated
       Hamlin from his cousin—to take away from Sacha Elaguine the
      demoralising sense of being an only half‐forgiven intruder. The great difficulty was Mrs
      Macgregor. The old lady could not abate one tittle of her hatred for the Sacha of former
      days.
“I tell you she is a bad woman, and you will find it out some day to your cost,” she would
      answer Anne. “The woman is contained in the child: or rather the woman is only the child
      altered and trimmed up to pass muster—dressirt, as my friend
      Schopenhauer says.”
“But, Auntie Claudia,” persisted Anne, “if a person can alter sufficiently to pass muster,
      why should that person not alter also in obedience to her awakened reason and conscience? Why
      should one not be able to shed the bad qualities of one’s childhood, for quite new and good
      ones?”
“Because one cannot, Anne; because the fox remains a fox, and the cat remains a cat, and the
      swine remains a swine.” And Mrs Macgregor looked with cynical compassion at Anne.

“I might have remained a mere soulless servant, had every one gone on your theory,” answered
      Anne. “No, I cannot agree with you, Aunt Claudia. I think it is terrible to condemn a woman
      because she was a good‐for‐nothing child; I think it is terrible to shut her out from sympathy
      which might be a comfort and an encouragement to her if she be still in need of any.”
“Ah, well, that is how you young people of to‐day always talk. You would object to sending
      criminals to the docks, because it is shutting them out of improving society.”
“I don’t see that the cases are parallel. I merely ask that a person be not condemned where
      she could not be responsible. If I thought that any one were really and hopelessly vicious, a
      mere source of evil, I think I should do my best to crush them out, to trample upon them.”
“That is how you are, Anne, willing to be a moral sick‐nurse or a moral executioner. In a
      world where every one has some horrid
       moral disease or is some horrid moral nuisance, you will
      soon find that such a line as that leaves no time to live. However, as to Sacha
      Polozoff—Madame Elaguine, I suppose I ought to call her—do whatever you please. You are your
      own mistress, and free to choose your own friends. See as much of the woman as you please, as
      long as you don’t expect me to sympathise with you in your admiration, love, and awe of
      her.”
“I don’t feel any admiration or love or awe for Madame Elaguine. But I think that she is a
      comparatively young woman, very impulsive and rather injudicious, all alone here in London;
      and I think she ought not to be shut out from the only house which she has, as Mr Hamlin’s
      cousin, a sort of right to enter.”
“As you choose, Anne. Invite her, give up the house to her; do what you please. But
      remember, when you have burnt your fingers, that I told you you were playing with fire.”

So Anne had her way. And Madame Elaguine came often to Hammersmith. Hamlin and Anne did
      their best to prevent her meeting Mrs Macgregor; Madame Elaguine was received mainly in the
      studio, where, little by little, and at first seemingly casually, Hamlin’s friends would drop
      in to meet her. She was a curiously fascinating little woman. Education, in any regular sense,
      she seemed never to have had; she was grotesquely ignorant about a great many things, and
      laughed at it herself.
“I am teaching myself arithmetic in order to teach my boy a little before he goes to
      school,” she would say—or spelling, or grammar, or something similar. On the other hand, she
      had a lot of superficial accomplishments, like most Russians: she spoke four or five languages
      with tolerable correctness and extraordinary fluency; she had, in some mysterious manner,
      acquired Greek. She read little, and that little mainly novels and poetry; but, with her
      Russian rapidity to adapt herself to a new position,
       she had scarcely realised that she had been accidentally
      drafted into æsthetical society, before she had got æsthetic literature, æsthetic gossip, and
      æsthetic modes of feeling at her finger‐ends. She immediately understood the relative
      positions of Hamlin, of Chough, of Dennistoun, of Lewis, and of all the others; and was able
      to talk to each as he best liked to be talked to. She began with a passion for Alfred de
      Musset, for Gautier, for Catulle Mendès, and she rapidly became an enthusiast for Swinburne,
      for Rossetti, for Chough, and, above all, “for that genius, Monsieur
       mon cousin.” She let herself be talked to about æsthetic dresses, gravely listening
      (with only a little side‐look of amusement at Hamlin or Anne) to Mrs Spencer’s strictures on
      modern costumes, on stays, and heels, and tight waists and full skirts; and she immediately
      set to work untrimming her frocks and making them up into wondrous garments, not at all like
      what any æsthetic woman had ever worn in her life, but queer, fantastic, delightful, neither
       Greek nor medieval, but individual and quaint and
      fascinating.
“Dressmaking, as long as only pins are required, is my one talent, my one accomplishment,”
      she would say, when any one admired the capricious garments, in which she looked sometimes
      like a schoolgirl, and sometimes like a page in woman’s clothes, and sometimes almost like a
      little nun. But this was not the case. Without ever having learned, she sang with wonderful
      charm: a small, childish, high voice, which trilled out Russian and Spanish and French
      folk‐songs, and which had a strange, hot, passionate power of singing those German songs which
      poor Anne, for all her fine voice (which Chough used distressingly to compare with that of
      various equivocal singers of former days) and her conscientious learning, could never succeed
      in rendering. But the fact was that Madame Elaguine’s personality was surrounded by a vague
      halo and shimmer of talents: she had never learned to do anything, yet she could somehow do
      everything; she
       could write fearfully misspelt but fascinating letters and
      bits of verse and prose; she could mimic and act.
“She is a first‐rate actress,” was one of the first things which Edmund Lewis, who seemed at
      once singularly attracted and puzzled by her, found to say about Madame Elaguine.
“You think that because she sometimes looks a little like Sarah Bernhardt,” answered Hamlin,
      who never cared much to hear his cousin praised, since everything which was praised in her
      seemed to point to a deficiency in Anne.
“I think she is an actress because I see it,” answered Lewis, in his positive way. “For my
      part, I don’t think any of you half appreciate all that there is in Madame Elaguine.”
“A nice little kittenish, intelligent flirt; just the same as a hundred Russian women one
      has known,” said Hamlin.
Lewis shook his head.
“That woman is not a mere ordinary flirt. She has an almost unique temperament: she is a
      first‐rate medium; I feel it.”

“You have felt so many people to be first‐rate mediums, Mr Lewis,” said Anne, scornfully.
      “Do you remember, you thought once that I was one.”
“So I did. But this time I’m not mistaken;” and he gave Anne one of those looks of fierce
      aversion which, loathing him as she did, she rather liked from the little painter.
However, Lewis proved right this time. Madame Elaguine had scarcely ever heard about
      spiritualism, but she threw herself into it with all her Russian ardour, and in a very short
      time, under Lewis’s guidance, became a great adept. Lewis declared that he had never met so
      gifted a medium in his life; and, indeed, Madame Elaguine showed a perfectly marvellous power
      of going off into trances, reading thoughts, and otherwise communicating with spirit‐land.
A young doctor, one of Marjory Leigh’s hygienic demigods, whom she brought to call on Anne,
      once met Madame Elaguine at Hammersmith. Anne noticed the way in which he
       watched her face and manner; she seemed somehow to interest
      him as a problem.
“Why were you staring so at Mr Hamlin’s cousin?” asked Marjory Leigh when the Russian had
      left.
“Staring at her?” answered the Professor, vaguely.
“She is a very pretty woman, and very charming,” said Anne; “I think that is sufficient
      explanation.”
“Well,” said the young doctor, a rough, brusque creature, “that wasn’t exactly the reason. I
      was thinking how very—well, to put it plainly—how very hysterical a subject that lady
      looks.”
“What do you mean by hysterical?” said Anne, quickly. “She is very nervous, but she doesn’t
      seem to me to be at all subject to any kind of fits.”
“That’s not what we mean by hysteria,” exclaimed the doctor. “Hysteria isn’t a
      fit of hysterics; it is a condition of morbid nervous excitability, usually accompanied by a
      certain
       loss of will‐power. Hysterical subjects are a kind of
      milder mad men and women; their characters undergo curious modifications; they haven’t the
      same responsibilities as others. I wonder whether that lady is not a spiritualist,—she looks
      like it.”
“She has let Mr Lewis, who has gone in a good deal for that sort of thing, mesmerise her
      once or twice,” answered Anne. “I don’t believe in that rubbish myself.”
“Nor do I. But there is this much of truth in it, that some sorts of temperaments are
      naturally inclined to it, and that it reacts upon them. And I should think it would be the
      case with that lady.”
“But surely,” hesitated Anne, “people who are in good health—who have never had any kind of
      nervous illness or shock—don’t get into that state.”
“Oh yes, they do. It is often hereditary; one or two, or even sometimes only one, depraved
      ancestor will do it for you.”
The recollection of all she had heard of
       Sacha’s horrible profligate old Russian father, of her
      violent and weak and constantly ailing mother, flashed across Anne. And then came also the
      remembrance of those portraits at Wotton Hall—of those generations of weak and depraved
      planters, who had been the grandfathers and granduncles of Sacha as well as of Hamlin.
And any remaining ill‐will which Mrs Macgregor’s stories had left was swept away. Anne did
      not like Madame Elaguine, in the same way that she liked the Leighs or even Mrs Spencer; but
      she felt a sudden strong compassion for her. Perhaps, she thought, there is more goodness in
      the world than I guessed. And it seemed to her that this giddy little woman, with her
      passionate desire for the welfare of her children, this woman who had struggled through the
      disadvantages of hereditary weakness and corrupt training, was a sort of a hero.
</div></body></text></TEI>