<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Mark Rutherford's Deliverance, by Mark Rutherford</title><author>White, William Hale (1831-1913).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1885</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
CHAPTER VII QUI DEDIT IN MARI VIAM
From time to time I received a newspaper from my native town, and one morning,
     looking over the advertisements, I caught sight of one which arrested me.  It was as
     follows:—
“A Widow Lady desires a situation as Daily Governess to little children.  Address E.
      B., care of Mrs. George Andrews, Fancy Bazaar, High Street.”
Mrs. George Andrews was a cousin of Ellen Butts, and that this was her advertisement I had
     not the slightest doubt.  Suddenly, without being able to give the least reason for it, an
     unconquerable desire to see her arose within me.  I could not understand it.  I recollected
     that memorable resolution after Miss Arbour’s story years ago.  How true that counsel of Miss
     Arbour’s was! and yet it had the defect of most counsel.  It was but a principle; whether it
     suited this particular case was the one important point on which Miss Arbour was no authority. 
     What was it which prompted this inexplicable emotion?  A thousand things rushed
     through my head without reason or order.  I begin to believe that a first love never dies.  A
     boy falls in love at eighteen or nineteen.  The attachment comes to nothing.  It is broken off
     for a multitude of reasons, and he sees its absurdity.  He marries afterwards some other woman
     whom he even adores, and he has children for whom he spends his life; yet in an obscure corner
     of his soul he preserves everlastingly the cherished picture of the girl who first was dear to
     him.  She, too, marries.  In process of time she is fifty years old, and he is fifty-two.  He
     has not seen her for thirty years or more, but he continually turns aside into the little
     oratory, to gaze upon the face as it last appeared to him when he left her at her gate and saw
     her no more.  He inquires now and then timidly about her whenever he gets the chance.  And once
     in his life he goes down to the town where she lives, solely in order to get a sight of her
     without her knowing anything about it.  He does not succeed, and he comes back and tells his
     wife, from whom he never conceals any secrets, that he has been away on business.  I did not
     for a moment confess that my love for Ellen had returned.  I knew who she was and what she was,
     and what had led to our separation; but nevertheless, all this obstinately remained in the
     background, and all the passages of love between us, all our kisses, and above everything, her
     tears at that parting in her father’s house, thrust themselves upon me.  It was a mystery to
     me.  What should have induced that utterly unexpected resurrection of what I believed to be
     dead and buried, is beyond my comprehension.  However, the fact remains.  I did not to myself
     admit that this was love, but it was love, and that it should have shot up with such
     swift vitality merely because I had happened to see those initials was miraculous.  I pretended
     to myself that I should like once more to see Mrs. Butts—perhaps she might be in want and I
     could help her.  I shrank from writing to her or from making myself known to her, and at last I
     hit upon the expedient of answering her advertisement in a feigned name, and requesting her to
     call at the King’s Arms hotel upon a gentleman who wished to engage a widow lady to teach his
     children.  To prevent any previous inquiries on her part, I said that my name was Williams,
     that I lived in the country at some little distance from the town, but that I should be there
     on business on the day named.  I took up my quarters at the King’s Arms the night before.  It
     seemed very strange to be in an inn in the place in which I was born.  I retired early to my
     bedroom, and looked out in the clear moonlight over the river.  The landscape seemed haunted by
     ghosts of my former self.  At one particular point, so well known, I stood fishing.  At
     another, equally well known, where the water was dangerously deep, I was examining the ice; and
     round the corner was the boathouse where we kept the little craft in which I had voyaged so
     many hundreds of miles on excursions upwards beyond where the navigation ends, or, still more
     fascinating, down to where the water widens and sails are to be seen, and there is a foretaste
     of the distant sea.  It is no pleasure to me to revisit scenes in which earlier days have been
     passed.  I detest the sentimental melancholy which steals over me; the sense of the lapse of
     time, and the reflection that so many whom I knew are dead.  I would always, if possible, spend
     my holiday in some new scene, fresh to me, and full of new interest.  I slept but little, and
     when the morning came, instead of carrying out my purpose of wandering through the streets, I
     was so sick of the mood by which I had been helplessly overcome, that I sat at a distance from
     the window in the coffee-room, and read diligently last week’s Bell’s Weekly
     Messenger.  My reading, however, was nothing.  I do not suppose I comprehended the
     simplest paragraph.  My thoughts were away, and I watched the clock slowly turning towards the
     hour when Ellen was to call.  I foresaw that I should not be able to speak to her at the inn. 
     If I have anything particular to say to anybody, I can always say it so much better out of
     doors.  I dreaded the confinement of the room, and the necessity for looking into her face. 
     Under the sky, and in motion, I should be more at liberty.  At last eleven struck from the
     church in the square, and five minutes afterwards the waiter entered to announce Mrs. Butts.  I
     was therefore right, and she was “E. B.”  I was sure that I should not be recognised.  Since I
     saw her last I had grown a beard, my hair had got a little grey, and she was always a little
     short-sighted.  She came in, and as she entered she put away over her bonnet her thick black
     veil.  Not ten seconds passed before she was seated on the opposite side of the table to that
     on which I was sitting, but I re-read in her during those ten seconds the whole history of
     years.  I cannot say that externally she looked worn or broken.  I had imagined that I should
     see her undone with her great troubles, but to some extent, and yet not altogether, I was
     mistaken.  The cheek-bones were more prominent than of old, and her dark-brown hair drawn
     tightly over her forehead increased the clear paleness of the face; the just perceptible tint
     of colour which I recollect being now altogether withdrawn.  But she was not haggard, and
     evidently not vanquished.  There was even a gaiety on her face, perhaps a trifle enforced, and
     although the darkness of sorrow gleamed behind it, the sorrow did not seem to be ultimate, but
     to be in front of a final background, if not of joy, at least of resignation.  Her ancient
     levity of manner had vanished, or at most had left nothing but a trace.  I thought I detected
     it here and there in a line about the mouth, and perhaps in her walk.  There was a reminiscence
     of it too in her clothes.  Notwithstanding poverty and distress, the old neatness—that
     particular care which used to charm me so when I was little more than a child, was there
     still.  I was always susceptible to this virtue, and delicate hands and feet, with delicate
     care bestowed thereon, were more attractive to me than slovenly beauty.  I noticed that the
     gloves, though mended, fitted with the same precision, and that her dress was unwrinkled and
     perfectly graceful.  Whatever she might have had to endure, it had not destroyed that
     self-centred satisfaction which makes life tolerable.
I was impelled at once to say that I had to beg her pardon for asking her there. 
     Unfortunately I was obliged to go over to Cowston, a village which was about three miles from
     the town.  Perhaps she would not mind walking part of the way with me through the meadows, and
     then we could talk with more freedom, as I should not feel pressed for time.  To this
     arrangement she at once agreed, and dropping her thick veil over her face, we went out.  In a
     few minutes we were clear of the houses, and I began the conversation.
“Have you been in the habit of teaching?”
“No.  The necessity for taking to it has only lately arisen.”
“What can you teach?”
“Not much beyond what children of ten or eleven years old are expected to know; but I could
     take charge of them entirely.”
“Have you any children of your own?”
“One.”
“Could you take a situation as resident teacher if you have a child?”
“I must get something to do, and if I can make no arrangement by which my child can live with
     me, I shall try and place her with a friend.  I may be able to hear of some appointment as a
     daily governess.”
“I should have thought that in your native town you would have been easily able to find
     employment—you must be well known?”
There was a pause, and after a moment or so she said:—
“We were well known once, but we went abroad and lost all our money.  My husband died
     abroad.  When I returned, I found that there was very little which my friends could do for me. 
     I am not accomplished, and there are crowds of young women who are more capable than I am. 
     Moreover, I saw that I was becoming a burden, and people called on me rather as a matter of
     duty than for any other reason.  You don’t know how soon all but the very best insensibly
     neglect very poor relatives if they are not gifted or attractive.  I do not wonder at being
     made to feel this, nor do I blame anybody.  My little girl is a cripple, my rooms are dull, and
     I have nothing in me with which to amuse or entertain visitors.  Pardon my going into this
     detail.  It was necessary to say something in order to explain my position.”
“May I ask what salary you will require if you live in the house?”
“Five-and-thirty pounds a year, but I might take less if I were asked to do so.”
“Are you a member of the Church of England?”
“No.”
“To what religious body do you belong?”
“I am an Independent, but I would go to Church if my employers wished it.”
“I thought the Independents objected to go to Church.”
“They do; but I should not object, if I could hear anything at the Church which would help
     me.”
“I am rather surprised at your indifference.”
“I was once more particular, but I have seen much suffering, and some things which were
     important to me are not so now, and others which were not important have become so.”
I then made up a little story.  My sister and I lived together.  We were about to take up our
     abode at Cowston, but were as yet strangers to it.  I was left a widower with two little
     children whom my sister could not educate, as she could not spare the time.  She would
     naturally have selected the governess herself, but she was at some distance.  She would like to
     see Mrs. Butts before engaging her finally, but she thought that as this advertisement
     presented itself, I might make some preliminary inquiries.  Perhaps, however, now that Mrs.
     Butts knew the facts, she would object to living in the house.  I put it in this way, feeling
     sure that she would catch my meaning.
“I am afraid that this situation will not suit me.  I could not go backwards and forwards so
     far every day.”
“I understand you perfectly, and feared that this would be your decision.  But if you
     hesitate, I can give you the best of references.  I had not thought of that before.  References
     of course will be required by you as well as by me.”
I put my hand in my pocket for my pocket-book, but I could not find it.  We had now reached a
     part of our road familiar enough to both of us.  Along that very path Ellen and I had walked
     years ago.  Under those very trees, on that very seat had we sat, and she and I were there
     again.  All the old confidences, confessions, tendernesses, rushed upon me.  What is there
     which is more potent than the recollection of past love to move us to love, and knit love with
     closest bonds?  Can we ever cease to love the souls who have once shared all that we know and
     feel?  Can we ever be indifferent to those who have our secrets, and whose secrets we hold?  As
     I looked at her, I remembered what she knew about me, and what I knew about her, and this
     simple thought so overmastered me, that I could hold out no longer.  I said to her that if she
     would like to rest for one moment, I might be able to find my papers.  We sat down together,
     and she drew up her veil to read the address which I was about to give her.  She glanced at me,
     as I thought, with a strange expression of excited interrogation, and something swiftly passed
     across her face, which warned me that I had not a moment to lose.  I took out one of my own
     cards, handed it to her, and said, “Here is a reference which perhaps you may know.”  She bent
     over it, turned to me, fixed her eyes intently and directly on mine for one moment, and then I
     thought she would have fallen.  My arm was around her in an instant, her head was on my
     shoulder, and my many wanderings were over.  It was broad, high, sunny noon, the most solitary
     hour of the daylight in those fields.  We were roused by the distant sound of the town clock
     striking twelve; we rose and went on together to Cowston by the river bank, returning late in
     the evening.
</div></body></text></TEI>