<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Mark Rutherford's Deliverance, by Mark Rutherford</title><author>White, William Hale (1831-1913).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1885</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII FLAGELLUM NON APPROQUINABIT TABERNACULO TUO
I suppose that the reason why in novels the story ends with a marriage is partly
     that the excitement of the tale ceases then, and partly also because of a theory that marriage
     is an epoch, determining the career of life after it.  The epoch once announced, nothing more
     need be explained; everything else follows as a matter of course.  These notes of mine are
     autobiographical, and not a romance.  I have never known much about epochs.  I have had one or
     two, one specially when I first began to read and think; but after that, if I have changed, it
     has been slowly and imperceptibly.  My life, therefore, is totally unfitted to be the basis of
     fiction.  My return to Ellen, and our subsequent marriage, were only partially an epoch.  A
     change had come, but it was one which had long been preparing.  Ellen’s experiences had altered
     her position, and mine too was altered.  She had been driven into religion by trouble, and
     knowing nothing of criticism or philosophy, retained the old forms for her religious feeling. 
     But the very quickness of her emotion caused her to welcome all new and living modes of
     expressing it.  It is only when feeling has ceased to accompany a creed that it becomes fixed,
     and verbal departures from it are counted heresy.  I too cared less for argument, and it even
     gave me pleasure to talk in her dialect, so familiar to me, but for so many years unused.
It was now necessary for me to add to my income.  I had nothing upon which to depend save my
     newspaper, which was obviously insufficient.  At last, I succeeded in obtaining some clerical
     employment.  For no other work was I fit, for my training had not been special in any one
     direction.  My hours were long, from ten in the morning till seven in the evening, and as I was
     three miles distant from the office, I was really away from home for eleven hours every day,
     excepting on Sundays.  I began to calculate that my life consisted of nothing but the brief
     spaces allowed to me for rest, and these brief spaces I could not enjoy because I dwelt upon
     their brevity.  There was some excuse for me.  Never could there be any duty incumbent upon man
     much more inhuman and devoid of interest than my own.  How often I thought about my friend
     Clark, and his experiences became mine.  The whole day I did nothing but write, and what I
     wrote called forth no single faculty of the mind.  Nobody who has not tried such an occupation
     can possibly forecast the strange habits, humours, fancies, and diseases which after a time it
     breeds.  I was shut up in a room half below the ground.  In this room were three other men
     besides myself, two of them between fifty and sixty, and one about three or four-and-twenty. 
     All four of us kept books or copied letters from ten to seven, with an interval of
     three-quarters of an hour for dinner.  In all three of these men, as in the case of Clark’s
     companions, there had been developed, partly I suppose by the circumstance of enforced idleness
     of brain, the most loathsome tendency to obscenity.  This was the one subject which was common
     ground, and upon which they could talk.  It was fostered too by a passion for beer, which was
     supplied by the publican across the way, who was perpetually travelling to and fro with cans. 
     My horror when I first found out into what society I was thrust was unspeakable.  There was a
     clock within a hundred yards of my window which struck the hours and quarters.  How I watched
     that clock!  My spirits rose or fell with each division of the day.  From ten to twelve there
     was nothing but gloom.  By half-past twelve I began to discern dinner time, and the prospect
     was brighter.  After dinner there was nothing to be done but doggedly to endure until five, and
     at five I was able to see over the distance from five to seven.  My disgust at my companions,
     however, came to be mixed with pity.  I found none of them cruel, and I received many little
     kindnesses from them.  I discovered that their trade was largely answerable for the impurity of
     thought and speech which so shocked me.  Its monotony compelled some countervailing stimulus,
     and as they had never been educated to care for anything in particular, they found the
     necessary relief in sensuality.  At first they “chaffed” and worried me a good deal because of
     my silence, but at last they began to think I was “religious,” and then they ceased to torment
     me.  I rather encouraged them in the belief that I had a right to exemption from their
     conversation, and I passed, I believe, for a Plymouth brother.  The only thing which they could
     not comprehend was that I made no attempt to convert them.
The whole establishment was under the rule of a deputy-manager, who was the terror of the
     place.  He was tall, thin, and suffered occasionally from spitting of blood, brought on no
     doubt from excitement.  He was the strangest mixture of exactitude and passion.  He had
     complete mastery over every detail of the business, and he never blundered.  All his work was
     thorough, down to the very bottom, and he had the most intolerant hatred of everything which
     was loose and inaccurate.  He never passed a day without flaming out into oaths and curses
     against his subordinates, and they could not say in his wildest fury that his ravings were
     beside the mark.  He was wrong in his treatment of men—utterly wrong—but his facts were always
     correct.  I never saw anybody hated as he was, and the hatred against him was the more intense
     because nobody could convict him of a mistake.  He seemed to enjoy a storm, and knew nothing
     whatever of the constraints which with ordinary men prevent abusive and brutal language to
     those around them.  Some of his clerks suffered greatly from him, and he almost broke down two
     or three from the constant nervous strain upon them produced by fear of his explosions.  For my
     own part, although I came in for a full share of his temper, I at once made up my mind as soon
     as I discovered what he was, not to open my lips to him except under compulsion.  My one object
     now was to get a living.  I wished also to avoid the self-mortification which must ensue from
     altercation.  I dreaded, as I have always dreaded beyond what I can tell, the chaos and wreck
     which, with me, follows subjugation by anger, and I held to my resolve under all provocation. 
     It was very difficult, but how many times I have blessed myself for adhesion to it.  Instead of
     going home undone with excitement, and trembling with fear of dismissal, I have walked out of
     my dungeon having had to bite my lips till the blood came, but still conqueror, and with peace
     of mind.
Another stratagem of defence which I adopted at the office was never to betray to a soul
     anything about myself.  Nobody knew anything about me, whether I was married or single, where I
     lived, or what I thought upon a single subject of any importance.  I cut off my office life in
     this way from my life at home so completely that I was two selves, and my true self was not
     stained by contact with my other self.  It was a comfort to me to think the moment the clock
     struck seven that my second self died, and that my first self suffered nothing by having
     anything to do with it.  I was not the person who sat at the desk downstairs and endured the
     abominable talk of his colleagues and the ignominy of serving such a chief.  I knew nothing
     about him.  I was a citizen walking London streets; I had my opinions upon human beings and
     books; I was on equal terms with my friends; I was Ellen’s husband; I was, in short, a man.  By
     this scrupulous isolation, I preserved myself, and the clerk was not debarred from the domain
     of freedom.
It is very terrible to think that the labour by which men are to live should be of this
     order.  The ideal of labour is that it should be something in which we can take an interest and
     even a pride.  Immense masses of it in London are the merest slavery, and it is as mechanical
     as the daily journey of the omnibus horse.  There is no possibility of relieving it, and all
     the ordinary copybook advice of moralists and poets as to the temper in which we should earn
     our bread is childish nonsense.  If a man is a painter, or a physician, or a barrister, or even
     a tradesman, well and good.  The maxims of authors may be of some service to him, and he may be
     able to exemplify them; but if he is a copying clerk they are an insult, and he can do nothing
     but arch his back to bear his burden and find some compensation elsewhere.  True it is, that
     beneficent Nature here, as always, is helpful.  Habit, after a while, mitigated much of the
     bitterness of destiny.  The hard points of the flint became smoothed and worn away by perpetual
     tramping over them, so that they no longer wounded with their original sharpness; and the sole
     of the foot was in time provided with a merciful callosity.  Then, too, there was developed an
     appetite which was voracious for all that was best.  Who shall tell the revulsion on reaching
     home, which I should never have known had I lived a life of idleness!  Ellen was fond of
     hearing me read, and with a little care I was able to select what would bear reading—dramas,
     for example.  She liked the reading for the reading’s sake, and she liked to know that what I
     thought was communicated to her; that she was not excluded from the sphere in which I lived. 
     Of the office she never heard a word, and I never would tell her anything about it; but there
     was scarcely a single book in my possession which could be read aloud, that we did not go
     through together in this way.  I don’t prescribe this kind of life to everybody.  Some of my
     best friends, I know, would find it intolerable, but it suited us.  Philosophy and religion I
     did not touch.  It was necessary to choose themes with varying human interest, such as the best
     works of fiction, a play, or a poem; and these perhaps, on the whole, did me more good at that
     time than speculation.  Oh, how many times have I left my office humiliated by some silently
     endured outbreak on the part of my master, more galling because I could not put it aside as
     altogether gratuitous; and in less than an hour it was two miles away, and I was myself again. 
     If a man wants to know what the potency of love is, he must be a menial; he must be despised. 
     Those who are prosperous and courted cannot understand its power.  Let him come home after he
     has suffered what is far worse than hatred—the contempt of a superior, who knows that he can
     afford to be contemptuous, seeing that he can replace his slave at a moment’s notice.  Let him
     be trained by his tyrant to dwell upon the thought that he belongs to the vast crowd of people
     in London who are unimportant; almost useless; to whom it is a charity to offer employment; who
     are conscious of possessing no gift which makes them of any value to anybody, and he will then
     comprehend the divine efficacy of the affection of that woman to whom he is dear.  God’s mercy
     be praised ever more for it!  I cannot write poetry, but if I could, no theme would tempt me
     like that of love to such a person as I was—not love, as I say again, to the hero, but love to
     the Helot.  Over and over again, when I have thought about it, I have felt my poor heart swell
     with a kind of uncontrollable fervour.  I have often, too, said to myself that this love is no
     delusion.  If we were to set it down as nothing more than a merciful cheat on the part of the
     Creator, however pleasant it might be, it would lose its charm.  If I were to think that my
     wife’s devotion to me is nothing more than the simple expression of a necessity to love
     somebody, that there is nothing in me which justifies such devotion, I should be miserable. 
     Rather, I take it, is the love of woman to man a revelation of the relationship in which God
     stands to him—of what ought to be, in fact.  In the love of a woman to the man who is
     of no account God has provided us with a true testimony of what is in His own heart.  I often
     felt this when looking at myself and at Ellen.  “What is there in me?” I have said, “is she not
     the victim of some self-created deception?” and I was wretched till I considered that in her I
     saw the Divine Nature itself, and that her passion was a stream straight from the Highest.  The
     love of woman is, in other words, a living witness never failing of an actuality in God which
     otherwise we should never know.  This led me on to connect it with Christianity; but I am
     getting incoherent and must stop.
My employment now was so incessant, for it was still necessary that I should write for my
     newspaper—although my visits to the House of Commons had perforce ceased—that I had no time for
     any schemes or dreams such as those which had tormented me when I had more leisure.  In one
     respect this was a blessing.  Destiny now had prescribed for me.  I was no longer agitated by
     ignorance of what I ought to do.  My present duty was obviously to get my own living, and
     having got that, I could do little besides save continue the Sundays with M’Kay.
We were almost entirely alone.  We had no means of making any friends.  We had no money, and
     no gifts of any kind.  We were neither of us witty nor attractive, but I have often wondered,
     nevertheless, what it was which prevented us from obtaining acquaintance with persons who
     thronged to houses in which I could see nothing worth a twopenny omnibus fare.  Certain it is,
     that we went out of our way sometimes to induce people to call upon us whom we thought we
     should like; but, if they came once or twice, they invariably dropped off, and we saw no more
     of them.  This behaviour was so universal that, without the least affectation, I acknowledge
     there must be something repellent in me, but what it is I cannot tell.  That Ellen was the
     cause of the general aversion, it is impossible to believe.  The only theory I have is, that
     partly owing to a constant sense of fatigue, due to imperfect health, and partly to chafing
     irritation at mere gossip, although I had no power to think of anything better, or say anything
     better myself, I was avoided both by the commonplace and those who had talent.  Commonplace
     persons avoided me because I did not chatter, and persons of talent because I stood for
     nothing.  “There was nothing in me.”  We met at M’Kay’s two gentlemen whom we thought we might
     invite to our house.  One of them was an antiquarian.  He had discovered in an excavation in
     London some Roman remains.  This had led him on to the study of the position and boundaries of
     the Roman city.  He had become an authority upon this subject, and had lectured upon it.  He
     came; but as we were utterly ignorant, and could not, with all our efforts, manifest any
     sympathy which he valued at the worth of a pin, he soon departed, and departed for ever.  The
     second was a student of Elizabethan literature, and I rashly concluded at once that he must be
     most delightful.  He likewise came.  I showed him my few poor books, which he condemned, and I
     found that such observations as I could make he considered as mere twaddle.  I knew nothing, or
     next to nothing, about the editions or the curiosities, or the proposed emendations of obscure
     passages, and he, too, departed abruptly.  I began to think after he had gone that my study of
     Shakespeare was mere dilettantism but I afterwards came to the conclusion that if a man wishes
     to spoil himself for Shakespeare, the best thing he can do is to turn Shakespearian critic.
My worst enemy at this time was ill health, and it was more distressing than it otherwise
     would have been, because I had such responsibilities upon me.  When I lived alone I knew that
     if anything should happen to me it would be of no particular consequence, but now whenever I
     felt sick I was anxious on account of Ellen.  What would become of her—this was the thought
     which kept me awake night after night when the terrors of depression were upon me, as they
     often were.  But still, terrors with growing years had lost their ancient strength.  My brain
     and nerves were quiet compared with what they were in times gone by, and I had gradually
     learned the blessed lesson which is taught by familiarity with sorrow, that the greater part of
     what is dreadful in it lies in the imagination.  The true Gorgon head is seldom seen in
     reality.  That it exists I do not doubt, but it is not so commonly visible as we think.  Again,
     as we get older we find that all life is given us on conditions of uncertainty, and yet we walk
     courageously on.  The labourer marries and has children, when there is nothing but his own
     strength between him and ruin.  A million chances are encountered every day, and any one of the
     million accidents which might happen would cripple him or kill him, and put into the workhouse
     those who depend upon him.  Yet he treads his path undisturbed.  Life to all of us is a narrow
     plank placed across a gulf, which yawns on either side, and if we were perpetually looking down
     into it we should fall.  So at last, the possibility of disaster ceased to affright me.  I had
     been brought off safely so many times when destruction seemed imminent, that I grew hardened,
     and lay down quietly at night, although the whim of a madman might to-morrow cast me on the
     pavement.  Frequently, as I have said, I could not do this, but I strove to do it, and was able
     to do it when in health.
I tried to think about nothing which expressed whatever in the world may be insoluble or
     simply tragic.  A great change is just beginning to come over us in this respect.  So many
     books I find are written which aim merely at new presentation of the hopeless.  The
     contradictions of fate, the darkness of death, the fleeting of man over this brief stage of
     existence, whence we know not, and whither we know not, are favourite subjects with writers who
     seem to think that they are profound, because they can propose questions which cannot be
     answered.  There is really more strength of mind required for resolving the commonest
     difficulty than is necessary for the production of poems on these topics.  The characteristic
     of so much that is said and written now is melancholy; and it is melancholy, not because of any
     deeper acquaintance with the secrets of man than that which was possessed by our forefathers,
     but because it is easy to be melancholy, and the time lacks strength.
As I am now setting down, without much order or connection, the lessons which I had to learn,
     I may perhaps be excused if I add one or two others.  I can say of them all, that they are not
     book lessons.  They have been taught me by my own experience, and as a rule I have always found
     that in my own most special perplexities I got but little help from books or other persons.  I
     had to find out for myself what was for me the proper way of dealing with them.
My love for Ellen was great, but I discovered that even such love as this could not be left
     to itself.  It wanted perpetual cherishing.  The lamp, if it was to burn brightly, required
     daily trimming, for people became estranged and indifferent, not so much by open quarrel or
     serious difference, as by the intervention of trifles which need but the smallest, although
     continuous effort for their removal.  The true wisdom is to waste no time over them, but to
     eject them at once.  Love, too, requires that the two persons who love one another shall
     constantly present to one another what is best in them, and to accomplish this, deliberate
     purpose, and even struggle, are necessary.  If through relapse into idleness we do not attempt
     to bring soul and heart into active communion day by day, what wonder if this once exalted
     relationship become vulgar and mean?
I was much overworked.  It was not the work itself which was such a trial, but the time it
     consumed.  At best, I had but a clear space of an hour, or an hour and a half at home, and to
     slave merely for this seemed such a mockery!  Day after day sped swiftly by, made up of nothing
     but this infernal drudgery, and I said to myself—Is this life?  But I made up my mind that
      never would I give myself tongue.  I clapped a muzzle on my mouth.  Had I followed my
     own natural bent, I should have become expressive about what I had to endure, but I found that
     expression reacts on him who expresses and intensifies what is expressed.  If we break out into
     rhetoric over a toothache, the pangs are not the easier, but the worse to be borne.
I naturally contracted a habit of looking forward from the present moment to one beyond.  The
     whole week seemed to exist for the Sunday.  On Monday morning I began counting the hours till
     Sunday should arrive.  The consequence was, that when it came, it was not enjoyed properly, and
     I wasted it in noting the swiftness of its flight.  Oh, how absurd is man!  If we were to
     reckon up all the moments which we really enjoy for their own sake, how few should we find them
     to be!  The greatest part, far the greatest part, of our lives is spent in dreaming over the
     morrow, and when it comes, it, too, is consumed in the anticipation of a brighter morrow, and
     so the cheat is prolonged, even to the grave.  This tendency, unconquerable though it may
     appear to be, can to a great extent at any rate, be overcome by strenuous discipline.  I tried
     to blind myself to the future, and many and many a time, as I walked along that dreary New Road
     or Old St. Pancras Road, have I striven to compel myself not to look at the image of Hampstead
     Heath or Regent’s Park, as yet six days in front of me, but to get what I could out of what was
     then with me.
The instinct which leads us perpetually to compare what we are with what we might be is no
     doubt of enormous value, and is the spring which prompts all action, but, like every instinct,
     it is the source of greatest danger.  I remember the day and the very spot on which it flashed
     into me, like a sudden burst of the sun’s rays, that I had no right to this or that—to so much
     happiness, or even so much virtue.  What title-deeds could I show for such a right? 
     Straightway it seemed as if the centre of a whole system of dissatisfaction were removed, and
     as if the system collapsed.  God, creating from His infinite resources a whole infinitude of
     beings, had created me with a definite position on the scale, and that position only could I
     claim.  Cease the trick of contrast.  If I can by any means get myself to consider myself alone
     without reference to others, discontent will vanish.  I walk this Old St. Pancras Road on
     foot—another rides.  Keep out of view him who rides and all persons riding, and I shall not
     complain that I tramp in the wet.  So also when I think how small and weak I am.
How foolish it is to try and cure by argument what time will cure so completely and so gently
     if left to itself.  As I get older, the anxiety to prove myself right if I quarrel dies out.  I
     hold my tongue and time vindicates me, if it is possible to vindicate me, or convicts me if I
     am wrong.  Many and many a debate too which I have had with myself alone has been settled in
     the same way.  The question has been put aside and has lost its importance.  The ancient Church
     thought, and seriously enough, no doubt, that all the vital interests of humanity were bound up
     with the controversies upon the Divine nature; but the centuries have rolled on, and who cares
     for those controversies now.  The problems of death and immortality once upon a time haunted me
     so that I could hardly sleep for thinking about them.  I cannot tell how, but so it is, that at
     the present moment, when I am years nearer the end, they trouble me but very little.  If I
     could but bury and let rot things which torment me and come to no settlement—if I could always
     do this—what a blessing it would be.
</div></body></text></TEI>