<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Mark Rutherford's Deliverance, by Mark Rutherford</title><author>White, William Hale (1831-1913).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1885</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II M’KAY
It was foggy and overcast as we walked home to Goodge Street.  The churches and
     chapels were emptying themselves, but the great mass of the population had been “nowhere.”  I
     had dinner with M’Kay, and as the day wore on the fog thickened.  London on a dark Sunday
     afternoon, more especially about Goodge Street, is depressing.  The inhabitants drag themselves
     hither and thither in languor and uncertainty.  Small mobs loiter at the doors of the gin
     palaces.  Costermongers wander aimlessly, calling “walnuts” with a cry so melancholy that it
     sounds as the wail of the hopelessly lost may be imagined to sound when their anguish has been
     deadened by the monotony of a million years.
About two or three o’clock decent working men in their best clothes emerge from the houses in
     such streets as Nassau Street.  It is part of their duty to go out after dinner on Sunday with
     the wife and children.  The husband pushes the perambulator out of the dingy passage, and gazes
     doubtfully this way and that way, not knowing whither to go, and evidently longing for the
     Monday, when his work, however disagreeable it may be, will be his plain duty.  The wife
     follows carrying a child, and a boy and girl in unaccustomed apparel walk by her side.  They
     come out into Mortimer Street.  There are no shops open; the sky over their heads is mud, the
     earth is mud under their feet, the muddy houses stretch in long rows, black, gaunt, uniform. 
     The little party reach Hyde Park, also wrapped in impenetrable mud-grey.  The man’s face
     brightens for a moment as he says, “It is time to go back,” and so they return, without the
     interchange of a word, unless perhaps they happen to see an omnibus horse fall down on the
     greasy stones.  What is there worth thought or speech on such an expedition?  Nothing!  The
     tradesman who kept the oil and colour establishment opposite to us was not to be tempted
     outside.  It was a little more comfortable than Nassau Street, and, moreover, he was religious
     and did not encourage Sabbath-breaking.  He and his family always moved after their mid-day
     Sabbath repast from the little back room behind the shop up to what they called the
     drawing-room overhead.  It was impossible to avoid seeing them every time we went to the
     window.  The father of the family, after his heavy meal, invariably sat in the easy-chair with
     a handkerchief over his eyes and slept.  The children were always at the windows, pretending to
     read books, but in reality watching the people below.  At about four o’clock their papa
     generally awoke, and demanded a succession of hymn tunes played on the piano.  When the weather
     permitted, the lower sash was opened a little, and the neighbours were indulged with the
     performance of “Vital Spark,” the father “coming in” now and then with a bass note or two at
     the end where he was tolerably certain of the harmony.  At five o’clock a prophecy of the
     incoming tea brought us some relief from the contemplation of the landscape or brick-scape.  I
     say “some relief,” for meals at M’Kay’s were a little disagreeable.  His wife was an honest,
     good little woman, but so much attached to him and so dependent on him that she was his mere
     echo.  She had no opinions which were not his, and whenever he said anything which went beyond
     the ordinary affairs of the house, she listened with curious effort, and generally responded by
     a weakened repetition of M’Kay’s own observations.  He perpetually, therefore, had before him
     an enfeebled reflection of himself, and this much irritated him, notwithstanding his love for
     her; for who could help loving a woman who, without the least hesitation, would have opened her
     veins at his command, and have given up every drop of blood in her body for him?  Over and over
     again I have heard him offer some criticism on a person or event, and the customary chime of
     approval would ensue, provoking him to such a degree that he would instantly contradict himself
     with much bitterness, leaving poor Mrs. M’Kay in much perplexity.  Such a shot as this
     generally reduced her to timid silence.  As a rule, he always discouraged any topic at his
     house which was likely to serve as an occasion for showing his wife’s dependence on him.  He
     designedly talked about her household affairs, asked her whether she had mended his clothes and
     ordered the coals.  She knew that these things were not what was upon his mind, and she
     answered him in despairing tones, which showed how much she felt the obtrusive condescension to
     her level.  I greatly pitied her, and sometimes, in fact, my emotion at the sight of her
     struggles with her limitations almost overcame me and I was obliged to get up and go.  She was
     childishly affectionate.  If M’Kay came in and happened to go up to her and kiss her, her face
     brightened into the sweetest and happiest smile.  I recollect once after he had been unusually
     annoyed with her he repented just as he was leaving home, and put his lips to her head, holding
     it in both his hands.  I saw her gently take the hand from her forehead and press it to her
     mouth, the tears falling down her cheek meanwhile.  Nothing would ever tempt her to admit
     anything against her husband.  M’Kay was violent and unjust at times.  His occupation he hated,
     and his restless repugnance to it frequently discharged itself indifferently upon everything
     which came in his way.  His children often thought him almost barbarous, but in truth he did
     not actually see them when he was in one of these moods.  What was really present with him,
     excluding everything else, was the sting of something more than usually repulsive of which they
     knew nothing.  Mrs. M’Kay’s answer to her children’s remonstrances when they were alone with
     her always was, “He is so worried,” and she invariably dwelt upon their faults which had given
     him the opportunity for his wrath.
I think M’Kay’s treatment of her wholly wrong.  I think that he ought not to have imposed
     himself upon her so imperiously.  I think he ought to have striven to ascertain what lay
     concealed in that modest heart, to have encouraged its expression and development, to have
     debased himself before her that she might receive courage to rise, and he would have found that
     she had something which he had not; not his something perhaps, but something which
     would have made his life happier.  As it was, he stood upon his own ground above her.  If she
     could reach him, well and good, if not, the helping hand was not proffered, and she fell back,
     hopeless.  Later on he discovered his mistake.  She became ill very gradually, and M’Kay began
     to see in the distance a prospect of losing her.  A frightful pit came in view.  He became
     aware that he could not do without her.  He imagined what his home would have been with other
     women whom he knew, and he confessed that with them he would have been less contented.  He
     acknowledged that he had been guilty of a kind of criminal epicurism; that he rejected in
     foolish, fatal, nay, even wicked indifference, the bread of life upon which he might have lived
     and thriven.  His whole effort now was to suppress himself in his wife.  He read to her, a
     thing he never did before, and when she misunderstood, he patiently explained; he took her into
     his counsels and asked her opinion; he abandoned his own opinion for hers, and in the presence
     of her children he always deferred to her, and delighted to acknowledge that she knew more than
     he did, that she was right and he was wrong.  She was now confined to her house, and the end
     was near, but this was the most blessed time of her married life.  She grew under the soft rain
     of his loving care, and opened out, not, indeed, into an oriental flower, rich in profound
     mystery of scent and colour, but into a blossom of the chalk-down.  Altogether concealed and
     closed she would have remained if it had not been for this beneficent and heavenly gift poured
     upon her.  He had just time enough to see what she really was, and then she died.  There are
     some natures that cannot unfold under pressure or in the presence of unregarding power.  Hers
     was one.  They require a clear space round them, the removal of everything which may overmaster
     them, and constant delicate attention.  They require too a recognition of the fact, which M’Kay
     for a long time did not recognise, that it is folly to force them and to demand of them that
     they shall be what they cannot be.  I stood by the grave this morning of my poor, pale,
     clinging little friend now for some years at peace, and I thought that the tragedy of
     Promethean torture or Christ-like crucifixion may indeed be tremendous, but there is a tragedy
     too in the existence of a soul like hers, conscious of its feebleness and ever striving to
     overpass it, ever aware that it is an obstacle to the return of the affection of the man whom
     she loves.
Meals, as I have said, were disagreeable at M’Kay’s, and when we wanted to talk we went out
     of doors.  The evening after our visit to the debating hall we moved towards Portland Place,
     and walked up and down there for an hour or more.  M’Kay had a passionate desire to reform the
     world.  The spectacle of the misery of London, and of the distracted swaying hither and thither
     of the multitudes who inhabit it, tormented him incessantly.  He always chafed at it, and he
     never seemed sure that he had a right to the enjoyment of the simplest pleasures so long as
     London was before him.  What a farce, he would cry, is all this poetry, philosophy, art, and
     culture, when millions of wretched mortals are doomed to the eternal darkness and crime of the
     city!  Here are the educated classes occupying themselves with exquisite emotions, with
     speculations upon the Infinite, with addresses to flowers, with the worship of waterfalls and
     flying clouds, and with the incessant portraiture of a thousand moods and variations of love,
     while their neighbours lie grovelling in the mire, and never know anything more of life or its
     duties than is afforded them by a police report in a bit of newspaper picked out of the
     kennel.  We went one evening to hear a great violin-player, who played such music, and so
     exquisitely, that the limits of life were removed.  But we had to walk up the Haymarket home,
     between eleven and twelve o’clock, and the violin-playing became the merest trifling.  M’Kay
     had been brought up upon the Bible.  He had before him, not only there, but in the history of
     all great religious movements, a record of the improvement of the human race, or of large
     portions of it, not merely by gradual civilisation, but by inspiration spreading itself
     suddenly.  He could not get it out of his head that something of this kind is possible again in
     our time.  He longed to try for himself in his own poor way in one of the slums about Drury
     Lane.  I sympathised with him, but I asked him what he had to say.  I remember telling him that
     I had been into St. Paul’s Cathedral, and that I pictured to myself the cathedral full, and
     myself in the pulpit.  I was excited while imagining the opportunity offered me of delivering
     some message to three or four thousand persons in such a building, but in a minute or two I
     discovered that my sermon would be very nearly as follows: “Dear friends, I know no more than
     you know; we had better go home.”  I admitted to him that if he could believe in hell-fire, or
     if he could proclaim the Second Advent, as Paul did to the Thessalonians, and get people to
     believe, he might change their manners, but otherwise he could do nothing but resort to a much
     slower process.  With the departure of a belief in the supernatural departs once and for ever
     the chance of regenerating the race except by the school and by science. [2]  However, M’Kay thought he would try.  His earnestness was
     rather a hindrance than a help to him, for it prevented his putting certain important questions
     to himself, or at any rate it prevented his waiting for distinct answers.  He recurred to the
     apostles and Bunyan, and was convinced that it was possible even now to touch depraved men and
     women with an idea which should recast their lives.  So it is that the main obstacle to our
     success is a success which has preceded us.  We instinctively follow the antecedent form, and
     consequently we either pass by, or deny altogether, the life of our own time, because its
     expression has changed.  We never do practically believe that the Messiah is not incarnated
     twice in the same flesh.  He came as Jesus, and we look for Him as Jesus now, overlooking the
     manifestation of to-day, and dying, perhaps, without recognising it.
M’Kay had found a room near Parker Street, Drury Lane, in which he proposed to begin, and
     that night, as we trod the pavement of Portland Place, he propounded his plans to me, I
     listening without much confidence, but loth nevertheless to take the office of Time upon
     myself, and to disprove what experience would disprove more effectually.  His object was
     nothing less than gradually to attract Drury Lane to come and be saved.
The first Sunday I went with him to the room.  As we walked over the Drury Lane gratings of
     the cellars a most foul stench came up, and one in particular I remember to this day.  A man
     half dressed pushed open a broken window beneath us, just as we passed by, and there issued
     such a blast of corruption, made up of gases bred by filth, air breathed and rebreathed a
     hundred times, charged with odours of unnameable personal uncleanness and disease, that I
     staggered to the gutter with a qualm which I could scarcely conquer.  At the doors of the
     houses stood grimy women with their arms folded and their hair disordered.  Grimier boys and
     girls had tied a rope to broken railings, and were swinging on it.  The common door to a score
     of lodgings stood ever open, and the children swarmed up and down the stairs carrying with them
     patches of mud every time they came in from the street.  The wholesome practice which amongst
     the decent poor marks off at least one day in the week as a day on which there is to be a
     change; when there is to be some attempt to procure order and cleanliness; a day to be preceded
     by soap and water, by shaving, and by as many clean clothes as can be procured, was unknown
     here.  There was no break in the uniformity of squalor; nor was it even possible for any single
     family to emerge amidst such altogether suppressive surroundings.  All self-respect, all effort
     to do anything more than to satisfy somehow the grossest wants, had departed.  The shops were
     open; most of them exhibiting a most miscellaneous collection of goods, such as bacon cut in
     slices, fire-wood, a few loaves of bread, and sweetmeats in dirty bottles.  Fowls, strange to
     say, black as the flagstones, walked in and out of these shops, or descended into the dark
     areas.  The undertaker had not put up his shutters.  He had drawn down a yellow blind, on which
     was painted a picture of a suburban cemetery.  Two funerals, the loftiest effort of his craft,
     were depicted approaching the gates.  When the gas was alight behind the blind, an effect was
     produced which was doubtless much admired.  He also displayed in his window a model coffin, a
     work of art.  It was about a foot long, varnished, studded with little brass nails, and on the
     lid was fastened a rustic cross stretching from end to end.  The desire to decorate existence
     in some way or other with more or less care is nearly universal.  The most sensual and the
     meanest almost always manifest an indisposition to be content with mere material satisfaction. 
     I have known selfish, gluttonous, drunken men spend their leisure moments in trimming a bed of
     scarlet geraniums, and the vulgarest and most commonplace of mortals considers it a necessity
     to put a picture in the room or an ornament on the mantelpiece.  The instinct, even in its
     lowest forms, is divine.  It is the commentary on the text that man shall not live by bread
     alone.  It is evidence of an acknowledged compulsion—of which art is the highest
     manifestation—to escape.  In the alleys behind Drury Lane this instinct, the very salt
     of life, was dead, crushed out utterly, a symptom which seemed to me ominous, and even awful to
     the last degree.  The only house in which it survived was in that of the undertaker, who
     displayed the willows, the black horses, and the coffin.  These may have been nothing more than
     an advertisement, but from the care with which the cross was elaborated, and the neatness with
     which it was made to resemble a natural piece of wood, I am inclined to believe that the man
     felt some pleasure in his work for its own sake, and that he was not utterly submerged.  The
     cross in such dens as these, or, worse than dens, in such sewers!  If it be anything, it is a
     symbol of victory, of power to triumph over resistance, and even death.  Here was nothing but
     sullen subjugation, the most grovelling slavery, mitigated only by a tendency to mutiny.  Here
     was a strength of circumstance to quell and dominate which neither Jesus nor Paul could have
     overcome—worse a thousandfold than Scribes or Pharisees, or any form of persecution.  The
     preaching of Jesus would have been powerless here; in fact, no known stimulus, nothing ever
     held up before men to stir the soul to activity, can do anything in the back streets of great
     cities so long as they are the cesspools which they are now.
We came to the room.  About a score of M’Kay’s own friends were there, and perhaps
     half-a-dozen outsiders, attracted by the notice which had been pasted on a board at the
     entrance.  M’Kay announced his errand.  The ignorance and misery of London he said were
     intolerable to him.  He could not take any pleasure in life when he thought upon them.  What
     could he do? that was the question.  He was not a man of wealth.  He could not buy up these
     hovels.  He could not force an entrance into them and persuade their inhabitants to improve
     themselves.  He had no talents wherewith to found a great organisation or create public
     opinion.  He had determined, after much thought, to do what he was now doing.  It was very
     little, but it was all he could undertake.  He proposed to keep this room open as a place to
     which those who wished might resort at different times, and find some quietude, instruction,
     and what fortifying thoughts he could collect to enable men to endure their almost unendurable
     sufferings.  He did not intend to teach theology.  Anything which would be serviceable he would
     set forth, but in the main he intended to rely on holding up the examples of those who were
     greater than ourselves and were our redeemers.  He meant to teach Christ in the proper sense of
     the word.  Christ now is admired probably more than He had ever been.  Everybody agrees to
     admire Him, but where are the people who really do what He did?  There is no religion
     now-a-days.  Religion is a mere literature.  Cultivated persons sit in their studies and write
     overflowingly about Jesus, or meet at parties and talk about Him; but He is not of much use to
     me unless I say to myself, how is it with thee? unless I myself become what He was. 
     This was the meaning of Jesus to the Apostle Paul.  Jesus was in him; he had put on Jesus; that
     is to say, Jesus lived in him like a second soul, taking the place of his own soul and
     directing him accordingly.  That was religion, and it is absurd to say that the English nation
     at this moment, or any section of it, is religious.  Its educated classes are inhabited by a
     hundred minds.  We are in a state of anarchy, each of us with a different aim and shaping
     himself according to a different type; while the uneducated classes are entirely given over to
     the “natural man.”  He was firmly persuaded that we need religion, poor and rich alike.  We
     need some controlling influence to bind together our scattered energies.  We do not know what
     we are doing.  We read one book one day and another book another day, but it is idle wandering
     to right and left; it is not advancing on a straight road.  It is not possible to bind
     ourselves down to a certain defined course, but still it is an enormous, an incalculable
     advantage for us to have some irreversible standard set up in us by which everything we meet is
     to be judged.  That is the meaning of the prophecy—whether it will ever be fulfilled God only
     knows—that Christ shall judge the world.  All religions have been this.  They have said that in
     the midst of the infinitely possible—infinitely possible evil and infinitely possible good
     too—we become distracted.  A thousand forces good and bad act upon us.  It is necessary, if we
     are to be men, if we are to be saved, that we should be rescued from this tumult, and that our
     feet should be planted upon a path.  His object, therefore, would be to preach Christ, as
     before said, and to introduce into human life His unifying influence.  He would try and get
     them to see things with the eyes of Christ, to love with His love, to judge with His judgment. 
     He believed Christ was fitted to occupy this place.  He deliberately chose Christ as worthy to
     be our central, shaping force.  He would try by degrees to prove this; to prove that Christ’s
     way of dealing with life is the best way, and so to create a genuinely Christian spirit, which,
     when any choice of conduct is presented to us, will prompt us to ask first of all, how
      would Christ have it? or, when men and things pass before us, will decide through him
     what we have to say about them.  M’Kay added that he hoped his efforts would not be confined to
     talking.  He trusted to be able, by means of this little meeting, gradually to gain admittance
     for himself and his friends into the houses of the poor and do some practical good.  At present
     he had no organisation and no plans.  He did not believe in organisation and plans preceding a
     clear conception of what was to be accomplished.  Such, as nearly as I can now recollect, is an
     outline of his discourse.  It was thoroughly characteristic of him.  He always talked in this
     fashion.  He was for ever insisting on the aimlessness of modern life, on the powerlessness of
     its vague activities to mould men into anything good, to restrain them from evil or moderate
     their passions, and he was possessed by a vision of a new Christianity which was to take the
     place of the old and dead theologies.  I have reported him in my own language.  He strove as
     much as he could to make his meaning plain to everybody.  Just before he finished, three or
     four out of the half-a-dozen outsiders who were present whistled with all their might and ran
     down the stairs shouting to one another.  As we went out they had collected about the door, and
     amused themselves by pushing one another against us, and kicking an old kettle behind us and
     amongst us all the way up the street, so that we were covered with splashes.  Mrs. M’Kay went
     with us, and when we reached home, she tried to say something about what she had heard.  The
     cloud came over her husband’s face at once; he remained silent for a minute, and getting up and
     going to the window, observed that it ought to be cleaned, and that he could hardly see the
     opposite house.  The poor woman looked distressed, and I was just about to come to her rescue
     by continuing what she had been saying, when she rose, not in anger, but in trouble, and went
     upstairs.
</div></body></text></TEI>