<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="37">
CHAPTER XXXVII NOT DEATH BUT LOVE
He looked up as they entered, knew them, and smiled, but could not speak. For many
      hours the pain had been intense; and though drenched with narcotics, he lay wide awake and
      conscious. Now he was lying supported with pillows on the low bed, his head resting in Colonel
      Valence's arms. It gave him a little relief to stay in this position. His father neither moved
      nor spoke, though on seeing Lord Trelingham a mist came over his eyes, and his lips quivered.
      Hippolyta, who was seated on the other side of the bed, came round and took the Earl's hand;
      she seemed not to observe the two that accompanied him. But when Lady May took the hand that
      was disengaged and pressed it warmly, she smiled without raising her eyes. Tom Davenant stood
      at the foot of the bed. He had a tired expression, not having slept the previous night and
      being more affected than he was aware at the sight of
       Ivor's sufferings. The chaplain, Don Ramiro, was likewise in the room, but they
      scarcely observed his presence, and he did not come forward.
'Give me something to drink,' said Ivor, 'not a sleeping-draught.' Hippolyta moistened his
      lips. 'Now let me sit up,' he went on, clenching his fingers like a man who is intent on some
      difficult task. The pillows were rearranged. It was slow work, for the least movement caused
      him exquisite agony. 'I wish I had more time,' he said, and he smiled a little, fixing his
      gaze, which was bright and clear, on Colonel Valence. 'Father,' he continued, 'will you not
      tell them who I am? Do they all know?'
'Too late, too late,' said his father; and then, turning to the Earl, 'Davenant, this is
      Alice's child. You know. He is the last, the youngest. His two sisters died when they were
      children, before he was born. Alice,—she is dead too. They are all gone, and Ivor did not know
      I was his father. I would never tell him. I did not want him to be a Davenant, to go back to
      his mother's people and their ways. But all is at an end.'
Lord Trelingham put forth a trembling hand. 'Can we be friends, Valence?' he said; 'it is
      forty-four years since we met. And Alice would wish us to forgive one another, for her child's
      sake.'
Colonel Valence touched the hand held out to him. 'Forty-four years!' he repeated, 'and
      Alice died when Ivor was born. He is not thirty-four. It
       is young to die, isn't it, my boy?' turning to his son.
'But I have lived,' was the contented answer. 'And I have all that I love around me. What
      more do I want?—Ah, there is one thing.' A shade of sadness came over his countenance.
'What is it?' said Colonel Valence, stooping to kiss him. 'I will do it. Only speak.'
The dying eyes, still bright, glanced towards Rupert. 'Do you remember,' said Ivor, trying
      not to seem over-agitated, 'the night you and I met my father in Denzil Lane?'
Rupert looked at him in surprise. 'Yes, Ivor,' he said; 'what of it?'
'I want father—to promise me—to be on my side, not on the other.' The words were slow in
      coming. Colonel Valence was silent. 'Promise me,' pleaded his son; 'I shall not die happy
      unless you promise.' The others, except Rupert, thought he was wandering.
'Ivor,' said the old man, with an evident struggle to keep down his feelings, 'do you want
      me to renounce the Revolution?'
'Oh no, it is not the Revolution I want you to renounce,' answered his son; 'only the
      counterfeit—the violence, the shedding blood for blood.' His voice failed him. Again Hippolyta
      moistened his lips; she stroked his cheek and smiled at him. The caress seemed to give him
      courage. 'You know, father,' he said, his strength returning as it sometimes will at the last,
      and his accents growing
       clear, 'when I was a boy you gave me to Mr. Mardol; and he taught me to have a
      feeling for every one, high as well as low. He believed in the victory of right—and you did
      once.'
'It was when Alice lived,' murmured his father, 'not after I lost her. Forty years ago—when
      I was younger than you—I believed that all would come right; that the world was made right.
      But my life is a ruin.'
'No, no,' cried Ivor; 'the old creed was the true one, when you believed in life and love.
      See, father, here is love. There will be life too. These are shadows. Somewhere there is the
      reality. Have I not overcome death?' His face glowed, and he saw Lady May looking at him.
      'Stand on my side, father. Trust in the good that comes out of suffering, of martyrdom, if you
      will. But do not deny the hope in which you had me brought up; do not harden your heart. It
      was always loving, I know. Hippolyta knows.'
'Listen to Ivor, father,' she said tremulously.
He looked long at them both. 'I will,' he said, and the tears ran down his cheeks.
'Now let me die,' said Ivor, sinking back. 'I did not think death could be so sweet. Rupert,
      good-bye. Tom, my dear fellow, Rupert will be your friend instead of me. I was very fond of
      you. And Lady May—' She was weeping silently. He closed his eyes and lay still. They waited
      for the coming of death, voiceless, recollected, as when
       a great storm is gathering in the distance. Not a leaf stirred at the window;
      the sunset light was streaming in. But there remained something else. He called Rupert
      faintly. 'When you go home,' he said, 'search in my desk. You will find'—how slowly the words
      drop from dying lips!-'find pages I have written—a diary. There is a secret in them. Read, but
      do not tell any one.' Rupert whispered assent. Another pause. 'May was my cousin,' his voice
      murmured more faintly, and a smile lit up the darkling eyes. 'May—Hippolyta—remember—' The
      voice failed altogether. He was gone. A great calm lay on the dead face.
·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·
They buried him outside the convent walls, in a sheltered nook by the stream. It was
      unconsecrated ground, and there was no burial service. 'Was your brother a Christian?'
      inquired Don Ramiro, when Hippolyta told him a little of their story, and asked what should be
      done. 'He was never baptized,' she said. 'Then he cannot lie in consecrated soil,' replied the
      priest. 'Never mind,' she said absently. He thought she was grieving over it, and he added
      with the kindness which was a part of him—for he was a feeling man—'But you need not distress
      yourself so much; all the land is consecrated; wherever he lies will be holy ground; it is
       la tierra de Maria Santisima , this Andalusia of ours.' She smiled and said nothing.
      She had no trouble on that account.

Another grave may be seen near Ivor's, which was dug only a few weeks after he had been laid
      to rest. It is that of Lord Trelingham. The shock of that terrible moment when he beheld his
      daughter flinging herself into the lake, proved more than his enfeebled frame could bear. One
      morning when he was called he did not answer. They entered his room; he was dead. The heart
      had stopped beating many hours, and his limbs were cold.
On the day of the funeral, when the clergyman summoned from Seville had read over the Earl
      of Trelingham that solemn service, musical and heart-subduing, which the Liturgy of the
      English Church has consecrated to the dead, Hippolyta sent for May and Rupert. They came in
      their deep mourning, which vied in colour with the religious habit she wore. Standing in the
      guest-room she said to them, 'You are leaving San Lucar, and I am setting out for India. We
      shall never meet again, until they come back to us'—she pointed towards the sheltered nook
      where the nightingales were singing, and the scattered rays of sunlight making their way in
      among the leaves. 'Never again,' she said. 'I have only one thing to ask. Rupert, you remember
      Annie Dauris.' He assented silently, and she continued, 'Annie Dauris was taken, and I am
      left; but God's mercies are infinite. What I had to say was this. Take care of her father and
      the children when you go home. Their mother died while I was at the convent. For my sake be
      good to Willie and Charlie; they are
       loving boys. Charlie has a talent for drawing. Let him be with you in the
      studio. That is all.' She held out her hands to both of them, gave them one last look of
      farewell, and went out of the room.
·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·
The new Earl of Trelingham does not live at the Court. It is shown to visitors, and the
      frescoes of the Great Hall have won universal admiration, and will hand down the artist's name
      to a late posterity. But since their return to England Tom Davenant is much with Rupert and
      his cousin. I fancy he will sooner or later accept the devotion of the Countess Lutenieff, and
      that Karina's one sincere and enduring affection will meet with its reward.
Lady May is an artist's wife, and seems to have forgotten that she was once an Earl's
      daughter. She is happy. Rupert's genius, chastened and glorified, promises to achieve greater
      things than ever; but he has deep thoughts which he does not share with any one.
Colonel Valence, reconciled to Lord Trelingham, returned after his death to Falside, and
      lives there a lonely man, but not altogether unhappy. He spends many hours near Lady Alice's
      tomb in the gray old churchyard by the sea, and they bring him strange thoughts. Faith? Ah no,
      he does not believe yet in divine realities, but in his ears the Percy motto,
       Espérance , seems often ringing. Hippolyta writes to him from the Far East, where
      she is fulfilling her vow.

Looking in at Rupert's studio one afternoon, the Duke of Adullam found him absorbed in
      Ivor's diary, with the picture of Hippolyta lying before him. Charlie Dauris, seated at the
      farther end of the room, was drawing and did not look up or attend to the conversation which
      ensued. The Duke recognised Ivor's handwriting. He asked about the portrait, and Rupert, who
      remembered the familiar interchange of thought which had passed between them on a certain
      evening, told him how both portrait and diary had been discovered in a desk at Grafton Place.
      'Ah,' replied the Duke, with a peculiar expression of countenance, 'it is a pitiable story.
      You have lost the noblest friend, the most enchanting mistress, that ever a man had. Will you
      not join us now? You know what I mean; the doors of the smoking-room are open. A more
      melancholy experience than yours it is impossible to conceive.'
Rupert smiled gravely and shook his head. 'There is no sadness in the story,' he replied,
      'as you imagine. It is something higher and better than sadness. I seem to apprehend its
      meaning,— not all, but so much that it leaves the stars shining in heaven. May and I never
      speak of Ivor or Hippolyta, but their memory is to us a religion. How should we have known
      true affection but for them? Till that day at San Lucar she cared for me in the passionate way
      that brings neither happiness nor calm. And I hardly cared for her at all; my love had on it
      the shadow of a felt bereavement,
       and was faint, phantasmal rather than a living thing. Now the stars look down
      out of their serene heaven, the flowers bloom at our feet. Call on Lady May, and watch the
      delight she has in our first child. See,' he went on, pointing across the studio, 'there is
      the boy's portrait, with his mother's eyes and smile.'
It was a lovely sketch, the cherub in the dawn of existence, glowing with infantine joy;
      fair-haired, dark-eyed, rosy. He seemed to look out on the future as if it were a sunlit
      prospect, with hope and laughter on his murmuring lips.
'Ah!' said the Duke, while he fixed his searching gaze on the picture; 'you are right. Do
      not come to us. Your spirit has deepened, it has been touched to the finest issues. I see that
      the memory of the past, the fire you have both come through, has made for you a new life and a
      true marriage. Your Hippolyta, your Ivor, have saved you from losing the one thing that men
      like my friends—that I—have lost for ever. But that one thing, I suspect, is the secret of
      existence, let the world change as it will.'
'And what is it?' inquired the artist.
'Can you doubt?' said the Duke of Adullam, his proud lips trembling a little and a slight
      blush over-spreading his features; 'you that find it in the stars of heaven and the flowers
      that spring up from the earth? What can it be, but love?'
A tender light came into Rupert's eyes. The
       sound of a carriage was heard outside, and voices at the door.
'Who is it?' said the Duke.
It was Lady May, leading her child by the hand. They had come to pay a visit to his father's
      studio.
THE END
</div></body></text></TEI>