<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">
CHAPTER XXXV.

"When the days begin to lengthen,
Then the cold begins to strengthen."
THIS ancient distich proves true in the year I am speaking of. Not later than Christmas does
     the moist mild weather last. With January the frost comes hurrying back; hanging great icicles
     on the house-eaves, throwing men out of work, and pressing with its iron finger the thin faint
     life out of half-a-dozen old almsmen and almswomen. The foxes have a little breathing-time—a
     little space in which to steal and eat three or four more fat capons and stubble-fed
     geese—before that evil day when their dappled foes shall tear their poor little red bodies limb
     from limb. Hunting is stopped, and men are hurrying up from the shires to London. St. James's
     Street and its hundred clubs are crowded. At Blessington everybody is pirouetting on the ice.
     St. John, passionately fond of all out-of-door sports, spends the whole day on the mere. One
     afternoon a large party comes
      over from Lord Linley's place, five miles away. Not in all
     Lord Linley's grounds is there such a stretch of smooth ice as the Blessington pool affords;
     and so they are all come to show their prowess on its hard flat face.
Esther keeps well out of their way. From her post of obcervation—the deep window-seat in the
     China gallery— she has watched their arrival, heard their gay voices in the hall, and then,
     unnoticed, unmissed, she has stolen out upon one of her long, dawdling, cold-giving strolls in
     the park: over the frost-crisped grass, under the branchy trees, whose staglike crowns cut the
     pale sky—up little knolls and down into dips where, in summer time, the fern stands neck high.
     At last she comes in sight of the mere; and, impelled by curiosity, trusting in her own
     insignificance to escape notice, sits down on a bank that slopes gently down towards the sheet
     of water, and looks upon the unwonted brilliance of the scene. Girls in velvet short costumes;
     bright petticoats, furs, hats with humming birds on them, curls, fair chignons, glancing in the
     cheerful winter sun. Fashion in all its folly and extravagance, but picturesque withal; it is
     as if a company of Dresden shepherdesses had stepped off the mantelshelf, and come tripping,
     dainty-footed, over the frozen water. Her eyes follow the shepherdess figures with eager
     interest—so seldom in her simple country-bred life has she been brought into contact with any
     of Fashion's bright daughters. The men have less attraction for her. Under no most prosperous
     conjunction of circumstances could she ever have been a man ; but under happier auspices she
     might have been one of these fluttering butterflies—a prettier butterfly than any there, her
     heart tells her. Shylock's words recur to her: "Am not I 'fed with the same food, hurt
      with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and
      cooled by the same winter and summer?'  Why, then, are they frisking
      about in purple and fine linen upon the ice, with
     half-a-dozen young patricians (in trousers of surprising tightness and coats of unequalled
     brevity) in their train, while I am perched here upon the all-alone stone, among these stiff
     cold sedges, with only the Canada geese, with their long necks craned out, screeching above my
     head?"
Meanwhile, Miss Craven is the subject of more remark than she is at all aware of.
"I say, Gerard," says Lord Linley's heir—a goodnatured ugly little prodigal, who is one of
     the shining lights of Her Majesty's Household, and goes among men by the sobriquet of "Gaolbird," for which he has to thank the unexampled brevity of his
     locks—"I say, Gerard, you ought to know all the remarkable objects about here: tell us, who is
     the mourner in the distance?"
St. John's eyes follow the direction indicated by his friend, and a shade of annoyance
     crosses his face. "Her name is Miss Craven, I believe," he answers, shortly.
"Uncommon good-looking girl, whoever she is!" says a second man, who has just stopped to
     adjust his skates; "I have been perilling my life among those d—d rushes by the edge, to get a
     good look at her!"
"Deuced good legs!" subjoins a third, remarkable for his laconism; taking his pipe out of his
     mouth to make room for his criticism, and fixing upon that part of a woman's charms which is
     always the first to enchain the masculine attention.
"She is vewy like a girl I used to know at the Cape," says a "Heavy," who has been vanquished
     in single combat by the letter R. " The Fly we used to call her, because when she
     settled on a f'la, it was mowally impossible to dwive her off."
St. John, who has been listening with ill-concealed anger and disgust to these comments—free
     as if they had been
      upon the points of a horse—on the charms of the woman for
     whom he has been trying to persuade himself that he feels inveterate aversion, turns to move
     away; but Linley's voice recalls him.
"I say, Gerard!—Gerard!" 
"Well?"
"Do you know her?"
"Slightly."
"Introduce me, then—there's a good fellow!"
"And me!"
"And me!"
"My acquaintance with Miss Craven is not such as to justify my introducing any one to her,"
     answers Gerard, stiffly, and so walks resolutely off.
"Sly dog!" cries Linley, laughing; "means to keep her all to himself—a nice quiet little game
     of his own."
"Means to drive a pair then—eh?" asks the laconic youth.
"Vewy seldom pays," says the "Heavy," sagely; "one or other invawiably jibs."
But Mr. Linley, being more in earnest than he usually is about most things, is not so easily
     balked. After many fruitless inquiries among the company, he at length appeals to Miss
     Blessington.
"Do you know, Miss Blessington," he says, peering up at her with his quick terrier-face (for
     her stately height exceeds his), "I have actually been putting the same question to twenty
     people running, and never yet succeeded in getting an answer? You are my last hope: who
      is that lady in black?"
"The lady in black!" repeats Constance, amiably—following, as her lover had done, the
     direction of his gaze. "Oh!" (with a little, slighting laugh), " nobody very particular; only
     poor Miss Craven, my aunt's companion!" 

"Poor girl!" he says—his eyes still riveted upon the pensive oval face, and his interest in
     her not the least lessened by the information as to her social status, that Constance had
     thought so damning. He does not want to marry her; and for any other purpose a pretty
     woman is a pretty woman, be she duchess or fishwife. "It must be very slow for her, mustn't it?
     I always hate looking on—don't you? I always like to have a hand in everything, whatever it may
     be; it would really be a charity to go and speak to her, only I'm afraid she would take it as
     an insult if I went up and introduced myself."
"I assure you she is quite happy watching us," replies Constance, sweetly; being, for the
     most part, not fond of going shares with a sister fair one in any of the proper men and tall
     that are wont to gather about her.
But he is persevering. "Don't you think that a little improving conversation with me would
     tend to make her happier still?" he asks; banteringly, yet in earnest. "I tried to get Gerard
     to introduce me, but I could not make out exactly what was up; he seemed to take it as a
     personal insult. You won't mind doing me that good turn, I'm sure?" 
"I shall be most happy, of course," she answers, hiding her displeasure under the calm smile
     which covers all her emotions, or approximations to emotion. And with apparent readiness she
     leads the way to the spot where, couched in her rushy lair, the subject of their talk sits
     unconscious, with her eyes riveted on the darting forms beneath her.
"Miss Craven, Mr. Linley wishes to be introduced to you."
"To me!" she says, starting; her eyes opening wide, and cheeks flushing with
     surprise.
Then two bows are executed, and the thing is dona Esther is not longer upon the all-alone
     stone; she has other
      occupation for her ears than to listen to the screeching of
     the Canada geese; she, too, like the other butterflies, has got a tight-trousered, short-coated
     patrician in tow.
"Linley has succeeded, do you see?" says the man to whom Esther's legs have had the happiness
     to appear "very good."
"Mostly does; it is a little way he has!"
"Who did they say she was?" 
"Somebody's companion; old Blessington's, I think."
"Cunning old beggar! He knows what he is about, though he does pretend to be
     stone-blind."
"Old Blessington's companion, eh? I'm sure I wish she were mine."
"A sort of 'Abishag the Shunammite,' I suppose ?"
These are some of the comments that the unknown beauty draws forth. Five minutes later, Miss
     Craven's scruples—such as never having skated before, having no skates, etc.—being overruled
     by her new acquaintance, she is sitting on the bank; and he, kneeling before her, is fastening
     some one else's unused skates on her little feet. A great desire for pleasure has come over
     her—a great longing for warmth and colour in her grey life, that looks all the greyer now in
     the contrast to the brilliant reds and purples of these strange lives with which it is brought
     into sudden contact. A great delight in the wintry brightness fills her—in the shifting,
     varying hues—in the bubbling laughter; a great impulse to laugh too, the spirit of youth rising
     up in arms against the tyranny of grief.
The low sun shoots down dazzling crimson rays on the mere's dirty white face. The swans and
     Solan geese are exiled to a little corner, where the ice has been broken for them, and where
     they have to keep swimming round and round to prevent the invasion of their little territory by
     the grasping frost. Girls that cannot skate being pushed about
      in chairs; " Whirr! whirr!" they rush along the smooth
     surface at a headlong pace. Men, with their arms stretched out like the sails of a windmill,
     advancing cautiously—first one foot, then the other—just managing to keep on their feet, and
     thinking themselves extremely clever for so managing. Other men and women flying hand-in-hand,
     from one end of the pool to the other, in long, smooth slides—as safe and secure as if running
     upon their own feet on the grass. Others, cutting eights, and all manner of figures, whirling
     round upon one leg, and making themselves altogether remarkable. One poor gentleman with his
     skates in the air, and head starring the ice; brother men laughing and jeering; pretty girls
     pitying—light laughter mixed with their condolences also. Eight people dancing a quadrille,
      chaîne des dames: in and out, in and out—right, left—go the
     moving figures, the cerise petticoats, the glancing feet. It is all so pretty and gay. When one
     has spent the best part of three months in weeping, when one has the quick blood of seventeen
     in one's veins, one longs to get up and run, and dance, and jump about too.
"There's no wind to-day," says Linley, turning his face to the north-east, whence a bitter
     breath comes most faintly; "when there is, it is the best fun in the world to get a very light
     cane chair and a big umbrella—to sit on the one and hold the other up ; you can have no
     conception of the terrific rate that one gets along at."
"I should think it sometimes happened that the cane chair and the big umbrella went on by
     themselves and left you behind?" says Esther archly.
"Frequently, but that makes it all the more exciting."
"Does it?"
"Keep hold of the chair, push it gently before you, and try to balance yourself as well as
     you can," continues lie, giving grave instructions to his new pupil.

"How can one balance oneself on things no bigger than knife-blades?" she asks,
     grasping desperately the chair-back.
"Rome was not built in a day," he answers, with a cheery laugh; "try!"
She obeys, and moves forward two or three timid inches; then stops again.
"I have that poor gentleman's fate before my mind's eye," she says, nervously. "I feel as if,
     by some natural attraction, one's feet must go up sky-wards, and one's head make acquaintance
     with the ice."
"No necessity at all," replies the young man, encouragingly. "That fellow is a duffer at
     everything; he is the very worst rider I ever set eyes on-holds his whip like a
     fishing-rod."
"Does he ?"
"Look at that girl, now, with the purple feather! She skims along like a bird; she is as much
     at her ease as if she were in her arm-chair at home. By Jove! no, she ain't though!" For, as he
     speaks, "Thud!" comes the girl with the purple feather down in a sitting posture on the ice:
     men crowd round, inquire into casualties, pick her up again: off she goes!
"You must be more careful next time in your selection of examples," Esther says, smiling
     mischievously; "that one was not encouraging, you must allow."
Constitutionally timid, she stands hesitating, in half-shyness, half-fear, and whole dread of
     being ridiculous; laughing, reddening, dimpling in the happy sunlight—as pretty a picture as
     ever little terrier-faced member of the Household has seen.
"Perhaps you'd get on better if you tried walking between two people," he says, suggestively;
     "it is easier than with a chair. That is the way my sister began—I on one side, don't you know,
     and another fellow on the other.
      Here, Gerard, come and make yourself useful; give Miss
     Craven your arm!" 
Gerard looks—has been looking all the while; sees the face, that had met him so pale and
     dejected three hours ago, transformed by the keen January air, and the excitement of the
     moment, into more than its old loveliness; sees the soft splendour of languishing almond eyes,
     the guileless baby-smile. It is the transient happiness of a moment that has wrought the
     change, and he, in his rough anger, attributes it to the insatiate rabid desire for
     admiration.
"She would flirt in her coffin," he says to himself, bitterly; and so answers, coldly, "I
     cannot—I have taken my skates off!" 
"All right," says Mr. Linley, gaily, and then, in an aside to Esther, "On duty,
     evidently!"
"Evidently!" She assents with a faint smile, but her lips quiver with a dumb pain. "He need
     not have slighted me so openly," she thinks, in cruel mortification. "Perhaps if you gave me
     your hand I might manage to steady myself gradually," she says naïvely.
Mr. Linley has no objection whatever to having his hand convulsively clutched by a very
     pretty woman, even though it is so clutched, not in affection to himself, but in the spasmodic
     effort to maintain the perpendicular—in the desperate endeavour to hinder her feet from
     outrunning body and head. And so she totters along—amused, flattered, frightened; and far too
     much absorbed in considerations of her own safety, to be at all aware of the condescending
     notice that several of the more worthy gender are good enough to bestow upon her, though the
     conceit inborn in the male mind would have made them completely sceptical of that fact, had
     they been told it.
Meanwhile Miss Blessington, a little out of breath with her exertions, is resting on a chair,
     in bright blue velvet
      and a more delicate pink-and-white porcelain face than any
     of the other shepherdesses. Over her Gerard is leaning—frowning, sad, and heavy-hearted. Over
     and over again he has tried to turn his eyes to other groups, but again and again, contrary to
     his will, they return and fix themselves upon that slender staggering figure in black. Once he
     sees her on the point of falling—saved only by being caught with quick adroitness in her
     companion's arms. He draws his breath involuntarily hard. How dare any man but he touch her—lay
     a finger upon her fair person? One of the old simple instincts, stronger—oh, how far
     stronger!—than any of the restrictions with which our civilisation has sought to bind them—a
     great lust of raging jealousy—is upon him.
"I hate her!" he says to himself, fiercely; "she is a vile unprincipled coquette.
     Thank God, I found her out in time! Thank God, I washed my hands of her before it was too late!
     And yet—and yet—if I could but pick a quarrel with that fellow!"
What right has Gerard to object if every man upon the ground catch her in his arms, and hold
     her there under his very eyes? He has washed his hands of her, thank God! All his rights of
     proprietorship in womankind centre in the calm blue statue, smiling with even placidness on
     himself, on his poodle, on all the world—his Constance, whom no one is thinking of taking from
     him; his own—oh, blissful thought!—in life, in death, and in eternity!
In the meantime the remarks upon Esther vary from the wildly laudatory to the
     discriminatingly censuring.
"She is extwemely dark," says the dwagoon, as he would have called himself; "a
     thowough bwunette; must have a touch of the tar-bwush, I fancy!"
The stable-clock strikes four. Esther starts, as much as scullion Cinderella started at the
     chiming midnight. "I must go" she says, hastily; "I shall be wanted."

"Wanted?" he repeats, inquiringly. "And are not you wanted here I You cannot be in two places
     at once, like a bird."
"Mrs. Blessington will want me—I am her companion," she answers, colouring slightly. "I
     daresay you did not know it." ("He would not have been so civil to me if he had, I daresay," is
     her mental reflection.)
"Yes, I did."
"Who told you?—or have all 'companions' such a family likeness that you detected me at a
     glance?"
"Miss Blessington told me; and for the first time in my life I wished myself an old woman,"
     he replies, sentimentally.
She laughs, a little embarrassed. She knows as well as he does that he does not wish
     to be an old woman, even for the pleasure of having her to carry his air-cushion and
     spectacle-case. But civil speeches are always more or less untrue, and none the less pleasant
     for that.
"If the frost holds," says the young man, suggestively—taking the small black hand which she
     has timidly proffered, not being by any means sure that it is etiquette for a "companion" to
     shake hands with lords' eldest sons—"If the frost holds, will you be inclined for another
     lesson or two? There is nothing like making hay when the sun shines—say to-morrow?
     "
Her face brightens for a moment; it is so pleasant to talk gaily, and be admired, and made
     much of, and reminded that there are other things besides death and poverty and servitude; then
     her countenance falls.
"To-day has been very pleasant," she says, naively, "but I cannot answer for to-morrow."
"Are you so changeable," he asks, with a laudable though unsuccessful endeavour to fashion
     his jolly little dog-face into an expression of reproachful sentiment, "as
      not to know to-day what you will like or not like
     tomorrow?"
"I know what I shall like," she answers, gently, "but I don't know what other people
     will. Would not you think it very odd if your valet were to make engagements without consulting
     you? I am Mrs. Blessington's valet."
She evidently thinks this argument so conclusive, and that it so decidedly closes the
     question, that he has no choice but to loose her hand; and she, having no other farewells to
     make, turns and passes homewards through the crisply rustling sedges.
"Very clean about the fetlock!" ejaculates the laconic youth, unable to raise his
     mind from her legs; following them with his eyes, as she climbs the grassy slope.
"Yes, but what howible boots! Whoever could have had the atwocity to fwame such
     beetle-cwushers?"
</div></body></text></TEI>