<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="25">
CHAPTER XXV NEC DIVERSA TAMEN, QUALEM DECET ESSE SORORUM
Some time elapsed before she came across Annie Dauris. But when she was passing
      down Church Lane in the dusk one evening, on her way to the cottage, she observed a tall young
      man standing close to the hedge where a wide-spreading beech almost hid him from view, and
      near him on the farther side a girl whose shawl was drawn half over her face, but the accent
      of whose voice, though Hippolyta could make out nothing of what she said, was unmistakably
      like Mrs. Dauris's. The young man was not of the working-class. He was well dressed and had a
      supercilious air; while Annie Dauris, if she it was, clung to his arm with what appeared to be
      the vehemence of affection or exasperation. He heard her with impatience; flung away her hand,
      turned to go, but, seeing Hippolyta coming along at a little distance, went back to where he
      had left his companion. Both of them waited, loitering in the shade with faces
       averted till Hippolyta had passed by. It was not difficult to guess that they
      had been quarrelling, and were ashamed to be seen. Annie Dauris was never at home when
      Hippolyta called, and it was unlikely that she should have recognised in a casual figure
      passing down the lane one of whose face she could have no knowledge.
Hippolyta found the gardener and his wife sitting by the open window enjoying the evening
      air, which was warm and genial. It was one of Mrs. Dauris's good days, when she felt free from
      headache and could do the light work of the house. Charlie, a bright, fair-haired boy of
      eleven, was learning his lessons in the garden, sometimes coming up to the window to show what
      he had done to his father, and at other times dropping his book and looking out dreamily on
      the darkening sky, his imagination full of those strange fresh thoughts and fancies which are
      seldom written in our too elderly volumes for children. Willie had been put to bed. There was
      a great stillness in the air, and it had a soothing influence on them as they sat talking in
      low tones. While they were thus engaged the door opened, and some one came in. Mrs. Dauris
      looked up. 'Oh, it is you, Annie,' she said. 'We are very dark here. Will you bring the lamp?'
      Annie, without speaking a word, went out again and returned in a few moments with the light,
      which she set down upon a table, and then stationed herself at some distance from Hippolyta,
      in such a position that she could examine the visitor's
       face at her leisure. When she recognised the stranger that had passed along the
      lane an hour since, she blushed crimson and turned her head away. She bore a striking
      resemblance to her mother,—the same delicate and regular features, the same bright eyes, the
      same slender make and upright figure. But the general expression of her countenance was by no
      means the same. It was ill-tempered and passionate; there was an obstinate look about the
      mouth; and, for the first time in her life, Hippolyta found herself applying the word 'brazen'
      to a woman's forehead. She could not have told the reason; was it the swelling surface above
      the eyebrows which made an impression as of sullen obstinacy and want of shame? But Annie was
      blushing now; she appeared to be feeling confusion as well as surprise. Mr. Dauris, who had
      not stirred at her entrance, moved his chair round, and said, 'Annie, come and pay your
      respects, like a good girl, to Mrs. Malcolm, who has taken such care of your mother.' Annie
      seemed uncertain whether she would obey or not, but with deliberate slowness she got up from
      where she was sitting and came forward. Hippolyta held out her hand. She felt for the girl.
      Annie returned her glance suspiciously, but did not refuse the offered greeting. 'You have
      never seen my daughter before,' said Mrs. Dauris, 'but I daresay you would have known her in
      the street if you had. William says she is so like me when we first married.' There was much
      affection in the mother's voice; not anger or coldness, which,
       under the circumstances, might have seemed more natural. Hippolyta did not know
      what to reply. But with as much gentleness as she could command, she answered, 'No, I never
      saw your daughter till this evening. But you are right in saying I should recognise the
      likeness. I did so at once when I was on my way hither, and Annie was walking outside.'
The girl looked frightened, and did not speak one word, waiting for the end of Mrs.
      Malcolm's revelations. What might have been the consequence had Hippolyta gone on with her
      story it is impossible to say. She judged it, however, expedient not to add anything. They
      knew their daughter's habits, as was evident from Willie's exclamations on the day of her
      first visit; neither did it become her to cast a slur upon conduct which, even if it had no
      justification, in some particulars might resemble her own. She contented herself with putting
      a question or two, while Annie kept a determined silence, on the kind of service in which she
      had lived and her special accomplishments. Annie told her at last that she was fond of
      dressmaking and wanted to go back, not to Dorset Square, but to a shop near Oxford Street,
      where she had been admitted to the sight of fashionable robemaking when about fiften. From
      that establishment, as Hippolyta learned by and by, her father had removed her, and she had
      then gone into domestic service. 'If all you want is to learn dressmaking,' said Mrs. Malcolm,
      'I can give you some instruction myself, and you would be able to take care of your
       mother at the same time. Would you like to come and see me at Forrest House? I
      have leisure on one or two days a week. What do you think, Mrs. Dauris? Do you approve?'
      Husband and wife were perfectly willing; but Mr. Dauris subjoined, 'Annie must say her own
      word in the matter, or she may think we are forcing her. Now, my girl, which would you
      prefer—to go with Mrs. Malcolm, or to stay at home as you have been doing?' She did not give a
      direct answer, but said, as if it was the same thing, 'I should like to learn dressmaking.'
      And Hippolyta thought it best to leave the matter so. In her own mind she said that Annie
      would be none the worse for learning, as she certainly should if she came to Forrest House,
      that her present attire was showy and not at all in good taste. Mrs. Dauris always looked neat
      and simple in her cotton gown; but her daughter assumed a tawdry style, which would have been
      expensive, could she have afforded it, and heightened her bold, shameless air. Had she not
      been so pretty, the whole appearance of the child, for she was nothing else, would have been
      exceedingly painful. She was like a tainted flower. Where had she gained that early
      acquaintance with vice and finery? Not at home, as was evident. Perhaps there was yet a chance
      of teaching her better things. Instractable and sullen though she was, a little incident which
      happened when Hippolyta was going showed that her feelings were not wholly perverted.
      'Good-night' had been said on both sides, and their visitor was passing
       through the gate, when she heard a step behind her, and turning saw Annie, who
      had followed unperceived. 'Well, my dear?' said Mrs. Malcolm kindly. Annie laid a furtive hand
      upon her dress, much in the fashion of a child who wants to whisper something, and said with a
      downcast look, 'Will you let me come to-morrow for the dressmaking, in the afternoon?'
      Hippolyta assured her of a hearty welcome; and the girl went on, forcing the words, which did
      not seem to flow easily from her lips. 'I like you; it was good of you not to tell my father
      what you saw, and not to ask me about it.' And when she had said this she let go Hippolyta's
      dress and went in again without waiting for an answer.
She did come next day; but some time elapsed before Hippolyta could win her confidece. It
      was during this interval that Rupert returned. While he stayed there was no time to instruct
      Annie or to call at the cottage. She did not mention the story to Rupert again; they had their
      own romance to talk over, and the possibilities of the future to forecast. And so it
      continued. Whenever, consistently with his engagements, the artist could run up to London for
      a few days, he would spend an hour or two at his own house, arranging papers and seeing those
      who would have been surprised or offended were he to overlook their claims; but no sooner were
      these formalities complied with than he vanished into space, and Hippolyta had him to herself
      at Forrest House. They were wonderfully happy.

Meanwhile her interest in the gardener's family continued. The boys, not altogether with
      Mrs. Leemings's goodwill, were allowed to play about the grounds of the red brick mansion,
      where no child had been since Glanville himself had paid those dreary visits to Miss Atterbury
      which he was glad not to remember. But Willie and Charlie, though they could not help doing
      mischief in their primeval innocence, were very amusing, affectionate, and original, helping
      Hippolyta with the flowers, wheeling barrows of earth or dead leaves, which they occasionally
      overset on the pathway to their own extreme delight, and making believe that they were elves
      in enchanted places, or young princes in search of adventures under the trees of the forest
      into which they transformed the garden to give themselves larger scope. They were great
      favourites with Mrs. Malcolm, whom they worshipped and followed everywhere. But being shy and
      well brought up, they did not presume on her favour; and if she told them there was a border
      they must not dig up, or a room they were not to enter, Charlie not only observed the command
      himself, but took especial care that Willie, who was younger and more volatile, should not
      foget it. 'Mrs. Malcolm said not,' was their law of the Medes and Persians which might not be
      altered. On Saturdays they carried between them the flowers which Hippolyta destined for the
      church, to their father. It was part of their play to repeat, with childish treble pipe and
      most naïve turns of speech, the legends of
       the Catholic saints which they had been taught at school; and their kind
      protectress, whose presence did not terrify them nor check their harmless babble, listened
      with more pleasure than she could have supposed to their fantastic stories. But they were
      instinct with a life and colour which for the moment gave them something like the air of
      reality. It was like viewing the painted windows from the inside, where the legend came out
      plain and the figures seemed more human. Both the boys would be story-tellers in turn; and
      Willie's slow but vivid imagination, which wrought confusion in the history, made him one of
      the most lovable and laughable of little creatures. Charlie, however, had more feeling. He
      returned Mrs. Malcolm's affection ardently, and though he was too big at eleven to be hanging
      on a lady's skirts, as Willie often did, you might be sure that, if Hippolyta were within
      reach, he would not be far off. Did she leave her hat, or cloak, or gloves on the table, he
      liked to steal up when he thought no one was looking and to touch them fondly. One thing
      surprised the religious boy, for such he was, why Mrs. Malcolm never went to St. Cyprian's
      like his father—and his mother when she was well. On a certain Saturday, when she had made up
      the flowers into bouquets and put them into the children's hands, as they were going Charlie
      stopped and, fixing his beautiful eyes on Hippolyta, said to her, 'Won't you come and see them
      on the altar? They look prettiest there, and they smell so sweet in church.'

'No, darling,' said Hippolyta with a slight feeling of sadness, 'not now, I am busy. Some
      other time, perhaps.' The boys ran off; but she repeated mechanically to herself, 'Some other
      time, some other time! Ought I to have said that? I shall not go to see the flowers on the
      altar, let them look ever so pretty.'
Their sister was quite different. She did not enter St. Cyprian's either; she seemed to have
      little or none of the religious instinct; and when Willie and Charlie ran and jumped in the
      garden, she did not join them. Hippolyta was almost too considerate towards the girl, letting
      her spend long afternoons in the house, and showing her everything that she thought would
      interest her. Annie had never seen such treasures before; they took hold of her fancy
      mightily, and she was eager to learn the objects and uses of the multiplied curiosities in
      which the old mansion abounded. She gave careful attention to every word that fell from
      Hippolyta in illustration of the pictures, china, and the ten thousand knick-knacks which were
      necessarily not to be comprehended without a gloss by the gardener's daughter. She studied
      Mrs. Malcolm's way of speaking, and expended thought not only on the patterns of dress which
      were given her to cut out, but likewise on those which were worn by her teacher. Not without a
      sense of amusement, though with keener feelings of compassion, did Hippolyta observe that she
      seemed to be going over in her mind a part to be hereafter acted; to be
       rehearsing, as it were, the manners and mode of speech that characterised 'a
      lady.' She was equally bold in imitation and timid in putting questions; but there was
      evidently a multitude of things belonging to this novel sphere that she thirsted to inquire
      about. Hippolyta, seeming not to mind, let her have her way. Annie began to talk more freely,
      to give expression to some of her less dangerous inclinations. She was not exactly ignorant or
      dull, but the first steps in mounting from one's native regions are the most difficult, and
      she dreaded to set Mrs. Malcolm against her. Little by little, however, the nature of the girl
      discovered itself.
There was nothing uncommon, except her lovely features, and they were half spoilt by her
      sullen look, in Annie Dauris. Between her and thousands of other London-bred girls there
      reigned an unmistakable family likeness; but Hippolytan, in spite of her reading and travels,
      did not know it, and this, the first specimen she had seen, filled her with dislike and
      amazement. Mr. Dauris sent his boys to the school which was carried on by the fathers at St.
      Cyprian's, and his girl to the convent. But there was another school which he could not
      prevent them from frequenting if they chose—that of the children who played with them, and of
      the London streets. Annie —but I think Mrs. Dauris can begin the story better than I. She had
      lived through it all. Sitting up on her couch, and pausing from time to time when her breath
      failed her, she unburdened herself of this great
       trouble to the young married lady one morning, when Annie was ironing in the
      little back-kitchen and not likely to interrupt them.
'It shames me,' she said, 'to speak about such things in the hearing of a lady like you; but
      Annie is not the child she was, and you ought to know her ways. I don't know what came over
      her when she got to be a big girl. She was as good a child as you would wish to see, and the
      sisters were very fond of her, till she was twelve or thirteen. And then she took up with some
      of the bad characters in the school, and she was always going about with them at night instead
      of coming home, staying in the street, and staring into public-houses, and seeing what it was
      not right for her to see. I spoke to her often enough, God knows, but as soon as my back was
      turned away she would go, and not be home again till midnight perhaps, or later. I was afraid
      William would notice it; for, though he is a peaceable, religious man, as you may see, he can
      be very angry, and once he gives way to his feeling I am afraid of what will happen. He did go
      after her once, and she was obstinate and would not come in; it was when they were holding a
      fair in the market,—she said no, she had rather stay out all night; and William took her and
      brought her home, and that time he beat her severely. Oh, dear me, I shall never, never forget
      it. And it did no good; she was worse than ever. Many an hour I spent in search of her during
      the dark winter nights, when she would slip out and run
       off to her bad companions. And where did I find her, after all? Standing at the
      bar of a gin palace, talking and laughing with grown men, or coming out of one of the low
      theatres in the neighbourhood. When she saw me she ran away or hid round a corner, and I have
      had to come home through rain and snow without Annie. My husband told me it was madness, that
      I should only kill myself; but I had the feelings of a mother, and I could not see my child
      lost. It is a wonder that she never got into worse mischief, for the men and the women she
      made friends of were thieves, and well known to the police. I cannot tell where she found a
      shelter the nights she stayed out. She would never say, and she seemed not to care. One night
      she would have spent in the station-house, for she was taken there with others that had been
      drinking and fighting; but the sergeant knew my husband, and instead of taking down the
      charge, he sent round, like a good man, for William, and her father brought her home. That
      struck a wholesome fear into her during a week or two; and then she went away again. We were
      at our wits' end what to do with her. Isn't it a pitiful tale, Mrs. Malcolm?' she said,
      turning with wet eyes to Hippolyta, whose silence had deepened with her sympathy and horror.
      She could not speak, but she pressed the poor mother's hand. There was a painful pause.
'I don't believe,' resumed Mrs. Dauris, when she recovered her breath, 'that there was
      malice in Annie. She was young and curious; she had no
       sense of danger, and of course she liked to see what was going on. That is how
      we poor people lose our children. They go into the streets and the flood carries them away. We
      are not the only ones in this neighbourhood that have had trouble with a daughter and shed
      scalding tears over her ruin. Though, I thank God, Annie is not ruined yet. She has lost her
      character with the sisters, and the people about think she has behaved like the rest of her
      bad companions. But, Mrs. Malcolm, it is not true. I give you the word of a mother that there
      is not a word of truth in it. Annie will not be said or led by her father, more is the pity;
      and when he is at home she will not open her mouth, as you saw the other night. The poor child
      is afraid of him since he beat her, and she is stiff-necked too, and no one can manage her. I
      do sometimes coax her to talk, and then she tells me things. William doesn't know that Maurice
      Regan has been near the cottage, and I would not have him know. But Annie confessed it when I
      repeated what her brother said about a gentleman in the lane.'
'Oh, indeed,' exclaimed Hippolyta; 'then Maurice Regan is the gentleman's name. Is
      he a gentleman?'
Yes, he was a gentleman, and he had seen Annie walking home to her Cousin Harriet's from
      Mark Tomlinson the draper's near Oxford Street; and he had fallen desperately in love with
      her. It was the most ordinary of 'London idylls'—gutter-idylls, one
       should call them perhaps. While Mrs. Dauris went on with the shameful story
      Hippolyta seemed to hear it all in a dream. The great workroom, with its rows of workers; the
      elder girl, Charlotte Fraser, who had 'taken a fancy to Annie,' and showed her fine sights,
      leading her to music halls, where there was comic singing, with plenty to eat and drink, and
      nothing for Annie to pay; the well-dressed gentleman that was a friend of Charlotte's, and
      gave her up to walk with the younger girl he met in her company; the first fit of
      intoxication, when the mother, going after Annie, saw her with eyes 'at first full of wild
      fire, and then as full of sleep and stupidity'; and the second and the third fit, when a
      stranger passing along noticed the child of fifteen lying outside the tavern insensible, with
      a crowd standing about her; the midnight scenes, when her father and mother went searching
      over London for their lost daughter; the flights from home, the recaptures, the hopeless
      efforts on the part of this good lady and that to bring her to a better mind; and at last, the
      trembling fear of the poor mother, declining every day to her grave, but dreading that Annie
      would break away from home once more and cast herself upon the London streets; —it was a
      horrible chapter of existence, more like nightmare than reality.
But it was also, for Hippolyta Valence, like holding up a blurred and crooked mirror to her
      own countenance. The distorted features came back, her own and not her own, as if she beheld
      them under the
       oppression of delirium. Why should the sentiment of guilt or shame stir within
      her bosom, at the thought of Annie Dauris's unmaidenly history? There existed no kinship, how
      remote soever, between them. But the caricature of love was hideously grotesque; its
      surroundings were so vile and mean. The streets with their flaring, murky lamps; the horrible,
      glittering gin palaces; the throng of men and women in rags or in flaunting colours that were
      ever in motion, in and out through the half-open doors; the rainy nights, when mud was lying
      thick in the gutters and the spouts were running with foul water, and along the dark and
      noisome pathways went to and fro the miscellaneous company of women with their draggled
      garments and shameless, miserable, wrinkled faces, while their partners in vice reeled along,
      drunken and riotous, in the full tide of debauch,—all this, which came before her suddenly
      like a stage built up and illuminated from end to end in the depth of darkness, was it indeed
      the realisation of that dream of free love wherein she had delighted as in a thing most
      beautiful and tender? Was this the breathing out of pure affection, the blending of heart with
      heart, the springing up of amaranthine flowers from our mortal mould? At a glance she seemed
      to take in the existence of such a girl as Annie Dauris,—the withering of its innocence and
      beauty, the stubborn rage, and unfulfilled desire, and ever-renewed thirst for what was
      forbidden. 'Oh, horrible, horrible,' she said beneath her breath. It made her sick and faint
      to think of it.

Mrs. Dauris had not finished speaking when 'Hush!' said Hippolyta, 'I hear a noise this way.
      'Isn't Annie coming from the back-kitchen?' They stopped to listen, and the girl entered, with
      a number of her favourite weekly novelette in her hand.
'I have done ironing,' she said. 'Will you let me sit here? it is so hot near the
      ironing-stove.' Her face was flushed with the heat, but she looked less ill-tempered than
      usual. She was certainly pretty, with a sweet expression, something like her brother
      Charlie's, just then.
'What are you reading?' said Hippolyta; 'may I look?' She surrendered her novelette
      doubtingly. It was not badly printed, but rejoiced in illustrations of a most pronounced
      crudeness and vulgarity, which appeared on the reverse of the thin paper; and its title
      was—but there is no reason why the title, though merely high-sounding and silly, should be
      advertised here. It used to glare from London hoardings in great red and green letters, for
      the delectation of the passing multitude not so many years ago, although it is now rarely to
      be met with—at least that is my experience—even in catalogues of second-hand rubbish. About a
      hundred and four numbers compose this sort of tale, which affects the dramatic suddenness and
      mysterious endings of Eugène Sue, dashed with the sentiment of Mr. G. W. M. Reynolds. There is
      a whole library of such fiction scattered broadcast by our freedom of the press. Hippolyta,
      better acquainted with Sophocles than with the
       purveyors of 'romance for the million,' turned over the pages in silent disgust,
      and gave them back without remark. Mrs. Dauris, meanwhile, said to Annie with her accustomed
      gentleness:
'You can come and sit here in a few moments, my dear, when Mrs. Malcolm and I have finished
      what we are saying. There is something I want to tell the lady.'
'About me, I suppose,' returned Annie with great quickness, her cheeks lighting up and then
      turning pale; 'well, I don't care. Tell as much as you like, and I will tell my side of the
      story if I am asked.' And away she went, attempting, for the sake of bravado, to hum the notes
      of a comic street-song under her breath, but not succeeding in getting through it. On the
      contrary, when she reached the back-kitchen again and sat down by the ironing-board, such a
      sense of wretchedness overcame the unhappy girl that she burst into a fit of sobbing, and
      rocked herself to and fro in agony. She was miserable indeed; far more so than she would have
      dared to let her mother know or any human creature.
But, a few days later, she told as much of 'her own side of the story' as she judged
      expedient, sitting in Mrs. Malcolm's boudoir, and in answer to the question which that lady
      put to her in the words, 'Tell me, Annie, who is Mr. Maurice Regan?'
'Ah, mother told you his name that afternoon I was ironing, when she wouldn't let me sit in
      the parlour,' cried Annie; 'but I should have told you
       myself, all the same. Maurice Regan is the gentleman you saw me talking with. He
      is—I mean—I am—'
She was confused and could get no further. Hippolyta came to her aid.
'You mean to say he is your lover. But when I passed you were quarrelling, I thought.'
Annie looked down at her work. 'Yes, we were,' she said; 'but it was only a lovers quarrel.
      Maurice adores me, and I adore him.'
'And was he asking you to do something you didn't like?' inquired Mrs. Malcolm, who thought
      she had better let Annie tell the story her own way piecemeal.
'No, it was not that,' replied the girl. 'I wanted him to take me away. I did,' she
      repeated, as if in answer to the look of sorrow and astonishment on the lady's countenance. 'I
      hate staying at home. Father makes it so miserable. And I hate him,' she concluded
      vehemently.
Hippolyta put her hand on the wicked lips of the child, saying softly, 'My dear, my dear,
      don't utter such wrong words. Your father is a good man, and he loves you.'
'Why did he beat me then?' cried Annie in a shrill voice, pushing away the gentle hand which
      would fain have stilled her irreverence. 'He shall not have the chance of beating me long, I
      can tell him.' She spoke loud, as if there was some one in the next room that would hear what
      she said. Hippolyta was
       more grieved than shocked. How to bring back so wayward a being to the sense of
      duty?
'I suppose,' she said after a pause, when Annie had had time to reflect, and had begun to
      fear the consequences of speaking out loud in such a grand room and before such a fine lady as
      Mrs. Malcolm, 'I suppose your father wanted to break you off being out late at night, in the
      streets. You cannot blame him for that.'
'Yes, I can,' said Annie, her spirit rising again; 'I wasn't doing anything. Why shouldn't I
      go about like other girls, instead of moping indoors? If I had always kept in the house I
      shouldn't have come to know a soul at Cousin Harriet's. Maurice says father was cruel to beat
      me, and he hates him too.'
'But why do you like running about after dark, Annie?' It was Hippolyta's purpose to probe
      as deeply, and yet as delicately as she could, into the mind of this rebellious creature, and
      to discover, if possible, a remedy for the unhappiness she was causing herself and others.
      Annie did not hesitate. She replied:
'I do like it, and I always did. If I stay with father and mother, it is all reading good
      books and talking as the priest does in church. I cannot stand it. I like doing as I like. Why
      should I be different from the other girls? They talk and sing and dance with their young men,
      and go to music halls, and they have nice things to eat and drink, and some of them don't work
      at all—' She stopped. She
       was going a step too far in her confidences, as she could perceive, being quick
      enough in her way, by the growing paleness of Mrs. Malcolm's cheek.
'Yes,' said Hippolyta in a low voice, 'there are thousands that never put their hand to
      anything useful. Would you wish to be one of them, you poor ignorant child?' She turned a
      wistful glance towards Annie. That young lady, but little abashed, made answer:
'I need not be one of them, if I can get Maurice to take me with him. He has plenty of money
      and a beautiful house, with servants, and horses, and carriages—'
'Then you have seen the house?' said Mrs. Malcolm, interrupting her; 'and it was there you
      went when your father and mother lost you, before Miss Thatchford took you into her service?'
      While she spoke Annie was listening attentively, but she would not answer for some time. She
      seemed to be turning over a resolution in her mind. Once and again she studied the lady's
      expression with a sharpness beyond her years, until at last, being apparently satisfied, she
      said somewhat less impetuously than usual:
'If you would not let anybody know that I asked, I should like—oh, you are such a good lady,
      I know you will help a poor girl in distress. It is no use telling father or mother, it will
      only make things worse. Do let me say it all to you, in confidence, as if I was going to
      confession. Please, will you, ma'am?' She was very imploring. Hippolyta considered.
       Annie would keep her secret, as she had kept it hitherto, unless the promise was
      made that it should go no further. And might it not be the girl's salvation for one of her own
      sex to become in this way her guardian?
'Very well,' said Hippolyta at length. 'I promise not to repeat what you are going to say,
      unless it is the only way to save you from the danger you have run into.'
'It will not be the only way,' she replied, 'as you will see when I give you the account.
      But you do promise?' Hippolyta repeated the assurance. Annie became very thoughtful, and broke
      down several times in trying to begin. It was with great difficulty that at last she said in a
      broken voice:
'When you saw me and Maurice we were quarrelling. I own it now, because I want some
      one to help me so badly. He went away in a passion, and I haven't—I haven't seen him since,
      and I don't know where he lives, and it is like being alive and yet screwed down in a coffin
      to live as I have been living all these weeks.' She gasped for breath and words failed her, as
      she put down the skirt she was working upon in a helpless way. She looked not only miserable,
      but ill and feverish.
'But surely,' said Hippolyta, moved with great commiseration towards her, and forgetting the
      circumstances which would have seemed to make this turn of events desirable, 'if he loves you,
      he will come again.'
'I don't know, I don't know,' sobbed Annie. 'He
       did come, twice, to see me in the lane, and when he began each time he was ever
      so kind and affectionate; but he got angry as soon as I asked him to take me from my wretched
      home. He said he was not ready, and I ought to wait and not be such a trouble. And then, when
      I began to press him a good deal more, he was so out of temper that he turned his back and
      walked away as fast as possible, and he would not come back when I called and ran after him.
      And he does not write or anything. What shall I do?' she cried wildly. 'If I cannot find him
      again I shall go clean out of my mind.'
'And you have no address, no means of writing to him?' inquired Mrs. Malcolm, her heart
      touched at the sight of distress which it had evidently cost an extreme effort not to show at
      the cottage, in the presence of the unhappy girl's parents. What a mockery was the so-called
      love of this Maurice Regan!
'There never was any address, and I haven't got a morsel of his handwriting,' said Annie
      with reluctance. 'We used to meet him, when I was with Cousin Harriet, at the Oxford or the
      Metropolitan, or wherever he sent word to Charlotte Fraser. Afterwards Charlotte and I didn't
      speak, but he would wait till I came out of the workroom in the evening, and come up as I was
      going home, and tell me where to meet him later.' She paused.
'But when last you left home, was it not to go to him?' Hippolyta felt she must ask this
      question.
       Annie's thoughts seemed to wander while she was answering.
'I couldn't stay quiet,' she said, 'that was why I ran away. I wanted to see Maurice; and
      though he knew I lived out here, he did not come as I thought he would. So I made up my mind
      to go and look for him at the old places where we used to meet. I had some money he gave me;
      but I was hardly certain whether his right name even was what he said. Only I did love him,
      and I do still; and I don't care what he does, I shall always be faithful to him.' The tone of
      intense gravity with which Annie uttered these words, coming in the midst of real and
      undisguised trouble, would have amused Hippolyta at another time. Annie Dauris believed in the
      mockheroic, and had no doubt practised it diligently. She must be fancying herself just then
      one of the distressed damsels whose abandonment by their lovers made the middle chapters—as it
      were the third and fourth acts —of those melodramas in prose which were the staple of her
      reading. But, unluckily, all the wretchedness was real; and the melodramatic winding-up was
      yet in the far distance, if it would ever come at all.
'Did you find him in the old places?' was Hippolyta's next question.
'Not for several nights, I didn't. I went all about, but I couldn't ask any one. I thought
      of waiting for Charlotte Fraser, but I was not going to give her the laugh over me; and I
      didn't know but he might have gone back to her, just for amusement,
       because he always told me he had not cared a bit about Charlotte. No more he
      had, I am sure. And I did see him at last, one night, as he was coming out of the Oxford. I
      ran to him and he seemed very glad. He called a cab and told me to get in, and gave the cabman
      the address, but I couldn't catch it.'
'Did he go with you?' said Hippolyta, waiting for the answer.
Annie did not return her glance, but answered quietly, 'No, he didn't go with me. And I
      wouldn't stay when I got there, late as it was. I got out of the cab and waited near the house
      a good many hours, until it began to rain. And he never came; and I was so desperate I went
      back all the way in the rain, and I don't know what I did the next days. I was mad, I think.
      It was after that Mrs. Wardlaw found me and took me to Miss Thatchford. And then the meetings
      began again, for I could get out unobserved, and this time I went to Charlotte Fraser's and we
      made it up. She did not care for him either. She had got somebody else, and she told him
      so,—better off, as she said, than he would ever be; but it was all brag, I daresay. But still,
      all the same, she was not jealous, and we used to meet one another sometimes at the house
      where she lived. That is one of the reasons why I never had Maurice's address. But I must get
      it now, or I shall do something to myself. Do you think he is gone for good? Oh, don't say
      that you think so.'
'I don't know,' answered Hippolyta very slowly, and
       as if some unseen power were putting the words on her unwilling lips. 'Would it
      not be the best for both of you?'
'But I tell you, dear lady,' cried Annie, in her desperation, rising to her feet, 'that we
      love one another; I know we do. It is as sure as God is in heaven. He told me again and again
      that he was never happy without me; he counted the minutes till I came. And I am never happy
      when he is away,' she said, falling back into her chair. 'Oh, if you know what it is to be
      wild with love, and to pine and die because you can't be near the man your heart is set on, do
      help me to find Maurice again. If I only knew where to write I would go down on my knees and
      thank you. He would be sure to come when I told him I was dying for the sight of his face once
      more.'
She was pitiably in earnest now, not melodramatic. Hippolyta, divided between her early
      feelings and the rapidly growing conviction that, love or no love, Maurice Regan was a
      scoundrel, did not know how to reply. She sat in front of the hysterical, passionate girl in
      silence, dismayed and terrified, unable to put forth a syllable which should express her
      feelings. But where intellect failed the heart knew its way. Rising and going near to Annie,
      she drew the unfortunate child to her breast, and while Annie wept the bitter, hopeless tears
      of disappointed affection, Hippolyta mingled her own with them. For a while there was no other
      sound in the room. Then, lifting her face to the lady whose arms were clasping her, Annie said
       in a whisper, 'Do, please, find out the address for me. Hippolyta shook her head
      sorrowfully. She was still undecided whether she ought to encourage any hope in that
      direction. What made her at last say, in almost as low a whisper as Annie's, the words that
      she had dreamt would never have passed her lips? Was it an inspiration, or was it a surrender?
      She did not know. The sentence was short and simple enough. She said, 'But, Annie, would Mr.
      Regan ever marry you?'
The words were no sooner out of her mouth than she coloured from brow to chin; a deep
      swarthy hue accompanied with a burning sense of shame overspread her whole countenance, her
      eyes filled with hot tears, and, unclasping Annie's arms, she went hastily towards a table
      that stood in a dark corner of the room, as though searching for something. Annie, on the
      point of replying, was startled into silence. What had come over the lady? Was she suddenly
      taken ill? That, perhaps, was the explanation, for Mrs. Malcolm, after moving the ornaments
      about which lay on the carved wood table, returned with a richly-chased flask of salvolatile,
      which she opened, and sprinkling some on her handkerchief put it to her forehead.
'Have you got a headache?' inquired Annie, brusquely to be sure, but not without feeling,
      thoughtless as she commonly was of the sufferings of any one but herself.
'It is gone now,' said Hippolyta, laying down the flask. She could not continue the
      conversation which
       was raising so great a storm in her breast. But she must inquire of Annie what
      her design had been in beginning it. 'What do you want me to do?' she said, almost in the tone
      she would have employed towards a stranger whom she distrusted. Annie, intent on her own
      projects, did not observe it.
'I want Maurice's address,' she answered, 'and you could get it from his brother the
      clergyman, Mr. Philip Regan, if you asked him, without saying who it was for. If I went to him
      he would perhaps give me in charge for coming about the house. At any rate he would never tell
      me, for he doesn't want me to know; he thinks I am Maurice's ruin. He said so that night in
      Dorset Square.'
'But I am not acquainted with Mr. Philip Regan,' returned Hippolyta; 'he would not be likely
      to tell a stranger who did not explain her purpose.'
'Oh, but you are a lady, and if you called on him the clergyman would very likely tell you
      anything you wanted very much to know. I can show you where he lives. He goes a good deal
      among the poor people in his neighbourhood. It is near Saffron Hill. I have been there; I went
      with Charlotte once to hear the singing at the Italian church, and as we were coming home she
      pointed to the other church that Maurice's brother belongs to. Maurice lives somewhere else,
      by himself, he told me.'
Annie was beseeching and tearful, but she did not know the difficulties that lay in Mrs.
      Malcolm's path, or the feelings, so entirely different from her own,
       which struggled for the mastery in Hippolyta's bosom. There was the danger of an
      expedition into the heart of London, with all that might spring out of meeting a clergyman
      who, if he came so much in contact with the poor, would perhaps have heard of Colonel Valence,
      and might know those who would recognise Colonel Valence's daughter. But the main peril was of
      another kind. Had not fortune been dealing tenderly with Annie Dauris in taking away her
      unprincipled admirer and putting a great distance between them; and would it not be doing the
      girl an injury, an irreparable injury, to help towards a renewal of their acquaintance? On the
      other hand, she was not only foolish but stiff-necked, and more likely to run the worst risks
      than to give up the chance of discovering where Maurice Regan lived. With an invalid mother,
      and a father whose control over her was utterly at an end, she needed a friend, a counsellor,
      prepared to watch every step she took. 'There is none but I,' said Hippolyta to herself. 'And
      how can one that has assumed the character of a Mrs. Malcolm be a protection to such a girl as
      Annie?'
While she was turning over these things painfully in her mind, and her young companion sat
      looking and waiting for an answer, the street door was heard to open and close, and a step
      came along the hall. Hippolyta started up and threw down her work. She recognised the footfall
      outside. 'It is Rupert,—Mr. Malcolm,' she said in a hurried voice, and, leaving Annie, she ran
      out of the room. The sound of joyful exclamations
       and lovers' greetings reached the girl where she sat, and brought tears of rage
      and envy into her eyes. Why were other women to be so happy and she so miserable? Mrs. Malcolm
      was good, but she could have hated Mrs. Malcolm; she hated all the world. In a few minutes
      Hippolyta came back, radiant, glowing with the unexpected delight of Rupert's presence. 'You
      must go now, my dear child,' she said, taking Annie affectionately round the neck; 'we shall
      not be able to do any more dressmaking to-day.'
The other, rising up to go, turned her large eyes upon Hippolyta and only replied by
      repeating her question, 'Will you find out for me about Maurice?'
The happy woman, rapturous at her own lover's arrival, could not be prudent or selfish then.
      She answered, 'If Rupert will allow me to go to Saffron Hill—if he does not think it wrong—I
      will call on Mr. Philip Regan, and tell you what he says.'
Annie lifted Hippolyta's hand to her lips with sudden passion, and went away.

</div></body></text></TEI>