<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III O RICHEST FORTUNE SOURLY CROST!
When Glanville awoke, rather late next morning, and glanced out of his window, he
      found that his dream had not been all a dream. The early hours must have been stormy, for the
      air had a moist fragrance, and the foliage on every side seemed to be glistening with
      raindrops. It would be an uncertain, changing day, rather dark than light, and not favourable
      for painting had he intended it. But the painting of the Great Hall was a long way off. He did
      not know whether his designs would meet with approval now that a professed (and probably
      ridiculous) antiquarian had come on the scene, to vex him with pedantic theories. He knew that
      Lord Trelingham had in these matters sound sense and judgement, however little of either he
      might display where the ritual of his creed was concerned. But he wanted no Mr. Truscombe to
      meddle; and he was resolved to keep him at arm's length. Whilst girding
       himself up with these and the like fierce thoughts of combat, he heard the
      breakfast-bell. It was, for a wonder, sweet-toned and musical; and, as he hurried down, he
      asked himself whether Lady May shared his intense dislike of gongs and other such barbaric
      instruments, and whether it was by her doing that the first morning-sounds were made pleasant
      to waking ears.
'You see,' he said, on wishing her good-morning, 'it was your prophetic sense that made you
      think of rain. It seems to have come in good earnest. Last night you must have heard it
      creeping over the sea.'
'Then I am a prophetess of evil,' said Lady May, 'for there has not been such a storm this
      long while. I could not sleep for the uproar it made.'
'No,' said Tom Davenant, coming in, 'you are too nervous. But have you seen what has
      happened in the picture-gallery?'
The Earl followed him in haste. 'Oh, my dear May,' he said, 'such a misfortune! One of the
      windows in the picture-gallery blew in during the storm, and has been shattered to pieces. And
      the portrait of Lady Elizabeth is ruined—utterly ruined.'
Lord Trelingham never lost his temper at the worst of times. He would have gone to the
      scaffold with placidity in a good cause. But he looked exceedingly distressed now. 'Lady
      Elizabeth's portrait,' he murmured; 'I should not have cared for any other.'
'Oh, father, what a pity!' said May in a feeling
       voice. 'How sorry you will be! Did it fall, or what was the accident?'
His distress instantly called out her sympathy.
'Ruined, ruined!' her father reiterated. 'It was found this morning by Redwood lying across
      some chairs; the canvas not only scratched, but torn in several places, as if it had been
      paper, and the face of the portrait damaged worse than all the rest.'
'It must have been struck bodily from the wall,' said Tom Davenant, 'by the window frame
      when it was blown in. You never saw such confusion. Glass, woodwork, and canvas all in a heap
      together. But can nothing be done? Here is Mr. Glanville,' he went on, turning to the artist;
      'he can tell us better than any one whether the harm can be put right.'
'I am at lord trelingham's service,' replied Glanville; 'shall I go at once and examine the
      picture?'
'You are very kind,' said the Earl, 'but you must not stir till you have breakfasted. There
      is no haste. The workmen have boarded up the window, and laid the picture in a safe
      place.'
There was a pause, during which, with subdued mien, the others addressed themselves to the
      duty of breakfasting. But the Earl could scarcely eat. 'We shall feel the loss of it, May,' he
      said to his daughter in a husky voice. 'You will feel it.'
'Never mind me,' she answered; 'if nothing can be done I shall know how to bear it. But till
      Mr.
       Glanville has said restoration is impossible we ought to hope.'
'I have always thought the history was not concluded yet,' he murmured as if to himself.
Lady May caught the words. 'No history ever is,' she said.
The meal ended they moved to the picture-gallery, a long, narrow apartment on the first
      floor, running half the length of the terrace and with an entrance from the Great Hall. There
      were portraits on one side and windows on the other, with one in addition, that which had
      blown in during the storm, at the end. Exclamations broke from the lips of all when the havoc
      met their eyes. Fragments of the casement were lying on the polished floor, and mixed with
      them were great pieces of the heavy gilt moulding which had been shattered as the picture
      fell. The canvas, rent in more than one place, was set upright against the wall where the
      light fell full on it. When Glanville came up the others drew back. He went close to the
      picture, and his first exclamation was one of intense surprise. 'Why,' he cried, 'it is a
      Spanish altar-piece.'
'And a family portrait,' said the Earl. 'I will tell you,' he continued, with some
      hesitation, 'the history, or what I can of it, in time—but first examine its condition.'
Glanville stepped back to take a general view. The picture had been, undoubtedly, a
      masterpiece. He did not recognise the painter. But whoever he
       may have been, the school to which he belonged was manifest in the splendour of
      colouring, the bold design, and the deep religious earnestness that distinguished his
      composition. An altar-piece it was, as the Earl said,—an Assumption of the Virgin, but
      altogether unlike that monotonous repetition which fills our galleries from London to Naples,
      of a single feminine figure, with a moon beneath her feet shaped to resemble a bent bar of
      yellow soap, while winged baby-heads float round her on clouds of milliner's gauze. This
      picture combined the intense realism in the human forms which is characteristic of Spanish
      painting, with a transparent depth of air, a vastness of prospect, a visionary glory in the
      distance; in seemed to draw out on every side as the artist gazed, and to lift him into the
      serene expanse through which the crowned Madonna rose towards heaven. She did not float on
      stationary clouds, as though her journey were ended; in the upward tending of the hands, in
      the sweeping forward of kingly messengers clad in glittering raiment and borne along upon
      eagles wings, as if to herald her coming; in the whirlwind that seemed to take her waving
      garments, shot through with gold, as she was rapt away from this lower world, and to have
      caught up with her the attendant saints—a mighty company, in their pure white and crimson,—the
      sense of a quickening magnetic motion made itself felt, a rushing onward from sphere to
      sphere, while in the dim and starry distance portals shone half-opened, and round about them
      an awful faint-toned halo, like
       a cloud or a rainbow, hiding yet betokening the mystery that should be revealed.
      A glorious work of genius, but ruined. Yes, it was too true. That which must have been the
      perfection of the whole, its central glory—the ecstatic countenance of the Virgin—was defaced,
      was almost beyond recognition. The crown, with its jewelled light, could still be made out;
      the Madonna's features were gone.
'How very lovely!' said Glanville after a long pause. 'And how hopeless, I fear, to restore
      it! Even if the canvas could be joined and the colouring touched again, how could the most
      daring painter reproduce the head of the Virgin? There is nothing to copy from, and, judging
      by the rest of the figure, it must have been a peculiarly striking and original face.'
'Oh,' replied Lord Trelingham, 'we need be at no loss for an original, if the picture were
      otherwise capable of being restored. You have only to look at my daughter, Lady May, and you
      will see the face that was vanished.'
'Indeed! What an extraordinary thing!' cried the artist, turning from the picture to the
      lady, who stood blushing a little and with her eyes averted. 'You were saying that this
      altar-piece, for such it is, was likewise a family portrait. Did I hear the name of Lady
      Elizabeth? And it was like Lady May. Yes, I can just fancy, when I look very closely into it,
      that there is left even now some shadow of resemblance. But how comes it, if I may ask? Do
       tell me the story whilst I go on with my examination. I cannot decide in a moment
      how this should be treated.'
There was a pause. The strangers who were present silently withdrew, leaving Lord Trelingham
      and his daughter with Mr. Glanville. These three sat down in front of the picture. 'You have a
      morning's work cut out for you, I should think,' said Tom Davenant. 'I will go round to the
      stables and come back in an hour or so, in case you want me.' And that unromantic youth, in
      whose ears the family chronicles had been repeated without their making the slightest
      impression on his memory, went off in his careless way with his hands in his pockets. His
      cousin looked after him and smiled a little sarcastically. Then she said, 'Well, papa, Mr.
      Glanville wants you to begin.' Her father seemed to be hesitating; and one might have fancied
      that he did not wish to pursue the subject. He said rather hastily, 'May, my dear, I am not
      very good at telling a story. I hardly know where to begin. The portrait came into my hands
      soon after my father's death, during the war of the Spanish succession.' He paused again, and
      with some agitation turned to the artist and laid his hand on his shoulder—'My dear Mr.
      Glanville,' he said, 'the associations this picture brings up to me are very painful; much
      more so than my daughter has reason to suspect. It is years since I spoke of them to any one.
      But in the short time of our acquaintance,
       which, however, should be reckoned since I came to know your paintings rather
      than from the day when I first called at your studio, I have come to think of you, if you will
      allow me to say so, as a friend. It is a sad story. I do not know the whole of it, but I will
      endeavour to repeat the chief incidents.'
Glanville was touched by the old man's simplicity and kindly tone. A soft light came into
      his eyes and his swarthy cheek grew ruddier as he murmured, 'You are very good to me, Lord
      Trelingham; I shall be happy to do all in my power.' And Lady May looked pleased, and eager to
      hear what was coming.
'I know,' she said to Glanville, 'the picture is like my father's sister, who died before I
      was born, and I am told it is like me. Colonel Valence brought it from Spain. I have often
      wondered why he gave it to the family when he has never been a friend of ours.'
'He was a dear friend of mine once,' replied her father. 'If he was not so later, perhaps I
      am in a measure to blame. But the past is past, and we can never recall it. Let me tell you
      the history in a few words, Mr. Glanville.'
He looked down, as if collecting his thoughts, and began in a low meditative voice, like one
      who watches the scenes of earlier days emerging into daylight, from the dim recesses where
      they hide, at his summoning.

'Edgar Valence and I were boys together; at home, where his father's little estate joined
      Trelingham Chase, as you may see in your ride this afternoon; at school, where he was my
      senior, and I counted it great good fortune that I was allowed to fag for him; and at
      Cambridge, where he was so distinguished and I of so little consequence that to be noticed by
      him was enough to make one proud. I thought him the finest fellow in the world; I loved and
      admired him and everything he did, and took him as my pattern hero. When he came down from the
      University my father welcomed him as much for his sake as for mine, and he was looked upon as
      one of ourselves. It was a happy time, and I thought it would last for ever. What a charm
      there was in his company, his bright fanciful talk, his quick reasoning, his decision and
      boldness of character! It enchanted us all; and my sister, Lady Alice Davenant, who was then a
      girl of seventeen, fell in love with him and he with her. They found it out one Long Vacation
      when he was at home, and they made no secret of it. My father, not unwillingly, gave his
      consent. Edgar Valence had nothing to call wealth, but he was of ancient descent, great
      talent, and unblemished reputation. He might be expected to win fame in the world if an
      opening were afforded him. My sister need not have despaired of being one day a Prime
      Minister's wife did she marry Edgar Valence. The engagement was not announced. Both the young
      people felt that a delay of some years was
       inevitable; and Valence went back to pursue his studies at Cambridge.
'He and I were of the same college, though in very different sets, for my tastes led me in
      the direction of religious and ecclesiastical subjects—in short, towards the movement which,
      beginning at Oxford, had now affected Cambridge also; whilst his, I am sorry to say, had
      thrown him into society which, intellectual though it may have called itself, was frivolous
      and unbelieving. Valence was a young man of the world; he had never been a fervent Christian,
      and his studies and associations received that year an unfortunate bent, from which they never
      recovered. He became an open, a violent atheist. He said the most daring things, scoffed at
      the University authorities, took my own remonstrances by no means in the affectionate spirit
      which, I trust, dictated them, and saved himself from expulsion only by quitting Cambridge in
      a fit of passion and taking his name off the books. He returned, a changed and deteriorated
      man, to his father's house. A ruined man, alas! for it was well known why he had left the
      University; and in those days unbelief roused a universal horror and was visited with social
      excommunication. It is not so now,' said Lord Trelingham, interrupting himself.
'No,' said Glanville, his eyes falling as he answered; 'I suppose people are more used to
      it. But how did the change affect Lady Alice? Did she also give him up?'

'I will tell you,' resumed the Earl. 'When my father heard of this extraordinary and painful
      lapse in one towards whom he cherished the kindliest feelings, he sent for Valence and kept
      him at Trelingham nearly a week, doing his best by argument and exhortation to bring him into
      a more suitable frame of mind. Lady Alice, who knew of what had taken place, joined her
      entreaties to her father's; and her evident distress might have wrought upon a more decided
      temper than that of Edgar Valence, had pride for the moment not dulled his affection. It
      proved all in vain. During their reiterated and, as one may suppose, not very calm
      discussions, bitter words passed on both sides, and my father could never forgive the harsh,
      the blasphemous denial by Valence of all that Christians deem sacred. My sister was no less
      horror-stricken; I cannot, however, think she was much to blame if an affection begun in
      childhood survived even this rude trial. When my father pointed out to Valence that while he
      continued an unbeliever his marriage with Lady Alice was out of the question, my sister
      silently acquiesced. She did not pretend that her feelings had altered; though she exhibited
      much self-control, she could not, in bidding her lover farewell, but whisper that she trusted
      the sky would clear again and all be as before. Valence was free, she said, but she had given
      him her heart and could wait until he was worthy of it. "That will never be," replied my
      father with some anger. "Valence has no heart
       himself, and what brain he has will bring him to little good. If he cannot
      believe in God, you ought never to believe in him . He will only deceive you."
      Valence said nothing, looked for an instant into Lady Alice's face, bowed haughtily to my
      father, and turned from the door. Once, and once only, was he fated to cross that threshold
      again.
'The engagement had been secret, and the secret was not told. After a few days spent in
      moody seclusion under his father's roof, Edgar Valence disappeared; and when I ran down at the
      end of term to Trelingham no one could inform me what had become of him. I was more grieved
      than I cared to show, for my father's anger increased as time went on, and he forgot the
      pleasant ways of the boy to remember only that they had ended in unbelief and blasphemy. Lady
      Alice never spoke of Edgar, and I was afraid to touch that quivering string, for I saw that
      she suffered. Two years passed, and still no tidings came. We had settled down into our
      accustomed ways, except that my father was now an invalid, and Lady Alice spent most of her
      time in attending to his comfort. We were not unhappy together. I began to think my sister
      would never marry, for she went into no society, and declined more than one brilliant proposal
      of marriage without assigning any reason. I asked her one evening whether she thought Edgar
      Valence might return, whether she hoped it; and she replied: "I cannot tell; but when I gave
      him my promise it
       was once for all, and I will never break it." I argued that her promise was no
      longer binding, that Edgar himself had tacitly released her, since he neither came, nor wrote,
      nor gave sign that he was living. I might have spared my pains; they were thrown away upon her
      loyal and passionate nature. Poor Alice!' said the Earl; 'you often remind me of her, May,
      with your enthusiasm and poetic outbursts, and the steady look in your eyes. There is a
      wonderful likeness between you and my sister when she was nineteen, in that troubled uncertain
      time which elapsed from the day of Edgar's disappearance till we heard of him again.'
'Yes,' replied Lady May, 'you did hear of him again, to be sure, and in a singular fashion.
      I know that part of the story.'
'You know some of it,' said Lord Trelingham. 'I will now tell you the rest, so far as I can
      unravel this tangled skein. On a certain morning, as we sat at breakfast and the letters were
      brought in, I noticed that a large one addressed to me seemed quite covered with
      travel-stains, and before I could think whose writing it was, the post-marks, which were very
      numerous, caught my attention, and I exclaimed, "A letter from Spain; who can have sent it?"
      Lady Alice looked up from her own correspondence; and as I held the letter out, she said with
      a kind of gasp, "It is from Edgar," and sank fainting to the ground. Great confusion ensued,
      as was natural; my sister did not recover at once, and when she did
       her distress was piteous to see. Joy and grief seemed to be struggling for the
      mastery; she put out her hand as if to grasp the letter, and then, whispering like one upon
      whom a great fear has fallen, she said to me, "Look at the date. It may be long ago, and
      perhaps, now, he is dead." I cannot express to you the passionate yearning she threw into her
      words, but I shall never forget them whilst I live. She sat trembling, and I broke the seal.
      It bore a date some twelve months back. My father, who had been silent until now, though
      painfully agitated, took the letter from my hand as I was on the point of reading it, and
      said, "Alice, I promise that you shall hear everything in this which you ought to know; but
      there may be—in short, your brother and I will read it first, and you meanwhile lie down in
      your own room and endeavour to compose yourself." She was led with tottering steps from the
      room. Even in my haste I was obliged to open the letter carefully, for it was written on the
      thinnest paper and would have borne very little more ill-usage. It began,—but stay,—I will
      bring you the strange document and you shall read its very words. I have kept it among my
      papers.' And as he spoke the Earl rose and left the picture-gallery. Lady May turned to the
      window and gazed out on the sky, which had in nothing abated of its sombreness; in the heavens
      was a wild and shifting dance of clouds, directed, as it would seem, by an inconstant breeze,
      and upon the ear came a long low whisper from the
       waves which could be seen tossing on the beach and rolling out again to sea.
      Glanville was deep in contemplation of the wreck before him. 'No one,' he said half aloud,
      'can tell me what to do with this, except Ivor Mardol.'
The lady came back at the sound of his voice. 'And who is Ivor Mardol?' she said.
Before he had time to answer Lord Trelingham entered. He bore in his hand a yellow,
      dingycoloured epistle, which, when it was unfolded, almost fell to pieces. He spread it out on
      a table near the window, for it was growing very dark, and said to the artist: 'Your young
      eyes will decipher this better than mine. It is written, however, in a beautiful hand. Edgar
      Valence did all things gracefully and was noted for his penmanship. Will you read it aloud? My
      daughter knows part of the story, but never till this moment have I shown her Valence's
      letter.'

</div></body></text></TEI>