<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER X COMPANIONED BY DIVINER HOPES
' Thursday ,—18—. It seems only the other day since I took possession of the
      Hermitage; and it is more than a month. What a gap in these pages! I have never been a careful
      annotator of the day's work. The less I had done, the less I was inclined to write it; when my
      hands were full I grudged the time. But this evening I have lighted my reading-lamp, drawn the
      curtains, stirred the wood fire into a blaze, and, seated where I can enjoy its cheerful glow
      and feel its warmth, must make an effort, in the only way endurable, to hold up the mirror
      before me and view therein my counterfeit presentment. The time is propitious. Thanks to Van
      Helmont and his alchemist fore-fathers, I have at any rate restored the surface of the Virgin
      of the Seraphim. My composition, as binding as Roman cement, smooth enough to lay upon it the
      most delicate colours, and no thicker than a
       transparent wash, will endure from Rupert's hand whatever treatment he may
      attempt. Who says that alchemy was good for nothing? or that poring over its obscure and dusty
      records will bring no reward? If I had not been drawn to them, held by them, lost in them
      during weeks of seeming idleness, the Madonna would still be a dismal sight, instead of
      inviting a great modern artist to add the finishing touch, and promising to shine out again
      among the Trelingham portraits.
'I have done what was required, and should be returning to London when my portmanteau is
      packed. Do I think of going? No. I must if the Earl does not bid me stay. But I am confident
      he will. There is the Great Hall to be commenced now. Rupert's designs will have to be made
      out, and I can help him better than any one else. Why should I not render him the service he
      expects? Admirable reasoning, Ivor! And is it what you mean? Come, my friend, be plain with
      yourself; there is not a soul listening. Let me cross-examine you a little. Now, sir, what are
      you by profession? A philosopher. Good. It is not the commonest trade in these times. And what
      kind of philosopher?—do you pretend to know the essences of things, entities, quiddities, and
      all the rest? You do not? You hold with an uncouth Athenian sculptor, who carved badly, but
      argued irresistibly, that your business, being a philosopher, is to know yourself and do your
      duty, not to peer into the mysteries of the gods. Yes, and you consider that a man should rise
      above his passions and control
       them, not be swayed as they move. For, you say, they run wild in every
      direction, all wanting to be satisfied at once, and, like horses that will not obey the rein,
      each of them pulls the way it would like to go, and is fain to drag the charioteer along with
      it. Right—quite right. You remember your Greek, I see. But, then, why do you think of staying
      here?
'Because the place is so beautiful, adapted exquisitely to my tastes and desires. I have
      travelled, but never dwelt in a lovely region like this. The air feels like home; the waters
      are ever sounding sweetly or solemnly in my ear, and when they lie down in perfect stillness
      the calm penetrates my innermost being, and is more delightful than the murmur of ocean. The
      mind grows clear; the passion for wisdom takes on a more ethereal hue; my thoughts seem
      larger, and become crystalline in depth and tranquillity. Without violating the secrets of the
      gods, I lift a corner of the veil of Isis, and fall down in reverence before a loveliness too
      awful to be disclosed.
'You speak very well, better than some books I have read. And, Ivor, were I not looking so
      straight at you, I should think this was not only the truth, but the whole truth. Ah, you
      colour at my insinuation; your eyes droop. I must ask no further. My dear young man, the
      lawyer shall give place to the physician, to the father confessor. Tell me what that feeling
      is which has begun to stir like a serpent in your bosom. I will not vex you, but suggest the
      healing remedies, if any there be.'

When Ivor Mardol had written thus far he laid down his pen, and, going to the window, drew
      aside the curtain and looked out. He was in the largest chamber of the Hermitage, called the
      study, which permitted a view along the gorge and down to the sea. A portion of the
      overhanging roof had been taken away, to allow of sufficient light for mending the canvas and
      for such bits of engraving as Mardol might undertake during his leisure. It was a silent,
      starlit night. No moon was in the sky, nor any cloud. The air, though not frosty, was keen and
      dry, for a wind came at intervals out of the north and swept noiselessly along, brushing away
      the evening vapours which lingered about the Hermitage. Everywhere, as he looked, the stars
      broke on his view sparkling with soft light, not wildly, as when a throbbing seems to take the
      heavens, but in mild serenity and with friendly glances at the mortal who beheld them. 'The
      thousand eyes are looking into mine,' he murmured, remembering that conversation on the
      watch-tower with Lady May. Her dark eyes, too,— he was not likely to forget them. How
      beautiful and piercing they were! they seemed to look through you. But the light in them was
      fitful, not serene; it came and went in sudden flashes, startling you as with unexpected
      questionings. It did not speak of calm or comfort; the deep resignation which that silent
      night inspired,—how unlike the restlessness, the languor, yearning, melancholy, the fretting
      desire which their glance quickened into life within him. He was
       alone now, in the presence of infinite worlds, each an abyss of splendour, a
      flaming ocean pouring out its waves upon Eternity, unhasting, unresting, bound by obedience to
      unspeakable laws which might not be transgressed, moving towards a goal that no man should
      ever behold. Could human passion endure in the greatness of the midnight spectacle? What was
      it but a little flame springing up out of the dust and dying down in a moment,—a handful of
      dry heather set on fire and cast into the waters of death? Should he break his heart because
      no flame answered his? For a long while he stood motionless, absorbed in meditation. An hour
      passed, but he did not move; his mind, intently thinking, controlled the muscles of the limbs;
      as though he were out of the body, his spirit sweeping through the countless worlds, beheld
      their greatness, their strange magnificence, their lonely spaces where living thing had never
      breathed nor would breathe, and unbroken solitude had reigned from the immeasurable past
      Eternity, as it would reign into the Eternity to come. He did not strive to leap the bounds of
      ordinance and break through the guarded gates into the mystery beyond. It was enough to open
      his eyes and see what was before him. The longer he thought the more was his mind overwhelmed,
      subdued, penetrated, cleansed from earthly desires and lifted out of itself. Again, the
      beautiful face, with its piercing passionate glances, came across the vision; but it had lost
      its power. It passed by like a falling star, vanishing in the
       steadfast night of eternity. And the awful silent heavens looked down and were
      reflected in the waters of the shining mere; and deep calm fell upon Ivor. He drew the curtain
      again, sat down, took up his pen with a firm hand, and wrote:—
'If hitherto I have been so foolish as to dream of love, and such a love, here is the end.
      It is not for me. I know my calling, to which, until I found myself at Trelingham, I have
      never been disloyal. These moments of madness shall not count. Let me recall them now that
      they belong to the past; let me examine, in the starry light of intellect, a passion to which,
      as I think, I yielded too much, but hope to yield no more. The most efficacious means of
      vanquishing a sentiment is, say the wise masters, to put it under the microscope and analyse
      it to the last fibre. I doubt that a mistress's letters, howsoever tender and eloquent they
      seem to the lover, would charm or subdue if he read them critically to see where the charm
      lay. I will pluck up this fast-growing wild rose by the roots, trace the delicate, almost
      invisible threads which it was insinuating into my heart, and leave it, a beautiful dead
      thing, perfect but withered, compressed between these pages. Am I strong enough to be fair to
      myself, resolved enough not to run a further risk? But should I not still be exposed to
      temptation, while the warm earth cherished the seed of love? Out with it to the surface; let
      the light kill it! But in what way? Let me think. This book,
       so scanty in its record of facts, is abundant in delineation of moods and
      feelings. I always meant to make it an autobiography,—the travels of a soul towards truth.
      Why, now, should I not take Carlyle's advice, and set down the story of my life? Why not, like
      Jean Paul, in that charming brief fragment of his, become the professor of biography to
      myself? It will bring out the contrast which would make any love of mine for Lady May
      ridiculous; and I might turn to these pages for a little cooling of my infatuation should it
      return. The sweet poison must not run in my veins any longer. This antidote shall allay its
      fury. Do but let me begin at the beginning, and not spare the subject of the story out of
      misplaced tenderness.
'Ivor Mardol, then, a young man of uncertain age, but, as he believes, verging on thirty, of
      plain features, less than the middle height, and surely not well connected,—ay, that is the
      inventory.
'Of my birth and parentage I know less than a workhouse orphan, except that neither can have
      signified to the world at large; for it is something to be chargeable to the parish. All I
      know is that I was brought up by good-natured, affectionate people, who told me I was no child
      of theirs. The old man taught me to draw, praised my ability, set me to learn what I could,
      being a mere lad, of the technique of engraving, and took me with him, almost as soon as I
      could walk, to his workman's club, his tradesunion meetings, his political association, his
      temperance
       and vegetarian propaganda, but at no time to church. He did not believe greatly
      in churches. However, I soon learnt that the world was a busy place; and strange to say, I
      learnt equally soon that I had nothing to do with its concerns. I liked to see and hear human
      beings. To attend a crowded meeting and listen to straightforward, energetic speeches,
      interrupted, encouraged, sometimes put an end to, by a vast audience upon whom not a word fell
      unobserved,—this was to me as animating as it was instructive. All the arguments I heard were
      of much the same import; they dwelt on the misery of the masses and proved it by appealing to
      ourselves. I was not miserable; I had all I wanted. But I knew of some in my own street that
      had nothing, to whom the charity of neighbours supplied a crust now and then, while at other
      times they went hungry to bed. Did I feel for them? Have I not often sat down with tears in my
      eyes to our simple table, because I could not share my little meal with the poor wretches? I
      pitied, I caressed the tiny children, so begrimed and neglected, as they sat shivering on the
      door-step near the street lamp, afraid to go into the dark when night was fallen on the huge
      city, and mothers and sisters had left them at home—left them on what a business too often!
      That, too, I was not long in learning; the children of the poor know everything. They cannot
      be blessedly ignorant like those who are fenced round about in luxurious mansions and pleasant
      gardens whither evil does not
       penetrate easily. But I have known them, though not ignorant, innocent; though
      acquainted so young with the ways of life, modest and self-respecting. My teacher might have
      forbidden me to make friends among these outcast children. He did no such thing. He trusted to
      the moral influence of the movement of reform to which he belonged; and his trust was not in
      vain. Deeply impressed as I was, at an incredibly early date, with a sense of the many things,
      too bad for improvement, that could not and ought not to endure, there was little room left in
      my thoughts for what was base or ignoble. I have smiled since on hearing it said that children
      are too young to understand these things. How young was I when the problem of social misery,
      shouted from a hundred platforms, became to me as real a fact as it is this night?
'But still, it was a problem in which others were affected, and I on their behalf, not on my
      own. The days of my childhood were solitary, and not at all unhappy. I could have wished for a
      companion in the evenings; I longed to know my father and mother. There came rainy hours to
      vary the long calm sunshine, and, like other children, I wept, even bitterly. But it was
      seldom. Mr. Mardol and his wife displayed the tenderest fondness for a child who lacked
      neither discernment to recognise their affection nor the feeling of gratitude that was all he
      could give in return. I do not mean that he was unloving, far from it; but he knew they were
      not his parents,
       and he would have deemed it somehow a violation of the duty he owed elsewhere to
      love them as such. A curious distinction for a boy to make! He had, in truth, from the
      beginning a quick and delicate sense for the moral aspects of things, developed by his
      intimacy with men who were all day long discoursing of the just and the unjust, the rational
      order of the world, and the inherent defects of existing institutions. I have read nothing in
      the debates of Parliament or the works of political economists with which as a boy I was not
      familiar. The handling is not always so good; the amount of conventional falsehood seems to me
      immeasurably greater.
'Had I lived in my own family, or known what it was to have brothers and sisters, I too must
      have thrown myself as I grew up into the reform movement. To change the world, one must have a
      home, a country, a religion. It is that which gives the local habitation and the name, apart
      from which our aspirations are like the poet's dream—airy nothings. But I had neither home,
      nor country, nor religion. I had only myself and this kind-hearted philosophy. It charmed my
      imagination; it roused me at the great meetings to enthusiasm; it did not hinder me from
      falling back into that solitary world where I was the only figure. I learned much, and with
      superhuman quickness; I spent hour after hour at my teacher's side, watching all he did, and
      copying it as he allowed me, always with astonishing accuracy for so young a hand. The good
      man looked on
       me, I think, as something uncanny. I must, indeed, have been a weird, elfish
      creature. And how I went on dreaming, longing, imagining, ever under a presentiment that,
      sooner or later, a figure would step down to me from the unknown world, and I should enter
      upon a fresh chapter of existence! Not that I despised my station, or coveted the rich wares I
      saw in shop-windows, or thought as I went by the enormous palaces of Belgravia and Tyburnia,
      that I should like to live in them. My dream did not run thus. I saw myself restored to father
      and mother, or kissing the lips of a baby-sister, and wandering in the fields, holding my
      new-found father's hand. An idle dream! But, surely, innocent enough.
'The fresh chapter of existence opened at last, when I was not expecting it. There was one
      day in the year, and only one, that Mr. Mardol had a fancy for keeping. It was Christmas Day.
      He did not go to church, and he despised the festive decorations by which his neighbours
      marked their enjoyment. But, if the day was fine, he took his wife and me for a walk in the
      green country, which then lay nearer London than it does now. We went just so far as to be out
      of the clash and jangle of the Christmas bells, but not far enough to lose their delicious
      chiming when heard in the distance. While we wandered quietly along, my teacher would take up
      his favourite parable and expound to us the universal charity of Nature; for he never uttered
      the name of God. He enlarged on the bounty that sends us
       not only what we may eat and drink, but wise men, in whom there are thoughts by
      which we may live and learn to care for one another. He told over their names; he spoke of
      their sufferings, their triumphs, their undying influence; and he chose, as the greatest
      example, the name which so many in gross and ignorant fashion were celebrating that day. He
      said a man could do nothing so good as follow His example and labour to change the world in
      His spirit. Occasionally, he would read a few words from the story of His life; but this was
      not often, and the only book he would not have me peruse was the Christian Bible.
'I liked what he read; but I did not think of disobeying his wishes. What took up my
      thoughts a great deal more was the fancy, which I indulged without breathing a word to any
      one, that Christmas Day was my birthday, to be kept sacred by me, to be filled with a
      vision of home and all that I was by and by to recover of my inheritance of love.
      Christmastide for me meant infinite hopes, unquenchable desires. I, too, was to taste the joys
      of childhood, and be folded to a mother's bosom. While old Mr. Mardol was speaking of the
      dream of innocence long banished from mankind, or to be found only in the hearts of children;
      when he prophesied that by the law of progress it would in due time become no dream, but a
      universal reality, and the age of reason, of obedience to nature, of unpurchased happiness and
      sylvan delights, be ushered in with
       acclamation, and terminate the ferocious strife of man with man, by a treaty of
      eternal brotherhood, my heart warmed within me, and I saw myself roaming the beautiful forest
      and playing in its sunlit glades, not an orphan or an outcast, but restored to all that loved
      me and were by me beloved. I could think of no progress but the change from my wintry
      desolation to a home looking out on the wide world, yet centred in the rustic cabin of my
      parents. For it was the firm conviction of Mr. Mardol, as of thousands besides, that, when the
      day came, mankind would pour out of their enormous modern towns, as on the opening of the
      prison gates captives rush forth in ecstasy, and would never more shut out the air and light
      of heaven with high walls and crowded habitations, or heap together corrupting luxuries, every
      one of which was soaked or stained with the blood and sweat of unrewarded toilers. He called
      the splendid capitals of Europe and America mouths of hell, where flame and smoke ascended day
      and night without ceasing, and the shrieks of the damned for ever filled the mirky air. But
      for the sense of duty which kept him where the battle raged, he would have sold what he
      possessed and gone away, when he was young and active, to the uncolonised lands in which a man
      might live as nature intended. But it was a task laid upon him, laid upon me too, he repeated
      with solemn emphasis, to aid in conquering from effete civilisation the countries on which it
      had inflicted wars and pestilence and famine, and a
       tyranny as hurtful to the few that exercised it as to the millions who could not
      shake it off. Meanwhile, we must share the captivity of our brethren, and teach them to forge
      weapons whereby freedom might be won. I felt that he spoke nobly; I was eager to follow his
      lead; but my imagination delighted in the remote continents whose soil was yet virgin, and
      whose pathless woods owned no sovereignty but nature's. I longed to lose myself in the vast
      solitude, with only the stars to tell me whether I was travelling towards the equator or the
      pole; I spent in thought more hours than I can reckon floating down the mighty rivers in the
      canoe I had with my own hands hollowed out of a fallen trunk,—floating, dreaming, as the
      waters bore me onward between forest and forest, the endless branches interlacing over my
      head, and almost shutting out the sky. Was I called to be a soldier in the war against corrupt
      civilisation, my pleasure should be to explore in fancy the beautiful regions I could not
      otherwise attain. I was, and have remained amid a variety of changes, an untamable creature, a
      denizen of woods and wild places. The deep seclusion of this valley, where now I am writing,
      the loneliness of the Hermitage, have for me a charm which only those can experience who,
      living much in the throng of civilised men, yet strange to their ways and feelings, are in
      dreams transported into the midst of landscapes they have never with waking eyes beheld.
'Our Christmas morning walk did not take us into
       the mighty woods of Brazil—my favourite hunting-ground in fancy—nor over the
      rolling savannahs of South America. There were times when snow or frost kept us within all
      day. Invariably, if we had spent the early hours abroad, we came home to our meal of
      deliciously-dressed herbs—for I have implied that Mr. Mardol was a vegetarian, and on the same
      principle was I brought up. When the dishes were cleared away, we would sit round a blazing
      fire, kept up in all its glory by Mrs. Mardol to whom the warmth was grateful and almost the
      only enjoyment in which she displayed what her husband termed an unphilosophical excess. He
      did not grudge the wood or the coals, however, and, as he sat there, sipping his glass of
      water, he would tell me stories of his youth and his old companions; how some realised in
      humble station the meaning and the joy of an earnest human life, and others, the many, had
      been as thriftless and pleasure-seeking as though born to high estate. The dispositions of
      men, he said, did not correspond to the cleavage of ranks. But it was his way to enlarge on
      the good he had known rather than to dishearten me by dwelling on the bad. Then he would
      recall his own adventures, which were amusing sometimes and singular; and he seldom left off
      ere he had drawn, with sharp strokes, in the manner of an engraving rather than a painted
      scene,—for it had no colour, only an admirable distinctness,—the sketch of some well-known
      hero that had risen, by labour and genius, to be great among his fellow-workmen
       and a power in the world's development. The saints of his calendar were such men
      as Franklin, Pallissy, Stephenson, James Watt, Ampère. But he admired them less when they
      became rich and famous than in their days of adversity. Of some he said that they had more
      energy than light; that, in accepting wealth they were false to the brethren; that the
      founders of the golden aristocracy were too often thieves, as those who had established the
      aristocracy of blood had been pirates and robbers. He was never long without coming back to
      his favourite theme, and I was never weary of it.
'I must have been about twelve years old, when, as the short afternoon of Christmas was
      closing in, and the blazing fire made a mixture of light and shade on our parlour ceiling, a
      ring came to the sidedoor, and Mr. Mardol, pausing in the story he was telling,—I remember it
      was the life and adventures of Victor Jacquemont, the French traveller in the Himalayas,—rose
      from his chimney-corner and went to open it. We had no servant, not even a girl to run
      errands. It was my business to do such commissions for Mrs. Mardol, and very willingly I did
      them. In a few moments the old man came back with some one I had never seen. Mrs. Mardol,
      however, did not look surprised. Her husband seemed intimate with the man, whose peculiar
      appearance, to confess the truth, I did not like. He shook hands with Mrs. Mardol, sat down in
      the chair she offered him, and asked in a quick but courteous
       tone, whether the candles standing on the table might not be lighted. I disliked
      him even for this little thing. I was fond of watching the uncertain dancing shadows on the
      ceiling and the tongues of fire that leaped among them, before the lights came. He seemed to
      be intruding on the poetic interval I had enjoyed at Mr. Mardol's knee; to be ending my time
      of poetry altogether. I cannot tell why this notion came into my head; but, as Mrs. Mardol
      said to me once, I was always fancying something. And so I fancied this, not guessing what the
      stranger's business might be. The candles were lighted; my teacher threw himself back in his
      chair; and the unknown guest, backoning me to him, drew the lights where they would fall full
      on my face and leave him in shadow. I looked at Mr. Mardol; he smiled encouragingly, and said,
      "You need not be afraid, Ivor; our friend will do you no harm." But I was afraid, although, by
      a strong resolution, I kept down the trembling that came upon me. How well I remember what
      ensued!
"'My boy," said the stranger, "should you like to be a gentleman?" I stared at him. "A
      gentleman," I answered when my sense of politeness returned; "I don't know what you mean by a
      gentleman."
"'Well," said he, "to be rich and wear fine clothes, a new suit every day if you liked, and
      to drink wine, and eat venison which you had killed yourself, and have servants, and horses,
      and carriages?" He spoke in an amused voice, and smiled, not unpleasantly I
       thought, across at Mr. Mardol. He had not long to wait for his answer.
"'I should like a horse," I said, "very much, if I had caught it myself with a lasso, and
      tamed it." I did not speak of breaking it in, because I was not learned in the terms of
      chivalry.
"'But," I went on at once, "I have clothes enough, and Mr. Mardol says it is wrong and cruel
      to be rich. And I don't want to kill anything, or to eat dead animals, or to drink fire-water.
      And," I concluded, out of breath, though not so incoherently as it sounded, "if all men are
      equal, how can a good man have servants?"
'To my astonishment, the stranger bent down and kissed me. "You have been well taught, my
      boy," he cried, laying his hand on my shoulder; "if you really think as you say, there is
      small fear of your becoming a gentleman. But let me try you. I have left a carriage round the
      corner; will you come with me and live in a beautiful house, and have all the things I told
      you about?" His eyes kept looking steadily into mine while he spoke. Do you think (I am
      addressing the acute lawyer who cross-examined me not long ago) that the prospect dazzled or
      attracted me? Quite otherwise. Nay, I did not loathe the temptation, I despised it. And I
      despised him. Why did he come to spoil our Christmas evening? I did not believe in the devil;
      but, as this man sat looking into my eyes and telling me of unknown riches and a glory that I
      associated with blood-guiltiness,
       I felt, for the first time in my life, that the evil power, whose tokens I saw
      everywhere in misery and hunger, had drawn nigh to me. I would have run to Mr. Mardol and
      hidden myself in his arms; but the stranger held me, saying, "Why don't you answer? Will you
      come?" I released myself from his grasp, and sobbed out, "Let me alone, I do not want anything
      of yours. I wish to be poor. I mean to be poor as long as I live." He caught me round the neck
      and kissed me once more. "Never mind," he said soothingly, "never mind. Did I not warn you
      that it was only a trial? It is true I came in a carriage, because I am in weak health, and
      cannot face the piercing weather on foot. And I live in a larger house than Mr. Mardol quite
      approves. But I am not rich; and I do not want you to be rich."
"'Then," I answered immediately, "why do you not speak the truth? It is wrong to make
      believe that you could give me the things you said, when you hadn't them." He laughed a good
      deal before replying. "I did not say I had them, but that you might have them, my boy.
      However, let us leave this. I am going to propose something which I mean in earnest; and I
      hope you will be a good boy and say yes where I want you to do so?" He raised all manner of
      wild hopes within me. I looked at him with eager eyes; I felt the tears coming into them; and
      I could hardly see him for crying, as I said tremulously, "Will you take me to my father and
      mother?" Such were the words in which my heart
       relieved its pent-up sorrow. At last the promise of Christmas Day was to be
      fulfilled. The home I longed for could not be all a dream. As though it were near at hand,
      hidden only by a curtain that instant to be drawn away, I divined its presence. Children on
      every side of me, though in want, though with scantiest raiment, and oftentimes only sleep to
      still their hunger, had love to keep them warm; while I, poor outcast, was owned by none
      except for charity. Must not this unexpected friend, if he cared for me as he said, have
      brought the best of news? Who was so wretched as to lack the love of kith and kin, save only
      me? Shaken with childish sobbing, I repeated, "Take me to my father and mother!"'

</div></body></text></TEI>