<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">
CHAPTER XXXV THE CRY FROM OFF THE WATERS
The Andalusian air is pleasant in the early morning, and our travellers were
      stirring betimes. It was their intention to cross the lake immediately after breakfast, but a
      slight incident had almost put off their expedition. Lord Trelingham, fatigued with his three
      days' journey in a rough vehicle, and perhaps feeling the languor which in warm climates
      assails those who come to the hills from the city, was unequal to the many hours' exploration
      which might be in store for visitors to the convent. He required a day's rest. To go without
      him seemed uninviting, for his interest in the sanctuary and his antiquarian knowledge would
      have lit up the past they were to study, and a true picture of which they desired to take with
      them from San Lucar. But he would not have them delay on his account. Tom Davenant would bear
      him company; Rupert and Lady May promised to return for luncheon when they had visited the
      church, leaving the
       convent for a later inspection; and thus it was arranged. The Earl saw his
      daughter and son-in-law embark; they declined the services of a boatman, Lady May steering and
      Glanville taking the oars. They carried a sail, which they thought of unfurling on the
      homeward voyage. A more lovely morning, clear, bright, and breezy, could not have been wished.
      The waters flashed from the blade and fell away in diamond streamers as they moved along; the
      reeds shivered delicately and half-bent into the wavelets which the boat was making; in a
      neighbouring cover the music of sweet-throated song-birds was audible, and nearer and nearer
      came the gray old convent, tranquil as in the moonlight, sacred, melancholy, peaceful. 'I will
      sketch this by and by,' said Rupert.
They touched the gravel, landed, and made their boat fast. Not a soul met them as they went
      up 'the way of the partridges,' as the Spaniards call a track that can hardly be seen and is
      wide enough only for a bird's foot. It led through low brushwood, not far, and they found
      themselves on the broad, dusty terrace which they had observed the evening before, from
      Sepúlveda, running like a white thread round the convent. Turning to the left and going
      forward a few steps they reached the wooden gates which had been erected instead of those
      battered down, forty years ago, by the wild gipsy and his companions that day they sacked the
      cloister. No fear of violence seemed to be felt now within those walls. The gates were open,
      so too were the doors of the church. They passed
       in and could hardly see at first, the roof was so low and the gloom so
      intense.
It was an exceedingly ancient edifice, which had been first Gothic, then Moorish, and then
      Christian again in the course of its thousand years. Built, as it now stood, chiefly under
      Moslem influence, it was a confused but not unpicturesque combination of the mosque and the
      basilica, ending in a chancel of the Early Pointed style whose lancet windows almost touched
      one another. Thus, on entering, it appeared a forest of low pillars where darkness dwelt, with
      a large and pure radiance in the sanctuary. There were many side-chapels, now bare of gates
      and altars, with narrow round-headed windows, hardly admitting the light of day. A lamp,
      burning feebly, denoted where the shrine of San Lucar once had existed; but its marbles,
      precious offerings, and pictures encrusted with gold, were no more to be seen. There was a
      priest saying mass at the tawdry altar, with only the boy kneeling behind him for a
      congregation. The nave was vast and desolate. Fragments of gilded work remained where the
      hands of the despoilers could not reach them; and the curious motley architecture, stained
      with the dust of ages, with the smoke of tapers borne in procession, and the burning of a
      hundred lamps day and night, resembled in its intricacy and mellowness the work of Nature
      rather than of man. It was all matted together, so to speak; one style ran into the next, and
      a sudden turn revealed the old embedded in the new like a fossil. The grandeur, the
       solemn abandonment, the petrified life, had a vast and penetrating effect which
      could neither be defined nor resisted. Man had erected this magnificent pile, yet it spoke not
      so much of man or his works as of the unknown influence that subdues and takes possession of
      them while the ages flow on. The artist's pride was brought down, his glory annihilated, and
      another spirit seemed to be brooding over the creation which had once been his. Time, the
      irresistible; Change, the magician; and the world's judgment as men hasten upon other
      paths,—these had emptied the holy place, and made it a desolation, while lifting it up into
      the serene air of eternity.
They spent a long hour in going from chapel to chapel, not always seeing what was before
      them, nor talking of it, but exchanging, as seldom hitherto, their thoughts on the manifold
      ideals which have gleamed as out of a cloud upon humankind, and, shedding momentary light,
      have vanished again. At intervals they heard the sound of a bell, denoting that mass was going
      on at the various altars; they made way more than once for a priest who moved by them across
      the nave, in vestment and alb, carrying the chalice. They could hear faintly when a great door
      was opened or shut in the convent itself; and by degrees they came through the forest of
      pillars to the Trascoro, with its railing of wood instead of the bronze gates that had been
      torn away, and its white walls on which neither painting nor ornament was visible. No Madonna
      of the Seraphim hung
       above the high altar; saints and angels had spread their lustrous wings and were
      fled. The pictured glass had been struck into fragments by Colonel Valence's soldiery, and was
      now replaced by the commonest sort, into which a shred or two of colour, still flamboyant, had
      been introduced, as a reminiscence of that which could never be restored. It was a comfortless
      chancel, not inviting to pray; and the light, though pure, seemed too large.
Naturally they paused a long while in front of the altar. 'Here,' said Rupert, 'your face
      was visible for two hundred years, as in the clouds of heaven. Were one of the old sisters to
      come alive now and see you, she would fancy the Madonna of the Seraphim had descended from the
      wall.' As he spoke, and while he went on to explain the peculiarities of the style, he raised
      his voice occasionally, for nothing tires so much as a whispered conversation. From time to
      time he turned to look down the church. At the great door a flood of morning light poured
      in.
The nave was still empty; but kneeling to his left, not far from the altar-rails, in the
      shadow of clustering columns, was a figure draped in black from head to foot, whose attention
      had been caught by the voice of the stranger, and whose face, bordered by a long white veil,
      was now fixed upon his with overpowering astonishment. He returned the look for a full half
      minute in complete stupor. Lady May was examining the chancel, and her face was turned from
       him. 'Good God,' he said, grasping her arm, 'who is that?'
'Who?' said Lady May, turning round. The colour was gone out of his cheeks; he stood
      bewildered. Ere he could recover, and while Lady May was still uncertain of his meaning, the
      black-draped figure rose hastily and disappeared round the column. They heard swift steps, the
      sound of an opening door, and its recoil upon its hinges again.
Glanville without a moment's pause, when he saw the figure retreating, followed it. He ran
      to the first door in the side aisle, pulled it violently open, and beheld the unknown woman
      moving fast along the narrow passage in which he was now alone with her. There was a turning,
      and the steps fled round it; still Rupert followed. A number of cells lined the passage on
      both sides, and a large door at the end standing open showed the lake and the distant side of
      the valley. It was impossible the nun should escape him. She reached the last cell,—it was a
      guest-room or parlour,—entered it, and stood palpitating with frantic terror as Glanville
      rushed in, and falling at her feet, clasping her robe, kissing the hands she would fain have
      withheld from him, cried, like a man out of himself, 'Hippolyta, Hippolyta, have I found you?
      In mercy speak. Tell me I am not mad.'
'You are not mad,' said the nun faintly; 'I am Hippolyta.'
It was no other. Lost so long, vanished so suddenly, she was found in a moment, thus. He
       sank speechless to the ground. He did not swoon. His eyes, like those of a
      wounded animal, looked up at her. After a minute and more, when he could speak, he said
      pityingly, breathlessly, 'What has become of your golden hair? It was so beautiful. Why do you
      hide it under that veil?' He seemed to think of nothing else but this.
'I have cut it off,' the nun replied in a low voice. When he heard the words, tears came
      into his eyes. 'I saw a woman in the hospital that they told me had golden hair,' he murmured,
      'when I was looking for you the first night; but they had never seen yours, Hippolyta, or they
      would not have said so. The woman came back when I was ill, when I had brain fever. She was
      dead then, I think. Her name was Annie Dauris. Her hair was not like yours, Hippolyta. Why did
      you cut it off? Are you a nun?' He spoke, hardly knowing what he said, in low uncertain
      tones.
'Oh, must I suffer this again!' cried Hippolyta in agony, her eyes streaming. 'Rupert,
      Rupert, be a man. I have left you, I am nothing to you. Are you not married?'
'Yes,' he answered simply. 'Would you believe it, darling, that I forgot even your name when
      I was ill?' He went on, pausing at every two or three words, and shaking with passion, 'I
      didn't remember that I had seen you till one day, one winter's afternoon, when I found your
      letters, and it all came back. Why did you leave me? Was I unkind to
       you? I never meant to be. It made me ill for a long while; it made me forget
      everything. I married—you know who it is, you were friends once —May Davenant.' It was pitiful
      to hear him—reason seemed to be tottering on its throne; and the accents were those of a
      trembling, penitent child, asking pardon for a fault it has committed unwittingly. Hippolyta's
      distress grew with every word. She implored him to rise. He did so, and stood a little way
      off, facing her. 'Why did you go?' he repeated, beseeching her with a mute gesture not to be
      angry. She wrung her hands.
'Because it was wrong from the beginning,' she exclaimed; 'because I sinned and made you to
      sin; because He spoke to me from the Cross and chided me, and my heart broke. I could not, I
      could not, Rupert, stay with you when I was so guilty. I went because the sound was in my ears
      of lost souls, and polluted children, and murdered maidens. I was worse than all; I had
      believed in sin, dedicated myself to sin; how could I face you when the light broke on me and
      I saw myself—stained, stained? Oh, I went. I would have thrown myself into the fire if it
      might cleanse me.'
'You were never stained,' he said, his eyes flaming with wrath and love; 'you were my own
      Hippolyta. I loved you. Did you love me?'
'Ah, Rupert,' she said, weeping.
He was subdued at the sound of her voice. 'Never mind, never mind,' he went on more
      composedly,
       and as beginning to control himself. 'But I would have married you—I told you so
      at the beginning—when you pleased. It was only to say the word.'
'There was no marriage for me,' she answered; 'the past could never be undone. I sinned with
      Magdalene. I must do penance with Magdalene.'
'And you would not marry me?' said Rupert, trying to understand, but his mind all abroad,
      unhinged by the shock, and not yet comprehending how the woman he loved could be standing
      there in the nun's dark raiment.
Hippolyta answered, 'I had fallen below marriage. My sin spoilt our affection; it took away
      its sacredness. It made me unfit to be any man's wife.'
'Who taught you it was a sin?' he inquired. But his looks were fastened on her face, and he
      was thinking how the soft brown eyes glowed above the paleness of the cheeks and the crimson
      lips. Hippolyta had always been pale. The white linen deadened her countenance. Why did she
      wear it? She had begun to answer the other question which he had forgotten while he was
      thinking over this.
'Look who taught me,' she said, putting a hand on the crucifix she wore at her girdle.
Rupert glanced towards it, and shuddered. 'I do not like that symbol to be everywhere,' he
      said pettishly; 'Spain is covered with it. You ought to have stayed in England.'
'I made it my book before I left England,' she
       replied. 'Will you hear my story, Rupert? It will reconcile you to our
      separation—if you ever loved me,' she went on hastily, for the dangerous light was in his eyes
      again.
'Must we separate because I love you?' he cried. 'Hippolyta, be merciful. I have suffered—
      so much,' his voice sinking; 'not pain only and fever, but madness, despair, a gnawing at the
      heart that will not, will not leave me.'
She broke down at the sight of his grief. Pressing the crucifix to her bosom, as though to
      gain strength from it, after a while she had so far recovered that she made him listen.
      Briefly, pathetically, she tole her experience in the depths of London, her consternation at
      the flight of Annie Dauris, her chance hearing of the sermon in St. Cyprian's, and the night
      that followed. 'How could I be the same to you?' she went on, while he stood in amaze, not
      taking in her thought, but afraid that she might be obstinate after all. 'How to meet you next
      morning? I cast myself on the mercy of God, whom I did not know, who was hidden, yet had sent
      this message to me. I had but an hour to decide. When the light came, in the gray cheerless
      dusk, I wrote—oh, they were hard words; I made them so. I wanted you to despise, not to search
      for me. I made them hard.'
'They almost killed me,' said Rupert; 'do not be afraid, they were cruel enough. Look at
      them.' And from his breast he drew the wedding-ring with
       the scrap of writing twisted round it. 'I have always carried them since the day
      at Nice,' he continued. 'They are poison, the antidote to lesser grief.'
Hippolyta took the ring out of his hand. 'How can you be so harsh to yourself, Rupert?' she
      said gently. 'Let this be the end.'
'It shall be,' he replied. There was silence between them. Hippolyta was about to continue
      when a knock was heard at the half-open door. A lay-sister entered. She did not look at the
      strange visitor, but said in Spanish:
'There are two gentlemen, foreigners, inquiring for you, sister. They say they are from
      England.'
'Two strangers, did you say?' inquired Hippolyta, in surprise and with quivering lips. 'Who
      can they be? One I might have expected.' Then, after a pause, she said to the lay-sister,
      'Take them to the other guest-room and say I will come. Ask them to wait a little.' The other
      departed, leaving the door, according to conventual rule, half-open, as she found it. 'I
      thought I heard some one,' continued Hippolyta to herself; 'it must have been the lay-sister
      moving about. Why did she not come in immediately?'
But she was mistaken. It was not the lay-sister. In this terrible drama there was a third,
      unseen, but no less affected and overcome than the two that stood fronting one another with
      the narrow convent cell for their stage, and the lovely prospect shining unregarded before
      them through the window. When
       Rupert left the church in pursuit of the flying figure, Lady May, unable to
      account for his hasty movement, waited, thinking he would return. But on hearing the door shut
      behind him she became vaguely alarmed, always dreading, as she did, some access of the
      delirium which he seemed incapable of shaking off. She followed, therefore, but the door at
      which she arrived resisted her efforts. It had caught and she spent some time in getting it
      open, and in entering the long passage leading into the public portion of the convent where
      strangers might pass through. But she saw no one. Whither had Rupert gone? While she was
      wondering she heard the sound of voices, mingled, as she fancied, with sobbing, in a room on
      the right. She hearkened, holding her breath. Yes, Rupert was there; he was speaking. She
      crept along, paused on this side of the door; looked through the long slit between its hinges,
      and saw her husband at Hippolyta's feet. Neither veil nor habit deluded her for an instant.
      She saw the countenance, she knew the voice; but she remained perfectly still. Her blood was
      boiling in her veins, her brain was on fire. 'This, this,' she said to herself, 'is the
      secret; this explains all.' She listened as for very life. She heard everything. She saw
      Rupert's changing expression and Hippolyta's distress. She watched while the ring was taken
      back. At the same moment she heard a step coming down the cloister. What was to be done?
      Fortunately, the great door leading out on the terrace
       had been flung back against the wall, making a large angle with it, on the other
      side of which, in the darkness, a person might be hidden. Quick and noiseless she darted past
      the door of the cell, and was crouching behind the portal when the lay-sister arrived. It was
      the rustle of her dress in passing which had caught Hippolyta's ear. In her new position she
      was quite safe; and though unable to look into the cell, she could hear what was spoken.
Hippolyta continued her narrative, to which Rupert lent a more attentive ear, while Lady May
      caught and dwelt upon every word of it. There had been much said that to her was
      incomprehensible. She did not know when or where Hippolyta and Rupert could have been
      together. Was it for months or weeks? At Falside or in London? Impossible to guess from the
      story. But that signified nothing. Colonel Valence's daughter had fallen; she confessed it;
      and Rupert was the man to whom she had sacrificed reputation and virtue. What was this
      incredible story of leaving him? She strained her ears to listen.
'I wrote those words as an everlasting farewell,' said her poor rival, not aware to whom she
      was confessing; 'and I put them in the blotting-book, and crept downstairs and out by the
      front door. No one saw me. The street was empty. There was only one place in which I could
      take shelter. I thought they would receive me at the convent, if I told them —if I might speak
      again to the priest whose sermon
       I had heard. It was but a little way, and I kept in the shadow of the houses;
      and then the morning was dark, and I came to the convent door without being noticed, and I
      stood there awhile, not daring to ring. But there was no time to consider. I rang twice and
      thrice; nobody came. Oh, it was a terrible moment; yet I could think of nothing except that
      perhaps they would not open. Rupert, if the grave had been my only refuge, I had no power to
      go back.'
'Don't torture me,' he said abruptly; 'do you think I am adamant?'
'Don't be angry,' she besought him, her tears falling afresh; 'oh, how happy we might have
      been but for my wickedness!'
'We shall be happy yet,' he muttered, more to himself than to her.
She gazed at him doubtfully. But he must hear the rest; it would bring him to the right
      conclusion. She took up the story again: 'At last,' she said, 'I could hear footsteps as of
      several passing along, and I rang loudly. This time the door opened. The sisters were coming
      from an early mass in their own chapel. I stood inside near the door waiting till they had
      passed. The portress, I could see, was startled at my appearance. I did not know what to say.
      But I told her that I wanted to see the Mother; that I was in great trouble; I persuaded her
      to take my message. Oh, what a morning it was! The Mother came; I went into a private room
       with her, and she was good and compassionate, and I confessed everything. She
      pitied, she did not despise me, as I thought she would.'
Glanville seemed to be listening while Hippolyta went on. He let her finish without
      interrupting. He had something in his mind. Her own agitation was outwardly much greater than
      his. She spoke of seeing the preacher, and of finding him to be like herself, Spanish, though
      long resident in London; she told how she had repeated her confession to him, and asked
      whether she might remain in the convent, and how consent was given, though not easily, for it
      was against the rule; and how she stayed there several months and came afterwards to San
      Lucar. But there were many things about herself which Hippolyta could not have told, for she
      did not suspect them. The story of her repentance was better known to others. And it was
      exceedingly strange.
At one stroke Hippolyta Valence, from the high-spirited woman she had been, attached with
      the most passionate intensity to Rupert, whom she regarded as more than a husband, was changed
      to a humble, conscience-stricken penitent, whose sole thought was expiation of the past. She
      left Forrest House, as the medieval saints had fled out of the world, her sin burning the road
      under her feet, darkening the sky, overwhelming her with fear and loathing. She said truly
      that rather than return and face her lover she would have leapt into the grave. From that
      moment Rupert Glanville was to her simply a dreadful
       memory, and a name which did not pass her lips. With the new faith, to which she
      had turned as her sole refuge, she had only an abstract and vague acquaintance which counted
      for nothing in the life on which she had now determined to enter. She came to it like a little
      child. The word expiation, which had been so frequently on Ivor Mardol's lips, rang in her
      ears as the only gospel. How was she to realise it? They put Christian books into her hands,
      and she found therein a language that expressed the abasement, the contrition, the hope which
      now made the very essence of her being. But it was not enough. To pray was not to work. She
      went after a few days to the Spanish preacher again, and said timidly that there must be some
      place—she had heard of such —where women like herself were admitted. Might she go there, and
      labour with and for them? He was astonished and greatly moved. Could he explain to her that
      the fallen sisterhood was made up chiefly of the ignorant, untaught, rough-mannered women, the
      outcasts of society, on whom she had been expending pity in the dens of the Ratcliffe Highway?
      She would be like a rare exotic among weeds. But she entreated so earnestly, it was hard to
      say no. The head of the convent, Mother Juliana, was consulted. She answered like Father
      Laurence, that it was not to be thought of; and Hippolyta, meekly submitting, wasted and fell
      into a dangerous illness, which lasted several months. She could not leave her room even to
      walk in the convent garden; and while
       the search for her continued all over London, she remained in a dying condition
      not a quarter of a mile from Forrest House.
She never lost consciousness during that long prostration. When Mother Juliana inquired
      whether she would allow Rupert to be informed that she was living, her answer was at once in
      the negative. Did he know where she was he would not rest until he had brought her back. And
      for the like reason she would not write to her father. What more appalling shock for him than
      to learn that his child, brought up far from Christianity and the creed of repentance, was now
      of her own free will imprisoned within convent walls? He had pulled down so many shrines,
      thrown open cloister after cloister in Southern Spain, apparently that Nemesis might overtake
      him in its least endurable form. The daughter of an iconoclast become a nun! Strongly as he
      believed in the freedom of the individual to choose his way of life, it was not to be thought
      of that he would acquiesce in Hippolyta's voluntary dedication of herself to asceticism. But
      she had the tremendous courage of her creed. She would go to the full extent of that text
      which speaks of renouncing father and mother, house and home, to follow the steps of Christ.
      She gave up once and for all those whom she loved best; it was a part of the expiation she had
      resolved on after sinning so deeply. To fast and do rough work with delicate hands, to give
      the hours of sleep to prayer and weeping, to entreat as
       a favour that the most abject offices of the community might be assigned to her,
      to keep silence, and be alone, and think no more of the interests which had filled her
      life—all this was nothing compared with the nailing of her love to the Cross, and surrendering
      her father and Rupert. She drove the nails in with unfaltering stroke, while her heart seemed
      to bleed its last drops. That she could not kneel in humble service at the feet of her outcast
      sisters, fretted her only because it seemed a denial of the bitter cup which she had been
      commanded from the Cross to drain. She sickened under it. In that bitterness she hoped to find
      strength and courage.
'No,' said Hippolyta; 'I asked them to let me work in London, but they refused. I wanted to
      be a lay-sister at the convent, and that, too, they said was unfit for me. I had been with
      them nearly a year when Father Laurence came to me, and proposed I should join the new order
      of which this is the noviciate. It has been founded to help towards the elevation and
      conversion of women in the East —a work that can be attempted only by women. It is an active
      order, not cloistered. I was glad to come, though it has made my penance more dreadful to be
      at San Lucar, reminded always of the past. But in a few months I shall sail for India. I am
      professed and acquainted with my new duties.'
'Does Colonel Valence know?' asked Rupert, always in the same abstracted voice.

'He will soon, I think,' she answered cheerfully. It was a good sign that he asked
      questions, and did not return to what she feared. 'When I knew that I was to leave Europe I
      sent him a message through his old friend, the Duke of Adullam, telling him where I was and
      what I thought of doing. There was no danger in that, now you are married,' she concluded,
      faltering.
'None,' said Glanville briefly. His eyes sought the ground; he was still intent on something
      which he did not express. After a pause he lifted his head, drew a step nearer, and said in a
      low tone, 'You have explained all, darling, and there is nothing to forgive. When shall we
      return to England?'
She misunderstood him. 'If Lady May is with you,' she replied, 'it might be well for you to
      go immediately. She ought not to guess at what has passed; and to meet would be too painful. I
      do not think I could bear it.'
'Who was talking of Lady May?' he returned; 'I meant you and me, Hippolyta. We have met; I
      know what you have been doing away from me; and it is all as it should be. We shall never part
      again.
The listener, so many times torn with anguish during Hippolyta's narrative, was sick unto
      death. But she must endure a little longer. The nun, the fallen woman, was speaking—oh, how
      tender she could be! Yes, she called him Rupert, in spite of her self-chosen penances.

'Dear Rupert,' Hippolyta was saying, 'do not be unmanly. Your duty is clear. Mine is not
      less so. Don't you understand that I have taken a vow?'
'Yes,' he exclaimed; 'you took one to me in the studio. That goes before any other; it
      annuls the rest, if there were a thousand. You have broken it; but I forgive you, darling, I
      forgive you.' His voice sank. Had he taken her hand or knelt to her? The listening woman dared
      not move, though she would have given worlds to see with her own eyes the degradation into
      which both of them were falling.
'The vow you talk of was a sin; it left us free to part when we chose,' Hippolyta replied;
      'it did not make us man and wife. You are married to another.'
'What marriage?' he said with a ring of desperation in his voice; 'it is no marriage. Did I
      not tell you that the fever destroyed my memory, that I could not recall your name, or your
      features, or any scene in which you had taken part? For nearly two years Hippolyta was to me
      as though she had never existed. It was during that time I married Lady May. How could I have
      done so had I remembered you?' The accents of the speaker were high and piercing. They filled
      the room with their echo.
'He never loved me,' said Lady May in a dull whisper. She left her hiding-place and went
      slowly and noiselessly out on the terrace, then moved with unequal but hasty steps along the
      narrow track by which Rupert and herself had come up. It lay out of sight of the cell-window a
      high, narrow grating,
       through which the lake was visible, as I have said, only in the farther
      distance.
Glanville, utterly oblivious that he had left Lady May in the church, continued to plead his
      cause with passionate vehemence, while Hippolyta, though not to be moved, became every moment
      more wretched. 'Ah,' she said at last, as her tears fell, 'if I sinned, if I was self-willed
      and cruel when I came to you in the studio, I am suffering for it now. Think, Rupert, think
      what you are asking. Am I to break the vow I have made? Are you to forsake your wife?'
'I have no wife but you,' he cried wildly. He had no sooner uttered the words than they
      heard a woman's scream from the water, echoed by confused exclamations and the rush of feet on
      the terrace. 'What is it?' said Hippolyta, running out, followed by Glanville. A dreadful
      sight met their gaze. The boat in which Rupert had come was floating in the middle of the
      lake, apparently adrift; and in the water they saw a form rising to the surface, which, with
      cries of horror, they both recognised as Lady May. Her face, turned towards them, was
      distinctly visible. Then it disappeared in the depths. As it did so, a second figure which
      they had seen running to the lake-side leaped in, and swam rapidly to the place where the body
      had gone down. Hippolyta and Rupert, out of themselves with anguish, ran headlong through the
      low underwood and arrived on the bank just as the stranger who had plunged
       in turned round towards the shore, keeping himself afloat as well as he could
      while holding the inanimate form of May Glanville. Others came running at the same time,
      fishermen from the upper stream, men and women from the church and the convent. The disaster
      had been viewed from all sides; it could not have been in a more conspicuous part of the river
      or the valley. But assistance had come apparently too late. The young man who had rescued Lady
      May was seen to pause ere he reached the bank, exhausted; he gave a faint cry; and rescued and
      rescuer sank into the waters again. Several of the fishermen leaped in bravely, and between
      them brought the bodies to land, clinging in a close embrace. But there seemed no life in
      either. It was a moment of awful confusion. For hardly were they laid on the sand than an old
      man who had been standing by motionless, watching all, but unable to stir from his place,
      rushed suddenly forward, and flinging his arms round the young man's body, fainted. Rupert
      drew near, gave one startled glance, uttered an exclamation, and would have led Hippolyta
      away. 'No, no,' she said; 'this is my place. Who are they?'—'Look,' he said in a terrified
      whisper. She bent over the old man. It was Colonel Valence. He held Ivor Mardol in his
      arms.
Then it was that Hippolyta's heroic nature showed itself. She did not fall or faint; but
      while those around stood frightened and bewildered, she took Rupert by the arm, and said to
      him, 'Now be a
       man and help me. The thunderbolt has fallen.' Unlocking Lady May's arms from the
      neck of the unhappy Ivor, whom she had dragged down with her into the depths, she and Rupert
      between them lifted her from the ground and put her gently into the arms of the rough
      fishermen, who carried their sad burden, lifeless as it still appeared, through the door from
      which a short while ago she had issued in her madness, to the cell where the fatal
      conversation had taken place. The nuns came about her. A bed was hastily strewn on the floor,
      and all possible efforts were made to restore the spirit which had seemingly fled.
Ivor lay on the sand, his eyes closed and his limbs motionless, but a faint pulsation could
      be detected when Rupert put his hand to his heart. 'He is not dead,' said he, bursting into
      tears. Colonel Valence was some time in coming to himself; nor was it without difficulty that
      his arms could be disentangled from the embrace in which he clasped Ivor Mardol. Till that was
      done there was no moving them. Hippolyta knelt by her father and put a cordial to his lips. He
      drew a deep breath, as if awaking from a sleep, opened his eyes, looked round, and did not
      seem to know any one. 'Is my son drowned?' he said in a stifled, unnatural tone. 'Ivor is by
      your side,' whispered Hippolyta. She was too much intent on recovering him from his swoon to
      notice what he had said. Colonel Valence rose, took Ivor once more into his arms,
       and turned towards the house. No one could hinder him. Walking steadily under
      the corpse-like weight, he went up through the brushwood and did not pause till he reached the
      terrace, Hippolyta and the rest following. 'Where can I lay him down?' he said, always in the
      same unnatural voice. Don Ramiro, the nuns' chaplain, who had been a witness of the disaster
      and was standing by, answered, 'In my room; let me help you to carry him.' Colonel Valence
      would have put him aside; but in trying to do so, he staggered and almost fell. The priest
      silently insisted; and they moved to one of the farther doors, then along a broad passage and
      up a flight of stone-steps, bearing Ivor as best they could, and still followed by the others.
      When he was stretched with face downwards on the large writing-table which was standing near
      the window, a shudder ran through him; the water poured out of his mouth and nostrils, and he
      put a hand to his side as if in pain. His clothes were torn and muddy; there was blood on
      them. But when Rupert and the priest stripped him, they could find no external injury. His
      hands had come in contact with some jagged stones at the bottom of the lake and were bleeding.
      He seemed in great agony. The chaplain expressed his fears that the hurt was internal. They
      must send immediately to Sepúlveda for the only doctor at hand. Rupert prayed him to do so,
      and one of the men set off on horseback. Colonel Valence had never quitted the room; he did
      not speak, or offer to help
       Don Ramiro. He could have done nothing to the purpose. Silent and motionless, he
      sat holding Ivor's hand. Hippolyta, as soon as she had seen the young man taken to the
      chaplain's room, had returned to Lady May, without speaking a word to her father. It would
      almost seem that they had not recognised one another.
While they were running to and fro in the convent, distracted by the suddenness of the
      accident, not knowing which needed the more instant attention, Ivor or Lady May, and vainly
      conjecturing the cause of the disaster, a second boat was perceived crossing the lake. All the
      horror of that morning was not yet known to Hippolyta. As she moved about the inanimate form
      of Lady May, suggesting one appliance after another, and dreading that all might fail, she was
      accosted by a sister who begged her in God's name to go out and comfort the father of the
      dying woman, now standing at the door. Hippolyta was overwhelmed. She went out hastily, and
      found Lord Trelingham and Tom Davenant, the former endeavouring to force his way in, while the
      latter, with distress painted on his countenance, strove to keep him back. 'She is dead—she is
      dead, I know,' said the Earl piteously; 'but let me see her. I implore you to let me see her.'
      Hippolyta spoke to him. 'She is not dead, and she shall not die,' said Colonel Valence's
      daughter. Lord Trelingham seemed to know the voice, but he did not remember to whom it
      belonged. 'If she is living, I can wait,' he
       answered simply, and leaned against the door as if meaning to stay there till
      they suffered him to enter. Tom Davenant explored with his eyes the countenance of the
      sister.
'Are you Miss Valence?' he said under his breath. 'Yes, yes,' she replied impatiently. 'But
      take Lord Trelingham away, see, into that other room. Make him sit down till I come again.'
      The Earl moaned. 'I saw it from the hotel,' he said feebly; 'she slipped from the prow of the
      boat into the water. It was an accident, was it not? Tell me it was an accident. Tell me she
      is not dead. But oh, it was so strange to see her fall over the edge of the boat and no one
      near. Where was Rupert?'
'Do take him away, dear Mr. Davenant,' said Hippolyta in great anxiety; 'if his daughter
      should hear the voice, it may kill her. I will come again the moment she is restored.' And
      Tom, with much gentle persuasion, induced him to pass into the vacant room opposite and to
      rest there. What the Earl had witnessed was, to a man of his devout religious temperament,
      more shocking than death. He had seen Lady May throw up her arms wildly, and deliberately put
      her foot over the side, slipping into the waters while the boat drifted away from her. It was
      not an accident he saw; he could not hide from himself the horrible truth. His daughter had
      attempted suicide. At once he sought for a boat, he called Tom Davenant; the delay was
      heartrending, but he
       controlled his nerves till they had traversed the lake and reached the convent
      door. Hippolyta's words gave him a faint hope. But he wept agonising tears while waiting for
      the moment when he should look on his child again. He listened intently; the long minutes grew
      to an hour, and no sound of her voice had broken the silence.
Hippolyta had said, 'She shall live;' and if a miracle of devotion, prayer, and loving
      attention were required to save Lady May, it was not wanting. When Colonel Valence could be
      safely left with Ivor, and in the care of the chaplain, Rupert, whose fever of the morning was
      upon him yet, came down to the cell where his wife was lying. Hippolyta noticed his look was
      alarmed at the effect it might produce on Lady May, and persuaded him to join Lord Trelingham.
      The two men met in silence. Of the events which had preceded his daughter's attempt at
      self-murder the Earl knew nothing, and Rupert had nothing to say. In his brain the scenes
      which had followed one another with bewildering rapidity were a phantasmagoria, in which he
      could distinguish neither persons nor motives. He knew that he had found Hippolyta, that Ivor
      Mardol was not dead. He felt towards Lady May like a stranger, but was dimly aware that she
      had been his wife, and that he must not leave the place where she lay unconscious. Only that
      thought prevented him from returning to Ivor. He did not feel grief or remorse at what had
      happened. His brain was incapable of reflection;
       his heart was sated with emotion and could take in no more.
They were sitting thus, without a word, when Lord Trelingham started up. He seemed to hear
      the sound of his daughter's voice in the next room, and ran to the door. Tom Davenant drew him
      back, saying, 'Wait for Miss Valence; she said she would come.'
'Where is Miss Valence?' inquired the Earl absently; 'I have not seen her.'
'It was she that spoke to us,' answered Tom, 'the sister. She will come. Be patient.' After
      some time he heard the door of the guest-room opening. Hippolyta was coming out.
Lord Trelingham's ear had not deceived him. Thanks to the repeated efforts of Hippolyta and
      the nuns, Lady May had given signs of returning life. She was of a death-like paleness, and
      her limbs were at first rigid as those of a corpse. But there still was life in her wounded
      heart; and little by little it came back with the colour on her lips and with the trembling in
      hands and feet. Her eyelids unclosed, and the first object on which her glance fell was the
      last she had distinctly beheld, Hippolyta Valence, in the dark weeds of a nun, her face framed
      about with white linen, and her eyes full of light. Lady May turned from her. 'Oh, the
      horrible vision!' she said. Hippolyta moved on one side, and the eyes of the drowned woman
      opened again. 'Is it gone?' she asked in fearful
       accents; 'I thought it might be there still and haunt me for ever. They say hell
      is made of such visions; they come in fire, and will not depart. Merciful God, grant me
      another hell than that. The fire I will endure, I will not complain. I have deserved it. Only
      do not let the vision come back.' It was the sharpest stroke Hippolyta had suffered, even on
      that day of suffering. May looked straight before her, quite still, as though she feared to
      bring the vision again by turning to the right or the left. And the penitent, heart-broken
      Hippolyta knelt in the shadow of the wall, and murmured with broken voice, 'Lady May, forgive
      me. As you hope to be forgiven, do not speak those frightful words again.'
'Are you still there?' replied the other, putting her hands, which she could hardly lift, to
      her eyes. 'Are we both in hell—you for being a harlot, and I for killing myself? I should be
      happy if I thought the fire had got hold of you. I hate you, Hippolyta Valence. I ought to
      have killed you first.'
That was the voice Lord Trelingham had heard, his daughter cursing the woman that, as she
      said, had stolen Rupert's love. Well for the unhappy father that the walls were thick and Tom
      Davenant held him when he would have made his way to her. Hippolyta dared not stay in the
      cell. Such agitation would cost Lady May her life. She was not far from the door. She glided
      out and came to the old man. 'Your daughter has recovered from her swoon, but she is
      wandering,' said the nun, taking no heed
       of Rupert. 'If you would sit by her bedside it might calm her.' Lord Trelingham
      pressed her hand gratefully and replied, 'You are Lady May's saviour.'—'Ah no,' said
      Hippolyta, her glance sinking; I have saved nobody.' Rupert drew near. 'Will you always malign
      yourself?' he cried sharply. They were the first words he had spoken in the Earl's hearing. He
      did not offer to accompany Lord Trelingham. When he was gone to his daughter, Tom Davenant,
      looking compassionately on the artist, said to him, 'Is there anything I can do for you,
      Glanville?'—'Try to save Ivor,' was the reply, which bewildered Davenant, who had seen
      nothing, and did not know who had rescued his cousin. He thought Glanville must be out of his
      mind. He sought an explanation from Hippolyta, who could hardly speak for crying. But when he
      learnt that Ivor was in the chaplain's room, and perhaps fatally injured, for so Rupert told
      him, he entreated Miss Valence to show him the way, and all three were standing at Don
      Ramiro's door as the physician arrived from Sepúlveda. They were forbidden to enter, and a
      dreary pause ensued till the medical examination was concluded. It left no hope. The injuries
      were internal, and of the most serious character; they could not be dealt with, and the utmost
      now to be expected was that the patient would lose consciousness ere the agony became
      unendurable. Not knowing in what relations those present stood to Ivor, the physician, a brief
      sententious
       speaker, uttered his verdict aloud, prescribed a few simple lenitives, and a
      gradually increasing dose of morphia which he had brought with him; and was proceeding to
      visit Lady May. The tall military-looking man who had insisted on being present at the
      examination, but did not utter a syllable throughout, rose when the doctor ended, and said to
      him in very pure Spanish, 'How long will my boy live? I am his father.' The doctor uttered an
      angry exclamation. 'Why did you not tell me, then? am I an executioner?' he cried. 'The young
      man may live seven or eight days. But it is uncertain,' and his voice dropped,—'the days may
      shrink to hours.' Colonel Valence sat down and took Ivor's hand again. It was resting on the
      coverlet, for he had now been transferred to the chaplain's bed.

</div></body></text></TEI>