<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Autobiography of a Slander</title><author>Lyall, Edna [pseud.] (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
MY FIRST STAGE

At last the tea came up, and so 
 With that our tongues began to go. 
 Now in that house you’re sure of knowing 
 The smallest scrap of news that’s going. 
 We find it there the wisest way 
 To take some care of what we say.Recreation.  Jane
     Taylor.
I was born on the 2nd September, 1886, in a small, dull, country town.  When I say the town
     was dull, I mean, of course, that the inhabitants were unenterprising, for in itself Muddleton
     was a picturesque place, and though it laboured under the usual disadvantage of a dearth of
     bachelors and a superfluity of spinsters, it might have been pleasant enough had it not been a
     favourite resort for my kith and kin.
My father has long enjoyed a world-wide notoriety; he is not, however, as a rule named in
     good society, though he habitually frequents it; and as I am led to believe that my
     autobiography will possibly be circulated by Mr. Mudie, and will lie about on drawing-room
     tables, I will merely mention that a most representation of my progenitor, under his nom de
      théatre, Mephistopheles, may be seen now in London, and I should recommend all who wish
     to understand his character to go to the Lyceum, though, between ourselves, he strongly
     disapproves of the whole performance.
I was introduced into the world by an old lady named Mrs. O’Reilly.  She was a very pleasant
     old lady, the wife of a General, and one of those sociable, friendly, talkative people who do
     much to cheer their neighbours, particularly in a deadly-lively provincial place like
     Muddleton, where the standard of social intercourse is not very high.  Mrs. O’Reilly had been
     in her day a celebrated beauty; she was now grey-haired and stout, but still there was
     something impressive about her, and few could resist the charm of her manner and the pleasant
     easy flow of her small talk.  Her love of gossip amounted almost to a passion, and nothing came
     amiss to her; she liked to know everything about everybody, and in the main I think her
     interest was a kindly one, though she found that a little bit of scandal, every now and then,
     added a piquant flavour to the homely fare provided by the commonplace life of the
     Muddletonians.
I will now, without further preamble, begin the history of my life.

“I assure you, my dear Lena, Mr. Zaluski is nothing less than a Nihilist!”
The sound waves set in motion by Mrs. O’Reilly’s words were tumultuously heaving in the
     atmosphere when I sprang into being, a young but perfectly formed and most promising slander. 
     A delicious odour of tea pervaded the drawing-room, it was orange-flower pekoe, and Mrs.
     O’Reilly was just handing one of the delicate Crown Derby cups to her visitor, Miss Lena
     Houghton.
“What a shocking thing!  Do you really mean it?” exclaimed Miss Houghton.  “Thank you, cream
     but no sugar; don’t you know, Mrs. O’Reilly, that it is only Low-Church people who take sugar
     nowadays?  But, really, now, about Mr. Zaluski?  How did you find it out?”
“My dear, I am an old woman, and I have learnt in the course of a wandering life to put two
     and two together,” said Mrs. O’Reilly.  She had somehow managed to ignore middle age, and had
     passed from her position of renowned beauty to the position which she now firmly and constantly
     claimed of many years and much experience.  “Of course,” she continued, “like every one else, I
     was glad enough to be friendly and pleasant to Sigismund Zaluski, and as to his being a Pole,
     why, I think it rather pleased me than otherwise.  You see, my dear, I have knocked about the
     world and mixed with all kinds of people.  Still, one must draw the line somewhere, and I
     confess it gave me a very painful shock to find that he had such violent antipathies to law and
     order.  When he took Ivy Cottage for the summer I made the General call at once, and before
     long we had become very intimate with him; but, my dear, he’s not what I thought him—not at
     all!”
“Well now, I am delighted to hear you say that,” said Lena Houghton, with some excitement in
     her manner, “for it exactly fits in with what I always felt about him.  From the first I
     disliked that man, and the way he goes on with Gertrude Morley is simply dreadful.  If they are
     not engaged they ought to be—that’s all I can say.”
“Engaged, my dear!  I trust not,” said Mrs. O’Reilly.  “I had always hoped for something very
     different for dear Gertrude.  Quite between ourselves, you know, my nephew John Carew is over
     head and ears in love with her, and they would make a very good pair; don’t you think so?”
“Well, you see, I like Gertrude to a certain extent,” replied Lena Houghton.  “But I never
     raved about her as so many people do.  Still, I hope she will not be entrapped into marrying
     Mr. Zaluski; she deserves a better fate than that.”
“I quite agree with you,” said Mrs. O’Reilly, with a troubled look.  “And the worst of it is,
     poor Gertrude is a girl who might very likely take up foolish revolutionary notions; she needs
     a strong wise husband to keep her in order and form her opinions.  But is it really true that
     he flirts with her?  This is the first I have heard of it.  I can’t think how it has escaped my
     notice.”
“Nor I, for indeed he is up at the Morleys’ pretty nearly every day.  What with tennis, and
     music, and riding, there is always some excuse for it.  I can’t think what Gertrude sees in
     him, he is not even good-looking.”
“There is a certain surface good-nature about him,” said Mrs. O’Reilly.  “It deceived even me
     at first.  But, my dear Lena, mark my words: that man has a fearful temper; and I pray Heaven
     that poor Gertrude may have her eyes opened in time.  Besides, to think of that little gentle,
     delicate thing marrying a Nihilist!  It is too dreadful; really, quite too dreadful!  John
     would never get over it!”
“The thing I can’t understand is why all the world has taken him up so,” said Lena Houghton. 
     “One meets him everywhere, yet nobody seems to know anything about him.  Just because he has
     taken Ivy Cottage for four months, and because he seems to be rich and good-natured, every one
     is ready to run after him.”
“Well, well,” said Mrs. O’Reilly, “we all like to be neighbourly, my dear, and a week ago I
     should have been ready to say nothing but good of him.  But now my eyes have been opened.  I’ll
     tell you just how it was.  We were sitting here, just as you and I are now, at afternoon tea;
     the talk had flagged a little, and for the sake of something to say I made some remark about
     Bulgaria—not that I really knew anything about it, you know, for I’m no politician; still, I
     knew it was a subject that would make talk just now.  My dear, I assure you I was positively
     frightened.  All in a minute his face changed, his eyes flashed, he broke into such a torrent
     of abuse as I never heard in my life before.”
“Do you mean that he abused you?”
“Dear me, no! but Russia and the Czar, and tyranny and despotism, and many other things I had
     never heard of.  I tried to calm him down and reason with him, but I might as well have
     reasoned with the cockatoo in the window.  At last he caught himself up quickly in the middle
     of a sentence, strode over to the piano, and began to play as he generally does, you know, when
     he comes here.  Well, would you believe it, my dear! instead of improvising or playing operatic
     airs as usual, he began to play a stupid little tune which every child was taught years ago, of
     course with variations of his own.  Then he turned round on the music-stool with the oddest
     smile I ever saw, and said, “Do you know that air, Mrs. O’Reilly?”
“Yes,” I said; “but I forget now what it is.’”
“It was composed by Pestal, one of the victims of Russian tyranny,” said he.  “The
     executioner did his work badly, and Pestal had to be strung up twice.  In the interval he was
     heard to mutter, ‘Stupid country, where they don’t even know how to hang!’”
“Then he gave a little forced laugh, got up quickly, wished me good-bye, and was gone before
     I could put in a word.”
“What a horrible story to tell in a drawing-room!” said Lena Houghton.  “I envy Gertrude less
     than ever.”
“Poor girl!  What a sad prospect it is for her!” said Mrs. O’Reilly with a sigh.  “Of course,
     my dear, you’ll not repeat what I have just told you.”
“Not for the world!” said Lena Houghton emphatically.  “It is perfectly safe with me.”
The conversation was here abruptly ended, for the page threw open the drawing-room door and
     announced ‘Mr. Zaluski.’
“Talk of the angel,” murmured Mrs. O’Reilly with a significant smile at her companion.  Then
     skilfully altering the expression of her face, she beamed graciously on the guest who was
     ushered into the room, and Lena Houghton also prepared to greet him most pleasantly.
I looked with much interest at Sigismund Zaluski, and as I looked I partly understood why
     Miss Houghton had been prejudiced against him at first sight.  He had lived five years in
     England, and nothing pleased him more than to be taken for an Englishman.  He had had his silky
     black hair closely cropped in the very hideous fashion of the present day; he wore the
     ostentatiously high collar now in vogue; and he tried to be sedulously English in every
     respect.  But in spite of his wonderfully fluent speech and almost perfect accent, there
     lingered about him something which would not harmonise with that ideal of an English gentleman
     which is latent in most minds.  Something he lacked, something he possessed, which interfered
     with the part he desired to play.  The something lacking showed itself in his ineradicable love
     of jewellery and in a transparent habit of fibbing; the something possessed showed itself in
     his easy grace of movement, his delightful readiness to amuse and to be amused, and in a
     certain cleverness and rapidity of idea rarely, if ever, found in an Englishman.
He was a little above the average height and very finely built; but there was nothing
     striking in his aquiline features and dark grey eyes, and I think Miss Houghton spoke truly
     when she said that he was ‘Not even good-looking.’  Still, in spite of this, it was a face
     which grew upon most people, and I felt the least little bit of regret as I looked at him,
     because I knew that I should persistently haunt and harass him, and should do all that could be
     done to spoil his life.
Apparently he had forgotten all about Russia and Bulgaria, for he looked radiantly happy. 
     Clearly his thoughts were engrossed with his own affairs, which, in other words, meant with
     Gertrude Morley; and though, as I have since observed, there are times when a man in love is an
     altogether intolerable sort of being, there are other times when he is very much improved by
     the passion, and regards the whole world with a genial kindliness which contrasts strangely
     with his previous cool cynicism.
“How delightful and home-like your room always looks!” he exclaimed, taking the cup of tea
     which Mrs. O’Reilly handed to him.  “I am horribly lonely at Ivy Cottage.  This house is a sort
     of oasis in the desert.”
“Why, you are hardly ever at home, I thought,” said Mrs. O’Reilly, smiling.  “You are the
     lion of the neighbourhood just now; and I’m sure it is very good of you to come in and cheer a
     lonely old woman.  Are you going to play me something rather more lively to-day?”
He laughed.
“Ah!  Poor Pestal!  I had forgotten all about our last meeting.”
“You were very much excited that day,” said Mrs. O’Reilly.  “I had no idea that your
     political notions—”
He interrupted her
“Ah! no politics to-day, dear Mrs. O’Reilly.  Let us have nothing but enjoyment and harmony. 
     See, now, I will play you something very much more cheerful.”
And sitting down to the piano, he played the bridal march from ‘Lohengrin,’ then wandered off
     into an improvised air, and finally treated them to some recollections of the ‘Mikado.’
Lena-Houghton watched him thoughtfully as she put on her gloves; he was playing with great
     spirit, and the words of the opera rang in her ears:—

For he’s going to marry Yum-yum, Yum-yum, 
 And so you had better be dumb, dumb, dumb!
I knew well enough that she would not follow this moral advice, and I laughed to myself
     because the whole scene was such a hollow mockery.  The placid benevolent-looking old lady
     leaning back in her arm-chair; the girl in her blue gingham and straw hat preparing to go to
     the afternoon service; the happy lover entering heart and soul into Sullivan’s charming music;
     the pretty room with its Chippendale furniture, its æsthetic hangings, its bowls of roses; and
     the sound of church bells wafted through the open window on the soft summer breeze.
Yet all the time I lingered there unseen, carrying with me all sorts of dread possibilities. 
     I had been introduced into the world, and even if Mrs. O’Reilly had been willing to admit to
     herself that she had broken the ninth commandment, and had earnestly desired to recall me, all
     her sighs and tears and regrets would have availed nothing; so true is the saying, “Of thy word
     unspoken thou art master; thy spoken word is master of thee.”
“Thank you.”  “Thank you.”  “How I envy your power of playing!”
The two ladies seemed to vie with each other in making pretty speeches, and Zaluski, who
     loved music and loved giving pleasure, looked really pleased.  I am sure it did not enter his
     head that his two companions were not sincere, or that they did not wish him well.  He was
     thinking to himself how simple and kindly the Muddleton people were, and how great a contrast
     this life was to his life in London; and he was saying to himself that he had been a fool to
     live a lonely bachelor life till he was nearly thirty, and yet congratulating himself that he
     had done so since Gertrude was but nineteen.  Undoubtedly, he was seeing blissful visions of
     the future all the time that he replied to the pretty speeches, and shook hands with Lena
     Houghton, and opened the drawing-room door for her, and took out his watch to assure her that
     she had plenty of time and need not hurry to church.
Poor Zaluski!  He looked so kindly and pleasant.  Though I was only a slander, and might have
     been supposed to have no heart at all, I did feel sorry for him when I thought of the future
     and of the grief and pain which would persistently dog his steps.
</div></body></text></TEI>