<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Antigone: A Romance</title><author>Barry, William Francis (1849-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">
CHAPTER XXVI IF LOVE BE FREE?
Rupert's coming was not due to any sudden event, either pleasant or the reverse, at
      Trelingham. It was simply the escapade of a young man who is very much in love, and who
      discovers, or makes, in his daily pursuits an occasion for running off to the well of golden
      water, and there taking long draughts of felicity when no one is looking. As soon as the
      feeling of Hippolyta's presence which he carried with him into the West Country from Forrest
      House grew dim, a devouring melancholy seized upon him, a longing for which there was no
      anodyne, a weariness of all things which did not remind him of the maid of his heart, and a
      fever which seemed to infect him when he touched any trifle she had handled or come near. He
      wrought then like a man who is aware that one day's labour will purchase seven days'
      enjoyment, —fiercely, furiously, with his genius concentrated in every stroke, and a haste
      that is possible
       only to a spirit set on fire. He never painted so admirably; it was the passage
      of the beautiful, swift lightning over the face of a landscape, lambent, not destructive,
      adding a divine, an incomprehensible splendour to the colours and shapes of every day. But no
      sooner had he reached a stage where, without harm to the design, he could pause, than some
      attraction powerful as the magnet drew him to London. Now it was the need of refreshing his
      imagination by studying the great pictures—on which, in passing, he bestowed a glance, and
      hurried away from them to Hippolyta. Now it was an interview with some old friend who would be
      gone in a week, and whom he must therefore catch on the wing. But when he did catch him,
      Rupert seemed preoccupied, amazed, drowned in reverie, not equal to conversation, though
      capable of sudden speeches whose poetry and grace were so remarkable that even those who had
      anticipated wonders from their brilliant acquaintance, felt in him something original and
      undreamt of hitherto. Or it would be the need of rare and curious ingredients for his palette,
      which no one could choose but himself; or of the learning on the subject of King Arthur which
      was locked up in out-of-the-way books. It was something or nothing, and the French philosopher
      who invented 'occasional causes' would have smiled in his grave to find such a powerful
      demonstration of them in Rupert Glanville's comings and goings.
But the beginning, the middle, the end of the story
       was Hippolyta and ever Hippolyta. 'Thine eyes are lodestars,' he would say, with
      the infantine plagiarism of lovers who think that A Midsummer Night's Dream and
       Romeo and Juliet were indited for their particular use. To arrive unexpectedly; to
      rush into the presence of Hippolyta palpitating with eagerness and the haste of his long
      expedition; to dine tête-à-tête amid the antique curiosities and delicate English
      comfort of that red brick mansion in whose oakpanelled rooms the ghost of his great-aunt,
      trailing her silks and laces, and shocked out of her propriety (even as a well-informed
      spectre) by the sight of such romantic love-making, was perhaps still wandering after
      nightfall; to discourse of ten thousand nothings as if they had infinite importance, making
      them the strings on which love's sweet voluntary was played; to laugh and be serious and move
      with sudden flight into the fiery empyrean, Love seeming all the while to hold the secret of
      life, and existence so abounding in joy that for very excess it was transmuted into pain; to
      be wrapt in the flame of another's being and to feel all one's faculties alive to their
      uttermost height,—what was Rupert that he should resist the spell or put from him the
      overwhelming ecstasy of these things, and be content with a work-a-day world which glared upon
      him, hot and dusty, when Hippolyta was not there? Again and again he fled to his enchanted
      island. He was lost, rapt out of the sphere of things beneath the moon; he had broken through
      hedge and thicket, through thorn and brier,
       into the palace of the Sleeping Beauty, and, oh joy and wonder! it had only a
      single tenant who waked when his eyes were bent down upon her, and lived upon the breath of
      his lips. The tumultuous company of king and chancellor, of knights and serving-men, and all
      their noisy array, had sunk into a deep sleep, out of which, for his part, he desired never to
      awaken them. Why should not he and Hippolyta go on, loving and being loved, in the secrecy
      which increased their happiness a thousand-fold and kept friends—those worst of foes—at a
      distance? 'We do not want the palace to wake up, do we, Princess?' he said to her playfully as
      they were walking up and down the central path of the garden once more. No, Hippolyta would
      have left them gladly to their slumbers. But she had a question to ask. Might she call on Mr.
      Philip Regan?
It was not without blushing on her side, and a good deal of laughter from Rupert, that she
      contrived to get her question out. And who was Mr. Philip Regan, if he might be so bold as to
      inquire, demanded Rupert in turn. A clergyman? Oh, indeed! And so Hippolyta wanted to see a
      clergyman, after all. She had come round, then, from her obstinacy; she had begun to think
      marriage in a duly licensed building not so wicked as it appeared a few months ago. Well, he
      had no objection. But, half in shame and the least bit inclined to be angry with her adored
      Rupert, she answered no, it was not as he supposed, and, if he would promise to keep quiet and
      not laugh
       at her, she would tell him. The artist, however, was in that mood of abounding
      joy which the old wise Greeks thought unseemly for a mere creature of a day, whose happiness
      might be blown to dust by the passing wind, and which they esteemed the forerunner of Nemesis.
      He was quite sincere in declaring that he would marry Hippolyta when she pleased; but if that
      was not her motive in seeking a clergyman, —if, as seemed probable, it rose out of her
      enthusiasm for the poor of the neighbourhood, he would neither meddle nor mar, in accordance
      with the resolution he had taken at the outset. What did she want of Mr. Regan? Hippolyta,
      somewhat confused by his previous jesting, could not answer in a moment; she hardly knew
      whether, in seeing Maurice Regan's brother, she intended to thwart Annie's wishes or to
      forward them. And the confidence which, on this seemingly unimportant subject, might have been
      established between herself and Rupert was made impossible by his fit of light-mindedness.
      Instead, therefore, of telling him Annie Dauris's story, she contented herself with saying
      that Mr. Regan had it in his power to assist the family of the gardener in whom she had taken
      an interest; but that it was a long way to Saffron Hill, and she had not been able to decide
      on risking a drive into the heart of London. All this sounded very like what Glanville had
      anticipated. He would have been alarmed had she spoken of visiting a fashionable preacher at
      the West End; but Mr. Regan was not
       known to him by name and could not be famous, while any chance of discovery in
      such a region as Saffron Hill was not to be imagined. He had implicit faith in Hippolyta, and,
      merely renewing his stipulation that she should not enter a place where there was risk of
      infection, and should withold her address from Mr. Regan, he gave his consent. How seldom we
      know which of the cards we are holding in our hand will win or lose the game! To Glanville the
      clergyman was nobody; and Annie Dauris was not even a name; yet, if he could have been more
      sober amid the enchantments of that evening, if the frolic laughter of a spirit unbent had
      been kept in check, he might have discerned that Hippolyta, though no longer melancholy, was
      meditative, and after a new fashion.
More than once during those days Annie passed by the garden-gates; but, always seeing Mr.
      Malcolm, she did not venture in. She knew that Mrs. Malcolm would be kind, she was never
      anything else; but, so long as her husband stayed, there was no hope of her leaving Forrest
      House for an instant. How long, then, would he stay? To Annie it was a matter of life and
      death. Hippolyta, meanwhile, was like a water-lily floating in its dream of beauty on the
      tranquil waves, her thoughts absorbed, her feelings strung to their highest pitch of
      intensity, her sadness gone, as Rupert perceived, and her attachment to the beloved becoming
      more and more a part of her existence. What could she desire that was lacking? News of
       her father's whereabouts? Yes, it was strange he did not write or send a message
      to Falside. But she resolutely put that trouble away from her, like one who is on a voyage and
      knows that months must elapse ere he can reach the home he has quitted, or need take up again
      the cares he has left behind. In the midst of such a vast expanse of happiness around her, it
      was not difficult to forget the past or to paint the future in hues of Paradise. Three or four
      days of perfect love, cloudless and serene; so many hours during which the heart was steeped
      in bliss, the imagination laughing and gay in its fairy visions—hours at once long as
      eternity, swift as thought, and like some momentary crisis that can never be blotted from the
      memory,—were they over so soon, and was Rupert to be spirited away once more to that Hall of
      Frescoes where she saw him, in his artist costume, beautiful and strange as a god, not hers,
      but dedicated to another service? Yes, they were over; but she must not sit down to weep. Why
      should tears be the price of that happiness? She would help some one else to be happy; she
      would take charge of Annie Dauris, since there was no creature near who deserved her attention
      better, none whose rescue would bring so much joy to the good people whom she had found worthy
      of her affection. When Annie came next to the gate Mr. Malcolm was gone; and on inquiry she
      learnt that Mrs. Malcolm had set out soon after him, and would not be back till evening. But
      the housekeeper did not know that Hippolyta
       had resolved on a visit to Saffron Hill. It was to be a secret from Annie,
      unless good was certain to come from telling her.
Hippolyta, meanwhile, though acquainted with London in her frequent journeyings to and from
      abroad with Colonel Valence, was not at home in the purlieus of the Italian quarter, and she
      had some difficulty in finding her way. It was no part of her intention to disclose whence she
      had come to Mr. Regan, and accordingly she sent back the carriage to Forrest House when it had
      conveyed her a couple of miles in the direction of London. Walking some distance along the
      high road, she engaged the first cab that came towards her, and had herself driven to Hyde
      Park Corner. There she alighted again, turned down two or three streets, hired a second cab,
      and was taken, according to her directions, within a short distance of the church that Annie
      had pointed out as the one to which Mr. Philip Regan belonged. It was shut, as most London
      churches are on week-days, or as at least they seem to be when one passes by; and this, in
      particular, had a padlock on its rusty gate. Hippolyta looked round for the clergy-house.
      There was no building near that corresponded with her rather vague idea of what such a
      residence should be: the surroundings were poor and squalid; the people she saw going in and
      out of the various houses were emphatically 'low'—that is to say, not only poverty-stricken,
      but brutish-looking;—and though many of the houses were large and of massive
       construction, their general appearance was one of such pervading filth, misery,
      discomfort, and, she would have said, of such engrained wickedness, that she felt sure no
      minister of a Gospel dwelt in any of them. She bethought herself of reading the notices which
      were posted up on the church door, behind the rusty grating. They dealt with the things of
      this world, with dog taxes and carriage licenses—the latter absurdly out of place in a quarter
      which was traversed only by cabs in their flight east and west, or by great drays and
      butchers' or costermongers' carts. The only carriages likely to be seen within a large radius
      of St. Audry's Church were, said Hippolyta to herself, the hearse and mourning-coach of the
      undertaker. Parochial announcements, too, stared her in the face; but it would seem that in
      the modern significance a parish was not the fountain of heavenly grace to those who dwelt
      within its borders, so much as a corporate body bent on exacting two shillings in the pound
      under severest threats from the subjects over which it ruled. On other sheets were published
      the hours of service and the amount of the Sunday collection, distributed in columns according
      to the silver and copper pieces of which it was made up. In a corner of the last Hippolyta
      read the address of the church-wardens; but, so far as she could conjecture, these gentlemen
      abode at a distance, and the morning would be spent in seeking either of them. Were the clergy
      always so difficult to discover? She had thought of them as making a part of the buildings
       in which they officiated, but it would seem she was mistaken. What should she do
      next?
The way in which Colonel Valence had educated his daughter led to her being, in the presence
      of a trifling embarrassment like this, wild and shy. Clergymen were so closely bound up with
      that huge imposture called the social organism that Hippolyta, in endeavouring to find one of
      them, had something of the feeling which possesses a recruit who enters for the first time on
      a field of battle. She was excited and, perhaps it will be doing her no great injustice to
      add, slightly afraid. The medieval superstition which made men begin a story with the solemn
      announcement, 'in those days the devil walked openly in the streets of Heidelberg,' was
      paralleled to a certain extent by Hippolyta's shuddering reflection that she, a daughter of
      the Revolution, had come in search of that reverend vice, that sage iniquity, which, in the
      person of Mr. Philip Regan, was then stalking abroad through the streets of London. But she
      must find him; and after some hesitation, she entered one of the nearest houses, the door of
      which stood open, and knocked timidly. There was no answer for a time, but the scudding of
      children's feet was heard behind the partition, and by and by a room door opened and a tall,
      slatternly woman came out. She listened impatiently to Hippolyta's questions, eyeing her
      elegantly-dressed visitor with marked disdain; for there is the pride of Diogenes trampling on
      the pride of Plato in many an
       unkempt and ragged woman, when she brushes against another of her sex in silk
      attire. The only answer this virago made was that if the stranger would give Susan a penny,
      Susan would show the way to Mr. Regan's. Hippolyta was willing to give Susan many pence when
      she saw the pale-faced little thing, with her miserable frock reaching hardly to her knees,
      and an old straw bonnet on her head as much too large for her as the shabby frock was too
      small. The slatternly woman, among whose goods and chattels Susan was evidently reckoned, told
      her daughter in a loud voice to show where Mr. Regan lived and come home straight when she had
      done so instead of playing in the gutter. Hippolyta spoke a word or two of kindness to the
      child, but she did not seem to notice it, and went on before, her head hanging a little on one
      side and her feet finding the way mechanically. It was no distance. In a side street about
      five hundred yards from St. Audry's stood the small, dingy-looking house in which Mr. Regan
      had set up his modest establishment as a bachelor or celibate clergyman. Hippolyta kept the
      child with her till the bell was answered. A decently-attired elderly woman came to the door,
      and, in reply to inquiries, informed Hippolyta that Mr. Regan was out on his usual morning
      round; that it was uncertain when he would come in, and that if her business was pressing the
      only chance of transacting it at once would be to follow the clergyman on his beat, which was
      fairly regular, and catch him as he went from
       house to house. Seeing the little girl by Hippolyta's side, the good woman gave
      her some particular indications as to the quarter of the parish Mr. Regan was visiting; and
      Susan, with the sharpness of her sex and bringing up, nodded intelligently and set out afresh,
      nothing loth to guide Hippolyta on her travels. Questions put at diverse points of their
      pilgrimage elicited the information that the minister had been seen a few minutes previously
      going into a house in what I will call Denzil Lane,—for the true name is too well known. Here,
      then, Hippolyta dismissed Susan after giving her a little more than she had promised.
It was a fine old street was Denzil Lane, with noble but shamefully dilapidated houses, once
      the mansions of illustrious families, on both sides, interspersed with miserable tenements
      huddled one against another and in the last stages of decomposition. The house to which
      Hippolyta was shown had a large entrance-hall and magnificent oak staircase, which were both
      dimly lighted from a great window on the first landing, every third pane of which was broken,
      and the rest discoloured with smoke and festooned with antique cobwebs. Throughout the
      building one might catch the sound of voices in the different rooms and the movement of a
      numerous life, for it was densely populated from the cellars, which lay in darkness under
      Hippolyta's feet, to the roof that covered in a multitude of dismal attics. Knocking gently at
      the door on her left hand, Mrs. Malcolm
       inquired again for the whereabouts of this troublesome Mr. Regan. This time she
      received a civil answer from the woman who appeared on the threshold. 'Yes, Mr. Regan is
      upstairs, in the first floor front, but he may be there a long while. He always stays when he
      finds Mr. Mardol here.'
Hippolyta looked at her in astonishment on hearing the name. Could it be Ivor Mardol? What
      was he doing at such a time in such a place? 'Does Mr. Mardol live in this house?' she
      demanded, anxious to hear further about him.
'Oh no,' was the reply; 'Mr. Mardol is a good charitable gentleman, as well known in all the
      neighbourhood as Mr. Regan himself. They often meet in this way.' And the civil, talkative
      woman proceeded to express her wonder that they agreed as they did, and that they never had
      high words between them, considering that Mr. Mardol, like Mr. Minns, the tailor upstairs whom
      he visited, was an infidel, and Mr. Regan not only was a clergyman, but wore vestments on
      Sundays.
This was decisive. 'It must be the same,' said Hippolyta to herself. But how extraordinary
      that, in making inquiries about a stranger like Mr. Regan, she should have come upon the man
      whom she had been instrumental in sending away from the Hermitage, and whose absence, during
      those eventful weeks, had determined the course of her whole life! Should she endeavour to see
      and talk with him? He might be able to tell her something of her father. But, on
       the other hand, she had never learnt, or indeed cared to learn, by what name
      Colonel Valence was known, if known he personally was, to Ivor Mardol. While she was debating
      in her own mind, a door opened above and some one began to descend the stairs quietly. 'Ah,'
      said the woman, 'Mr. Mardol is coming. He has left the clergyman behind.' It was impossible
      for Hippolyta in the obscurity of the entrance to discern more than the figure of a young man
      coming down the stairs. But as he drew near and the light from outside fell upon his face, she
      uttered a cry of amazement, and went back some paces, almost into the street. Her own face,
      which had been in deep shade, was now lighted up in turn; and Ivor Mardol, for it was he,
      startled on hearing the voice and hastening to discover who it might be, when he saw Hippolyta
      paused, and for an appreciable space of time looked at her fixedly without saying a word. They
      both offered a picture of surprise and astonishment. Hippolyta was the first to recover. She
      held up her hand in a peculiar way. Ivor grasped it, let it fall, and whispered the only words
      he had yet thought of addressing to this strange young lady. She replied in the like whisper,
      adding aloud, 'I know your name, Mr. Mardol, though we have never met before.'
He drew her back into the dark entrance. 'You are one of ours,' he said; 'have you come with
      a message for me?' He was calm, but exceedingly grave in voice and manner. No, she told him,
      their
       meeting was accidental; she had intended to find Mr. Regan. Then, remembering
      what she had heard from the woman who was standing by, and who had viewed their introduction
      of themselves to one another with great admiration, Hippolyta asked him whether he knew Mr.
      Regan intimately.
'As intimately,' answered Mardol, 'as one knows a boy that has been at school with one. Mr.
      Regan and I were in the same class at—. We were not friends, however, and not enemies.
      Naturally, on leaving school we went our several ways, but when he came to work in these parts
      our orbits crossed again, and we are often in the way of meeting. If you wish to speak to Mr.
      Regan I will ask him to come down. What name shall I say?'
'Wait a moment,' answered Hippolyta; 'perhaps I need not speak to him. Tell me, do you know
      his brother, Mr. Maurice Regan? My business concerns him rather than the clergyman.'
Ivor considered before replying. He scanned the unknown visitor from head to foot, looked
      down, and said in a serious tone, 'I hope, my dear young lady, if I may take such a liberty,
      that it is no personal interest which prompts you to inquire for Maurice Regan. He is a
      dangerous man.'
'You do know him, then!' she exclaimed, 'and you can help me. But why do you call him
      dangerous? You confirm my suspicions.'
'He is one of ours, too,' said Ivor, with a look of mingled pain and displeasure; 'one by
      whom we
       shall gain little credit. If you will tell me why you are looking for him, I in
      turn will tell you all I know about him.'
'Most willingly,' said Hippolyta; 'but where can we speak? This place is too public and we
      shall be interrupted.'
'I will arrange that,' he replied. 'Here, Mrs. Scruton,' turning to the civil person, who
      was still at her door, 'have you the key of the committee-room? I want to show it to this
      lady.' Mrs. Scruton, after a minute or two of searching, handed him a large key, and he
      beckoned Hippolyta to follow him along the hall. When they were quite in the gloom of the
      staircase. Ivor found a door on their right which no eyes, save those accustomed to the
      darkness, would have perceived. The key turned easily in the lock, and they entered a vast but
      desolate apartment which may have served in happier days for a drawing-room, though now it was
      bare of all that could make it pleasant or habitable. Some wooden benches were ranged along
      the walls; a table covered with motheaten baize stood at one end and beside it a wooden
      arm-chair, which Ivor presented to Hippolyta. She would have begged him to be seated, but
      there was not another chair visible. He laughed and drew one of the benches forward, and
      seating himself at a respectful distance from her, said in a low, earnest voice, 'Begin.'
Sympathy is never a matter of words, nor can the utmost eloquence so easily convey an
      assurance of it
       as the tone, the look, which expressing that something in us that lies deeper
      than speech, are powerful enough to create in an instant the warm, comfortable atmosphere in
      which we disclose our very soul to the listener. So was it now with Ivor and Hippolyta. By a
      subtle, instant process she knew that she had found a friend, and Ivor knew equally well that
      the young lady in whose presence he sat, and whose every word and motion had the highest
      distinction, was sincere, unworldly, and simply intent on doing good. She unfolded to him the
      story, so far as she was acquainted with it, of Annie Dauris, her passionate folly and
      despairing love for a man who seemed to have abandoned her and gone his way. She added the
      dreadful suspicions which, from Annie's behaviour at their last meeting, she could not but
      have formed. Ivor listened without interrupting the recital, asked no questions till it was
      ended, and said merely as Hippolyta concluded, 'What did you propose to tell Mr. Philip Regan?
      the whole of this sad affair?'
'Yes,' said Hippolyta; 'I would have let him know everything, if he appeared to be a man of
      sense and judgment. If not, I would have asked him for his brother's address, and endeavoured
      to see him myself. Something must be done, or Annie will throw prudence to the winds and
      either disgrace her family or perhaps put an end to her wretched existence. She is not only
      giddy, but a slave of impulse.'
'Ah,' cried Ivor, standing up, 'is it not a heartbreak to hear such things? Maurice Regan is
      one
       of the thousands that join our movement under false pretences, from their hatred
      of moral order and discipline, not from any wish to set their brethren free and lift them
      higher. He is a libertine, not a Liberal; but he thinks it is all one. I remember him, too, at
      school,—unruly, indulgent in every way that was then possible to himself, and hard as the
      nether millstone to others. He has since run through a younger brother's fortune, and plunged
      headlong into dissipation such as London offers on all hands to the base. He is a quick
      writer, speaks forcibly and fluently, and has rendered services to us in the press. But though
      I never thought he had principle, of course I was unaware of the misery he has brought on this
      poor girl. And now, you say, he has cast her off.'
'Entirely, it seems, unless something can be done to unite them. I do not suppose she will
      ever be happy with such a man; yet anything is better than to see her good father and mother
      so miserable.'
'But,' said Ivor, turning his serious glance towards Hippolyta, 'what can be done? I know
      the man's philosophy, as he calls it. He will never marry her, for he does not believe in
      marriage.'
Hippolyta trembled from head to foot. A feeling of sickness came over her, and she clung to
      the arms of the chair to keep herself from falling. What could she say? in what way conceal
      her emotion? There was a difficult pause.
'No, I suppose not,' she said at last; 'but you—
       I—those who accept the Revolution, the principles of '89, do we believe in
      marriage?'
Ivor came to her with an air of infinite distress. 'I implore you,' he said with the most
      intense fervour, 'tell me, assure me that this is indeed the story of a third person,
      that—pardon me, I am too bold— that you are not Annie Dauris.'
Hippolyta smiled faintly. 'No, I am not Annie Dauris,' she said, regaining the control over
      her voice that she had lost; 'it is another's story, not mine. I should not dare,' she went on
      more steadily, 'to suggest in the hearing of a clergyman like Mr. Philip Regan the view I have
      expressed to you. Surely, Mr. Mardol, there can be no mistake as to the teaching of
       our religion. The free union of equal men and women is incompatible with marriage.
      If it is not, we are riveting again the chains that were smitten asunder when the churches
      went down.' She could face him now, this ambiguous son of the Revolution.
'I see,' he answered imperturbably, 'you are romantic. Excuse the word. I know the feeling,
      for I have gone through it. How shall I convince you that you are wrong?' He seemed to be
      pondering the matter. Hippolyta was too proud to submit to this.
'Nay, rather,' she exclaimed, 'how convince me that you have not forsaken the very
      principles of liberty and equality, if you are prepared to defend the iniquitous traffic in
      the souls and bodies of women which goes by the name of marriage?'

'Nay, nay,' he said. 'Let us use a little patience. I will convince you, if you do not
      shrink from the proof.'
'I shrink from no proof,' she said, rather hotly. It was too much. And he had been so full
      of sympathy while she was telling her tale; she must have been deceived in the man!
'Ah, but the proof I have in view is no less appalling than to plunge your arm up to the
      elbow in molten iron. There is but one cure for the stage of sentimentalism in which all
      Revolutionists find themselves sooner or later; and that is contact with reality. It is very
      trying to the heart and the nerves, however good for the head.'
'I had imagined,' said Hippolyta scornfully, 'that it was contact with reality, with life,
      which created Revolutionists. Is not that your experience?'
'No doubt,' was his answer; 'but where many of us have mistaken, and constantly do mistake,
      is in being satisfied with our first knowledge, and losing touch of things when we go on to
      mould our philosophies, our Utopias. We look once, when we should look twice and thrice.'
'What do you understand by looking twice and thrice? Finding an excuse for the rulers of
      mankind and turning back to the ancien régime ?'
'Not quite that, or I should have the courage, I hope, to declare that the Revolution and I
      had parted company. I mean, looking beyond to-day and to-morrow, considering what will happen
      when we have
       pulled down what is yet standing in our way. It is not enough to establish
      anarchy, as our friends now appear to have resolved. We must go on to establish that which,
      one day or other, ought to succeed anarchy —the kingdom of justice and of human
      brotherhood.'
'I am still in the dark,' said Hippolyta; 'apply your doctrine of second and third thoughts
      to marriage. The first thought, you will allow, is Free Love; every man and woman to choose
      the manner, the length, and the terms of union.'
'Yes, the romantic stage; degenerating in men like Maurice Regan into the stage of
      libertinism. Oh, I know,' he went on, lifting his hand as if to deprecate the expression of
      arguments familiar to him. 'You will say the abuse of Free Love is not greater, that its
      dangers are even less, than the abuse of marriage. But let me finish my prologue.'
Hippolyta, who had risen in her vehemence, sat down again. Ivor continued:
'When we turn our eyes upon life, as it is and has been, we are appalled at the multiplied
      serfdoms which go to make it up. Church, State, family, profession, rank in the world—what are
      these but names of long-established, deeply-rooted servitudes from which we can escape only by
      going into the wilderness? The present order of things is founded upon manifest or disguised
      slavery. Neither those that command, nor those that obey, are free. The king wears a golden
      chain, the convict an iron one; but the king can have his will as little as the convict.
       Yet all this heaping of serfdom upon serfdom does not end in happiness. Some
      internal disease appears to be eating out the vitals of civilisation; and our Socialism and
      Nihilism are but desperate remedies for the universal gangrene. See how far I go with your
      first thoughts. Is it far enough?'
'Perhaps,' answered Hippolyta; 'I will tell you when I have heard your second.'
'How wise women can be sometimes!' he said, smiling. 'I am not sure that you will like my
      second thoughts. They may be brought under a single axiom—'
'And that is—?'
'That man is a spiritual being, and can therefore be neither saved nor lost by a change of
      institutions which in their nature are mechanical. Or put it this way, man is made by
      character, not by laws or ordinances.'
'My dear Mr. Mardol,' cried Hippolyta, 'that is the old Christian fallacy. Do not laws
      create, modify, and mould character? What but a difference of institutions has made the Turk
      other than the German, or the Hindoo other than the Mussulman?' She would have drawn out her
      instances, but Ivor by a sign entreated her to pause.
'Excuse me,' he said, 'you are talking the dialect of the eighteenth century; and
       that is the old leaven of Revolutionists. We should have made further progress if we
      had not yielded to that fallacy, which the Nihilists begin to see through. At the root of all
       institutions lies the national character. I admit that enormous changes ought to
      take place; I am doing what I can, as an individual, to help on the transformation. But, when
      all possible changes have come to pass in the outer world of law and custom, nothing will have
      been done unless a change has taken place in the inner world of the spirit. And now I will
      tell you how this bears on Free Love. We want all institutions cleared away which fetter a
      woman's power of saying no. We want every means bestowed upon her by which she shall come to a
      full freedom of choosing,—a matter with which law has hardly anything to do, and custom almost
      everything. But this can be provided only by a right education of women.'
'Quite so,' said Hippolyta; 'that is what I have always believed. But would you have
      marriage indissoluble except by the legal process that drags a woman in the mire?'
'Now you have touched my second thoughts. Are the difficulties surrounding marriage
      artificial, that is to say of man's making, or do they exist in the nature of things?'
'How like a Socratic question!' she said, laughing, and Ivor joined in the laughter.
'A strange sort of question in Denzil Lane, is it not?' he cried. 'But this is one of the
      points on which my brethren and I cannot agree. So they have excommunicated me.'
'What!' said Hippolyta, becoming serious in a
       moment, 'you are jesting. It is impossible that you should speak so lightly if
      the thing had happened.'
'Well, it has happened. I do not wish to sail under false colours. I thought, in fact, when
      you disclosed to me your connection with the society, that you had brought me a message from
      the chiefs.'
'And that was why you looked so grave,' exclaimed Hippolyta, with compassion in every
      feature. 'Oh no, no, I had rather be excommunicated myself. But do tell me, if it will not
      distress you, how such a deplorable misunderstanding can have arisen?'
'It is no misunderstanding. In the society to which you and I belong, founded as it is on a
      social creed, speculative differences lead to very practical results. I must not disclose what
      is, after all, the secret of others; and I could not tell it now in any case. The quarrel is
      that deep one between the century which gave birth to the Revolution and the century which is
      guiding it through infancy. I believe there are difficulties—mysteries, if you like to call
      them so—in the nature of things, which must ever limit our aspirations towards an earthly
      Paradise. And I do not believe that to revolutionise all our institutions will have the effect
      which the brethren anticipate. As I say, the multitude are romantic and sentimental; they have
      not read, they will not study, the annals of the past. And they little see that when they have
      abolished Church, State, and family in the old forms, all three will spring up again in the
      new.'
'Oh, this is melancholy,' cried Hippolyta. 'I
       know not if it is one degree better than my father's gloomy
      prognostications.'
'Who is your father, may I ask?' inquired Ivor.
Hippolyta hesitated. If Mr. Mardol were no longer on friendly terms with his old companions
      there might be danger in giving him the full answer. She said, therefore, in an off-hand way,
      to dismiss the subject, 'My father is a philosopher and inclined to be a Pessimist.' Then,
      with a change of tone, 'But where is your proof that conventional marriages are better than
      Free Love.'
'I did not say that,' he replied; 'but if you would wish—I should say rather, if you can
      endure—to see a world where Free Love reigns supreme and unchecked, I can assign you such
      guides, good and worthy persons of your own sex, as will show it you.'
'In what part of the world?' demanded Hippolyta.
'Here,' he said, 'on all sides, within a radius of a couple of miles. Have you the heart to
      go down into these depths? You are romantic, and naturally so, since you have dedicated your
      youth to the Revolution, like those passionate, intellectual women—true Sibyls and Amazons of
      our modern world—who lead the van in Moscow and St. Petersburg. But the young are enthusiastic
      without knowledge, as the old have knowledge without enthusiasm. Come and study life where it
      may be seen in myriad forms, all strangely, dreadfully instructive; and then tell me what you
      think of Free Love, Mrs.—?' he paused inquiringly.

'Mrs. Malcolm,' she said with no tremor in her accent. Yes, she would come and see things
      with her own eyes. 'I am not afraid of truth or reality,' was her proud declaration to him.
      But she must not forget Annie. 'Can you get me Maurice Regan's address?' she said, rising to
      go when it had been settled that she was to return and begin her voyage of exploration in
      three days.
'I will inquire of his brother, and let you know,' replied Ivor; 'but, if I may offer one
      final piece of advice, it would be that you do not communicate with your young friend until
      you have gone over some at least of the scenes to which you will be taken. A desperate girl
      is, no doubt, one of the most fearful responsibilities you could have. But, on my honour and
      conscience, I do not think she could do anything worse, let her do what she might, than fall
      again in the way of Maurice Regan. She has perhaps escaped ruin once; but that sort of miracle
      is too rare to be looked for a second time. But you should watch over her as well as you
      can.'
He took up his hat where he had laid it on the green baize table, led Hippolyta to the door,
      which he locked, and asked her whether she would permit him to send for a cab. The day was
      fine, and, thinking she had better walk a little way, she declined. Ivor Mardol watched her
      depart, and, with an expression on his face which betokened great pity and equal doubt as to
      the destiny of such a frank and determined nature, restored the key of the committee-room
       to Mrs. Scruton, and went away in the opposite direction. He could not get the
      thought of Mrs. Malcolm out of his head that evening. Still enamoured of the lady whose bright
      eyes, had she been acquainted with his folly, would have scorned him at Trelingham, Ivor had
      only a calm, but a very sincere, interest to bestow upon any one else. He was in great
      trouble; his views had been altering and, as it seemed to him, enlarging for a number of
      years, and they had now brought him into a situation of such peril and loneliness that, but
      for his work among the poor, he must have sat down and eaten his heart with grief. From
      Hippolyta's conversation, from her way of putting what she had had to tell, he divined that
      there was a deep unsettlement beneath the daring opinions to which she had given utterance.
      Was she, like himself, ready to pass from implicit faith in the ways and principles of the
      Revolution to the severest criticism of them? No, not ready, far from it. But suspicions were
      rising up in the secret chambers of her heart and would not be lulled to sleep.
END OF VOL. II

</div></body></text></TEI>