<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">
CHAPTER XXXI.
" GET me some fresh candles—long ones; longer than these—as long as you possibly can," Esther
     says that same eveing, on going to bed, to the housemaid whom she finds putting coals on her
     fire.
"I think, 'm, that you will find these will last for to- night," the woman answers, looking
     at the very respectable dimensions of the unlit candles on Esther's queer old-fashioned
     toilet-table.
"No—no, they won't!" she answers, nervously; "it is better to be on the safe side."

"Would you like a night-light, miss?"
"Oh no, no! they make the corners of the room blacker than ever, and they cast such odd
     shadows. I'm so afraid of the dark," she ends, shuddering.
"I'm afraid you don't sleep well, 'm ?"
"Not very. By-the-by" (with a sudden inspiration), "have you got anything that you could give
     me to make me sleep—any opiate of any kind?"
"I've got a little laudanum, ma'am, that Mrs. Franklin give me last week when I had a bad
     face."
"Fetch it me," she cries, eagerly; "that is, if you don't want it yourself. It is very
     foolish of me," she says, looking rather ashamed, "but I cannot sleep for fright."
The servant goes, and presently returns with a small dark blue bottle.
"About how much ought one to take, I wonder?" Esther says, holding it up between herself and
     the firelight.
"If you have never been used to take it before, I should think two or three drops would be
      hample, 'm ; I hope, 'm" (with a little anxiety in her florid plebeian face), "as
     you'll be careful not to take a hoverdose, or you might chance never to wake up again:
     I knew a young person as took it by mistake for 'black dose'—it was the fault of the chemist's
     young man—and in an hour she was a corpse; they said as she had took enough to kill ten
     men."
"It is no wonder that she was a corpse, then," Miss Craven answers, with a slight smile. "I
     should not think" (scrutinising the little bottle inquisitively), "that there was enough here
     to kill one woman, let alone ten men. Yes, I'll be careful; thanks, very much. Good night!"
     (with her pretty courteous smile).
The housemaid being gone, Esther bolts the door—a weakly defensive measure against one class
     of assailants, the crape-masked burglars; though, as she is aware, utterly
      impotent against the other and worse class—the intangible,
     unkeep-outable revenants; the rustlers along the passage, the rattlers of the lock.
     She then seats herself at the dressing-table, flings down her arms among her brushes and combs,
     and sinks her head upon them, in closest proximity to the candles, whose little spires of flame
     the wind, thrusting its thin body in between window and frame, drives right against the tumbled
     plenty of her hair. In this attitude she remains a long time; forgetting even to search under
     the bed, up the chimney, behind the screen, or in the huge japanned chest, upon which a
     disconnected but interesting landscape of cocks, pagodas, and junks picks itself out, in
     tarnished yellow, from the dull black ground.
It is impossible for the most comprehensive mind or body to contain any two distinct, even
     though not necessarily opposite feelings, in their fullest force, at the same time. If one is
     famished with hunger, one cannot be consumed by thirst; if one is consumed by thirst, one
     cannot be famished with hunger. If one is in despair at being forgotten by one's lover, one is
     indifferent as to the onset of any number of ghosts and murderers; if one is paralyzed by fear
     of ghosts and murderers, one is tolerably indifferent as to one's lover's lapse of memory. For
     the first time since his death, Jack is not the leading thought in Esther's mind. Poor dead!
     How can they be so unreasonable as to expect to be anyone's leading thought? Even we noisy,
     voiceful, visible living are obliged to keep crying out, "I am here—remember me," in order not
     to sink into oblivion amongst our neighbours and kinsfolk. 
"Wilt thou remember me when I am gone,
Further each day from thy vision withdrawn—
Thou in the sunset, and I in the dawn?" Pretty, tender, touching
     lines; but I think that the answer to them, if given truly, would hardly content the asker:
      "I will remember thee for a very little while; even till I
     see some one younger and prettier than thou wert, and then I will forget thee!"
Miss Craven starts up, after awhile, and begins to walk up and down, over the creaky,
     up-and-downy boards, and to speak vehemently and out loud to the rats, who, numerous and
     cheerful as usual, are scrabbling, pattering, squeaking under the floor, behind the wainscot,
     in the japan-chest. "At all events," she says, with a sort of savage satisfaction, "there is
     one comfort: he'll be miserable—he'll curse the day when he ties himself to that lump of
      blancmange. Blancmange!
     white meat! that exactly expresses her; she looks as if she would be good to eat—soft,
     luscious, ripe. Unfortunately, a man does not contemplate eating his wife!"
But even this little angry gleam of comfort has but a short life. Soon, too soon, it occurs
     to her that men do not look at a woman with women's eyes. Men, being three parts animal
     themselves, condone any offence to a woman the animal part of whom is perfect and beautiful.
     How else is it that beauty—mere blank beauty, although destitute of any accessory charms—can
     always command its price in the market, and that price a high one? In marrying Constance, St.
     John will have no disappointments to undergo, no discoveries to make. He has known her all her
     life; has seen her change from a handsome stupid child into a handsomer stupider girl, and
     bloom, lastly, into a handsomest, stupidest woman. Constance has no antecedents; she is a woman
     without a history. That also is in her favour. A man likes to write his name on a sheet of
     white paper better than on one upon which many other men have written theirs. Perfectly
     virtuous, perfectly healthy, perfectly beautiful, young, rich, not ill-tempered, not fast, not
     shrew-tongued—surely she is a prize worth any man's
      drawing. If, in addition to her long list of qualifications,
     she possessed also Desdemona's heart and Imogen's mind, it would be too hard upon the rest of
     womankind : 
" Why should one woman have all goodly things?"
Want of sympathy with the companion of her life makes a woman embittered, reckless—sends her
     often trespassing on her neighbours' preserves, in the endeavour to find there that
     congeniality of spirit which is not to be met with in her own. Want of sympathy with the
     companion of his life sends a man oftener to his club; makes him much pleasanter to
     other women when he goes into society; makes him sulky and sleepy when he dines at home—that is
     all. Doubtless St. John will be indifferent to his bride at first; he will dislocate his jaw
     with yawning during their wedding-tour, but she will bear him children; " selon les us et coutumes Anglaises, elle aura beaucoup d'enfants;"  he will like
     her for that. Year by year they will come here to Blessington, probably. Year by year she
     (Esther) will see the blossom of a fuller contentment on his wide brow, the quiet of a deeper
     rest in his restless eyes. And she herself will be here always, for one cannot throw away one's
     daily bread. Year by year they will find her with ever thinner hair, sharper shoulders, drabber
     cheeks; and he, looking upon her with the forgiveness of complete indifference, will say to
     himself, "She is bad, and she is ugly; I was well rid of her!" Than to be so forgiven, how much
     rather would she have been struck down dead by his hand, lifted in righteous anger and
     vengeance, on that moonlit September night, beside the glassy rush-brimmed mere at Felton! A
     sudden rage at her own fatuity fills her, when she looks back on that idiotic hope that had
     upsprung in her mind, that his object in coming to Blessington was to pardon her,
      and take her back to himself. Do men ever pardon a sin
     against themselves ? 
 ".....Worse than despair,
Worse than the bitterness of death, is hope.
It is the only ill which can find place
Upon the giddy, sharp, and narrow hour
Tottering beneath us. Plead with the swift frost,
That it should spare the eldest flower of spring ;
Plead with awakening earthquake, o'er whose couch
Even now a city stands, strong, fair and free,
Now stench and blackness yawns like death. Oh! plead
With famine and wind-walking pestilence,
Blind lightning, or the deep sea; not with man—
Cruel, cold formal man-righteous in words,
In deeds a Cain."
She sits down before her looking-glass, and stares desperately, with inner eyes, at the blank
     ruin of her life; with outer eyes at the ruin mirrored in her sunken, altered face, that the
     old looking-glass, blurred with rust stains, makes look more sunken and altered still.
     Involuntarily she lifts her thumb and forefinger, and lays them in the hollows of her cheek, as
     if seeking for the red carnations that used to flower so fairly there. She has noticed before
     the decay of her beauty—noticed it with apathy, as who should say, "Everything else is gone,
     why should not this go too?" But now she observes it with a sick pang, as at the parting with a
     friend; she would give ten years of her life to reach it back again. "It was only for my beauty
     he liked me," she says, still speaking aloud; "it was only for my beauty that anybody could
     like me ; there is nothing else to like in me. I never was clever, or said witty things, or
     sang, or played: I was only pretty. Now that that is gone, everything is gone!" 
As one shipwrecked, floating about on a plank among the weltering waves of some great
     plunging, grey-green sea,
      strains his eyes along the horizon to see some sail-speck,
     some misty palm-island, that looks as though it were hung midway in air; so she strains her
     mental eyes to catch sight of some friendly ship that may take her off from this rock of her
     despair. This world is full, of pairs, but some oversight has left a good many odd ones also;
     Esther is an odd one. Her road has come to a blank wall, and there stopped. Is there no ladder
     that can overclimb this wall?—no gap in all the thickness of its brick-and-mortar?—no outlet
     ?
She rises and stands by the fire; her eyes down-dropped on the blue-and-white Dutch tiles—on
     the hobs, and queer brass-inlaid dogs: involuntarily she raises them, and they rest upon the
     little laudanum-bottle on the chimneypiece. Quick as lightning, an answer to her
     thought-question seems flashed across her mind. There is a ladder that can over-climb
      any wall; there is a gap that can give egress through the stoutest masonries; there
     is an outlet from the deepest dungeon; and this ladder, this gap, this outlet, men call
      Death. Over the sea of her memory the housemaid's words float back: "I hope you'll be
     careful not to take an overdose, 'm, or you might chance never to wake again!" They had been
     spoken in careful warning; to her they seemed words of persuasive promise. Never to wake again!
     Never to say again in the evening, " Would God it were morning!" and in the morning, "Would God
     it were evening!"
To Esther, the great sting of death had always laid in his pain—in his gasping breath,
     twitched features, writhen unfleshed limbs; but this death that comes in sleep can be no
     bitterer than a mother that lifts her little slumbering child out of his small bed (he not
     knowing), and bears him away softly. The idea of self-slaughter, when first suggested, has
     always something terrific, especially to us, who from
      our birth have been taught to look upon it as a crime hardly
     second to murder; to us, to whom Cato's great heroism and Lucretia's chaste martyrdom seem as
     sins. Some vague idea that suicide is forbidden in the Scriptures runs through Esther's mind.
     She sits down at the table, and, drawing a Bible towards her, searches long among the partial,
     temporary, and local prohibitions and commands of the Books of the Law, and still longer among
     the universal, all-applying prohibitions and commands of Gospel and Epistle. Whether it be that
     she search ill, or that there is nought therein written on the subject she seeks, she knows
     not; only she finds nothing; and, closing the book, she leans her pale cheek on her closed
     white hand. Her brain feels strangely calm, and she even forgets the darkness of the night,
     musing on a deeper darkness.
What is this death, that we write in such great black letters? After all, what is it that we
     know about him, for or against? Is it fair to condemn him unheard, unknown? Why should we give
     him any embodiment?—why should we personify him at all? He is but an ending: what is there in
     the end of anything more terrifying than in its beginning, or its middle? Death is but the end
     of life, as birth is its beginning, and as some unnoticed moment in its course is its
     middle.
Why are the waters in which we set our feet at the last more coldly awful than those out of
     which we stepped at the first? Both—both, are they not portions of the great sea of Eternity
     that floweth ever round Time's little island? A clock is wound up for a certain number of
     hours; when that number of hours has elapsed, it stops. Our more complicated machinery is wound
     up to go for a certain number of years, months, days; when that number of years, months, and
     days is elapsed, we stop—that is all. What is this life, about the taking or keeping of which
     we make
      such a clamour, as if it were some great, costly, goodly
     thing? 
"It is but a watch or a vision
Between a sleep and a sleep."
It is cowardly, disloyal, say they, for a soldier to desert the post at which he has been
     set. Ay, but the galley-slave, chained to an oar, if he can but break his chain and be gone,
     may flee away, and none blame him. A prisoner that is not on parole, what shall hinder him from
     escaping? If he can but burst his bars, and draw his strong bolts, may he not out and away into
     the free air? If, before our birth, in that unknown pre-existence of ours at which
     backward-reaching memory catches not, we, standing looking into life, had said, "Oh, Master,
     give me of this life! I know not what it is, but I would fain taste it; and if Thou givest it
     to me, I swear to Thee to keep and guard it carefully, as long as I may—." But have we ever so
     asked for it? Has it not been thrust upon us, undesiring, unconsulted, as a gift that is
     neither of beauty nor of price? Who can chide us, if, laying it down meekly at the everlasting
     feet, we say, "Oh, Great Builder! take back that house in which, a reluctant tenant, Thou hast
     placed me. Resume Thy gift; it is a burden too heavy for me! Lay it, I pray Thee, on shoulders
     that mayhap may bear it stoutlier!"
She lifts the bottle, having uncorked it, to her lips and tastes. It has a deathly, sickly
     flavour, not enticing. Hesitating, she holds it in her hand, half-frightened, half-allured;
     while her heart beats loud and hard. "It is the key to all my doubts," she says within herself,
     looking steadfastly at it; "it is the answer to all my questions. If I do but drink this little
     draught, I shall have all knowledge; I shall never wonder again! I shall know where Jack is; I
     shall be with him! But shall I?" Ay, that's the rub! Even
      in this small world, to be alive at the same time with
     another person is not necessarily, or even probably, to be with him. Wide continents,
     high mountains, deep rivers often sever those that are closest of kin; and in the world of the
     dead, which, being so much more populous, must be so much the greater, is it not likely that
     still wider continents, higher mountains, deeper rivers, may part two that would fain be
     together? What if, before her time, she incur the abasement of death, the dishonour of
     corruption, and yet attain not the object for whose sake she is willing desperately to lay her
     comely head in the dust?
She changes her attitude, puts down the bottle, and again stoops her small flower-face on her
     bent fingers—her thoughts varying their channel a little: "If I go, I shall leave no gap behind
     me, any more than a teacupful of water taken out of a great pool leaves a gap behind. If it is
     disgraceful to go willingly out of the world, instead of being dragged unwillingly out of it,
     my disgrace is my own. I involve no one else in it; there is no one of my name left to be
     ashamed of me. I leave no work undone in the world. Hundreds of others can carry air-cushions,
     and read to a deaf old man far more patiently than I have done. My fifty pounds a year will go
     to put daily bread into some other poor woman's mouth, to whom it may perhaps taste sweeter
     than it has done to me." Her head sinks forward again on her outstretched arms. ...."It is
     awful to go out into the dark all by oneself," she thinks, with a pang of intense self-pity, as
     she feels the warm, gentle life throbbing in her round, tender limbs: "and I, that hate the
     dark so—, is it very wicked of me to think of this thing? People will say so, but I will not
     hear them. Where shall I be to-morrow at even?" 
"You will be at Blessington, and feeling a good deal ashamed of your absurd paroxysm of
     cowardly despair,"
      answers plain common sense, who, in the shape of an untold
     multitude of rats, begins rushing and gnawing, hundred- toothed, scampering hundred-footed
     behind the walls.
Esther lifts her foolish prone head, and listens. "Skurry—skurry!" go the rats; "Crack!" go
     the beams; "Thud!" goes some unexplained bulk, in the dining-room underneath! As the tide, at
     flood, creeps up and over the sands, so the child's old fear creeps up and over her new mad
     scheme of suicide. "Rustle—rustle!" come the ghostly dresses along the China gallery; "Click,
     rattle—rattle, click!" goes the door-lock. Down goes the laudanum bottle on the table, and
     Esther, springing to her feet, begins to unfasten, with fingers rendered nervous by extreme
     haste, her dress and the belt round her slim waist. "Crack—crack—crack!" goes something close
     to the bed-head; "Bang!" goes a distant door. There is no wind; what or who can have executed
     that bang The fire, which has been burning hollow for some time, collapses, and falls in
     suddenly with a clear, loud noise. In one leap Miss Craven is in bed and beneath the sheltering
     bed-clothes.
All very well pensively to contemplate, in half-earnest, the conveying oneself out of a world
     that has been a most harsh step-mother to one, but by no means well to have one's graceful
     farewells to existence broken in upon by a nation tailed and whiskered—by the spirits of old
     reprobates in flowered dressing-gowns, and of ladies, who nightly carry their patched and
     powdered heads like parcels under their arms.
Good night, wicked woman! May the rats career all night over your small face, as a punishment
     for your great idiocy!
</div></body></text></TEI>