<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="29">
CHAPTER XXIX.
I THINK that people's value, or want of value, is seldom their own: it belongs rather to the
     circumstances that surround them—to attributes foreign to themselves—outside of them. Had
     Robinson Crusoe, while walking down Bond Street in flowing wig and lace ruffles, first met his
     man Friday, he might have tossed him sixpence to avoid his importunities; but would hardly have
     taken him into intimate friendship—would hardly even have admitted him
      as a man and a brother. Among the blind the one-eyed is
     king, and among a crowd of total strangers an acquaintance rises into a friend.
Lonely Esther is half-inclined to effect this metamorphosis in the case of Miss Blessington.
     The mere fact of having eaten, drank, and slept for a considerable period under the same roof
     with her—the bare fact of having lived with and disliked her during a whole month and more—was
     enough recommendation in a house not one of whose inmates had she ever beheld before. Almost as
     a friend has she greeted her this morning. With admiration most unfeigned, though made a little
     bitter by mental comparison with her own dimmed, grief-blighted beauty, has she regarded the
     stately woman, the splendid animal, sleek and white as a sacred Egyptian cow; the brilliancy of
     whose pale, bright hair, and the perfect smoothness of her great satin throat, are heightened
     by the sober richness of her creaseless black velvet dress. Voluptuous, yet cold, the passions
     that her splendid physique provoke are chilled to death by the passionless stupor of her soul.
     I am not at all sure that impassioned ugliness— supposing the ugliness to be moderate, and the
     passion immoderate—has not more attraction for the generality of men than iced beauty.
Esther's warmth is thrown away; she might as well expect that the "Venus de Medici" would
     return the pressure of warm clinging fingers with her freezing, sculptured hand. "I was so glad
     to find you here last night: it was so pleasant to see a face one knew," Miss Craven says, with
     the rash credulity of youth unexpectant of snubs.
Miss Blessington looks slightly surprised. "Tha—anks; it is very good of you to say so, I am
     sure," she answers, rather drawlingly, and with a small, cold smile that would repress
     demonstrations much more violent than any that
      Esther had meditated. It is difficult always to
     remember that one is a "companion"
The Blessington dining-room is, like the other reception-rooms, huge and very nobly
     proportioned. Did we not know that our seventeenth and eighteenth century ancestors were not
     giants, we should be prone to imagine that it must have been a race of Anakims that required
     such great wide spaces to sup, and sip chocolate, and play at omnbre in. The furniture is in
     its dotage; it has, figuratively speaking, like its owners, lost hair and teeth, and all
     unnecessary etceteras; it is reduced to the bare elements of existence. Three tall windows look
     out upon a flat lawn, and in the middle of this lawn, exactly opposite Esther's eyes, as she
     sits at breakfast, is an unique and chaste piece of statuary, entitled "The Rape of the
     Sabines." The space afforded by the stone pediment is necessarily limited, and consequently
     Roman and Sabines, gentlemen and lady, are all piled one a-top of another in such inextricable
     confusion as to demand a good quarter of an hour's close observation to determine which of the
     muscular writhing legs belong to the Roman ravisher and which to the injured Sabine husband. As
     the sculptor has given none of his protégées any clothing, the
     snow has been kind enough to throw a modest white mantle over them all.
"Mr. and Mrs. Blessington do not come down to breakfast?" says Esther, interrogatively, as
     the two girls seat themselves at table.
"No; they breakfast in their own rooms."
"I suppose," says Esther, with some embarrassment, "that they will send for me if they want
     me for anything, won't they? Perhaps" (with diffidence)—"perhaps you will kindly tell me the
     sort of things they will want me to do?"
"My uncle will be down presently," answered Miss Blessington,
      "and he will then expect you to read to him until
     luncheon."
"To read what? The Bible?" inquired Esther, who has a vague idea that the Bible is the only
     form in which literature should employ the attention of the aged.
"The Bible? Oh, dear, no!" (with a little laugh). "The papers: the Times,
      Saturday, and Justice of the Peace, are his favourites; he takes a great, a
      remarkable interest, considering his age, in politics."
"I like reading aloud," says Esther, resolute to look on the bright side.
"Reading aloud to my uncle is very fatiguing," replies Constance, cheeringly: " one has to
     sustain one's voice at a pitch several octaves higher than the natural one. I attempted reading
     to him once or twice, but it affected my throat so much that I had to leave off," she ends,
     with a little lackadaisical cough.
"I daresay it won't affect mine," rejoins the other rather drily.
There is a pause. Talking is a vice to which Miss Blessington is nowise addicted—more
     especially objectless talking to a little person of the feminine gender who is not one of
      nous autres.
"I hope," says Esther, presently, trusting to the obtuseness of her companion's perceptions
     not to discover the flagrant hypocrisy of the question—"I hope that Sir Thomas was quite well
     when you left Felton?"
 "Quite—thanks."
"And Lady Gerard?"
"Yes—thanks."
"And—and" (bending down her head in the vain endeavour to screen the red blush that the
     frosty sun, flaming in through the window opposite, makes obtrusively evident)—and Mr.
     Gerard?"

"He is very well—thanks," replies Miss Blessington, with the conscious smile that
     had formerly exasperated Esther, and with an emphasis not common with her.
Miss Blessington does not usually employ emphasis: it is mezzoceto, as is enthusiasm of which it is the exponent.
Half an hour later Esther is sitting beside the old squire, as close as possible to his best
     ear, brandishing the Times' giant squares in her unaccustomed hand. The old squire is
     a superb wreck. Spiteful Time is fond of removing the landmarks that youth sets upon our faces;
     is fond of changing great, clear, almond eyes into little damp jellies—sweet moist pursemouths
     into dry bags of wrinkles; but it is a task beyond even his power to destroy the shape
     of that grand old bent head—to deface the outlines of that thin-nostriled, patrician nose.
"What shall I read first?" asks the young girl, timidly, but enunciating each syllable with
     painstaking slowness and clearness.
"The State of the Funds," replies the old gentleman, promptly, thrusting his hand into his
     breast, and closing his eyes, in his favourite attitude.
Esther has not the most distant idea where the "State of the Funds" lives: she turns the huge
     sheets topsy-turvy—inside out, outside in—in the vain search for their habitat, making,
     meanwhile, the most unjustifiable aggressive rustling and crackling, which she presumptuously
     trusts to his deafness not to hear.
"Don't make such an infernal crackling, my dear!" he says presently, with some
     pettishness.
"I thought you could not hear," she unwisely answers, trembling.
"God bless my soul, child! The dead would have heard the noise you were making," he rejoins,
     snappishly.
Having at length mastered the fact that the "State of
      the Funds" comes under the head of "Money Market and City
     Intelligence," Esther gives the desired information. Then follows a leader:
"The position of American politics is at this moment peculiarly perplexing and anomalous; so
     perplexing that even those English observers who, like ourselves, have given a careful and
     constant attention to the course of the Transatlantic movement since the first appearance of
     Secession, can hardly pretend clearly to understand—"
"Pretend clearly to what? For God's sake don't gabble so!" 
"
     Can—hardly—pretend—clearly—to—understand—the—full—meaning—of—the—situation,—and—must—feel—that—it—would—be—"
"Is there no medium, may I ask, between gabbling and drawling?"
"And must feel that it would be rash to express a confident opinion thereupon."
Esther now proceeds for a considerable period unchecked—gradually and unconsciously relapsing
     into the brisk gallop so dear to youth when engaged upon a subject that does not interest it.
     Suddenly a deep slumberous breath, drawn close to her ear, makes her aware that her hearer has
     lapsed into sleep.
"I have read him to sleep," she says to herself, with a sort of triumphant feeling at her own
     prowess, taking furtive glances at the wrinkled profile, sunk, in perfect imbecility of
     slumber, on his breast.
Not feeling any particular personal interest in the effect of Secession upon American
     politics, she stops, and gazes vacantly out of window at the "Rape of the Sabines." But the
     cessation of the sweet monotony that lulled him, arouses the old man.
"Go on—go on!" he cries, fussily, lifting his head and
      opening his dim eyes. " What are you stopping for ? Read
     that paragraph over again; you read it so fast that I could not quite follow the meaning of
     it."
She complies, and so, with dozing and waking, waking and dozing, on one side, reading and
     stopping, stopping and reading on the other, the little drama plays itself out till nearly
     luncheon-time.
"We are going to drive into Shelford this afternoon; do you feel inclined to come with us,
     Constance, my dear?" asks the old lady, as they quit the luncheon-table—Esther dutifully
     bringing up the rear, with air-cushion, footstool, and couvre-pied.
"Not to-day, aunt, I think—thanks," answers Constance, with the utmost sweetness; the "Not
     to-day" seeming to imply that on some future morrow she will gladly avail herself of the
     invitation to join her elderly relatives in their triste
     airing; but Miss Blessington being in her generation a wise woman, that morrow never comes.
The old family-coach rolls round the frosty sweep to the door; two large horses, sleek and
     fat with over-many oats and over-little work, draw it. 
"The tails of both hung down behind,
Their shoes were on their feet."
"Give me your arm, Miss Craven; one is very apt to fall this frosty weather," says the old
     lady, appearing at the door, transformed, by the aid of numberless cloaks and shawls, and a
     huge velvet bonnet, date anno domini, into a large and perfectly shapeless bundle.
Supported on one side by Esther's slender arm, and on the other by the florid and plethoric
     butler, she is hoisted up the three steps into the body of the ancient machine, which is
     painted invisible green, and hung marvellous high in air. The same course is pursued with the
     old gentleman, who, muffled, comfortered, and scarved up to the tip of his
      venerable nose, follows. Lastly, the young prop steps in,
     and sits down humbly with her back to the horses—a process which usually ends in making her
     sick. The windows are shut tight up; a great hot skin of some wild beast is thrown over their
     knees; in that confined atmosphere it emits a strong furry odour, more powerful than agreeable;
     striving emulously with it—sometimes mastering it, sometimes mastered by it—is the fusty smell
     of the cloth lining. The old people do not seem to perceive either; old noses haie less keen
     scent, old lungs require less air to feed on, than young ones.
"Trit-trot, trit-trot, trit-trot," goes the old vehicle along the beaten snow of the broad
     turnpike-road. As they are jogging a little brisklier than usual down a very slight
     decline, the old gentleman speaks—his strong, shaky old voice loudly audible above the
     "rumble—rumble—rumble," which, joined to the want of air, is fast making Esther faint and
     headachy:
"What the deuce does Ruggles mean going at such a pace down these steep hills? Does he think
     he is to knock my horses' legs all to pieces for his own amusement?"
"I'm sure I don't know, Mr. Blessington," answers the old lady, nervously laying hold of the
     side of the carriage; "it is not at all safe this slippery weather; I'm sure I hope the horses
     are roughed."
"Miss Craven, tell him to mind what he is about; tell him to go slower—much slower,"
     says the old gentleman, in some excitement.
Miss Craven, having with some difficulty lowered the front window, thrusts her head out of
     it, and, having taken the opportunity to open mouth and nose and eyes as wide as they will go,
     to inhale as large a quantity as possible of crisp fresh air, cries: "Ruggles! Ruggles! go
     slower! much slower!" 

Ruggles grins, but complies, and subsides into a solemn walk, which continues until they
     reach Shelford. There smug bareheaded shop-keepers, violet-nosed, scarlet-fingered, standing
     out in the cold street at the carriage-door, executing with pleased alacrity extensive
     commissions of half a yard of elastic for Miss Blessington—three ounces of red wool for Mrs.
     Blessington's knitting—half a dozen blue envelopes for Mr. Blessington. Then, "trit-trot,
     jig-jog," home again.
Dinner at six: a later hour would be fatal to his digestion, the old gentleman thinks, then,
     a nice long evening—long as one of those Veillées du Cháteau,
     when Madame la Baronne read aloud some enthralling yet severely moral tale, and Cassar and
     Caroline and Pulchérie all sat entranced, unheeding the flight of time, as ticked away by the
     château clocks. There is only one small lamp in the whole of the grand old room, and that, in
     deference to the old man's failing eyes, is hung with so large and deep a green shade, that it
     is impossible to see to do anything by its light. There is nothing for it but to gape, from
     seven till ten, at the great battle-pieces hung round the walls—to endeavour to make out, by
     the aid of the fitful firelight, the singularly clean dead bodies, free apparently from the
     slightest speck of dust, or stain of blood; at the red-nostriled chargers, snorting away their
     ebbing lives with all four legs in the air. At ten o'clock, James rung for, to light the
     candles: then Mrs. Blessington, her air-cushion, work-basket, and Shetland shawl, escorted to
     her room; two long chapters and several psalms read to her; then a frightened rush along dark
     passages and draughty galleries to the great distant bedroom—to the rats' multifarious noises;
     to the ingenious tunes played by the wind upon the rattling window-frames; to the
     ginger-curtained bed and many-folded screen; to possible sleep, and certain
 terrors—terrors none the less awful for being totally
     unreasonable.
</div></body></text></TEI>