<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="51">
CHAPTER LI
There is little more to tell. The man who had lived so fast was no long time dying. The
      eager soul was swift in this as in all else.
The day after Elsmere's return from Murewell, where he left the squire still alive (the
      telegram announcing the death reached Bedford Square a few hours after Robert's arrival),
      Edmondson came up to see him and examine him. He discovered tubercular disease of the larynx,
      which begins with slight hoarseness and weakness, and develops into one of the most rapid
      forms of phthisis. In his opinion it had been originally set up by the effects of the chill at
      Petites Dalles acting upon a constitution never strong, and at that moment peculiarly
      susceptible to mischief. And of course the speaking and preaching of the last four months had
      done enormous harm.
It was with great outward composure that Elsmere received
       his arrêt de mort at the hands of the young doctor, who announced the
      result of his examination with a hesitating lip and a voice which struggled in vain to
      preserve its professional calm. He knew too much of medicine himself to be deceived by
      Edmondson's optimist remarks as to the possible effect of a warm climate like Algiers on his
      condition. He sat down, resting his head on his hands a moment; then, wringing Edmondson's
      hand, he went out feebly to find his wife.
Catherine had been waiting in the dining-room, her whole soul one dry tense misery. She
      stood looking out of the window taking curious heed of a Jewish wedding that was going on in
      the square, of the preposterous bouquets of the coachman and the gaping circle of errand-boys.
      How pinched the bride looked in the north wind!
When the door opened and Catherine saw her husband come in—her young husband, to whom she
      had been married not yet four years—with that indescribable look in the eyes which seemed to
      divine and confirm all those terrors which had been shaking her during her agonised waiting,
      there followed a moment between them which words cannot render. When it ended—that
      half-articulate convulsion of love and anguish—she found herself sitting on the sofa beside
      him, his head on her breast, his hand clasping hers.
'Do you wish me to go, Catherine?' he asked her gently,—'to Algiers?'
Her eyes implored for her.
'Then I will,' he said, but with a long sigh. 'It will only prolong it two months,' he
      thought; 'and does one not owe it to the people for whom one has tried to live, to make a
      brave end among them? Ah, no! no! those two months are hers!'
So, without any outward resistance, he let the necessary preparations be made. It wrung his
      heart to go, but he could not wring hers by staying.
After his interview with Robert, and his further interview with Catherine, to whom he gave
      the most minute recommendations and directions, with a reverent gentleness which seemed to
      make the true state of the case more ghastly plain to the wife than ever, Edmondson went off
      to Flaxman.
Flaxman heard his news with horror.
'A bad case, you say—advanced?'
'A bad case!' Edmondson repeated gloomily. 'He has been fighting against it too long under
      that absurd delusion of clergyman's throat. If only men would not insist upon being their own
      doctors! And, of course, that going down to Murewell the other day was madness. I shall go
      with him to Algiers, and probably stay a week or two. To think of that life, that career, cut
      short! This is a queer sort of world!'
When Flaxman went over to Bedford Square in the afternoon, he went like a man going himself
      to execution. In the hall he met Catherine.


'You have seen Dr. Edmondson?' she asked, pale and still, except for a little nervous
      quivering of the lip.
He stooped and kissed her hand.
'Yes. He says he goes with you to Algiers. I will come after if you will have me. The
      climate may do wonders.'
She looked at him with the most heart-rending of smiles.
'Will you go in to Robert? He is in the study.'
He went, in trepidation, and found Robert lying tucked up on the sofa, apparently
      reading.
'Don't—don't, old fellow,' he said affectionately, as Flaxman almost broke down. 'It comes
      to all of us sooner or later. Whenever it comes we think it too soon. I believe I have been
      sure of it for some time. We are such strange creatures! It has been so present to me lately
      that life was too good to last. You remember the sort of feeling one used to have as a child
      about some treat in the distance—that it was too much joy—that something was sure to come
      between you and it? Well, in a sense, I have had my joy, the first-fruits of it at least.'
But as he threw his arms behind his head, leaning back on them, Flaxman saw the eyes darken
      and the naïve boyish mouth contract, and knew that under all these brave words there was a
      heart which hungered.
'How strange!' Robert went on reflectively; 'yesterday I was travelling, walking like other
      men, a member of society. To-day I am an invalid; in the true sense, a man no longer. The
      world has done with me; a barrier I shall never recross has sprung up between me and
      it.—Flaxman, to-night is the story-telling. Will you read to them? I have the book here
      prepared—some scenes from David Copperfield. And you will tell them?'
A hard task, but Flaxman undertook it. Never did he forget the scene. Some ominous rumour
      had spread, and the New Brotherhood was besieged. Impossible to give the reading. A hall full
      of strained upturned faced listened to Flaxman's announcement, and to Elsmere's messages of
      cheer and exhortation, and then a wild wave of grief spread through the place. The street
      outside was blocked, men looking dismally into each other's eyes, women weeping, children
      sobbing for sympathy, all feeling themselves at once shelterless and forsaken. When Elsmere
      heard the news of it, he turned on his face, and asked even Catherine to leave him for a
      while.
The preparations were pushed on. The New Brotherhood had just become the subject of an
      animated discussion in the press, and London was touched by the news of its young founder's
      breakdown. Catherine found herself besieged by offers of help of various kinds. One offer
      Flaxman persuaded her to accept. It was the loan of a villa at El Biar, on the hill above
      Algiers, belonging to a connection of his own. A resident on the spot was to take all trouble
      off their hands; they were to find servants ready for them, and every comfort.


Catherine made every arrangement, met every kindness, with a self-reliant calm that never
      failed. But it seemed to Flaxman that her heart was broken—that half of her, in feeling, was
      already on the other side of this horror which stared them all in the face. Was it his
      perception of it which stirred Robert after a while to a greater hopefulness of speech, a
      constant bright dwelling on the flowery sunshine for which they were about to exchange the fog
      and cold of London? The momentary revival of energy was more pitiful to Flaxman than his first
      quiet resignation.
He himself wrote every day to Rose. Strange love-letters! in which the feeling that could
      not be avowed ran as a fiery under-current through all the sad brotherly record of the
      invalid's doings and prospects. There was deep trouble in Long Whindale. Mrs. Leyburn was
      tearful and hysterical, and wished to rush off to town to see Catherine. Agnes wrote in
      distress that her mother was quite unfit to travel, showing her own inner conviction, too,
      that the poor thing would only be an extra burden on the Elsmeres if the journey were
      achieved. Rose wrote asking to be allowed to go with them to Algiers; and after a little
      consultation it was so arranged, Mrs. Leyburn being tenderly persuaded, Robert himself
      writing, to stay where she was.
The morning after the interview with Edmondson, Robert sent for Murray Edwardes. They were
      closeted together for nearly an hour. Edwardes came out with the look of one who has been
      lifted into 'heavenly places.'
'I thank God,' he said to Catherine, with deep emotion, 'that I ever knew him. I pray that I
      may be found worthy to carry out my pledges to him.'
When Catherine went into the study she found Robert gazing into the fire with dreamy eyes.
      He started and looked up to her with a smile.
'Murray Edwardes has promised himself heart and soul to the work. If necessary, he will give
      up his chapel to carry it on. But we hope it will be possible to work them together. What a
      brick he is! What a blessed chance it was that took me to that breakfast party at
      Flaxman's!'
The rest of the time before departure he spent almost entirely in consultation and
      arrangement with Edwardes. It was terrible how rapidly worse he seemed to grow directly the
      situation had declared itself, and the determination not to be ill had been perforce
      overthrown. But his struggle against breathlessness and weakness, and all the other symptoms
      of his state during these last days, was heroic. On the last day of all, by his own persistent
      wish, a certain number of members of the Brotherhood came to say good-bye to him. They came in
      one by one, Macdonald first. The old Scotchman, from the height of his sixty years of tough
      weather-beaten manhood, looked down on Robert with a fatherly concern.


'Eh, Mister Elsmere, but it's a fine place yur gawin' tu, they say. Ye'll do weel there,
      sir—ye'll do weel. And as for the wark, sir, we'll keep it oop—we'll not let the Deil mak' hay
      o' it, if we knaws it—the auld leer!' he added, with a phraseology which did more honour to
      the Calvinism of his blood than the philosophy of his training.
Lestrange came in, with a pale sharp face, and said little in his ten minutes. But Robert
      divined in him a sort of repressed curiosity and excitement akin to that of Voltaire turning
      his feverish eyes towards le grand secret. 'You, who preached to us that
      consciousness, and God, and the soul are the only realities—are you so sure of it now you are
      dying, as you were in health? Are your courage, your certainty, what they were?' These were
      the sort of questions that seemed to underlie the man's spoken words.
There was something trying in it, but Robert did his best to put aside his consciousness of
      it. He thanked him for his help in the past, and implored him to stand by the young society
      and Mr. Edwardes.
'I shall hardly come back, Lestrange. But what does one man matter? One soldier falls,
      another presses forward.'
The watchmaker rose, then paused a moment, a flush passing over him.
'We can't stand without you!' he said abruptly; then, seeing Robert's look of distress, he
      seemed to cast about for something reassuring to say, but could find nothing. Robert at last
      held out his hand with a smile, and he went. He left Elsmere struggling with a pang of
      horrible depression. In reality there was no man who worked harder at the New Brotherhood
      during the months that followed than Lestrange. He worked under perpetual protest from the
       frondeur within him, but something stung him on—on—till a habit had been formed
      which promises to be the joy and salvation of his later life. Was it the haunting memory of
      that thin figure—the hand clinging to the chair—the white appealing look?
Others came and went, till Catherine trembled for the consequences. She herself took in Mrs.
      Richards and her children, comforting the sobbing creatures afterwards with a calmness born of
      her own despair. Robson, in the last stage himself, sent him a grimly characteristic message.
      'I shall solve the riddle, sir, before you. The doctor gives me three days. For the first time
      in my life, I shall know what you are still guessing at. May the blessing of one who never
      blessed thing or creature before he saw you go with you!'
After it all Robert sank on the sofa with a groan.
'No more!' he said hoarsely—'no more! Now for air—the sea! To-morrow, wife, to-morrow!
       Cras ingens iterabimus æquor. Ah me! I leave my new Salamis behind!'
But on that last evening he insisted on writing letters to Langham and Newcome.


'I will spare Langham the sight of me' he said, smiling sadly. 'And I will spare myself the
      sight of Newcome—I could not bear it, I think! But I must say good-bye—for I love them
      both.'
Next day, two hours after the Elsmeres had left for Dover, a cab drove up to their house in
      Bedford Square, and Newcome descended from it. 'Gone, sir, two hours ago,' said the housemaid,
      and the priest turned away with an involuntary gesture of despair. To his dying day the
      passionate heart bore the burden of that 'too late,' believing that even at the eleventh hour
      Elsmere would have been granted to his prayers. He might even have followed them, but that a
      great retreat for clergy he was just on the point of conducting made it impossible.
Flaxman went down with them to Dover. Rose, in the midst of all her new and womanly care for
      her sister and Robert, was very sweet to him. In any other circumstances, he told himself, he
      could easily have broken down the flimsy barrier between them, but in those last twenty-four
      hours he could press no claim of his own.
When the steamer cast loose, the girl, hanging over the side, stood watching the tall figure
      on the pier against the gray January sky. Catherine caught her look and attitude, and could
      have cried aloud in her own gnawing pain.
Flaxman got a cheery letter from Edmondson describing their arrival. Their journey had gone
      well; even the odious passage from Marseilles had been tolerable; little Mary had proved a
      model traveller; the villa was luxurious, the weather good.
'I have got rooms close by them in the Vice-Consul's cottage,' wrote Edmondson. 'Imagine,
      within sixty hours of leaving London in a January fog, finding yourself tramping over wild
      marigolds and mignonette, under a sky and through an air as balmy as those of an English
      June—when an English June behaves itself. Elsmere's room overlooks the bay, the great plain of
      the Metidja dotted with villages, and the grand range of the Djurjura, backed by snowy summits
      one can hardly tell from the clouds. His spirits are marvellous. He is plunged in the history
      of Algiers, raving about one Fromentin, learning Spanish even! The wonderful purity and warmth
      of the air seem to have relieved the larynx greatly. He breathes and speaks much more easily
      than when we left London. I sometimes feel when I look at him as though in this as in all else
      he were unlike the common sons of men—as though to him it might be possible to subdue
      even this fell disease.'
Elsmere himself wrote—
'"I had not heard the half"—O Flaxman! An enchanted land—air, sun, warmth, roses, orange
      blossom, new potatoes, green peas, veiled Eastern beauties, domed mosques and preaching
      Mahdis—everything that feeds the outer and the inner man. To throw the window open at waking
      to the depth of sunlit air
       between us and the curve of the bay, is for the moment heaven! One's soul seems to
      escape one, to pour itself into the luminous blue of the morning. I am better—I breathe
      again.
'Mary flourishes exceedingly. She lives mostly on oranges, and has been adopted by sixty
      nuns who inhabit the convent over the way, and sell us the most delicious butter and cream. I
      imagine, if she were a trifle older, her mother would hardly view the proceedings of these
      dear berosaried women with so much equanimity.
'As for Rose, she writes more letters than Clarissa, and receives more than an editor of the
       Times. I have the strongest views, as you know, as to the vanity of letter-writing.
      There was a time when you shared them, but there are circumstances and conjunctures, alas! in
      which no man can be sure of his friend or his friend's principles. Kind friend, good fellow,
      go often to Elgood Street. Tell me everything about everybody. It is possible, after all, that
      I may live to come back to them.'
But a week later, alas! the letters fell into a very different strain. The weather had
      changed, had turned indeed damp and rainy, the natives of course declaring that such gloom and
      storm in January had never been known before. Edmondson wrote in discouragement. Elsmere had
      had a touch of cold, had been confined to bed, and almost speechless. His letter was full of
      medical detail, from which Flaxman gathered that, in spite of the rally of the first ten days,
      it was clear that the disease was attacking constantly fresh tissue. 'He is very depressed
      too,' said Edmondson; 'I have never seen him so yet. He sits and looks at us in the evening
      sometimes with eyes that wring one's heart. It is as though, after having for a moment allowed
      himself to hope, he found it a doubly hard task to submit.'
Ah, that depression! It was the last eclipse through which a radiant soul was called to
      pass; but while it lasted it was black indeed. The implacable reality, obscured at first by
      the emotion and excitement of farewells, and then by a brief spring of hope and returning
      vigour, showed itself now in all its stern nakedness—sat down, as it were, eye to eye with
      Elsmere—immovable, ineluctable. There were certain features of the disease itself which were
      specially trying to such a nature. The long silences it enforced were so unlike him, seemed
      already to withdraw him so pitifully from their yearning grasp! In these dark days he would
      sit crouching over the wood fire in the little salon, or lie drawn to the window
      looking out on the rainstorms bowing the ilexes or scattering the meshes of clematis, silent,
      almost always gentle, but turning sometimes on Catherine, or on Mary playing at his feet, eyes
      which, as Edmondson said, 'wrung the heart.'
But in reality, under the husband's depression, and under the wife's inexhaustible devotion,
      a combat was going on, which reached no third person, but was throughout poignant and tragic
      to the highest degree. Catherine was making her last
       effort, Robert his last stand. As we know, ever since that passionate submission of
      the wife which had thrown her morally at her husband's feet, there had lingered at the bottom
      of her heart one last supreme hope. All persons of the older Christian type attribute a
      special importance to the moment of death. While the man of science looks forward to his last
      hour as a moment of certain intellectual weakness, and calmly warns his friends beforehand
      that he is to be judged by the utterances of health and not by those of physical collapse, the
      Christian believes that on the confines of eternity the veil of flesh shrouding the soul grows
      thin and transparent, and that the glories and the truths of Heaven are visible with a special
      clearness and authority to the dying. It was for this moment, either in herself or in him,
      that Catherine's unconquerable faith had been patiently and dumbly waiting. Either she would
      go first, and death would wing her poor last words to him with a magic and power not their
      own; or, when he came to leave her, the veil of doubt would fall away perforce from a spirit
      as pure as it was humble, and the eternal light, the light of the Crucified, shine
      through.
Probably, if there had been no breach in Robert's serenity, Catherine's poor last effort
      would have been much feebler, briefer, more hesitating. But when she saw him plunged for a
      short space in mortal discouragement, in a sombreness that as the days went on had its points
      and crests of feverish irritation, her anguished pity came to the help of her creed. Robert
      felt himself besieged, driven within the citadel, her being urging, grappling with his. In
      little half-articulate words and ways, in her attempts to draw him back to some of their old
      religious books and prayers, in those kneeling vigils he often found her maintaining at night
      beside him, he felt a persistent attack which nearly—in his weakness—overthrew him.
For 'reason and thought grow tired like muscles and nerves.' Some of the greatest and most
      daring thinkers of the world have felt this pitiful longing to be at one with those who love
      them, at whatever cost, before the last farewell. And the simpler Christian faith has still to
      create around it those venerable associations and habits which buttress individual feebleness
      and diminish the individual effort.
One early February morning, just before dawn, Robert stretched out his hand for his wife and
      found her kneeling beside him. The dim mingled light showed him her face vaguely—her clasped
      hands, her eyes. He looked at her in silence, she at him; there seemed to be a strange shock
      as of battle between them. Then he drew her head down to him.
'Catherine,' he said to her in a feeble intense whisper, 'would you leave me without
      comfort, without help, at the end?'
'Oh, my beloved!' she cried, under her breath, throwing her arms round him, 'if you would
      but stretch out your hand to the true comfort—the true help—the Lamb of God sacrificed for
      us!'


He stroked her hair tenderly.
'My weakness might yield—my true best self never. I know Whom I have believed. Oh, my
      darling, be content. Your misery, your prayers hold me back from God—from that truth and that
      trust which can alone be honestly mine. Submit, my wife! Leave me in God's hands.'
She raised her head. His eyes were bright with fever, his lips trembling, his whole look
      heavenly. She bowed herself again with a quiet burst of tears, and an indescribable
      self-abasement. They had had their last struggle, and once more he had conquered! Afterwards
      the cloud lifted from him. Depression and irritation disappeared. It seemed to her often as
      though he lay already on the breast of God; even her wifely love grew timid and awestruck.
Yet he did not talk much of immortality, of reunion. It was like a scrupulous child that
      dares not take for granted more than its father has allowed it to know. At the same time, it
      was plain to those about him that the only realities to him in a world of shadows were
      God—love—the soul.
One day he suddenly caught Catherine's hands, drew her face to him, and studied it with his
      glowing and hollow eyes, as though he would draw it into his soul.
'He made it,' he said hoarsely, as he let her go—'this love—this yearning. And in life He
      only makes us yearn that He may satisfy. He cannot lead us to the end and disappoint the
      craving He Himself set in us. No, no—could you—could I—do it? And He, the source of love, or
      justice——'
Flaxman arrived a few days afterwards. Edmondson had started for London the night before,
      leaving Elsmere better again, able to drive and even walk a little, and well looked after by a
      local doctor of ability. As Flaxman, tramping up behind his carriage, climbed the long hill to
      El Biar, he saw the whole marvellous place in a white light of beauty—the bay, the city, the
      mountains, oliveyard and orange-grove, drawn in pale tints on luminous air. Suddenly, at the
      entrance of a steep and narrow lane, he noticed a slight figure standing—a parasol against the
      sun.
'We thought you would like to be shown the short cut up the hill,' said Rose's voice,
      strangely demure and shy. 'The man can drive round.'
A grip of the hand, a word to the driver, and they were alone in the high-walled lane, which
      was really the old road up the hill, before the French brought zigzags and civilisation. She
      gave him news of Robert—better than he had expected. Under the influence of one of the natural
      reactions that wait on illness, the girl's tone was cheerful, and Flaxman's spirits rose. They
      talked of the splendour of the day, the discomforts of the steamer, the picturesqueness of the
      landing—of anything and everything but the hidden something which was responsible for
       the dancing brightness in his eyes, the occasional swift veiling of her own.
Then, at an angle of the lane, where a little spring ran cool and brown into a moss-grown
      trough, where the blue broke joyously through the gray cloud of olive-wood, where not a sight
      or sound was to be heard of all the busy life which hides and nestles along the hill, he
      stopped, his hands seizing hers.
'How long?' he said, flushing, his light overcoat falling back from his strong, well-made
      frame; 'from August to February—how long?'
No more! It was most natural, nay, inevitable. For the moment death stood aside and love
      asserted itself. But this is no place to chronicle what it said.
And he had hardly asked, and she had hardly yielded, before the same misgiving, the same
      shrinking, seized on the lovers themselves. They sped up the hill, they crept into the house,
      far apart. It was agreed that neither of them should say a word.
But, with that extraordinarily quick perception that sometimes goes with such a state as
      his, Elsmere had guessed the position of things before he and Flaxman had been half an hour
      together. He took a boyish pleasure in making his friend confess himself, and, when Flaxman
      left him, at once sent for Catherine and told her.
Catherine, coming out afterwards, met Flaxman in the little tiled hall. How she had aged and
      blanched! She stood a moment opposite to him, in her plain long dress with its white collar
      and cuffs, her face working a little.
'We are so glad!' she said, but almost with a sob—'God bless you!'
And, wringing his hand, she passed away from him, hiding her eyes, but without a sound. When
      they met again she was quite self-contained and bright, talking much both with him and Rose
      about the future.
And one little word of Rose's must be recorded here, for those who have followed her through
      these four years. It was at night, when Robert, with smiles, had driven them out of doors to
      look at the moon over the bay, from the terrace just beyond the windows. They had been sitting
      on the balustrade talking of Elsmere. In this nearness to death, Rose had lost her mocking
      ways; but she was shy and difficult, and Flaxman felt it all very strange, and did not venture
      to woo her much.
When, all at once, he felt her hand steal trembling, a little white suppliant, into his, and
      her face against his shoulder.
'You won't—you won't ever be angry with me for making you wait like that? It was
      impertinent—it was like a child playing tricks!'
Flaxman was deeply shocked by the change in Robert. He
       was terribly emaciated. They could only talk at rare intervals in the day, and it
      was clear that his nights were often one long struggle for breath. But his spirits were
      extraordinarily even, and his days occupied to a point Flaxman could hardly have believed. He
      would creep downstairs at eleven, read his English letters (among them always some from Elgood
      Street), write his answers to them—those difficult scrawls are among the treasured archives of
      a society which is fast gathering to itself some of the best life in England—then often fall
      asleep with fatigue. After food there would come a short drive, or, if the day was very warm,
      an hour or two of sitting outside, generally his best time for talking. He had a wheeled chair
      in which Flaxman would take him across to the convent garden—a dream of beauty. Overhead an
      orange canopy—leaf and blossom and golden fruit all in simultaneous perfection; underneath a
      revel of every imaginable flower—narcissus and anemones, geraniums and clematis; and all
      about, hedges of monthly roses, dark red and pale alternately, making a roseleaf carpet under
      their feet. Through the tree-trunks shone the white sun-warmed convent, and far beyond were
      glimpses of downward-trending valleys edged by twinkling sea.
Here, sensitive and receptive to his last hour, Elsmere drank in beauty and delight;
      talking, too, whenever it was possible to him, of all things in heaven and earth. Then, when
      he came home, he would have out his books and fall to some old critical problem—his worn and
      scored Greek Testament always beside him, the quick eye making its way through some new
      monograph or other, the parched lips opening every now and then to call Flaxman's attention to
      some fresh light on an obscure point—only to relinquish the effort again and again with an
      unfailing patience.
But though he would begin as ardently as ever, he could not keep his attention fixed to
      these things very long. Then it would be the turn of his favourite poets—Wordsworth, Tennyson,
      Virgil. Virgil perhaps most frequently. Flaxman would read the Æneid aloud to him, Robert
      following the passages he loved best in a whisper, his hand resting the while in Catherine's.
      And then Mary would be brought in, and he would lie watching her while she played.
'I have had a letter,' he said to Flaxman one afternoon, 'from a Broad Church clergyman in
      the Midlands, who imagines me to be still militant in London, protesting against the "absurd
      and wasteful isolation" of the New Brotherhood. He asks me why instead of leaving the Church I
      did not join the Church Reform Union, why I did not attempt to widen the Church from within,
      and why we in Elgood Street are not now in organic connection with the new Broad Church
      settlement in East London. I believe I have written him rather a sharp letter; I could not
      help it. It was borne in on me to tell him that it is all owing to him and his brethren that
      we are in the
       muddle we are in to-day. Miracle is to our time what the law was to the early
      Christians. We must make up our minds about it one way or the other. And if we decide
      to throw it over as Paul threw over the law, then we must fight as he did. There is
      no help in subterfuge, no help in anything but a perfect sincerity. We must come out of it.
      The ground must be cleared; then may come the re-building. Religion itself, the peace of
      generations to come, is at stake. If we could wait indefinitely while the Church widened, well
      and good. But we have but the one life, the one chance of saying the word or playing the part
      assigned us.'
On another occasion, in the convent garden, he broke out with—
'I often lie here, Flaxman, wondering at the way in which men become the slaves of some
      metaphysical word—personality, or intelligence, or what not! What meaning
      can they have as applied to God? Herbert Spencer is quite right. We no sooner attempt
      to define what we mean by a Personal God than we lose ourselves in labyrinths of language and
      logic. But why attempt it at all? I like that French saying, "Quand on me demande ce que
       c'est que Dieu, je l'ignore; quand on ne me le demande pas, je le sais très-bien!" No,
      we cannot realise Him in words—we can only live in Him, and die to Him!'
On another occasion, he said, speaking to Catherine of the squire and of Meyrick's account
      of his last year of life—
'How selfish one is, always—when one least thinks it! How could I have forgotten
      him so completely as I did during all that New Brotherhood time? Where, what is he now? Ah! if
      somewhere, somehow, one could——'
He did not finish the sentence, but the painful yearning of his look finished it for
      him.
But the days passed on, and the voice grew rarer, the strength feebler. By the beginning of
      March all coming downstairs was over. He was entirely confined to his room, almost to his bed.
      Then there came a horrible week, when no narcotics took effect, when every night was a wrestle
      for life, which it seemed must be the last. They had a good nurse, but Flaxman and Catherine
      mostly shared the watching between them.
One morning he had just dropped into a fevered sleep. Catherine was sitting by the window
      gazing out into a dawn-world of sun which reminded her of the summer sunrises at Petites
      Dalles. She looked the shadow of herself. Spiritually, too, she was the shadow of herself. Her
      life was no longer her own: she lived in him—in every look of those eyes—in every movement of
      that wasted frame.
As she sat there, her Bible on her knee, her strained unseeing gaze resting on the garden
      and the sea, a sort of hallucination took possession of her. It seemed to her that she saw the
      form of the Son of man passing over the misty slope in front of her, that the dim majestic
      figure turned and beckoned. In her half-
      dream she fell on her knees. 'Master!' she cried in agony, 'I cannot leave him! Call
      me not! My life is here. I have no heart—it beats in his.'
And the figure passed on, the beckoning hand dropping at its side. She followed it with a
      sort of anguish, but it seemed to her as though mind and body were alike incapable of
      moving—that she would not if she could. Then suddenly a sound from behind startled her. She
      turned, her trance shaken off in an instant, and saw Robert sitting up in bed.
For a moment her lover, her husband, of the early days was before her—as she ran to him. But
      he did not see her.
An ecstasy of joy was on his face; the whole man bent forward listening.
'The child's cry!—thank God! Oh! Meyrick—Catherine—thank God!'
And she knew that he stood again on the stairs at Murewell in that September night which
      gave them their first-born, and that he thanked God because her pain was over.
An instant's strained looking, and, sinking back into her arms, he gave two or three gasping
      breaths, and died.
Five days later Flaxman and Rose brought Catherine home. It was supposed that she would
      return to her mother at Burwood. Instead, she settled down again in London, and not one of
      those whom Robert Elsmere had loved was forgotten by his widow. Every Sunday morning, with her
      child beside her, she worshipped in the old ways; every Sunday afternoon saw her black-veiled
      figure sitting motionless in a corner of the Elgood Street Hall. In the week she gave all her
      time and money to the various works of charity which he had started. But she held her peace.
      Many were grateful to her; some loved her; none understood her. She lived for one hope only;
      and the years passed all too slowly.
The New Brotherhood still exists, and grows. There are many who imagined that as it had been
      raised out of the earth by Elsmere's genius, so it would sink with him. Not so! He would have
      fought the struggle to victory with surpassing force, with a brilliancy and rapidity none
      after him could rival. But the struggle was not his. His effort was but a fraction of the
      effort of the race. In that effort, and in the Divine force behind it, is our trust, as was
      his.

'Others, I doubt not, if not we,
The issue of our toils shall see;
And (they forgotten and unknown)
Young children gather as their own
The harvest that the dead had sown.'

THE END

</div></body></text></TEI>