<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="38">
CHAPTER XXXVIII
There were one or two curious points connected with the beginnings of Elsmere's venture in
      North R——, one of which may just be noticed here. Wardlaw, his predecessor and colleague, had
      speculatively little or nothing in common with
       Elsmere or Murray Edwardes. He was a devoted and orthodox Comtist, for whom
      Edwardes had provided an outlet for the philanthropic passion, as he had for many others
      belonging to far stranger and remoter faiths.
By profession he was a barrister, with a small and struggling practice. On this practice,
      however, he had married, and his wife, who had been a doctor's daughter and a national
      schoolmistress, had the same ardours as himself. They lived in one of the dismal little
      squares near the Goswell Road, and had two children. The wife, as a Positivist mother is bound
      to do, tended and taught her children entirely herself. She might have been seen any day
      wheeling their perambulator through the dreary streets of a dreary region; she was their
      Providence, their deity, the representative to them of all tenderness and all authority. But
      when her work with them was done, she would throw herself into charity organisation cases,
      into efforts for the protection of workhouse servants, into the homeliest acts of ministry
      towards the sick, till her dowdy little figure and her face, which but for the stress of
      London, of labour, and of poverty, would have had a blunt fresh-coloured dairymaid's charm,
      became symbols of a divine and sacred helpfulness in the eyes of hundreds of straining men and
      women.
The husband also, after a day spent in chambers, would give his evenings to teaching or
      committee work. They never allowed themselves to breathe even to each other that life might
      have brighter things to show them than the neighbourhood of the Goswell Road. There was a
      certain narrowness in their devotion; they had their bitternesses and ignorances like other
      people; but the more Robert knew of them the more profound became his admiration for that
      potent spirit of social help which in our generation Comtism has done so much to develop, even
      among those of us who are but moderately influenced by Comte's philosophy, and can make
      nothing of the religion of Humanity.
Wardlaw has no large part in the story of Elsmere's work in North R——. In spite of Robert's
      efforts, and against his will, the man of meaner gifts and commoner clay was eclipsed by that
      brilliant and persuasive something in Elsmere which a kind genius had infused into him at
      birth. And we shall see that in time Robert's energies took a direction which Wardlaw could
      not follow with any heartiness. But at the beginning Elsmere owed him much, and it was a debt
      he was never tired of honouring.
In the first place, Wardlaw's choice of the Elgood Street room as a fresh centre for
      civilising effort had been extremely shrewd. The district lying about it, as Robert soon came
      to know, contained a number of promising elements.
Close by the dingy street which sheltered their schoolroom rose the great pile of a new
      factory of artistic pottery, a rival on the north side of the river to Doulton's immense works
      on
       the south. The old winding streets near it, and the blocks of workmen's dwellings
      recently erected under its shadow, were largely occupied by the workers in its innumerable
      floors, and among these workers was a large proportion of skilled artisans, men often of a
      considerable amount of cultivation, earning high wages, and maintaining a high standard of
      comfort. A great many of them, trained in the art school which Murray Edwardes had been
      largely instrumental in establishing within easy distance of their houses, were men of genuine
      artistic gifts and accomplishment, and as the development of one faculty tends on the whole to
      set others working, when Robert, after a few weeks' work in the place, set up a popular
      historical lecture once a fortnight, announcing the fact by a blue and white poster in the
      schoolroom windows, it was the potters who provided him with his first hearers.
The rest of the parish was divided between a population of dock labourers, settled there to
      supply the needs of the great dock which ran up into the south-eastern corner of it, two or
      three huge breweries, and a colony of watchmakers, an offshoot of Clerkenwell, who lived
      together in two or three streets, and showed the same peculiarities of race and specialised
      training to be noticed in the more northerly settlement from which they had been thrown off
      like a swarm from a hive. Outside these well-defined trades there was, of course, a warehouse
      population, and a mass of heterogeneous cadging and catering which went on chiefly in the
      riverside streets at the other side of the parish from Elgood Street, in the neighbourhood of
      St. Wilfrid's.
St. Wilfrid's at this moment seemed to Robert to be doing a very successful work among the
      lowest strata of the parish. From them at one end of the scale, and from the innumerable
      clerks and superintendents who during the daytime crowded the vast warehouses of which the
      district was full, its Lenten congregations, now in full activity, were chiefly drawn.
The Protestant opposition, which had shown itself so brutally and persistently in old days,
      was now, so far as outward manifestations went, all but extinct. The cassocked monk-like
      clergy might preach and 'process' in the open air as much as they pleased. The populace, where
      it was not indifferent, was friendly, and devoted living had borne its natural fruits.
A small incident, which need not be recorded, recalled to Elsmere's mind—after he had been
      working some six weeks in the district—the forgotten unwelcome fact that St. Wilfrid's was the
      very church where Newcome, first as senior curate and then as vicar, had spent those ten
      wonderful years into which Elsmere at Murewell had been never tired of inquiring. The thought
      of Newcome was a very sore thought. Elsmere had written to him announcing his resignation of
      his living immediately after his interview with the bishop. The letter had remained
      unanswered, and it was by now tolerably clear that the silence of its recipient meant a
      withdrawal from all friendly
       relations with the writer. Elsmere's affectionate sensitive nature took such things
      hardly, especially as he knew that Newcome's life was becoming increasingly difficult and
      embittered. And it gave him now a fresh pang to imagine how Newcome would receive the news of
      his quondam friend's 'infidel propaganda,' established on the very ground where he himself had
      all but died for those beliefs Elsmere had thrown over.
But Robert was learning a certain hardness in this London life which was not without its
      uses to character. Hitherto he had always swum with the stream, cheered by the support of all
      the great and prevailing English traditions. Here, he and his few friends were fighting a
      solitary fight apart from the organised system of English religion and English philanthropy.
      All the elements of culture and religion already existing in the place were against them. The
      clergy of St. Wilfrid's passed them with cold averted eyes; the old and fainéant
      rector of the parish church very soon let it be known what he thought as to the taste of
      Elsmere's intrusion on his parish, or as to the eternal chances of those who might take either
      him or Edwardes as guides in matters religious. His enmity did Elgood Street no harm, and the
      pretensions of the Church, in this Babel of 20,000 souls, to cover the whole field, bore
      clearly no relation at all to the facts. But every little incident in this new struggle of his
      life cost Elsmere more perhaps than it would have cost other men. No part of it came easily to
      him. Only a high Utopian vision drove him on from day to day, bracing him to act and judge, if
      need be, alone and for himself, approved only by conscience and the inward voice.

'Tasks in hours of insight willed
Can be in hours of gloom fulfilled;'

and it was that moment by the river which worked in him through all the prosaic and
      perplexing details of this new attempt to carry enthusiasm into life.
It was soon plain to him that in this teeming section of London the chance of the religious
      reformer lay entirely among the upper working class. In London, at any rate, all that
      is most prosperous and intelligent among the working class holds itself aloof—broadly
      speaking—from all existing spiritual agencies, whether of Church or Dissent.
Upon the genuine London artisan the Church has practically no hold whatever; and Dissent has
      nothing like the hold which it has on similar material in the great towns of the North.
      Towards religion in general the prevailing attitude is one of indifference tinged with
      hostility. 'Eight hundred thousand people in South London, of whom the enormous proportion
      belong to the working class, and among them, Church and Dissent nowhere—Christianity not
       in possession.' Such is the estimate of an Evangelical of our day; and similar laments
      come from all parts of the capital. The Londoner is on the
       whole more conceited, more prejudiced, more given over to crude theorising, than
      his North-country brother, the mill-hand, whose mere position, as one of a homogeneous and
      tolerably constant body, subjects him to a continuous discipline of intercourse and
      discussion. Our popular religion, broadly speaking, means nothing to him. He is sharp enough
      to see through its contradictions and absurdities; he has no dread of losing what he never
      valued; his sense of antiquity, of history, is nil; and his life supplies him with
      excitement enough without the stimulants of 'other-worldliness.' Religion has been on the
      whole irrationally presented to him, and the result on his part has been an irrational breach
      with the whole moral and religious order of ideas.
But the race is quick-witted and imaginative. The Greek cities which welcomed and spread
      Christianity carried within them much the same elements as are supplied by certain sections of
      the London working class—elements of restlessness, of sensibility, of passion. The mere
      intermingling of races, which a modern capital shares with those old towns of Asia Minor,
      predisposes the mind to a greater openness and receptiveness, whether for good or evil.
As the weeks passed on, and after the first inevitable despondency produced by strange
      surroundings and an unwonted isolation had begun to wear off, Robert often found himself
      filled with a strange flame and ardour of hope! But his first steps had nothing to do with
      religion. He made himself quickly felt in the night-school, and as soon as he possibly could
      he hired a large room at the back of their existing room, on the same floor, where, on the
      recreation evenings, he might begin the story-telling, which had been so great a success at
      Murewell. The story-telling struck the neighbourhood as a great novelty. At first only a few
      youths straggled in from the front room, where dominoes and draughts and the illustrated
      papers held seductive sway. The next night the number was increased, and by the fourth or
      fifth evening the room was so well filled both by boys and a large contingent of artisans,
      that it seemed well to appoint a special evening in the week for story-telling, or the
      recreation room would have been deserted.
In these performances Elsmere's aim had always been twofold—the rousing of moral sympathy
      and the awakening of the imaginative power pure and simple. He ranged the whole world for
      stories. Sometimes it would be merely some feature of London life itself—the history of a
      great fire, for instance, and its hairbreadth escapes; a collision in the river; a string of
      instances as true and homely and realistic as they could be made of the way in which the poor
      help one another. Sometimes it would be stories illustrating the dangers and difficulties of
      particular trades—a colliery explosion and the daring of the rescuers; incidents from the life
      of the great Northern ironworks, or from that of the Lancashire factories; or stories of
       English country life and its humours, given sometimes in dialect—Devonshire, or
      Yorkshire, or Cumberland—for which he had a special gift. Or, again, he would take the sea and
      its terrors—the immortal story of the Birkenhead; the deadly plunge of the
       Captain; the records of the lifeboats, or the fascinating story of the ships of
      science, exploring step by step, through miles of water, the past, the inhabitants, the hills
      and valleys of that underworld, that vast Atlantic bed, in which Mont Blanc might be buried
      without showing even his topmost snowfield above the plain of waves. Then at other times it
      would be the simple frolic and fancy of fiction—fairy tale and legend, Greek myth or Icelandic
      saga, episodes from Walter Scott, from Cooper, from Dumas; to be followed perhaps on the next
      evening by the terse and vigorous biography of some man of the people—of Stephenson or Cobden,
      of Thomas Cooper or John Bright, or even of Thomas Carlyle.
One evening, some weeks after it had begun, Hugh Flaxman, hearing from Rose of the success
      of the experiment, went down to hear his new acquaintance tell the story of Monte Cristo's
      escape from the Château d'If. He started an hour earlier than was necessary, and with an
      admirable impartiality he spent that hour at St. Wilfrid's hearing vespers. Flaxman had a
      passion for intellectual or social novelty; and this passion was beguiling him into a close
      observation of Elsmere. At the same time he was crossed and complicated by all sorts of
      fastidious conservative fibres, and when his friends talked rationalism, it often gave him a
      vehement pleasure to maintain that a good Catholic or Ritualist service was worth all their
      arguments, and would outlast them. His taste drew him to the Church, so did a love of
      opposition to current 'isms.' Bishops counted on him for subscriptions, and High Church
      divines sent him their pamphlets. He never refused the subscriptions, but it should be added
      that with equal regularity he dropped the pamphlets into his waste-paper basket.
      Altogether a not very decipherable person in religious matters—as Rose had already
      discovered.
The change from the dim and perfumed spaces of St. Wilfrid's to the bare warehouse room with
      its packed rows of listeners was striking enough. Here were no bowed figures, no
       recueillement. In the blaze of crude light every eager eye was fixed upon the slight
      elastic figure on the platform, each change in the expressive face, each gesture of the long
      arms and thin flexible hands, finding its response in the laughter, the attentive silence, the
      frowning suspense of the audience. At one point a band of young roughs at the back made a
      disturbance, but their neighbours had the offenders quelled and out in a twinkling, and the
      room cried out for a repetition of the sentences which had been lost in the noise. When
      Dantes, opening his knife with his teeth, managed to cut the strings of the sack, a gasp of
      relief ran through the crowd; when at last he reached terra firma there was a ringing
      cheer.


'What is he, d'ye know?' Flaxman heard a mechanic ask his neighbour, as Robert paused for a
      moment to get breath, the man jerking a grimy thumb in the story-teller's direction meanwhile.
      'Seems like a parson somehow. But he ain't a parson.'
'Not he,' said the other laconically. 'Knows better. Most of 'em as comes down 'ere stuffs
      all they have to say as full of goody-goody as an egg's full of meat. If he wur that sort you
      wouldn't catch me here. Never heard him say anything in the "dear brethren" sort of
      style, and I've been 'ere most o' these evenings and to his lectures besides.'
'Perhaps he's one of your d—d sly ones,' said the first speaker dubiously. 'Means to shovel
      it in by and by.'
'Well, I don't know as I couldn't stand it if he did,' returned his companion. 'He'd let
      other fellers have their say, anyhow.'
Flaxman looked curiously at the speaker. He was a young man, a gasfitter—to judge by the
      contents of the basket he seemed to have brought in with him on his way from work—with eyes
      like live birds', and small emaciated features. During the story Flaxman had noticed the man's
      thin begrimed hand, as it rested on the bench in front of him, trembling with excitement.
Another project of Robert's, started as soon as he had felt his way a little in the
      district, was the scientific Sunday school. This was the direct result of a paragraph in
      Huxley's Lay Sermons, where the hint of such a school was first thrown out. However, since the
      introduction of science teaching into the Board schools, the novelty and necessity of such a
      supplement to a child's ordinary education is not what it was. Robert set it up mainly for the
      sake of drawing the boys out of the streets in the afternoons, and providing them with some
      other food for fancy and delight than larking and smoking and penny dreadfuls. A little simple
      chemical and electrical experiment went down greatly; so did a botany class, to which Elsmere
      would come armed with two stores of flowers, one to be picked to pieces, the other to be
      distributed according to memory and attention. A year before he had had a number of large
      coloured plates of tropical fruit and flowers prepared for him by a Kew assistant. These he
      would often set up on a large screen, or put up on the walls, till the dingy schoolroom became
      a bower of superb blossom and luxuriant leaf, a glow of red and purple and orange. And
      then—still by the help of pictures—he would take his class on a tour through strange lands,
      talking to them of China or Egypt or South America, till they followed him up the Amazon, or
      into the pyramids or through the Pampas, or into the mysterious buried cities of Mexico, as
      the children of Hamelin followed the magic of the Pied Piper.
Hardly any of those who came to him, adults or children, while almost all of the artisan
      class, were of the poorest class. He knew it, and had laid his plans for such a result. Such
      work as
       he had at heart has no chance with the lowest in the social scale, in its
      beginnings. It must have something to work upon, and must penetrate downwards. He only can
      receive who already hath—there is no profounder axiom.
And meanwhile the months passed on, and he was still brooding, still waiting. At last the
      spark fell.
There, in the next street but one to Elgood Street, rose the famous Workmen's Club of North
      R——. It had been started by a former Liberal clergyman of the parish, whose main object,
      however, had been to train the workmen to manage it for themselves. His training had been, in
      fact, too successful. Not only was it now wholly managed by artisans, but it had come to be a
      centre of active, nay, brutal, opposition to the Church and faith which had originally
      fostered it. In organic connection with it was a large debating hall, in which the most
      notorious secularist lecturers held forth every Sunday evening; and next door to it, under its
      shadow and patronage, was a little dingy shop filled to overflowing with the coarsest
      free-thinking publications, Colonel Ingersoll's books occupying the place of honour in the
      window and the Freethinker placard flaunting at the door. Inside there was still more
      highly seasoned literature even than the Freethinker to be had. There was in
      particular a small halfpenny paper which was understood to be in some sense the special organ
      of the North R—— Club; which was at any rate published close by, and edited by one of the
      workmen founders of the club. This unsavoury sheet began to be more and more defiantly
      advertised through the parish as Lent drew on towards Passion week, and the exertions of St.
      Wilfrid's and of the other churches, which were being spurred on by the Ritualists' success,
      became more apparent. Soon it seemed to Robert that every bit of hoarding and every waste wall
      was filled with the announcement:—
'Read Faith and Fools. Enormous success. Our Comic Life of Christ now
      nearly completed. Quite the best thing of its kind going. Woodcut this
      week—Transfiguration.'
His heart grew fierce within him. One night in Passion week he left the night-school about
      ten o'clock. His way led him past the club, which was brilliantly lit up, and evidently in
      full activity. Round the door there was a knot of workmen lounging. It was a mild moonlit
      April night, and the air was pleasant. Several of them had copies of Faith and Fools,
      and were showing the week's woodcut to those about them, with chuckles and spirts of
      laughter.
Robert caught a few words as he hurried past them, and stirred by a sudden impulse turned
      into the shop beyond, and asked for the paper. The woman handed it to him, and gave him his
      change with a business-like sangfroid, which struck on his tired nerves almost more
      painfully than the laughing brutality of the men he had just passed.
Directly he found himself in another street he opened the
       paper under a lamp-post. It contained a caricature of the Crucifixion, the scroll
      emanating from Mary Magdalene's mouth, in particular, containing obscenities which cannot be
      quoted here.
Robert thrust it into his pocket and strode on, every nerve quivering.
'This is Wednesday in Passion week,' he said to himself. 'The day after to-morrow is Good
      Friday!'
He walked fast in a north-westerly direction, and soon found himself within the City, where
      the streets were long since empty and silent. But he noticed nothing around him. His thoughts
      were in the distant East, among the flat roofs and white walls of Nazareth, the olives of
      Bethany, the steep streets and rocky ramparts of Jerusalem. He had seen them with the bodily
      eye, and the fact had enormously quickened his historical perception. The child of Nazareth,
      the moralist and teacher of Capernaum and Gennesaret, the strenuous seer and martyr of the
      later Jerusalem preaching—all these various images sprang into throbbing poetic life within
      him. That anything in human shape should be found capable of dragging this life and this death
      through the mire of a hideous and befouling laughter! Who was responsible? To what cause could
      one trace such a temper of mind towards such an object—present and militant as that temper is
      in all the crowded centres of working life throughout modern Europe? The toiler of the world
      as he matures may be made to love Socrates or Buddha or Marcus Aurelius. It would seem often
      as though he could not be made to love Jesus! Is it the Nemesis that ultimately discovers and
      avenges the sublimest, the least conscious departure from simplicity and verity?—is it the
      last and most terrible illustration of a great axiom: 'Faith has a judge—in
      truth'?
He went home and lay awake half the night pondering. If he could but pour out his heart! But
      though Catherine, the wife of his heart, of his youth, is there, close beside him, doubt and
      struggle and perplexity are alike frozen on his lips. He cannot speak without sympathy, and
      she will not hear except under a moral compulsion which he shrinks more and more painfully
      from exercising.
The next night was a story-telling night. He spent it in telling the legend of St. Francis.
      When it was over he asked the audience to wait a moment, and there and then—with the tender
      imaginative Franciscan atmosphere, as it were, still about them—he delivered a short and
      vigorous protest in the name of decency, good feeling, and common sense, against the idiotic
      profanities with which the whole immediate neighbourhood seemed to be reeking. It was the
      first time he had approached any religious matter directly. A knot of workmen sitting together
      at the back of the room looked at each other with a significant grimace or two.
When Robert ceased speaking one of them, an elderly watch
      maker, got up and made a dry and cynical little speech, nothing moving but the thin
      lips in the shrivelled mahogany face. Robert knew the man well. He was a Genevese by birth,
      Calvinist by blood, revolutionist by development. He complained that Mr. Elsmere had taken his
      audience by surprise; that a good many of those present understood the remarks he had just
      made as an attack upon an institution in which many of them were deeply interested; and that
      he invited Mr. Elsmere to a more thorough discussion of the matter, in a place where he could
      be both heard and answered.
The room applauded with some signs of suppressed excitement. Most of the men there were
      accustomed to disputation of the sort which any Sunday visitor to Victoria Park may hear going
      on there week after week. Elsmere had made a vivid impression; and the prospect of a fight
      with him had an unusual piquancy.
Robert sprang up. 'When you will,' he said. 'I am ready to stand by what I have just said in
      the face of you all, if you care to hear it.'
Place and particulars were hastily arranged, subject to the approval of the club committee,
      and Elsmere's audience separated in a glow of curiosity and expectation.
'Didn't I tell ye?' the gasfitter's snarling friend said to him. 'Scratch him and you find
      the parson. These upper-class folk, when they come among us poor ones, always seem to me just
      hunting for souls, as those Injuns he was talking about last week hunt for scalps. They can't
      get to heaven without a certain number of 'em slung about 'em.'
'Wait a bit!' said the gasfitter, his quick dark eyes betraying a certain raised inner
      temperature.
Next morning the North R—— Club was placarded with announcements that on Easter Eve next
      Robert Elsmere, Esq., would deliver a lecture in the Debating Hall on 'The Claim of Jesus upon
      Modern Life'; to be followed, as usual, by general discussion.
</div></body></text></TEI>