<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">
CHAPTER XXIII
It was the beginning of April. The gorse was fast extending its golden empire over the
      commons. On the sunny slopes of the copses primroses were breaking through the hazel roots and
      beginning to gleam along the edges of the river. On the grass commons between Murewell and
      Mile End the birches rose like green clouds against the browns and purples of the still
      leafless oaks and beeches. The birds were twittering and building. Every day Robert was on the
      look-out for the swallows, or listening for the first notes of the nightingale amid the bare
      spring coverts.
But the spring was less perfectly delightful to him than it might have been, for Catherine
      was away. Mrs. Leyburn, who was to have come south to them in February, was attacked by
      bronchitis instead at Burwood and forbidden to move, even to a warmer climate. In March,
      Catherine, feeling restless and anxious about her mother, and thinking it hard that Agnes
      should have all the nursing and responsibility, tore herself from her man and her baby, and
      went north to Whindale for a fortnight, leaving Robert forlorn.
Now, however, she was in London, whither she had gone for a few days on her way home, to
      meet Rose and to shop. Robert's opinion was that all women, even St. Elizabeths, have
      somewhere rooted in them an inordinate partiality for shopping; otherwise why should that
      operation take four or five mortal days? Surely with a little energy, one might buy up the
      whole of London in twelve hours! However, Catherine lingered, and as her purchases were made,
      Robert crossly supposed it must be all Rose's fault. He believed that Rose spent a great deal
      too much on dress.
Catherine's letters, of course, were full of her sister. Rose, she said, had come back from
      Berlin handsomer than ever, and playing, she supposed, magnificently. At any rate, the letters
      which followed her in shoals from Berlin flattered her to the skies, and during the three
      months preceding her return Joachim himself had taken her as a pupil and given her unusual
      attention.
'And now, of course,' wrote Catherine, 'she is desperately disappointed that mamma and Agnes
      cannot join her in town, as she had hoped. She does her best, I know, poor child, to conceal
      it and to feel as she ought about mamma, but I can see
       that the idea of an indefinite time at Burwood is intolerable to her. As to Berlin,
      I think she has enjoyed it, but she talks very scornfully of German Schwärmerei and
      German women, and she tells the oddest stories of her professors. With one or two of them she
      seems to have been in a state of war from the beginning; but some of them, my dear Robert, I
      am persuaded were just simply in love with her!
'I don't—no, I never shall believe, that independent exciting student's life is
      good for a girl. But I never say so to Rose. When she forgets to be irritable and to feel that
      the world is going against her, she is often very sweet to me, and I can't bear there should
      be any conflict.'
His next day's letter contained the following:—
'Are you properly amused, sir, at your wife's performances in town? Our three concerts you
      have heard all about. I still can't get over them. I go about haunted by the
       seriousness, the life-and-death interest people throw into music. It is astonishing!
      And outside, as we got into our hansom, such sights and sounds!—such starved fierce-looking
      men, such ghastly women!
'But since then Rose has been taking me into society. Yesterday afternoon, after I wrote to
      you, we went to see Rose's artistic friends—the Piersons—with whom she was staying last
      summer, and to-day we have even called on Lady Charlotte Wynnstay.
'As to Mrs. Pierson, I never saw such an odd bundle of ribbons and rags and queer
      embroideries as she looked when we called. However, Rose says that, for "an æsthete"—she
      despises them now herself—Mrs. Pierson has wonderful taste, and that her wall-papers and her
      gowns, if I only understood them, are not the least like those of other æsthetic persons, but
      very recherché—which may be. She talked to Rose of nothing but acting, especially of
      Madame Desforêts. No one, according to her, has anything to do with an actress's private life,
      or ought to take it into account. But, Robert, dear,—an actress is a woman, and has a
      soul!
'Then Lady Charlotte,—you would have laughed at our entrée.
'We found she was in town, and went on her "day," as she had asked Rose to do. The room was
      rather dark—none of these London rooms seem to me to have any light and air in them. The
      butler got our names wrong, and I marched in first, more shy than I ever have been before in
      my life. Lady Charlotte had two gentlemen with her. She evidently did not know me in the
      least; she stood staring at me with her eyeglass on, and her cap so crooked I could think of
      nothing but a wish to put it straight. Then Rose followed, and in a few minutes it seemed to
      me as though it were Rose who were hostess, talking to the two gentlemen and being kind to
      Lady Charlotte. I am sure everybody in the room was amused by her self-possession,
       Lady Charlotte included. The gentlemen stared at her a great deal, and Lady
      Charlotte paid her one or two compliments on her looks, which I thought she would not
      have ventured to pay to any one in her own circle.
'We stayed about half an hour. One of the gentlemen was, I believe, a member of the
      Government, an under-secretary for something, but he and Rose and Lady Charlotte talked again
      of nothing but musicians and actors. It is strange that politicians should have time to know
      so much of these things. The other gentleman reminded me of Hotspur's popinjay. I think now I
      made out that he wrote for the newspapers, but at the moment I should have felt it insulting
      to accuse him of anything so humdrum as an occupation in life. He discovered somehow that I
      had an interest in the Church, and he asked me, leaning back in his chair and lisping, whether
      I really thought "the Church could still totter on a while in the rural dithtricts." He was
      informed her condition was so "vewy dethperate."
'Then I laughed outright, and found my tongue. Perhaps his next article on the Church will
      have a few facts in it. I did my best to put some into him. Rose at last looked round at me,
      astonished. But he did not dislike me, I think. I was not impertinent to him, husband mine. If
      I might have described just one of your days to his high-and-mightiness! There is no
      need to tell you, I think, whether I did or not.
'Then when we got up to go, Lady Charlotte asked Rose to stay with her. Rose explained why
      she couldn't, and Lady Charlotte pitied her dreadfully for having a family, and the
      under-secretary said that it was one's first duty in life to trample on one's relations, and
      that he hoped nothing would prevent his hearing her play some time later in the year. Rose
      said very decidedly she should be in town for the winter. Lady Charlotte said she would have
      an evening specially for her, and as I said nothing, we got away at last.'
The letter of the following day recorded a little adventure:—
'I was much startled this morning. I had got Rose to come with me to the National Gallery on
      our way to her dressmaker. We were standing before Raphael's "Vigil of the Knight," when
      suddenly I saw Rose, who was looking away towards the door into the long gallery, turn
      perfectly white. I followed her eyes, and there, in the doorway, disappearing,—I am almost
      certain,—was Mr. Langham! One cannot mistake his walk or his profile. Before I could say a
      word Rose had walked away to another wall of pictures, and when we joined again we did not
      speak of it. Did he see us, I wonder, and purposely avoid us? Something made me think so.
'Oh, I wish I could believe she had forgotten him! I am certain she would laugh me to angry
      scorn if I mentioned him; but there she sits by the fire now, while I am writing, quite
      drooping and pale, because she thinks I am not noticing. If she did but love me a little more!
      It must be my fault, I know.


'Yes, as you say, Burwood may as well be shut up or let. My dear, dear father!'
Robert could imagine the sigh with which Catherine had laid down her pen. Dear tender soul,
      with all its old-world fidelities and pieties pure and unimpaired! He raised the signature to
      his lips.
Next day Catherine came back to him. Robert had no words too opprobrious for the widowed
      condition from which her return had rescued him. It seemed to Catherine, however, that life
      had been very full and keen with him since her departure! He lingered with her after supper,
      vowing that his club boys might make what hay in the study they pleased; he was going to tell
      her the news, whatever happened.
'I told you of my two dinners at the Hall? The first was just tête-à-tête with the
      squire—oh, and Mrs. Darcy, of course. I am always forgetting her, poor little thing, which is
      most ungrateful of me. A pathetic life that, Catherine. She seems to me, in her odd way,
      perpetually hungering for affection, for praise. No doubt, if she got them, she wouldn't know
      what to do with them. She would just touch and leave them as she does everything. Her talk and
      she are both as light and wandering as thistledown. But still, meanwhile, she hungers, and is
      never satisfied. There seems to be something peculiarly antipathetic in her to the squire. I
      can't make it out. He is sometimes quite brutal to her when she is more inconsequent than
      usual. I often wonder she goes on living with him.'
Catherine made some indignant comment.
'Yes,' said Robert, musing. 'Yes, it is bad.'
But Catherine thought his tone might have been more unqualified, and marvelled again at the
      curious lenity of judgment he had always shown of late towards Mr. Wendover. And all his
      judgments of himself and others were generally so quick, so uncompromising!
'On the second occasion we had Freake and Dashwood,' naming two well-known English
      antiquarians. 'Very learned, very jealous, and very snuffy; altogether "too genuine," as poor
      mother used to say of those old chairs we got for the dining-room. But afterwards when we were
      all smoking in the library, the squire came out of his shell and talked. I never heard him
      more brilliant!'
He paused a moment, his bright eyes looking far away from her, as though fixed on the scene
      he was describing.
'Such a mind!' he said at last with a long breath, 'such a memory! Catherine, my book has
      been making great strides since you left. With Mr. Wendover to go to, all the problems are
      simplified. One is saved all false starts, all beating about the bush. What a piece of luck it
      was that put one down beside such a guide, such a living storehouse of knowledge!'
He spoke in a glow of energy and enthusiasm. Catherine sat
       looking at him wistfully, her gray eyes crossed by many varying shades of memory
      and feeling.
At last his look met hers, and the animation of it softened at once, grew gentle.
'Do you think I am making knowledge too much of a god just now, Madonna mine?' he said,
      throwing himself down beside her. 'I have been full of qualms myself. The squire excites one
      so, makes one feel as though intellect—accumulation—were the whole of life. But I struggle
      against it—I do. I go on, for instance, trying to make the squire do his social duties—behave
      like "a human."'
Catherine could not help smiling at his tone.
'Well?' she inquired.
He shook his head ruefully.
'The squire is a tough customer—most men of sixty-seven with strong wills are, I suppose. At
      any rate, he is like one of the Thurston trout—sees through all my manœuvres. But one piece of
      news will astonish you, Catherine!' And he sprang up to deliver it with effect. 'Henslowe is
      dismissed.'
'Henslowe dismissed!' Catherine sat properly amazed while Robert told the story.
The dismissal of Henslowe indeed represented the price which Mr. Wendover had been so far
      willing to pay for Elsmere's society. Some quid pro quo there must be—that he was
      prepared to admit—considering their relative positions as squire and parson. But, as Robert
      shrewdly suspected, not one of his wiles so far had imposed on the master of Murewell. He had
      his own sarcastic smiles over them, and over Elsmere's pastoral naïveté in general.
      The evidences of the young rector's power and popularity were, however, on the whole, pleasant
      to Mr. Wendover. If Elsmere had his will with all the rest of the world, Mr. Wendover knew
      perfectly well who it was that at the present moment had his will with Elsmere. He had found a
      great piquancy in this shaping of a mind more intellectually eager and pliant than any he had
      yet come across among younger men; perpetual food too, for his sense of irony, in the
      intellectual contradictions, wherein Elsmere's developing ideas and information were now,
      according to the squire, involving him at every turn.
'His religious foundations are gone already, if he did but know it,' Mr. Wendover grimly
      remarked to himself one day about this time, 'but he will take so long finding it out that the
      results are not worth speculating on.'
Cynically assured, therefore, at bottom of his own power with this ebullient nature, the
      squire was quite prepared to make external concessions, or, as we have said, to pay his price.
      It annoyed him that when Elsmere would press for allotment land, or a new institute, or a
      better supply of water for the village, it was not open to him merely to give carte
       blanche, and refer his petitioner to Henslowe. Robert's opinion of Henslowe,
       and Henslowe's now more cautious but still incessant hostility to the rector, were
      patent at last even to the squire. The situation was worrying and wasted time. It must be
      changed.
So one morning he met Elsmere with a bundle of letters in his hand, calmly informed him that
      Henslowe had been sent about his business, and that it would be a kindness if Mr. Elsmere
      would do him the favour of looking through some applications for the vacant post just
      received.
Elsmere, much taken by surprise, felt at first as it was natural for an over-sensitive,
      over-scrupulous man to feel. His enemy had been given into his hand, and instead of victory he
      could only realise that he had brought a man to ruin.
'He has a wife and children,' he said quickly, looking at the squire.
'Of course I have pensioned him,' replied the squire impatiently; 'otherwise I imagine he
      would be hanging round our necks to the end of the chapter.'
There was something in the careless indifference of the tone which sent a shiver through
      Elsmere. After all, this man had served the squire for fifteen years, and it was not Mr.
      Wendover who had much to complain of.
No one with a conscience could have held out a finger to keep Henslowe in his post. But
      though Elsmere took the letters and promised to give them his best attention, as soon as he
      got home he made himself irrationally miserable over the matter. It was not his fault that,
      from the moment of his arrival in the parish, Henslowe had made him the target of a vulgar and
      embittered hostility, and so far as he had struck out in return it had been for the protection
      of persecuted and defenceless creatures. But all the same, he could not get the thought of the
      man's collapse and humiliation out of his mind. How at his age was he to find other work, and
      how was he to endure life at Murewell without his comfortable house, his smart gig, his easy
      command of spirits, and the cringing of the farmers?
Tormented by the sordid misery of the situation almost as though it had been his own,
      Elsmere ran down impulsively in the evening to the agent's house. Could nothing be done to
      assure the man that he was not really his enemy, and that anything the parson's influence and
      the parson's money could do to help him to a more decent life, and work which offered fewer
      temptations and less power over human beings, should be done?
It need hardly be said that the visit was a complete failure. Henslowe, who was drinking
      hard, no sooner heard Elsmere's voice in the little hall than he dashed open the door which
      separated them, and, in a paroxysm of drunken rage, hurled at Elsmere all the venomous stuff
      he had been garnering up for months against some such occasion. The vilest abuse, the foulest
      charges—there was nothing that the maddened sot, now fairly unmasked, denied himself. Elsmere,
      pale and erect, tried to
       make himself heard. In vain. Henslowe was physically incapable of taking in a
      word.
At last the agent, beside himself, made a rush, his three untidy children, who had been
      hanging open-mouthed in the background, set up a howl of terror, and his Scotch wife, more
      pinched and sour than ever, who had been so far a gloomy spectator of the scene,
      interposed.
'Have doon wi' ye,' she said sullenly, putting out a long bony arm in front of her husband,
      'or I'll just lock oop that brandy where ye'll naw find it if ye pull the house doon. Now,
      sir,' turning to Elsmere, 'would ye jest be going? Ye mean it weel, I daur say, but ye've doon
      yer wark, and ye maun leave it.'
And she motioned him out, not without a sombre dignity. Elsmere went home crestfallen. The
      enthusiast is a good deal too apt to under-estimate the stubbornness of moral fact, and these
      rebuffs have their stern uses for character.
'They intend to go on living here, I am told,' Elsmere said, as he wound up the story, 'and
      as Henslowe is still churchwarden, he may do us a world of mischief yet. However, I think that
      wife will keep him in order. No doubt vengeance would be sweet to her as to him, but she has a
      shrewd eye, poor soul, to the squire's remittances. It is a wretched business, and I don't
      take a man's hate easily, Catherine!—though it may be a folly to say so.'
Catherine was irresponsive. The Old Testament element in her found a lawful satisfaction in
      Henslowe's fall, and a wicked man's hatred, according to her, mattered only to himself. The
      squire's conduct, on the other hand, made her uneasily proud. To her, naturally, it simply
      meant that he was falling under Robert's spell. So much the better for him, but——
</div></body></text></TEI>