<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="29">
CHAPTER XXIX
He shut the door softly, and went downstairs again. It was between ten and eleven. The
      lights in the lower passage were just extinguished; every one else in the house had gone to
      bed. Mechanically he stooped and put away the child's bricks, he pushed the chairs back into
      their places, and then he paused a while before the open window. But there was not a tremor on
      the set face. He felt himself capable of no more emotion. The fount of feeling, of pain, was
      for the moment dried up. What he was mainly noticing was the effect of some occasional gusts
      of night-wind on the moonlit cornfield; the silver ripples they sent through it; the shadows
      thrown by some great trees in the western corners of the field; the glory of the moon itself
      in the pale immensity of the sky.
Presently he turned away, leaving one lamp still burning in the room, softly unlocked the
      hall door, took his hat, and went out. He walked up and down the woodpath or sat on the bench
      there for some time, thinking indeed, but thinking with a certain stern practical dryness.
      Whenever he felt the thrill of feeling stealing over him again, he would make a sharp effort
      at repression. Physically he could not bear much more, and he knew it. A part remained for him
      to play, which must be played with tact, with prudence, and with firmness. Strength and nerves
       had been sufficiently weakened already. For his wife's sake, his people's sake, his
      honourable reputation's sake, he must guard himself from a collapse which might mean far more
      than physical failure.
So in the most patient methodical way he began to plan out the immediate future. As to
      waiting, the matter was still in Catherine's hands; but he knew that finely tempered soul; he
      knew that when she had mastered her poor woman's self, as she had always mastered it from her
      childhood, she would not bid him wait. He hardly took the possibility into consideration. The
      proposal had had some reality in his eyes when he went to see Mr. Grey; now it had none,
      though he could hardly have explained why.
He had already made arrangements with an old Oxford friend to take his duty during his
      absence on the Continent. It had been originally suggested that this Mr. Armitstead should
      come to Murewell on the Monday following the Sunday they were now approaching, spend a few
      days with them before their departure, and be left to his own devices in the house and parish,
      about the Thursday or Friday. An intense desire now seized Robert to get hold of the man at
      once, before the next Sunday. It was strange how the interview with his wife seemed to have
      crystallised, precipitated, everything. How infinitely more real the whole matter looked to
      him since the afternoon! It had passed—at any rate for the time—out of the region of thought,
      into the hurrying evolution of action, and as soon as action began it was characteristic of
      Robert's rapid energetic nature to feel this thirst, to make it as prompt, as complete, as
      possible. The fiery soul yearned for a fresh consistency, though it were a consistency of loss
      and renunciation.
To-morrow he must write to the bishop. The bishop's residence was only eight or ten miles
      from Murewell; he supposed his interview with him would take place about Monday or Tuesday. He
      could see the tall stooping figure of the kindly old man rising to meet him; he knew exactly
      the sort of arguments that would be brought to bear upon him. Oh, that it were done with—this
      wearisome dialectical necessity! His life for months had been one long argument. If he were
      but left free to feel, and live again!
The practical matter which weighed most heavily upon him was the function connected with the
      opening of the new Institute, which had been fixed for the Saturday—the next day but one. How
      was he—but much more how was Catherine—to get through it? His lips would be sealed as to any
      possible withdrawal from the living, for he could not by then have seen the bishop. He looked
      forward to the gathering, the crowds, the local enthusiasm, the signs of his own popularity,
      with a sickening distaste. The one thing real to him through it all would be Catherine's white
      face, and their bitter joint consciousness.
And then he said to himself, sharply, that his own feelings
       counted for nothing. Catherine should be tenderly shielded from all avoidable pain,
      but for himself there must be no flinching, no self-indulgent weakness. Did he not owe every
      last hour he had to give to the people amongst whom he had planned to spend the best energies
      of life, and for whom his own act was about to part him in this lame impotent fashion?
Midnight! The sounds rolled silverly out, effacing the soft murmurs of the night. So the
      long interminable day was over, and a new morning had begun. He rose, listening to the echoes
      of the bell, and—as the tide of feeling surged back upon him—passionately commending the
      new-born day to God.
Then he turned towards the house, put the light out in the drawing-room, and went upstairs,
      stepping cautiously. He opened the door of Catherine's room. The moonlight was streaming in
      through the white blinds. Catherine, who had undressed, was lying now with her face hidden in
      the pillow, and one white-sleeved arm flung across little Mary's cot. The night was hot, and
      the child would evidently have thrown off all its coverings had it not been for the mother's
      hand, which lay lightly on the tiny shoulder, keeping one thin blanket in its place.
'Catherine,' he whispered, standing beside her.
She turned, and by the light of the candle he held shaded from her he saw the austere
      remoteness of her look, as of one who had been going through deep waters of misery, alone with
      God. His heart sank. For the first time that look seemed to exclude him from her inmost
      life.
He sank down beside her, took the hand lying on the child, and laid down his head upon it,
      mutely kissing it. But he said nothing. Of what further avail could words be just then to
      either of them? Only he felt through every fibre the coldness, the irresponsiveness of those
      fingers lying in his.
'Would it prevent your sleeping,' he asked her presently, 'if I came to read here, as I used
      to when you were ill? I could shade the light from you, of course.'
She raised her head suddenly.
'But you—you ought to sleep.'
Her tone was anxious, but strangely quiet and aloof.
'Impossible!' he said, pressing his hand over his eyes as he rose. 'At any rate I will read
      first.'
His sleeplessness at any time of excitement or strain was so inveterate, and so familiar to
      them both by now, that she could say nothing. She turned away with a long sobbing breath,
      which seemed to go through her from head to foot. He stood a moment beside her, fighting
      strong impulses of remorse and passion, and ultimately maintaining silence and
      self-control.
In another minute or two he was sitting beside her feet, in a low chair drawn to the edge of
      the bed, the light arranged so as to reach his book without touching either mother or child.
      He had run over the book-shelf in his own room, shrinking pain
      fully from any of his common religious favourites as one shrinks from touching a
      still sore and throbbing nerve, and had at last carried off a volume of Spenser.
And so the night began to wear away. For the first hour or two, every now and then, a
      stifled sob would make itself just faintly heard. It was a sound to wring the heart, for what
      it meant was that not even Catherine Elsmere's extraordinary powers of self-suppression could
      avail to check the outward expression of an inward torture. Each time it came and went, it
      seemed to Elsmere that a fraction of his youth went with it.
At last exhaustion brought her a restless sleep. As soon as Elsmere caught the light
      breathing which told him she was not conscious of her grief, or of him, his book slipped on to
      his knee.

'Open the temple gates unto my love,
Open them wide that she may enter in,
And all the posts adorn as doth behove,
And all the pillars deck with garlands trim,
For to receive this saint with honour due
That cometh in to you.
With trembling steps and humble reverence,
She cometh in before the Almighty's view.'

The leaves fell over as the book dropped, and these lines, which had been to him, as to
      other lovers, the utterance of his own bridal joy, emerged. They brought about him a host of
      images—a little gray church penetrated everywhere by the roar of a swollen river; outside, a
      road filled with empty farmers' carts, and shouting children carrying branches of
      mountain-ash—winding on and up into the heart of wild hills dyed with reddening fern, the
      sun-gleams stealing from crag to crag, and shoulder to shoulder; inside, row after row of
      intent faces, all turned towards the central passage, and, moving towards him, a figure 'clad
      all in white, that seems a virgin best,' whose every step brings nearer to him the heaven of
      his heart's desire. Everything is plain to him—Mrs. Thornburgh's round cheeks and marvellous
      curls and jubilant airs, Mrs. Leyburn's mild and tearful pleasure, the vicar's solid
      satisfaction. With what confiding joy had those who loved her given her to him! And he knows
      well that out of all griefs, the grief he has brought upon her in two short years is the one
      which will seem to her hardest to bear. Very few women of the present day could feel this
      particular calamity as Catherine Elsmere must feel it.
'Was it a crime to love and win you, my darling?' he cried to her in his heart. 'Ought I to
      have had more self-knowledge? could I have guessed where I was taking you? Oh, how could I
      know—how could I know.'
But it was impossible to him to sink himself wholly in the past. Inevitably such a nature as
      Elsmere's turns very quickly from despair to hope; from the sense of failure to the passionate
      planning of new effort. In time will he not be able to comfort her, and, after a miserable
      moment of transition, to repair her
       trust in him and make their common life once more rich towards God and man? There
      must be painful readjustment and friction, no doubt. He tries to see the facts as they truly
      are, fighting against his own optimist tendencies, and realising as best he can all the
      changes which his great change must introduce into their most intimate relations. But after
      all can love and honesty and a clear conscience do nothing to bridge over, nay, to efface,
      such differences as theirs will be?
Oh to bring her to understand him! At this moment he shrinks painfully from the thought of
      touching her faith—his own sense of loss is too heavy, too terrible. But if she will only be
      still open with him!—still give him her deepest heart, any lasting difference between them
      will surely be impossible. Each will complete the other, and love knit up the ravelled strands
      again into a stronger unity.
Gradually he lost himself in half-articulate prayer, in the solemn girding of the will to
      this future task of a recreating love. And by the time the morning light had well established
      itself sleep had fallen on him. When he became sensible of the longed-for drowsiness, he
      merely stretched out a tired hand and drew over him a shawl hanging at the foot of the bed. He
      was too utterly worn out to think of moving.
When he woke the sun was streaming into the room, and behind him sat the tiny Mary on the
      edge of the bed, the rounded apple cheeks and wild-bird eyes aglow with mischief and delight.
      She had climbed out of her cot, and, finding no check to her progress, had crept on, till now
      she sat triumphantly, with one diminutive leg and rosy foot doubled under her, and her
      father's thick hair at the mercy of her invading fingers, which, however, were as yet touching
      him half timidly, as though something in his sleep had awed the baby sense.
But Catherine was gone.
He sprang up with a start. Mary was frightened by the abrupt movement, perhaps disappointed
      by the escape of her prey, and raised a sudden wail.
He carried her to her nurse, even forgetting to kiss the little wet cheek, ascertained that
      Catherine was not in the house, and then came back, miserable, with the bewilderment of sleep
      still upon him. A sense of wrong rose high within him. How could she have left him
      thus without a word?
It had been her way, sometimes, during the summer, to go out early to one or other of the
      sick folk who were under her especial charge. Possibly she had gone to a woman, just confined,
      on the farther side of the village, who yesterday had been in danger.
But, whatever explanation he could make for himself, he was none the less irrationally
      wretched. He bathed, dressed, and sat down to his solitary meal in a state of tension and
      agitation indescribable. All the exaltation, the courage of the night, was gone.


Nine o'clock, ten o'clock, and no sign of Catherine.
'Your mistress must have been detained somewhere,' he said as quietly and carelessly as he
      could to Susan, the parlour-maid, who had been with them since their marriage. 'Leave
      breakfast things for one.'
'Mistress took a cup of milk when she went out, cook says,' observed the little maid with a
      consoling intention, wondering the while at the rector's haggard mien and restless
      movements.
'Nursing other people indeed!' she observed severely downstairs, glad as we all are at times
      to pick holes in excellence which is inconveniently high. 'Missis had a deal better stay at
      home and nurse him!'
The day was excessively hot. Not a leaf moved in the garden; over the cornfield the air
      danced in long vibrations of heat; the woods and hills beyond were indistinct and colourless.
      Their dog Dandy lay sleeping in the sun, waking up every now and then to avenge himself on the
      flies. On the far edge of the cornfield reaping was beginning. Robert stood on the edge of the
      sunk fence, his blind eyes resting on the line of men, his ear catching the shouts of the
      farmer directing operations from his gray horse. He could do nothing. The night before, in the
      wood-path, he had clearly mapped out the day's work. A mass of business was waiting,
      clamouring to be done. He tried to begin on this or that, and gave up everything with a groan,
      wandering out again to the gate on to the wood-path to sweep the distances of road or field
      with hungry straining eyes.
The wildest fears had taken possession of him. Running in his head was a passage from
       The confessions, describing Monica's horror of her son's heretical opinions.
      'Shrinking from and detesting the blasphemies of his error, she began to doubt whether it was
      right in her to allow her son to live in her house and to eat at the same table with her;' and
      the mother's heart, he remembered, could only be convinced of the lawfulness of its own
      yearning by a prophetic vision of the youth's conversion. He recalled, with a shiver, how in
      the life of Madame Guyon, after describing the painful and agonising death of a kind but
      comparatively irreligious husband, she quietly adds, 'As soon as I heard that my husband had
      just expired, I said to Thee, O my God, Thou hast broken my bonds, and I will offer to Thee a
      sacrifice of praise!' He thought of John Henry Newman, disowning all the ties of kinship with
      his younger brother because of divergent views on the question of baptismal regeneration; of
      the long tragedy of Blanco White's life, caused by the slow dropping-off of friend after
      friend, on the ground of heretical belief. What right had he, or any one in such a strait as
      his, to assume that the faith of the present is no longer capable of the same stern
      self-destructive consistency as the faith of the past? He knew that to such Christian purity,
      such Christian inwardness as Catherine's, the ultimate sanction and legitimacy
       of marriage rest, both in theory and practice, on a common acceptance of the
      definite commands and promises of a miraculous revelation. He had had a proof of it in
      Catherine's passionate repugnance to the idea of Rose's marriage with Edward Langham.
Eleven o'clock striking from the distant tower. He walked desperately along the wood-path,
      meaning to go through the copse at the end of it towards the park, and look there. He had just
      passed into the copse, a thick interwoven mass of young trees, when he heard the sound of the
      gate which on the farther side of it led on to the road. He hurried on; the trees closed
      behind him; the grassy path broadened; and there, under an arch of young oak and hazel, stood
      Catherine, arrested by the sound of his step. He, too, stopped at the sight of her; he could
      not go on. Husband and wife looked at each other one long quivering moment. Then Catherine
      sprang forward with a sob and threw herself on his breast.
They clung to each other, she in a passion of tears—tears of such self-abandonment as
      neither Robert nor any other living soul had ever seen Catherine Elsmere shed before. As for
      him he was trembling from head to foot, his arms scarcely strong enough to hold her, his young
      worn face bent down over her.
'Oh, Robert!' she sobbed at last, putting up her hand and touching his hair, 'you look so
      pale, so sad.'
'I have you again!' he said simply.
A thrill of remorse ran through her.
'I went away,' she murmured, her face still hidden—'I went away, because when I woke up it
      all seemed to me, suddenly, too ghastly to be believed; I could not stay still and bear it.
      But, Robert, Robert, I kissed you as I passed! I was so thankful you could sleep a little and
      forget. I hardly know where I have been most of the time—I think I have been sitting in a
      corner of the park, where no one ever comes. I began to think of all you said to me last
      night—to put it together—to try and understand it, and it seemed to me more and more horrible!
      I thought of what it would be like to have to hide my prayers from you—my faith in Christ—my
      hope of heaven. I thought of bringing up the child—how all that was vital to me would be a
      superstition to you, which you would bear with for my sake. I thought of death,' and she
      shuddered—'your death, or my death, and how this change in you would cleave a gulf of misery
      between us. And then I thought of losing my own faith, of denying Christ. It was a nightmare—I
      saw myself on a long road, escaping with Mary in my arms, escaping from you! Oh, Robert! it
      wasn't only for myself,'—and she clung to him as though she were a child, confessing,
      explaining away, some grievous fault hardly to be forgiven. 'I was agonised by the thought
      that I was not my own—I and my child were Christ's. Could I risk what was His? Other
      men and women had died, had given up all for His sake. Is there no one now strong
       enough to suffer torment, to kill even love itself rather than deny Him—rather than
      crucify Him afresh?'
She paused, struggling for breath. The terrible excitement of that bygone moment had seized
      upon her again and communicated itself to him.
'And then—and then,' she said sobbing, 'I don't know how it was. One moment I was sitting up
      looking straight before me, without a tear, thinking of what was the least I must do,
      even—even—if you and I stayed together—of all the hard compacts and conditions I must
      make—judging you all the while from a long, long distance, and feeling as though I had buried
      the old self—sacrificed the old heart—for ever! And the next I was lying on the ground crying
      for you, Robert, crying for you! Your face had come back to me as you lay there in the early
      morning light. I thought how I had kissed you—how pale and gray and thin you looked. Oh, how I
      loathed myself! That I should think it could be God's will that I should leave you, or torture
      you, my poor husband! I had not only been wicked towards you—I had offended Christ. I could
      think of nothing as I lay there—again and again—but "Little children, love one another;
       little children, love one another." Oh, my beloved,'—and she looked up with the
      solemnest, tenderest smile breaking on the marred tear-stained face,—'I will never give up
      hope, I will pray for you night and day. God will bring you back. You cannot lose yourself so.
      No, no! His grace is stronger than our wills. But I will not preach to you—I will not
      persecute you—I will only live beside you—in your heart—and love you always. Oh, how could
      I—how could I have such thoughts!'
And again she broke off, weeping, as if to the tender torn heart the only crime that could
      not be forgiven was its own offence against love. As for him he was beyond speech. If he had
      ever lost his vision of God, his wife's love would that moment have given it back to him.
'Robert,' she said presently, urged on by the sacred yearning to heal, to atone, 'I will not
      complain—I will not ask you to wait. I take your word for it that it is best not, that it
      would do no good. The only hope is in time—and prayer. I must suffer, dear, I must be weak
      sometimes; but oh, I am so sorry for you! Kiss me, forgive me, Robert; I will be your faithful
      wife unto our lives' end.'
He kissed her, and in that kiss, so sad, so pitiful, so clinging, their new life was
      born.
</div></body></text></TEI>