<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
CHAPTER XIII
The next day was Sunday. Langham, who was as depressed and home-sick as ever, with a certain
      new spice of restlessness, not altogether intelligible to himself, thrown in, could only brace
      himself to the prospect by the determination to take the English rural Sunday as the subject
      of severe scientific investigation. He would 'do it' thoroughly.
So he donned a black coat and went to church with the rest. There, in spite of his boredom
      with the whole proceeding, Robert's old tutor was a good deal more interested by Robert's
      sermon than he had expected to be. It was on the character of David, and there was a note in
      it, a note of historical imagination, a power of sketching in a background of circumstance,
      and of biting into the mind of the listener, as it were, by a detail
       or an epithet, which struck Langham as something new in his experience of Elsmere.
      He followed it at first as one might watch a game of skill, enjoying the intellectual form of
      it, and counting the good points, but by the end he was not a little carried away. The
      peroration was undoubtedly very moving, very intimate, very modern, and Langham up to a
      certain point was extremely susceptible to oratory, as he was to music and acting. The
      critical judgment, however, at the root of him kept coolly repeating as he stood watching the
      people defile out of the church: 'This sort of thing will go down, will make a mark; Elsmere
      is at the beginning of a career!'
In the afternoon Robert, who was feeling deeply guilty towards his wife, in that he had been
      forced to leave so much of the entertainment of Langham to her, asked his old friend to come
      for him to the school at four o'clock and take him for a walk between two engagements. Langham
      was punctual, and Robert carried him off first to see the Sunday cricket, which was in full
      swing. During the past year the young rector had been developing a number of outdoor
      capacities which were probably always dormant in his Elsmere blood, the blood of generations
      of country gentlemen, but which had never had full opportunity before. He talked of fishing as
      Kingsley might have talked of it, and, indeed, with constant quotations from Kingsley; and his
      cricket, which had been good enough at Oxford to get him into his College eleven, had stood
      him in specially good stead with the Murewell villagers. That his play was not elegant they
      were not likely to find out; his bowling they set small store by; but his batting was of a
      fine, slashing, superior sort which soon carried the Murewell Club to a much higher position
      among the clubs of the neighbourhood than it had ever yet aspired to occupy.
The rector had no time to play on Sundays, however, and, after they had hung about the green
      a little while, he took his friend over to the Workmen's Institute, which stood at the edge of
      it. He explained that the Institute had been the last achievement of the agent before
      Henslowe, a man who had done his duty to the estate according to his lights, and to whom it
      was owing that those parts of it, at any rate, which were most in the public eye, were still
      in fair condition.
The Institute was now in bad repair and too small for the place. 'But catch that man doing
      anything for us!' exclaimed Robert hotly. 'He will hardly mend the roof now, merely, I
      believe, to spite me. But come and see my new Naturalists' Club.'
And he opened the Institute door. Langham followed in the temper of one getting up a subject
      for examination.
Poor Robert! His labour and his enthusiasm deserved a more appreciative eye. He was wrapped
      up in his Club, which had been the great success of his first year, and he dragged Langham
      through it all, not indeed, sympathetic creature that he
       was, without occasional qualms. 'But after all,' he would say to himself
      indignantly, 'I must do something with him.'
Langham, indeed, behaved with resignation. He looked at the collections for the year, and
      was quite ready to take it for granted that they were extremely creditable. Into the
      old-fashioned window-sills glazed compartments had been fitted, and these were now fairly
      filled with specimens, with eggs, butterflies, moths, beetles, fossils, and what not. A case
      of stuffed tropical birds presented by Robert stood in the centre of the room; another
      containing the birds of the district was close by. On a table farther on stood two large open
      books, which served as records of observations on the part of members of the Club. In one,
      which was scrawled over with mysterious hieroglyphs, any one might write what he would. In the
      other, only such facts and remarks as had passed the gauntlet of a Club meeting were recorded
      in Robert's neatest hand. On the same table stood jars full of strange creatures—tadpoles and
      water larvæ of all kinds, over which Robert hung now absorbed, poking among them with a straw,
      while Langham, to whom only the generalisations of science were congenial, stood by and mildly
      scoffed.
As they came out a great loutish boy, who had evidently been hanging about waiting for the
      rector, came up to him, boorishly touched his cap, and then, taking a cardboard box out of his
      pocket, opened it with infinite caution, something like a tremor of emotion passing over his
      gnarled countenance.
The rector's eyes glistened.
'Hullo! I say, Irwin, where in the name of fortune did you get that? You lucky fellow! Come
      in, and let's look it out!'
And the two plunged back into the Club together, leaving Langham to the philosophic and
      patient contemplation of the village green, its geese, its donkeys, and its surrounding fringe
      of houses. He felt that quite indisputably life would have been better worth living if, like
      Robert, he could have taken a passionate interest in rare moths or common ploughboys; but
      Nature having denied him the possibility, there was small use in grumbling.
Presently the two naturalists came out again, and the boy went off, bearing his treasure
      with him.
'Lucky dog!' said Robert, turning his friend into a country road leading out of the village,
      'he's found one of the rarest moths of the district. Such a hero he'll be in the Club
      to-morrow night. It's extraordinary what a rational interest has done for that fellow! I
      nearly fought him in public last winter.'
And he turned to his friend with a laugh, and yet with a little quick look of feeling in the
      gray eyes.
'Magnificent, but not war,' said Langham drily. 'I wouldn't have given much for your chances
      against those shoulders.'
'Oh, I don't know. I should have had a little science on my
       side, which counts for a great deal. We turned him out of the Club for brutality
      towards the old grandmother he lives with—turned him out in public. Such a scene! I shall
      never forget the boy's face. It was like a corpse, and the eyes burning out of it. He made for
      me, but the others closed up round, and we got him put out.'
'Hard lines on the grandmother,' remarked Langham.
'She thought so—poor old thing! She left her cottage that night, thinking he would murder
      her, and went to a friend. At the end of a week he came into the friend's house, where she was
      alone in bed. She cowered under the bedclothes, she told me, expecting him to strike her.
      Instead of which he threw his wages down beside her and gruffly invited her to come home. "He
      wouldn't do her no mischief." Everybody dissuaded her, but the plucky old thing went. A week
      or two afterwards she sent for me and I found her crying. She was sure the lad was ill, he
      spoke to nobody at his work. "Lord, sir!" she said, "it do remind me, when he sits glowering
      at nights, of those folks in the Bible, when the devils inside 'em kep' a-tearing 'em. But
      he's like a new-born babe to me, sir—never does me no 'arm. And it do go to my heart, sir, to
      see how poorly he do take his vittles!" So I made tracks for that lad,' said Robert, his eyes
      kindling, his whole frame dilating. 'I found him in the fields one morning. I have seldom
      lived through so much in half an hour. In the evening I walked him up to the Club, and we
      re-admitted him, and since then the boy has been like one clothed and in his right mind. If
      there is any trouble in the Club I set him on, and he generally puts it right. And when I was
      laid up with a chill in the spring, and the poor fellow came trudging up every night after his
      work to ask for me—well, never mind! but it gives one a good glow at one's heart to think
      about it.'
The speaker threw back his head impulsively, as though defying his own feeling. Langham
      looked at him curiously. The pastoral temper was a novelty to him, and the strong development
      of it in the undergraduate of his Oxford recollections had its interest.
'A quarter to six,' said Robert, as on their return from their walk they were descending a
      low-wooded hill above the village, and the church clock rang out. 'I must hurry, or I shall be
      late for my story-telling.'
'Story-telling!' said Langham, with a half-exasperated shrug. 'What next? You clergy are too
      inventive by half!'
Robert laughed a trifle bitterly.
'I can't congratulate you on your epithets,' he said, thrusting his hands far into his
      pockets. 'Good heavens, if we were—if we were inventive as a body, the Church
      wouldn't be where she is in the rural districts! My story-telling is the simplest thing in the
      world. I began it in the winter with the object of somehow or other getting at the
       imagination of these rustics. Force
       them for only half an hour to live some one else's life—it is the one thing worth
      doing with them. That's what I have been aiming at. I told my stories all the
      winter—Shakespeare, Don Quixote, Dumas—Heaven knows what! And on the whole it answers best.
      But now we are reading The Talisman. Come and inspect us, unless you're a purist
      about your Scott! None other of the immortals have such longueurs as he, and we cut
      him freely.'
'By all means,' said Langham; 'lead on.' And he followed his companion without repugnance.
      After all, there was something contagious in so much youth and hopefulness.
The story-telling was held in the Institute.
A group of men and boys were hanging round the door when they reached it. The two friends
      made their way through, greeted in the dumb friendly English fashion on all sides, and Langham
      found himself in a room half-filled with boys and youths, a few grown men, who had just put
      their pipes out, lounging at the back.
Langham not only endured, but enjoyed the first part of the hour that followed. Robert was
      an admirable reader, as most enthusiastic imaginative people are. He was a master of all those
      arts of look and gesture which make a spoken story telling and dramatic, and Langham marvelled
      with what energy, after his hard day's work and with another service before him, he was able
      to throw himself into such a hors d'œuvre as this. He was reading to-night one of the
      most perfect scenes that even the Wizard of the North has ever conjured; the scene in the tent
      of Richard Lion-Heart, when the disguised slave saves the life of the king, and Richard first
      suspects his identity. As he read on, his arms resting on the high desk in front of him, and
      his eyes, full of infectious enjoyment, travelling from the book to his audience, surrounded
      by human beings whose confidence he had won, and whose lives he was brightening from day to
      day, he seemed to Langham the very type and model of a man who had found his métier,
      found his niche in the world, and the best means of filling it. If to attain to an 'adequate
      and masterly expression of one's self' be the aim of life, Robert was fast achieving it. This
      parish of twelve hundred souls gave him now all the scope he asked. It was evident that he
      felt his work to be rather above than below his deserts. He was content—more than content—to
      spend ability which would have distinguished him in public life, or carried him far to the
      front in literature, on the civilising of a few hundred of England's rural poor. The future
      might bring him worldly success—Langham thought it must and would. Clergymen of Robert's stamp
      are rare among us. But if so, it would be in response to no conscious effort of his. Here, in
      the country living he had so long dreaded and put from him, lest it should tax his young
      energies too lightly, he was happy—deeply, abundantly happy, at peace with God, at one with
      man.


Happy! Langham, sitting at the outer corner of one of the benches, by the open
      door, gradually ceased to listen, started on other lines of thought by this realisation, warm,
      stimulating, provocative, of another man's happiness.
Outside, the shadows lengthened across the green; groups of distant children or animals
      passed in and out of the golden light-spaces; the patches of heather left here and there
      glowed as the sunset touched them. Every now and then his eye travelled vaguely past a cottage
      garden, gay with the pinks and carmines of the phloxes, into the cool browns and bluish-grays
      of the raftered room beyond; babies toddled across the road, with stooping mothers in their
      train; the whole air and scene seemed to be suffused with suggestions of the pathetic
      expansiveness and helplessness of human existence, which, generation after generation, is
      still so vulnerable, so confiding, so eager. Life after life flowers out from the darkness and
      sinks back into it again. And in the interval what agony, what disillusion! All the apparatus
      of a universe that men may know what it is to hope and fail, to win and lose!
      Happy!—in this world, 'where men sit and hear each other groan.' His friend's
      confidence only made Langham as melancholy as Job.
What was it based on? In the first place, on Christianity—'on the passionate acceptance of
      an exquisite fairy tale,' said the dreaming spectator to himself, 'which at the first honest
      challenge of the critical sense withers in our grasp! That challenge Elsmere has never given
      it, and in all probability never will. No! A man sees none the straighter for having a wife he
      adores, and a profession that suits him, between him and unpleasant facts!'
In the evening Langham, with the usual reaction of his afternoon self against his morning
      self, felt that wild horses should not take him to Church again, and, with a longing for
      something purely mundane, he stayed at home with a volume of Montaigne, while apparently all
      the rest of the household went to evening service.
After a warm day the evening had turned cold and stormy; the west was streaked with jagged
      strips of angry cloud, the wind was rising in the trees, and the temperature had suddenly
      fallen so much that when Langham shut himself up in Robert's study he did what he had been
      admonished to do in case of need, set a light to the fire, which blazed out merrily into the
      darkening room. Then he drew the curtains and threw himself down into Robert's chair with a
      sigh of Sybaritic satisfaction. 'Good! Now for something that takes the world less naïvely,'
      he said to himself; 'this house is too virtuous for anything.'
He opened his Montaigne and read on very happily for half an hour. The house seemed entirely
      deserted.
'All the servants gone too!' he said presently, looking up
       and listening. 'Anybody who wants the spoons needn't trouble about me. I don't
      leave this fire.'
And he plunged back again into his book. At last there was a sound of the swing door which
      separated Robert's passage from the front hall opening and shutting. Steps came quickly
      towards the study, the handle was turned, and there on the threshold stood Rose.
He turned quickly round in his chair with a look of astonishment. She also started as she
      saw him.
'I did not know any one was in,' she said awkwardly, the colour spreading over her face. 'I
      came to look for a book.'
She made a delicious picture as she stood framed in the darkness of the doorway; her long
      dress caught up round her in one hand, the other resting on the handle. A gust of some
      delicate perfume seemed to enter the room with her, and a thrill of pleasure passed through
      Langham's senses.
'Can I find anything for you?' he said, springing up.
She hesitated a moment, then apparently made up her mind that it would be foolish to
      retreat, and, coming forward, she said, with an accent as coldly polite as she could make
      it,—
'Pray don't disturb yourself. I know exactly where to find it.'
She went up to the shelves where Robert kept his novels, and began running her fingers over
      the books, with slightly knitted brows and a mouth severely shut. Langham, still standing,
      watched her and presently stepped forward.
'You can't reach those upper shelves,' he said; 'please let me.'
He was already beside her, and she gave way.
'I want Charles Auchester,' she said, still forbiddingly. 'It ought to be
      there.'
'Oh, that queer musical novel—I know it quite well. No sign of it here,' and he ran over the
      shelves with the practised eye of one accustomed to deal with books.
'Robert must have lent it,' said Rose, with a little sigh. 'Never mind, please. It doesn't
      matter,' and she was already moving away.
'Try some other instead,' he said, smiling, his arm still upstretched. 'Robert has no lack
      of choice.' His manner had an animation and ease usually quite foreign to it. Rose stopped,
      and her lips relaxed a little.
'He is very nearly as bad as the novel-reading bishop, who was reduced at last to stealing
      the servant's Family Herald out of the kitchen cupboard,' she said, a smile
      dawning.
Langham laughed.
'Has he such an episcopal appetite for them? That accounts for the fact that when he and I
      begin to talk novels I am always nowhere.'
'I shouldn't have supposed you ever read them,' said Rose, obeying an irresistible impulse,
      and biting her lip the moment afterwards.


'Do you think that we poor people at Oxford are always condemned to works on the "enclitic
      δέ"?' he asked, his fine eyes lit up with gaiety, and his head, of which the Greek outlines
      were ordinarily so much disguised by his stoop and hesitating look, thrown back against the
      books behind him.
Natures like Langham's, in which the nerves are never normal, have their moments of
      felicity, balancing their weeks of timidity and depression. After his melancholy of the last
      two days the tide of reaction had been mounting within him, and the sight of Rose had carried
      it to its height.
She gave a little involuntary stare of astonishment. What had happened to Robert's silent
      and finicking friend?
'I know nothing of Oxford,' she said a little primly, in answer to his question. 'I never
      was there—but I never was anywhere, I have seen nothing,' she added hastily, and, as Langham
      thought, bitterly.
'Except London, and the great world, and Madame Desforêts!' he answered, laughing. 'Is that
      so little?'
She flashed a quick defiant look at him, as he mentioned Madame Desforêts, but his look was
      imperturbably kind and gay. She could not help softening towards him. What magic had passed
      over him?
'Do you know,' said Langham, moving, 'that you are standing in a draught, and that it has
      turned extremely cold?'
For she had left the passage-door wide open behind her, and as the window was partially open
      the curtains were swaying hither and thither, and her muslin dress was being blown in coils
      round her feet.
'So it has,' said Rose, shivering. 'I don't envy the Church people. You haven't found me a
      book, Mr. Langham?'
'I will find you one in a minute, if you will come and read it by the fire,' he said, with
      his hand on the door.
She glanced at the fire and at him, irresolute. His breath quickened. She too had passed
      into another phase. Was it the natural effect of night, of solitude, of sex? At any rate, she
      sank softly into the armchair opposite to that in which he had been sitting.
'Find me an exciting one, please.'
Langham shut the door securely, and went back to the bookcase, his hand trembling a little
      as it passed along the books. He found Villette and offered it to her. She took it,
      opened it, and appeared deep in it at once. He took the hint and went back to his
      Montaigne.
The fire crackled cheerfully, the wind outside made every now and then a sudden gusty
      onslaught on their silence, dying away again as abruptly as it had risen. Rose turned the
      pages of her book, sitting a little stiffly in her long chair, and Langham gradually began to
      find Montaigne impossible to read. He became instead more and more alive to every detail of
      the situation into which he had fallen. At last seeing, or imagining,
       that the fire wanted attending to, he bent forward and thrust the poker into it. A
      burning coal fell on the hearth, and Rose hastily withdrew her foot from the fender and looked
      up.
'I am so sorry!' he interjected. 'Coals never do what you want them to do. Are you very much
      interested in Villette?'
'Deeply,' said Rose, letting the book, however, drop on her lap. She laid back her head with
      a little sigh, which she did her best to check, half way through. What ailed her to-night? She
      seemed wearied; for the moment there was no fight in her with anybody. Her music, her beauty,
      her mutinous mocking gaiety—these things had all worked on the man beside her; but this new
      softness, this touch of childish fatigue, was adorable.
'Charlotte Brontë wrote it out of her Brussels experience, didn't she?' she resumed
      languidly. 'How sorry she must have been to come back to that dull home and that awful brother
      after such a break!'
'There were reasons more than one that must have made her sorry to come back,' said Langham
      reflectively. 'But how she pined for her wilds all through! I am afraid you don't find your
      wilds as interesting as she found hers?'
His question and his smile startled her.
Her first impulse was to take up her book again, as a hint to him that her likings were no
      concern of his. But something checked it, probably the new brilliancy of that look of his,
      which had suddenly grown so personal, so manly. Instead. Villette slid a little
      farther from her hand, and her pretty head still lay lightly back against the cushion.
'No, I don't find my wilds interesting at all,' she said forlornly.
'You are not fond of the people as your sister is?'
'Fond of them?' cried Rose hastily. 'I should think not; and what is more, they don't like
      me. It is quite intolerable since Catherine left. I have so much more to do with them. My
      other sister and I have to do all her work. It is dreadful to have to work after somebody who
      has a genius for doing just what you do worst.'
The young girl's hands fell across one another with a little impatient gesture. Langham had
      a movement of the most delightful compassion towards the petulant, childish creature. It was
      as though their relative positions had been in some mysterious way reversed. During their two
      days together she had been the superior, and he had felt himself at the mercy of her scornful
      sharp-eyed youth. Now, he knew not how or why, Fate seemed to have restored to him something
      of the man's natural advantage, combined, for once, with the impulse to use it.
'Your sister, I suppose, has been always happy in charity?' he said.


'Oh dear, yes,' said Rose irritably; 'anything that has two legs and is ill, that is all
      Catherine wants to make her happy.'
'And you want something quite different, something more exciting?' he asked, his
      diplomatic tone showing that he felt he dared something in thus pressing her, but dared it at
      least with his wits about him. Rose met his look irresolutely, a little tremor of
      self-consciousness creeping over her.
'Yes, I want something different,' she said in a low voice and paused; then, raising herself
      energetically, she clasped her hands round her knees. 'But it is not idleness I want. I want
      to work, but at things I was born for; I can't have patience with old women, but I
      could slave all day and all night to play the violin.'
'You want to give yourself up to study then, and live with musicians?' he said quietly.
She shrugged her shoulders by way of answer, and began nervously to play with her rings.
That under-self which was the work and the heritage of her father in her, and which, beneath
      all the wilfulnesses and defiances of the other self, held its own moral debates in its own
      way, well out of Catherine's sight generally, began to emerge, wooed into the light by his
      friendly gentleness.
'But it is all so difficult, you see,' she said despairingly. 'Papa thought it wicked to
      care about anything except religion. If he had lived, of course I should never have been
      allowed to study music. It has been all mutiny so far, every bit of it, whatever I have been
      able to do.'
'He would have changed with the times,' said Langham.
'I know he would,' cried Rose. 'I have told Catherine so a hundred times. People—good
      people—think quite differently about art now, don't they, Mr. Langham?'
She spoke with perfect naïveté. He saw more and more of the child in her, in spite
      of that one striking development of her art.
'They call it the handmaid of religion,' he answered, smiling.
Rose made a little face.
'I shouldn't,' she said, with frank brevity. 'But then there's something else. You know
      where we live—at the very ends of the earth, seven miles from a station, in the very loneliest
      valley of all Westmoreland. What's to be done with a fiddle in such a place? Of course, ever
      since papa died I've just been plotting and planning to get away. But there's the difficulty,'
      and she crossed one white finger over another as she laid out her case. 'That house where we
      live has been lived in by Leyburns ever since—the Flood! Horrid set they were, I know, because
      I can't ever make mamma or even Catherine talk about them. But still, when papa retired, he
      came back and bought the old place from his brother. Such a dreadful, dreadful mistake!' cried
      the child, letting her hands fall over her knee.
'Had he been so happy there?'


'Happy!'—and Rose's lip curled. 'His brothers used to kick and cuff him, his father was
      awfully unkind to him, he never had a day's peace till he went to school, and after he went to
      school he never came back for years and years and years, till Catherine was fifteen. What
       could have made him so fond of it?'
And again looking despondently into the fire she pondered that far-off perversity of her
      father's.
'Blood has strange magnetisms,' said Langham, seized as he spoke by the pensive prettiness
      of the bent head and neck, 'and they show themselves in the oddest ways.'
'Then I wish they wouldn't,' she said irritably. 'But that isn't all. He went there, not
      only because he loved that place, but because he hated other places. I think he must have
      thought'—and her voice dropped—'he wasn't going to live long—he wasn't well when he gave up
      the school—and then we could grow up there safe, without any chance of getting into mischief.
      Catherine says he thought the world was getting very wicked and dangerous and irreligious, and
      that it comforted him to know that we should be out of it.'
Then she broke off suddenly.
'Do you know,' she went on wistfully, raising her beautiful eyes to her companion, 'after
      all, he gave me my first violin?'
Langham smiled.
'I like that little inconsequence,' he said.
'Then of course I took to it, like a duck to water, and it began to scare him that I loved
      it so much. He and Catherine only loved religion, and us, and the poor. So he always took it
      away on Sundays. Then I hated Sundays, and would never be good on them. One Sunday I cried
      myself nearly into a fit on the dining-room floor because I mightn't have it. Then he came in,
      and he took me up, and he tied a Scotch plaid round his neck, and he put me into it, and
      carried me away right up on to the hills, and he talked to me like an angel. He asked me not
      to make him sad before God that he had given me that violin; so I never screamed again—on
      Sundays!
Her companion's eyes were not quite as clear as before.
'Poor little naughty child' he said, bending over to her. 'I think your father must have
      been a man to be loved.'
She looked at him, very near to weeping, her face all working with a soft remorse.
'Oh, so he was—so he was! If he had been hard and ugly to us, why, it would have been much
      easier for me; but he was so good! And there was Catherine just like him, always
      preaching to us what he wished. You see what a chain it's been—what a weight! And as I must
       struggle—must, because I was I—to get back into the world on the other side of the
      mountains, and do what all the dear wicked people there were doing, why, I have been a
      criminal all my life! And that isn't exhilarating always.'


And she raised her arm and let it fall beside her with the quick over-tragic emotion of
      nineteen.
'I wish your father could have heard you play as I heard you play yesterday,' he said
      gently.
She started.
'Did you hear me—that Wagner?'
He nodded, smiling. She still looked at him, her lips slightly open.
'Do you want to know what I thought? I have heard much music, you know.'
He laughed into her eyes, as much as to say, 'I am not quite the mummy you thought me, after
      all!' And she coloured slightly.
'I have heard every violinist of any fame in Europe play, and play often; and it seemed to
      me that with time—and work—you might play as well as any of them.'
The slight flush became a glow that spread from brow to chin. Then she gave a long breath
      and turned away, her face resting on her hand.
'And I can't help thinking,' he went on, marvelling inwardly at his own rôle of mentor, and
      his strange enjoyment of it, 'that if your father had lived till now, and had gone with the
      times a little, as he must have gone, he would have learnt to take pleasure in your pleasure,
      and to fit your gift somehow into his scheme of things.'
'Catherine hasn't moved with the times,' said Rose dolefully.
Langham was silent. Gaucherie seized him again when it became a question of
      discussing Mrs. Elsmere, his own view was so inconveniently emphatic.
'And you think,' she went on, 'you really think, without being too ungrateful to
      papa, and too unkind to the old Leyburn ghosts'—and a little laugh danced through the
      vibrating voice—'I might try and get them to give up Burwood—I might struggle to have my way?
      I shall, of course I shall! I never was a meek martyr, and never shall be. But one can't help
      having qualms, though one doesn't tell them to one's sisters and cousins and aunts. And
      sometimes'—she turned her chin round on her hand and looked at him with a delicious shy
      impulsiveness—'sometimes a stranger sees clearer. Do you think me a monster, as
      Catherine does?'
Even as she spoke her own words startled her—the confidence, the abandonment of them. But
      she held to them bravely; only her eyelids quivered. She had absurdly misjudged this man, and
      there was a warm penitence in her heart. How kind he had been, how sympathetic!
He rose with her last words, and stood leaning against the mantelpiece, looking down upon
      her gravely, with the air, as it seemed to her, of her friend, her confessor. Her white
      childish brow, the little curls of bright hair upon her temples, her parted lips, the pretty
      folds of the muslin dress, the little foot on the
       fender—every detail of the picture impressed itself once for all. Langham will
      carry it with him to his grave.
'Tell me,' she said again, smiling divinely, as though to encourage him—'tell me quite
      frankly, down to the bottom, what you think?'
The harsh noise of an opening door in the distance, and a gust of wind sweeping through the
      house, voices and steps approaching. Rose sprang up, and, for the first time during all the
      latter part of their conversation, felt a sharp sense of embarrassment.
'How early you are, Robert!' she exclaimed, as the study door opened, and Robert's
      wind-blown head and tall form, wrapped in an Inverness cape, appeared on the threshold. 'Is
      Catherine tired?'
'Rather,' said Robert, the slightest gleam of surprise betraying itself on his face. 'She
      has gone to bed, and told me to ask you to come and say good-night to her.'
'You got my message about not coming from old Martha?' asked Rose. 'I met her on the
      common.'
'Yes, she gave it us at the church door.' He went out again into the passage to hang up his
      greatcoat. She followed, longing to tell him that it was pure accident that took her to the
      study, but she could not find words in which to do it, and could only say good-night a little
      abruptly.
'How tempting that fire looks!' said Robert, re-entering the study. 'Were you very cold,
      Langham, before you lit it?'
'Very,' said Langham, smiling, his arm behind his head, his eyes fixed on the blaze; 'but I
      have been delightfully warm and happy since.'
</div></body></text></TEI>