<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I
It was a brilliant afternoon towards the end of May. The spring had been unusually cold and
      late, and it was evident from the general aspect of the lonely Westmoreland valley of Long
      Whindale that warmth and sunshine had only just penetrated to its bare green recesses, where
      the few scattered trees were fast rushing into their full summer dress, while at their feet,
      and along the bank of the stream, the flowers of March and April still lingered, as though
      they found it impossible to believe that their rough brother, the east wind, had at last
      deserted them. The narrow road, which was the only link between the farmhouses sheltered by
      the crags at the head of the valley and those far-away regions of town and civilisation
      suggested by the smoke wreaths of Whinborough on the southern horizon, was lined with masses
      of the white heckberry or bird-cherry, and ran, an arrowy line of white, through the greenness
      of the sloping pastures. The sides of some of the little becks running down into the main
      river and many of the plantations round the farms were gay with the same tree, so that the
      farmhouses, gray-roofed and gray-walled, standing in the hollows of the fells, seemed here and
      there to have been robbed of all their natural austerity of aspect, and to be masquerading in
      a dainty garb of white and green imposed upon them by the caprice of the spring.
During the greater part of its course the valley of Long Whindale is tame and featureless.
      The hills at the lower part are low and rounded, and the sheep and cattle pasture over slopes
      unbroken either by wood or rock. The fields are bare and close shaven by the flocks which feed
      on them; the walls run either perpendicularly in many places up the fells or horizontally
      along them, so that, save for the wooded course of the tumbling river and the bush-grown
      hedges of the road, the whole valley looks like a green map divided by regular lines of
      grayish black. But as the walker penetrates farther, beyond a certain bend which the stream
      makes half way from the head of the dale, the hills grow steeper, the breadth between them
      contracts, the enclosure lines are broken and deflected by rocks and patches of plantation,
      and the few farms stand more boldly and conspicuously
       forward, each on its spur of land, looking up to or away from the great masses of
      frowning crag which close in the head of the valley, and which from the moment they come into
      sight give it dignity and a wild beauty.
On one of these solitary houses, the afternoon sun, about to descend before very long behind
      the hills dividing Long Whindale from Shanmoor, was still lingering on this May afternoon we
      are describing, bringing out the whitewashed porch and the broad bands of white edging the
      windows into relief against the gray stone of the main fabric, the gray roof overhanging it,
      and the group of sycamores and Scotch firs which protected it from the cold east and north.
      The western light struck full on a copper beech, which made a welcome patch of warm colour in
      front of a long gray line of outhouses standing level with the house, and touched the
      heckberry blossom which marked the upward course of the little lane connecting the old farm
      with the road; above it rose the green fell, broken here and there by jutting crags, and below
      it the ground sank rapidly through a piece of young hazel plantation, at this present moment a
      sheet of bluebells, towards the level of the river. There was a dainty and yet sober
      brightness about the whole picture. Summer in the North is for Nature a time of expansion and
      of joy as it is elsewhere, but there is none of that opulence, that sudden splendour and
      superabundance, which mark it in the South. In these bare green valleys there is a sort of
      delicate austerity even in the summer; the memory of winter seems to be still lingering about
      these wind-swept fells, about the farmhouses, with their rough serviceable walls, of the same
      stone as the crags behind them, and the ravines, in which the shrunken becks trickle musically
      down through the débris of innumerable Decembers. The country is blithe, but soberly
      blithe. Nature shows herself delightful to man, but there is nothing absorbing or intoxicating
      about her. Man is still well able to defend himself against her, to live his own independent
      life of labour and of will, and to develop the tenacity of hidden feeling, that slowly growing
      intensity of purpose, which is so often wiled out of him by the spells of the South.
The distant aspect of Burwood Farm differed in nothing from that of the few other farmhouses
      which dotted the fells or clustered beside the river between it and the rocky end of the
      valley. But as one came nearer, certain signs of difference became visible. The garden,
      instead of being the old-fashioned medley of phloxes, lavender bushes, monthly roses,
      gooseberry trees, herbs, and pampas grass, with which the farmers' wives of Long Whindale
      loved to fill their little front enclosures, was trimly laid down in turf dotted with neat
      flower-beds, full at the moment we are writing of with orderly patches of scarlet and purple
      anemones, wallflowers, and pansies. At the side of the house a new bow window, modest enough
      in dimensions and make, had been thrown out on to another close-shaven piece of lawn, and by
      its
       suggestion of a distant sophisticated order of things disturbed the homely
      impression left by the untouched ivy-grown walls, the unpretending porch, and wide slate
      window-sills of the front. And evidently the line of sheds standing level with the
      dwelling-house no longer sheltered the animals, the carts, or the tools which make the small
      capital of a Westmoreland farmer. The windows in them were new, the doors fresh painted and
      closely shut; curtains of some soft outlandish make showed themselves in what had once been a
      stable, and the turf stretched smoothly up to a narrow gravelled path in front of them,
      unbroken by a single footmark. No, evidently the old farm, for such it undoubtedly was, had
      been but lately, or comparatively lately, transformed to new and softer uses; that rough
      patriarchal life of which it had once been a symbol and centre no longer bustled and clattered
      through it. It had become the shelter of new ideals, the home of another and a milder race
      than once possessed it.
In a stranger coming upon the house for the first time, on this particular evening, the
      sense of a changing social order and a vanishing past produced by the slight but significant
      modifications it had undergone, would have been greatly quickened by certain sounds which were
      streaming out on to the evening air from one of the divisions of that long one-storied
      addition to the main dwelling we have already described. Some indefatigable musician inside
      was practising the violin with surprising energy and vigour, and within the little garden the
      distant murmur of the river and the gentle breathing of the west wind round the fell were
      entirely conquered and banished by these triumphant shakes and turns, or by the flourishes and
      the broad cantabile passages of one of Spohr's Andantes. For a while, as the sun sank
      lower and lower towards the Shanmoor hills, the hidden artist had it all his, or her, own way;
      the valley and its green spaces seemed to be possessed by this stream of eddying sound, and no
      other sign of life broke the gray quiet of the house. But at last, just as the golden ball
      touched the summit of the craggy fell, which makes the western boundary of the dale at its
      higher end, the house door opened, and a young girl, shawled and holding some soft burden in
      her arms, appeared on the threshold, and stood there for a moment, as though trying the
      quality of the air outside. Her pause of inspection seemed to satisfy her, for she moved
      forward, leaving the door open behind her, and, stepping across the lawn, settled herself in a
      wicker chair under an apple-tree, which had only just shed its blossoms on the turf below. She
      had hardly done so when one of the distant doors opening on the gravel path flew open, and
      another maiden, a slim creature garbed in æsthetic blue, a mass of reddish brown hair flying
      back from her face, also stepped out into the garden.
'Agnes!' cried the new-comer, who had the strenuous and dishevelled air natural to one just
      emerged from a long violin practice. 'Has Catherine come back yet?'


'Not that I know of. Do come here and look at pussie; did you ever see anything so
      comfortable?'
'You and she look about equally lazy. What have you been doing all the afternoon?'
'We look what we are, my dear. Doing? Why, I have been attending to my domestic duties,
      arranging the flowers, mending my pink dress for to-morrow night, and helping to keep mamma in
      good spirits; she is depressed because she has been finding Elizabeth out in some waste or
      other, and I have been preaching to her to make Elizabeth uncomfortable if she likes, but not
      to worrit herself. And after all, pussie and I have come out for a rest. We've earned it,
      haven't we, Chattie? And, as for you, Miss Artistic, I should like to know what you've been
      doing for the good of your kind since dinner. I suppose you had tea at the vicarage?'
The speaker lifted inquiring eyes to her sister as she spoke, her cheek plunged in the warm
      fur of a splendid Persian cat, her whole look and voice expressing the very highest degree of
      quiet, comfort, and self-possession. Agnes Leyburn was not pretty; the lower part of the face
      was a little heavy in outline and moulding; the teeth were not as they should have been, and
      the nose was unsatisfactory. But the eyes under their long lashes were shrewdness itself, and
      there was an individuality in the voice, a cheery even-temperedness in look and tone, which
      had a pleasing effect on the bystander. Her dress was neat and dainty; every detail of it
      bespoke a young woman who respected both herself and the fashion.
Her sister, on the other hand, was guiltless of the smallest trace of fashion. Her skirts
      were cut with the most engaging naïveté, she was much adorned with amber beads, and
      her red brown hair had been tortured and frizzled to look as much like an aureole as possible.
      But, on the other hand, she was a beauty, though at present you felt her a beauty in disguise,
      a stage Cinderella as it were, in very becoming rags, waiting for the godmother.
'Yes, I had tea at the vicarage,' said this young person, throwing herself on the grass in
      spite of a murmured protest from Agnes, who had an inherent dislike of anything physically
      rash, 'and I had the greatest difficulty to get away. Mrs. Thornburgh is in such a flutter
      about this visit! One would think it was the Bishop and all his Canons, and promotion
      depending on it, she has baked so many cakes and put out so many dinner napkins! I don't envy
      the young man. She will have no wits left at all to entertain him with. I actually wound up by
      administering some sal-volatile to her.'
'Well, and after the sal-volatile did you get anything coherent out of her on the subject of
      the young man?'
'By degrees,' said the girl, her eyes twinkling; 'if one can only remember the thread
      between whiles one gets at the facts somehow. In between the death of Mr. Elsmere's father and
       his going to college, we had, let me see,—the spare room curtains, the making of
      them and the cleaning of them, Sarah's idiocy in sticking to her black sheep of a young man,
      the price of tea when she married, Mr. Thornburgh's singular preference of boiled mutton to
      roast, the poems she had written to her when she was eighteen, and I can't tell you what else
      besides. But I held fast, and every now and then I brought her up to the point again, gently,
      but firmly, and now I think I know all I want to know about the interesting stranger.'
'My ideas about him are not many,' said Agnes, rubbing her cheek gently up and down the
      purring cat, 'and there doesn't seem to be much order in them. He is very accomplished—a
      teetotaller—he has been to the Holy Land, and his hair has been cut close after a fever. It
      sounds odd, but I am not curious. I can very well wait till to-morrow evening.'
'Oh, well, as to ideas about a person, one doesn't get that sort of thing from Mrs.
      Thornburgh. But I know how old he is, where he went to college, where his mother lives, a
      certain number of his mother's peculiarities, which seem to be Irish and curious, where his
      living is, how much it is worth, likewise the colour of his eyes, as near as Mrs. Thornburgh
      can get.'
'What a start you have been getting!' said Agnes lazily. 'But what is it makes the poor old
      thing so excited?'
Rose sat up and began to fling the fir cones lying about her at a distant mark with an
      energy worthy of her physical perfections and the æsthetic freedom of her attire.
'Because, my dear, Mrs. Thornburgh at the present moment is always seeing herself as the
      conspirator sitting match in hand before a mine. Mr. Elsmere is the match—we are the
      mine!'
Agnes looked at her sister, and they both laughed, the bright rippling laugh of young women
      perfectly aware of their own value, and in no hurry to force an estimate of it on the male
      world.
'Well,' said Rose deliberately, her delicate cheek flushed with her gymnastics, her eyes
      sparkling, 'there is no saying. "Propinquity does it"—as Mrs. Thornburgh is always reminding
      us.—But where can Catherine be? She went out directly after lunch.'
'She has gone out to see that youth who hurt his back at the Tysons—at least I heard her
      talking to mamma about him, and she went out with a basket that looked like beef-tea.'
Rose frowned a little.
'And I suppose I ought to have been to the school or to see Mrs. Robson, instead of fiddling
      all the afternoon. I daresay I ought—only, unfortunately, I like my fiddle, and I don't like
      stuffy cottages; and as for the goody books, I read them so badly that the old women
      themselves come down upon me.'
'I seem to have been making the best of both worlds,' said Agnes placidly. 'I haven't been
      doing anything I don't like,
       but I got hold of that dress she brought home to make for little Emma Payne and
      nearly finished the skirt, so that I feel as good as one when one has been twice to church on
      a wet Sunday. Ah, there is Catherine. I heard the gate.'
As she spoke steps were heard approaching through the clump of trees which sheltered the
      little entrance gate, and as Rose sprang to her feet a tall figure in white and gray appeared
      against the background of the sycamores, and came quickly towards the sisters.
'Dears, I am so sorry; I am afraid you have been waiting for me. But poor Mrs. Tyson wanted
      me so badly that I could not leave her. She had no one else to help her or to be with her till
      that eldest girl of hers came home from work.'
'It doesn't matter,' said Rose, as Catherine put her arm round her shoulder; 'mamma hasn't
      been fidgeting, and as for Agnes, she looks as if she never wanted to move again.'
Catherine's clear eyes, which at the moment seemed to be full of inward light, kindled in
      them by some foregoing experience, rested kindly, but only half consciously, on her younger
      sister, as Agnes softly nodded and smiled to her. Evidently she was a good deal older than the
      other two—she looked about six-and-twenty, a young and vigorous woman in the prime of health
      and strength. The lines of the form were rather thin and spare, but they were softened by the
      loose bodice and long full skirt of her dress, and by the folds of a large white muslin
      handkerchief which was crossed over her breast. The face, sheltered by the plain shady hat,
      was also a little spoilt from the point of view of beauty by the sharpness of the lines about
      the chin and mouth, and by a slight prominence of the cheekbones, but the eyes, of a dark
      bluish gray, were fine, the nose delicately cut, the brow smooth and beautiful, while the
      complexion had caught the freshness and purity of Westmoreland air and Westmoreland streams.
      About face and figure there was a delicate austere charm, something which harmonised with the
      bare stretches and lonely crags of the fells, something which seemed to make her a true
      daughter of the mountains, partaker at once of their gentleness and their severity.
       She was in her place here, beside the homely Westmoreland house and under the
      shelter of the fells. When you first saw the other sisters you wondered what strange chance
      had brought them into that remote sparely-peopled valley; they were plainly exiles, and
      conscious exiles, from the movement and exhilarations of a fuller social life. But Catherine
      impressed you as only a refined variety of the local type; you could have found many like her,
      in a sense, among the sweet-faced serious women of the neighbouring farms.
Now, as she and Rose stood together, her hand still resting lightly on the other's shoulder,
      a question from Agnes banished the faint smile on her lips, and left only the look of inward
      illumination, the expression of one who had just passed, as it
       were, through a strenuous and heroic moment of life, and was still living in the
      exaltation of memory.
'So the poor fellow is worse?'
'Yes. Doctor Baker, whom they have got to-day, says the spine is hopelessly injured. He may
      live on paralysed for a few months or longer, but there is no hope of cure.'
Both girls uttered a shocked exclamation. 'That fine strong young man!' said Rose under her
      breath. 'Does he know?'
'Yes; when I got there the doctor had just gone, and Mrs. Tyson, who was quite unprepared
      for anything so dreadful, seemed to have almost lost her wits, poor thing! I found her in the
      front kitchen with her apron over her head, rocking to and fro, and poor Arthur in the inner
      room—all alone—waiting in suspense.'
'And who told him? He has been so hopeful.'
'I did,' said Catherine gently; 'they made me. He would know, and she couldn't—she
      ran out of the room. I never saw anything so pitiful.'
'Oh, Catherine!' exclaimed Rose's moved voice, while Agnes got up, and Chattie jumped softly
      down from her lap, unheeded.
'How did he bear it?'
'Don't ask me,' said Catherine, while the quiet tears filled her eyes and her voice broke,
      as the hidden feeling would have its way. 'It was terrible! I don't know how we got through
      that half-hour—his mother and I. It was like wrestling with some one in agony. At last he was
      exhausted—he let me say the Lord's Prayer; I think it soothed him, but one couldn't tell. He
      seemed half asleep when I left. Oh!' she cried, laying her hand in a close grasp on Rose's
      arm, 'if you had seen his eyes, and his poor hands—there was such despair in them! They say,
      though he was so young, he was thinking of getting married; and he was so steady, such a good
      son!'
A silence fell upon the three. Catherine stood looking out across the valley towards the
      sunset. Now that the demand upon her for calmness and fortitude was removed, and that the
      religious exaltation in which she had gone through the last three hours was becoming less
      intense, the pure human pity of the scene she had just witnessed seemed to be gaining upon
      her. Her lip trembled, and two or three tears silently overflowed. Rose turned and gently
      kissed her cheek, and Agnes touched her hand caressingly. She smiled at them, for it was not
      in her nature to let any sign of love pass unheeded, and in a few more seconds she had
      mastered herself.
'Dears, we must go in. Is mother in her room? Oh, Rose! in that thin dress on the grass; I
      oughtn't to have kept you out. It is quite cold by now.'
And she hurried them in, leaving them to superintend the preparations for supper downstairs
      while she ran up to her mother.


A quarter of an hour afterwards they were all gathered round the supper-table, the windows
      open to the garden and the May twilight. At Catherine's right hand sat Mrs. Leyburn, a tall
      delicate-looking woman, wrapped in a white shawl, about whom there were only three things to
      be noticed—an amiable temper, a sufficient amount of weak health to excuse her all the more
      tiresome duties of life, and an incorrigible tendency to sing the praises of her daughters at
      all times and to all people. The daughters winced under it: Catherine, because it was a
      positive pain to her to hear herself brought forward and talked about; the others, because
      youth infinitely prefers to make its own points in its own way. Nothing, however, could mend
      this defect of Mrs. Leyburn's. Catherine's strength of will could keep it in check sometimes,
      but in general it had to be borne with. A sharp word would have silenced the mother's
      well-meant chatter at any time—for she was a fragile, nervous woman, entirely dependent on her
      surroundings—but none of them were capable of it, and their mere refractoriness counted for
      nothing.
The dining-room in which they were gathered had a good deal of homely dignity, and was to
      the Leyburns full of associations. The oak settle near the fire, the oak sideboard running
      along one side of the room, the black oak table with carved legs at which they sat, were
      genuine pieces of old Westmoreland work, which had belonged to their grandfather. The heavy
      carpet covering the stone floor of what twenty years before had been the kitchen of the
      farmhouse was a survival from a south-country home, which had sheltered their lives for eight
      happy years. Over the mantelpiece hung the portrait of the girls' father, a long serious face,
      not unlike Wordsworth's face in outline, and bearing a strong resemblance to Catherine; a line
      of silhouettes adorned the mantelpiece; on the walls were prints of Winchester and Worcester
      Cathedrals, photographs of Greece, and two old-fashioned engravings of Dante and Milton; while
      a bookcase, filled apparently with the father's college books and college prizes and the
      favourite authors—mostly poets, philosophers, and theologians—of his later years, gave a final
      touch of habitableness to the room. The little meal and its appointments—the eggs, the
      home-made bread and preserves, the tempting butter and old-fashioned silver gleaming among the
      flowers which Rose arranged with fanciful skill in Japanese pots of her own
      providing—suggested the same family qualities as the room. Frugality, a dainty personal
      self-respect, a family consciousness, tenacious of its memories and tenderly careful of all
      the little material objects which were to it the symbols of those memories—clearly all these
      elements entered into the Leyburn tradition.
And of this tradition, with its implied assertions and denials, clearly Catherine Leyburn,
      the elder sister, was, of all the persons gathered in this little room, the most pronounced
       embodiment. She sat at the head of the table, the little basket of her own and her
      mother's keys beside her. Her dress was a soft black brocade, with lace collar and cuff, which
      had once belonged to an aunt of her mother's. It was too old for her both in fashion and
      material, but it gave her a gentle, almost matronly dignity, which became her. Her long thin
      hands, full of character and delicacy, moved nimbly among the cups; all her ways were quiet
      and yet decided. It was evident that among this little party she, and not the plaintive
      mother, was really in authority. To-night, however, her looks were specially soft. The scene
      she had gone through in the afternoon had left her pale, with traces of patient fatigue round
      the eyes and mouth, but all her emotion was gone, and she was devoting herself to the others,
      responding with quick interest and ready smiles to all they had to say, and contributing the
      little experiences of her own day in return.
Rose sat on her left hand in yet another gown of strange tint and archaic outline. Rose's
      gowns were legion. They were manufactured by a farmer's daughter across the valley, under her
      strict and precise supervision. She was accustomed, as she boldly avowed, to shut herself up
      at the beginning of each season of the year for two days' meditation on the subject. And now,
      thanks to the spring warmth, she was entering at last with infinite zest on the results of her
      April vigils.
Catherine had surveyed her as she entered the room with a smile, but a smile not altogether
      to Rose's taste.
'What, another, Röschen?' she had said, with the slightest lifting of the eyebrows. 'You
      never confided that to me. Did you think I was unworthy of anything so artistic?'
'Not at all,' said Rose calmly, seating herself. 'I thought you were better employed.'
But a flush flew over her transparent cheek, and she presently threw an irritated look at
      Agnes, who had been looking from her to Catherine with amused eyes.
'I met Mr. Thornburgh and Mr. Elsmere driving from the station,' Catherine announced
      presently; 'at least there was a gentleman in a clerical wideawake, with a portmanteau behind,
      so I imagine it must have been he.'
'Did he look promising?' inquired Agnes.
'I don't think I noticed,' said Catherine simply, but with a momentary change of expression.
      The sisters, remembering how she had come in upon them with that look of one 'lifted up,'
      understood why she had not noticed, and refrained from further questions.
'Well, it is to be hoped the young man is recovered enough to stand Long Whindale
      festivities,' said Rose. 'Mrs. Thornburgh means to let them loose on his devoted head
      to-morrow night.'
'Who are coming?' asked Mrs. Leyburn eagerly. The occasional tea parties of the
      neighbourhood were an unfailing excite
      ment to her, simply because, by dint of the small adornings, natural to the
      occasion, they showed her daughters to her under slightly new aspects. To see Catherine, who
      never took any thought for her appearance, forced to submit to a white dress, a line of pearls
      round the shapely throat, a flower in the brown hair, put there by Rose's imperious fingers;
      to sit in a corner well out of draughts, watching the effect of Rose's half-fledged beauty,
      and drinking in the compliments of the neighbourhood on Rose's playing or Agnes's
      conversation, or Catherine's practical ability—these were Mrs. Leyburn's passions, and a tea
      party always gratified them to the full.
'Mamma asks as if really she wanted an answer,' remarked Agnes drily. 'Dear mother, can't
      you by now make up a tea party at the Thornburghs out of your head?'
'The Seatons?' inquired Mrs. Leyburn.
'Mrs. Seaton and Miss Barks,' replied Rose. 'The rector won't come. And I needn't
      say that, having moved heaven and earth to get Mrs. Seaton, Mrs. Thornburgh is now miserable
      because she has got her. Her ambition is gratified, but she knows that she has spoilt the
      party. Well, then, Mr. Mayhew, of course, his son, and his flute.'
'You to play his accompaniments?' put in Agnes slily. Rose's lip curled.
'Not if Miss Barks knows it,' she said emphatically, 'nor if I know it. The Bakers, of
      course, ourselves, and the unknown.'
'Dr. Baker is always pleasant,' said Mrs. Leyburn, leaning back and drawing her white shawl
      languidly round her. 'He told me the other day, Catherine, that if it weren't for you he
      should have to retire. He regards you as his junior partner. "Marvellous nursing gift your
      eldest daughter has, Mrs. Leyburn," he said to me the other day. A most agreeable man.'
'I wonder if I shall be able to get any candid opinions out of Mr. Elsmere the day after
      to-morrow?' said Rose, musing. 'It is difficult to avoid having an opinion of some sort about
      Mrs. Seaton.'
'Oxford dons don't gossip and are never candid,' remarked Agnes severely.
'Then Oxford dons must be very dull,' cried Rose. 'However,' and her countenance brightened,
      'if he stays here four weeks we can teach him.'
Catherine, meanwhile, sat watching the two girls with a soft elder sister's indulgence. Was
      it in connection with their bright attractive looks that the thought flitted through her head,
      'I wonder what the young man will be like?'
'Oh, by the way,' said Rose presently, 'I had nearly forgotten Mrs. Thornburgh's two
      messages. I informed her, Agnes, that you had given up water-colour and meant to try oils, and
      she told me to implore you not to, because "water-colour is so much more lady-like
      than oils." And as for you, Catherine, she sent you a most special message. I was to tell you
      that she just
      
loved the way you had taken to plaiting your hair lately—that it was exactly like the
      picture of Jeanie Deans she has in the drawing-room, and that she would never forgive you if
      you didn't plait it so to-morrow night.'
Catherine flushed faintly as she got up from the table.
'Mrs. Thornburgh has eagle-eyes,' she said, moving away to give her arm to her mother, who
      looked fondly at her, making some remark in praise of Mrs. Thornburgh's taste.
'Rose!' cried Agnes indignantly, when the other two had disappeared, 'you and Mrs.
      Thornburgh have not the sense you were born with. What on earth did you say that to Catherine
      for?'
Rose stared; then her face fell a little.
'I suppose it was foolish,' she admitted. Then she leant her head on one hand and drew
      meditative patterns on the table-cloth with the other. 'You know, Agnes,' she said presently,
      looking up, 'there are drawbacks to having a St. Elizabeth for a sister.'
Agnes discreetly made no reply, and Rose was left alone. She sat dreaming a few minutes, the
      corners of the red mouth drooping. Then she sprang up with a long sigh. 'A little life!' she
      said half-aloud, 'a little wickedness!' and she shook her curly head defiantly.
A few minutes later, in the little drawing-room on the other side of the hall, Catherine and
      Rose stood together by the open window. For the first time in a lingering spring, the air was
      soft and balmy; a tender grayness lay over the valley; it was not night, though above the
      clear outlines of the fell the stars were just twinkling in the pale blue. Far away under the
      crag on the farther side of High Fell a light was shining. As Catherine's eyes caught it there
      was a quick response in the fine Madonna-like face.
'Any news for me from the Backhouses this afternoon?' she asked Rose.
'No, I heard of none. How is she?'
'Dying,' said Catherine simply, and stood a moment looking out. Rose did not interrupt her.
      She knew that the house from which the light was shining sheltered a tragedy; she guessed with
      the vagueness of nineteen that it was a tragedy of passion and sin; but Catherine had not been
      communicative on the subject, and Rose had for some time past set up a dumb resistance to her
      sister's most characteristic ways of life and thought, which prevented her now from asking
      questions. She wished nervously to give Catherine's extraordinary moral strength no greater
      advantage over her than she could help.
Presently, however, Catherine threw her arm round her with a tender protectingness.
'What did you do with yourself all the afternoon, Röschen?'
'I practised for two hours,' said the girl shortly, 'and two hours this morning. My Spohr is
      nearly perfect.'


'And you didn't look into the school?' asked Catherine, hesitating; 'I know Miss Merry
      expected you.'
'No, I didn't. When one can play the violin and can't teach, any more than a cockatoo,
      what's the good of wasting one's time in teaching?'
Catherine did not reply. A minute after Mrs. Leyburn called her, and she went to sit on a
      stool at her mother's feet, her hands resting on the elder woman's lap, the whole attitude of
      the tall active figure one of beautiful and childlike abandonment. Mrs. Leyburn wanted to
      confide in her about a new cap, and Catherine took up the subject with a zest which kept her
      mother happy till bedtime.
'Why couldn't she take as much interest in my Spohr?' thought Rose.
Late that night, long after she had performed all a maid's offices for her mother, Catherine
      Leyburn was busy in her own room arranging a large cupboard containing medicines and ordinary
      medical necessaries, a storehouse whence all the simpler emergencies of their end of the
      valley were supplied. She had put on a white flannel dressing-gown and moved noiselessly about
      in it, the very embodiment of order, of purity, of quiet energy. The little white-curtained
      room was bareness and neatness itself. There were a few book-shelves along the walls, holding
      the books which her father had given her. Over the bed were two enlarged portraits of her
      parents, and a line of queer little faded monstrosities, representing Rose and Agnes in
      different stages of childhood. On the table beside the bed was a pile of well-worn
      books—Keble, Jeremy Taylor, the Bible—connected in the mind of the mistress of the room with
      the intensest moments of the spiritual life. There was a strip of carpet by the bed, a plain
      chair or two, a large press; otherwise no furniture that was not absolutely necessary, and no
      ornaments. And yet, for all its emptiness, the little room in its order and spotlessness had
      the look and spell of a sanctuary.
When her task was finished Catherine came forward to the infinitesimal dressing-table, and
      stood a moment before the common cottage looking-glass upon it. The candle behind her showed
      her the outlines of her head and face in shadow against the white ceiling. Her soft brown hair
      was plaited high above the broad white brow, giving to it an added stateliness, while it left
      unmasked the pure lines of the neck. Mrs. Thornburgh and her mother were quite right. Simple
      as the new arrangement was, it could hardly have been more effective.
But the looking-glass got no smile in return for its information. Catherine Leyburn was
      young; she was alone; she was being very plainly told that, taken as a whole, she was, or
      might be at any moment, a beautiful woman. And all her answer was a frown and a quick movement
      away from the glass. Putting up her hands she began to undo the plaits with haste, almost with
      impatience; she smoothed the whole mass then set free
       into the severest order, plaited it closely together, and then, putting out her
      light, threw herself on her knees beside the window, which was partly open to the starlight
      and the mountains. The voice of the river far away, wafted from the mist-covered depths of the
      valley, and the faint rustling of the trees just outside, were for long after the only sounds
      which broke the silence.
When Catherine appeared at breakfast next morning her hair was plainly gathered into a close
      knot behind, which had been her way or dressing it since she was thirteen. Agnes threw a quick
      look at Rose; Mrs. Leyburn, as soon as she had made out through her spectacles what was the
      matter, broke into warm expostulations.
'It is more comfortable, dear mother, and takes much less time,' said Catherine,
      reddening.
'Poor Mrs. Thornburgh!' remarked Agnes drily.
'Oh, Rose will make up!' said Catherine, glancing, not without a spark of mischief in her
      gray eyes, at Rose's tortured locks; 'and mamma's new cap, which will be superb!'
</div></body></text></TEI>