<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="42">
CHAPTER XLII
And after this little scene, through the busy exciting weeks of the season which followed,
      Robert, taxed to the utmost on all sides, yielded to the impulse of silence more and more.
Society was another difficulty between them, Robert delighted in it so far as his East End
      life allowed him to have it. No one was ever more ready to take other men and women at their
      own valuation than he. Nothing was so easy to him as to believe in other people's goodness, or
      cleverness, or superhuman achievement. On the other hand, London is kind to such men as Robert
      Elsmere. His talk, his writing, were becoming known and relished; and even the most rigid of
      the old school found it difficult to be angry with him. His knowledge of the poor and of
      social questions attracted the men of actions; his growing historical reputation drew the
      attention of the men of thought. Most people wished to know him and to talk to him,
       and Catherine, smiled upon for his sake, and assumed to be his chief disciple, felt
      herself more and more bewildered and antagonistic as the season rushed on.
For what pleasure could she get out of these dinners and these evenings, which supplied
      Robert with so much intellectual stimulus? With her all the moral nerves were jarring and out
      of tune. At any time Richard Leyburn's daughter would have found it hard to tolerate a society
      where everything is an open question and all confessions of faith are more or less bad taste.
      But now, when there was no refuge to fall back upon in Robert's arms, no certainty of his
      sympathy—nay, a certainty that, however tender and pitiful he might be, he would still think
      her wrong and mistaken! She went here and there obediently because he wished; but her youth
      seemed to be ebbing, the old Murewell gaiety entirely left her, and people in general wondered
      why Elsmere should have married a wife older than himself, and apparently so unsuited to him
      in temperament.
Especially was she tried at Madame de Netteville's. For Robert's sake she tried for a time
      to put aside her first impression and to bear Madame de Netteville's evenings—little dreaming,
      poor thing, all the time that Madame de Netteville thought her presence at the famous
      'Fridays' an incubus only to be put up with because the husband was becoming socially an
      indispensable.
But after two or three Fridays Catherine's endurance failed her. On the last occasion she
      found herself late in the evening hemmed in behind Madame de Netteville and a distinguished
      African explorer, who was the lion of the evening. Eugénie de Netteville had forgotten her
      silent neighbour, and presently, with some biting little phrase or other, she asked the great
      man his opinion on a burning topic of the day, the results of Church Missions in Africa. The
      great man laughed, shrugged his shoulders, and ran lightly through a string of stories in
      which both missionaries and converts played parts which were either grotesque or worse. Madame
      de Netteville thought the stories amusing, and as one ceased she provoked another, her black
      eyes full of a dry laughter, her white hand lazily plying her great ostrich fan.
Suddenly a figure rose behind them.
'Oh, Mrs. Elsmere!' said Madame de Netteville, starting, and then coolly recovering herself,
      'I had no idea you were there all alone. I am afraid our conversation has been disagreeable to
      you. I am afraid you are a friend of missions!'
And her glance, turning from Catherine to her companion, made a little malicious signal to
      him which only he detected, as though bidding him take note of a curiosity.
'Yes, I care for them, I wish for their success,' said Catherine, one hand, which trembled
      slightly, resting on the table beside her, her great gray eyes fixed on Madame de Netteville.
      'No Christian has any right to do otherwise.'


Poor brave goaded soul! She had a vague idea of 'bearing testimony' as her father would have
      borne it in like circumstances. But she turned very pale. Even to her the word 'Christian'
      sounded like a bombshell in that room. The great traveller looked up astounded. He saw a tall
      woman in white with a beautiful head, a delicate face, a something indescribably noble and
      unusual in her whole look and attitude. She looked like a Quaker prophetess—like Dinah Morris
      in society—like—but his comparisons failed him. How did such a being come there? He
      was amazed; but he was a man of taste, and Madame de Netteville caught a certain æsthetic
      approbation in his look.
She rose, her expression hard and bright as usual.
'May one Christian pronounce for all?' she said with a scornful affectation of meekness.
      'Mrs. Elsmere, please find some chair more comfortable than that ottoman; and Mr. Ansdale,
      will you come and be introduced to Lady Aubrey?'
After her guests had gone Madame de Netteville came back to the fire flushed and frowning.
      It seemed to her that in that strange little encounter she had suffered, and she never forgot
      or forgave the smallest social discomfiture.
'Can I put up with that again?' she asked herself with a contemptuous hardening of the lip.
      'I suppose I must if he cannot be got without her. But I have an instinct that it is
      over—that she will not appear here again. Daudet might make use of her. I can't. What a
      specimen! A boy and girl match, I suppose. What else could have induced that poor wretch to
      cut his throat in such fashion? He, of all men!'
And Eugénie de Netteville stood thinking—not, apparently, of the puritanical wife; the
      dangerous softness which overspread the face could have had no connection with Catherine.
Madame de Netteville's instinct was just. Catherine Elsmere never appeared again in her
      drawing-room.
But, with a little sad confession of her own invincible distaste, the wife pressed the
      husband to go without her. She urged it at a bitter moment, when it was clear to her that
      their lives must of necessity, even in outward matters, be more separate than before. Elsmere
      resisted for a time; then, lured one evening towards the end of February by the prospect
      conveyed in a note from Madame de Netteville, wherein Catherine was mentioned in the most
      scrupulously civil terms, of meeting one of the most eminent of French critics, he went, and
      thenceforward went often. He had, so far, no particular liking for the hostess; he hated some
      of her habitués; but there was no doubt that in some ways she made an admirable
      holder of a salon, and that round about her there was a subtle mixture of elements, a
      liberty of discussion and comment, to be found nowhere else. And how bracing and refreshing
      was that free play of equal mind to the man weary sometimes of his leader's rôle and
      weary of himself!


As to the woman, his social naïveté, which was extraordinary, but in a man
      of his type most natural, made him accept her exactly as he found her. If there were two or
      three people in Paris or London who knew or suspected incidents of Madame de Netteville's
      young married days which made her reception at some of the strictest English houses a matter
      of cynical amusement to them, not the remotest inkling of their knowledge was ever likely to
      reach Elsmere. He was not a man who attracted scandals. Nor was it anybody's interest to
      spread them. Madame de Netteville's position in London society was obviously excellent. If she
      had peculiarities of manner and speech they were easily supposed to be French. Meanwhile she
      was undeniably rich and distinguished, and gifted with a most remarkable power of protecting
      herself and her neighbours from boredom. At the same time, though Elsmere was, in truth, more
      interested in her friends than in her, he could not possibly be insensible to the
      consideration shown for him in her drawing-room. Madame de Netteville allowed herself plenty
      of jests with her intimates as to the young reformer's social simplicity, his dreams, his
      optimisms. But those intimates were the first to notice that as soon as he entered the room
      those optimisms of his were adroitly respected. She had various delicate contrivances for
      giving him the lead; she exercised a kind of surveillance over the topics introduced;
      or in conversation with him she would play that most seductive part of the cynic shamed out of
      cynicism by the neighbourhood of the enthusiast.
Presently she began to claim a practical interest in his Elgood Street work. Her offers were
      made with a curious mixture of sympathy and mockery. Elsmere could not take her seriously. But
      neither could he refuse to accept her money, if she chose to spend it on a library for Elgood
      Street, or to consult with her about the choice of books. This whim of hers created a certain
      friendly bond between them which was not present before. And on Elsmere's side it was
      strengthened when, one evening, in a corner of her inner drawing-room, Madame de Netteville
      suddenly, but very quietly, told him the story of her life—her English youth, her elderly
      French husband, the death of her only child, and her flight as a young widow to England during
      the war of 1870. She told the story of the child, as it seemed to Elsmere, with a deliberate
      avoidance of emotion, nay, even with a certain hardness. But it touched him profoundly. And
      everything else that she said, though she professed no great regret for her husband, or for
      the break-up of her French life, and though everything was reticent and measured, deepened the
      impression of a real forlornness behind all the outward brilliance and social importance. He
      began to feel a deep and kindly pity for her, coupled with an earnest wish that he could help
      her to make her life more adequate and satisfying. And all this he showed in the look of his
      frank gray
       eyes, in the cordial grasp of the hand with which he said good-bye to her.
Madame de Netteville's gaze followed him out of the room—the tall boyish figure, the nobly
      carried head. The riddle of her flushed cheek and sparkling eye was hard to read. But there
      were one or two persons living who could have read it, and who could have warned you that the
       true story of Eugénie de Netteville's life was written, not in her literary studies
      or her social triumphs, but in various recurrent outbreaks of unbridled impulse—the secret,
      and in one or two cases the shameful landmarks of her past. And, as persons of experience,
      they could also have warned you that the cold intriguer, always mistress of herself, only
      exists in fiction, and that a certain poisoned and fevered interest in the religious leader,
      the young and pious priest, as such, is common enough among the corrupter women of all
      societies.
Towards the end of May she asked Elsmere to dine 'en petit comité, a gentlemen's
      dinner—except for my cousin, Lady Aubrey Willert'—to meet an eminent Liberal Catholic, a
      friend of Montalembert's youth.
It was a week or two after the failure of the Wardlaw experiment. Do what each would, the
      sore silence between the husband and wife was growing, was swallowing up more of life.
'Shall I go, Catherine?' he asked, handing her the note.
'It would interest you,' she said gently, giving it back to him scrupulously, as though she
      had nothing to do with it.
He knelt down before her, and put his arms round her, looking at her with eyes which had a
      dumb and yet fiery appeal written in them. His heart was hungry for that old clinging
      dependence, that willing weakness of love, her youth had yielded him so gladly, instead of
      this silent strength of antagonism. The memory of her Murewell self flashed miserably through
      him as he knelt there, of her delicate penitence towards him after her first sight of Newcome,
      of their night walks during the Mile End epidemic. Did he hold now in his arms only the ghost
      and shadow of that Murewell Catherine?
She must have read the reproach, the yearning of his look, for she gave a little shiver, as
      though bracing herself with a kind of agony to resist.
'Let me go, Robert!' she said gently, kissing him on the forehead and drawing back. 'I hear
      Mary calling, and nurse is out.'
The days went on and the date of Madame de Netteville's dinner-party had come round. About
      seven o'clock that evening Catherine sat with the child in the drawing-room, expecting Robert.
      He had gone off early in the afternoon to the East End with Hugh Flaxman to take part in a
      committee of workmen organised for the establishment of a choral union in R——, the scheme of
      which had been Flaxman's chief contribution so far to the Elgood Street undertaking.


It seemed to her as she sat there working, the windows open on to the bit of garden, where
      the trees were already withered and begrimed, that the air without and her heart within were
      alike stifling and heavy with storm. Something must put an end to this oppression,
      this misery! She did not know herself. Her whole inner being seemed to her lessened and
      degraded by this silent struggle, this fever of the soul, which made impossible all those
      serenities and sweetnesses of thought in which her nature had always lived of old. The fight
      into which fate had forced her was destroying her. She was drooping like a plant cut off from
      all that nourishes its life.
And yet she never conceived it possible that she should relinquish that fight. Nay, at times
      there sprang up in her now a dangerous and despairing foresight of even worse things in store.
      In the middle of her suffering she already began to feel at moments the ascetic's terrible
      sense of compensation. What, after all, is the Christian life but warfare? 'I came not to
       send peace, but a sword!'
Yes, in these June days Elsmere's happiness was perhaps nearer wreck than it had ever been.
      All strong natures grow restless under such a pressure as was now weighing on Catherine. Shock
      and outburst become inevitable.
So she sat alone this hot afternoon, haunted by presentiments, by vague terror for herself
      and him; while the child tottered about her, cooing, shouting, kissing, and all impulsively,
      with a ceaseless energy, like her father.
The outer door opened, and she heard Robert's step, and apparently Mr. Flaxman's also. There
      was a hurried subdued word or two in the hall, and the two entered the room where she was
      sitting.
Robert came, pressing back the hair from his eyes with a gesture which with him was the
      invariable accompaniment of mental trouble. Catherine sprang up.
'Robert, you look so tired! and how late you are!' Then as she came nearer to him: 'And your
       coat—torn—blood!'
'There is nothing wrong with me, dear,' he said hastily, taking her hands—'nothing!
      But it has been an awful afternoon. Flaxman will tell you. I must go to this place, I suppose,
      though I hate the thought of it! Flaxman, will you tell her all about it?' And, loosing his
      hold, he went heavily out of the room and upstairs.
'It has been an accident,' said Flaxman gently, coming forward, 'to one of the men of his
      class. May we sit down, Mrs. Elsmere? Your husband and I have gone through a good deal these
      last two hours.'
He sat down with a long breath, evidently trying to regain his ordinary even manner. His
      clothes, too, were covered with dust, and his hand shook. Catherine stood before him in
      consternation, while a nurse came for the child.
'We had just begun our committee at four o'clock,' he said
       at last, 'though only about half of the men had arrived, when there was a great
      shouting and commotion outside, and a man rushed in calling for Elsmere. We ran out, found a
      great crowd, a huge brewer's dray standing in the street, and a man run over. Your husband
      pushed his way in. I followed, and, to my horror, I found him kneeling by—Charles
      Richards!'
'Charles Richards?' Catherine repeated vacantly.
Flaxman looked up at her, as though puzzled; then a flash of astonishment passed over his
      face.
'Elsmere has never told you of Charles Richards, the little gasfitter, who has been his
      right hand for the past three months?'
'No—never,' she said slowly.
Again he looked astonished; then he went on sadly: 'All this spring he has been your
      husband's shadow—I never saw such devotion. We found him lying in the middle of the road. He
      had only just left work, a man said who had been with him, and was running to the meeting. He
      slipped and fell, crossing the street, which was muddy from last night's rain. The dray swung
      round the corner—the driver was drunk or careless—and they went right over him. One foot was a
      sickening sight. Your husband and I luckily knew how to lift him for the best. We sent off for
      doctors. His home was in the next street, as it happened—nearer than any hospital; so we
      carried him there. The neighbours were round the door.'
Then he stopped himself.
'Shall I tell you the whole story?' he said kindly; 'it has been a tragedy! I won't give you
      details if you had rather not.'
'Oh no!' she said hurriedly; 'no—tell me.'
And she forgot to feel any wonder that Flaxman, in his chivalry, should treat her as though
      she were a girl with nerves.
'Well, it was the surroundings that were so ghastly. When we got to the house an old woman
      rushed at me—"His wife's in there, but ye'll not find her in her senses; she's been at it from
      eight o'clock this morning. We've took the children away." I didn't know what she meant
      exactly till we got into the little front room. There, such a spectacle! A young woman on a
      chair by the fire sleeping heavily, dead drunk; the breakfast things on the table, the sun
      blazing in on the dust and the dirt, and on the woman's face. I wanted to carry him into the
      room on the other side—he was unconscious; but a doctor had come up with us, and made us put
      him down on a bed there was in the corner. Then we got some brandy and poured it down. The
      doctor examined him, looked at his foot, threw something over it. "Nothing to be done," he
      said—"internal injuries—he can't live half an hour." The next minute the poor fellow opened
      his eyes. They had pulled away the bed from the wall. Your husband was on the farther side,
      kneel
      ing. When he opened his eyes, clearly the first thing he saw was his wife. He half
      sprang up—Elsmere caught him—and gave a horrible cry—indescribably horrible. "At it again,
       at it again! My God!" Then he fell back fainting. They got the wife out of the room
      between them—a perfect log—you could hear her heavy breathing from the kitchen opposite. We
      gave him more brandy and he came to again. He looked up in your husband's face. "She hasn't
      broke out for two months," he said, so piteously, "two months—and now—I'm done—I'm done—and
      she'll just go straight to the devil!" And it comes out, so the neighbours told us, that for
      two years or more he had been patiently trying to reclaim this woman, without a word of
      complaint to anybody, though his life must have been a dog's life. And now, on his deathbed,
      what seemed to be breaking his heart was, not that he was dying, but that his task was
      snatched from him!'
Flaxman paused, and looked away out of window. He told his story with difficulty.
'Your husband tried to comfort him—promised that the wife and children should be his special
      care, that everything that could be done to save and protect them should be done. And the poor
      little fellow looked up at him, with the tears running down his cheeks, and—and—blessed him.
      "I cared about nothing," he said, "when you came. You've been—God—to me—I've seen Him—in you."
      Then he asked us to say something. Your husband said verse after verse of the Psalms, of the
      Gospels, of St. Paul. His eyes grew filmy, but he seemed every now and then to struggle back
      to life, and as soon as he caught Elsmere's face his look lightened. Towards the last he said
      something we none of us caught; but your husband thought it was a line from Emily Brontë's
      "Hymn," which he said to them last Sunday in lecture.'
He looked up at her interrogatively, but there was no response in her face.
'I asked him about it,' the speaker went on, 'as we came home. He said Grey of St. Anselm's
      once quoted it to him, and he has had a love for it ever since.'
'Did he die while you were there?' asked Catherine presently after a silence. Her voice was
      dull and quiet. He thought her a strange woman.
'No,' said Flaxman, almost sharply; 'but by now it must be over. The last sign of
      consciousness was a murmur of his children's names. They brought them in, but his hands had to
      be guided to them. A few minutes after it seemed to me that he was really gone, though he
      still breathed. The doctor was certain there would be no more consciousness. We stayed nearly
      another hour. Then his brother came, and some other relations, and we left him. Oh, it is over
      now!'
Hugh Flaxman sat looking out into the dingy bit of London garden. Penetrated with pity as he
      was, he felt the presence of
       Elsmere's pale, silent, unsympathetic wife an oppression. How could she receive
      such a story in such a way?
The door opened and Robert came in hurriedly.
'Good-night, Catherine—he has told you?'
He stood by her, his hand on her shoulder, wistfully looking at her, the face full of signs
      of what he had gone through.
'Yes, it was terrible!' she said, with an effort.
His face fell. He kissed her on the forehead and went away.
When he was gone, Flaxman suddenly got up and leant against the open French window, looking
      keenly down on his companion. A new idea had stirred in him.
And presently, after more talk of the incident of the afternoon, and when he had recovered
      his usual manner, he slipped gradually into the subject of his own experiences in North R——
      during the last six months. He assumed all through that she knew as much as there was to be
      known of Elsmere's work, and that she was as much interested as the normal wife is in her
      husband's doings. His tact, his delicacy, never failed him for a moment. But he spoke of his
      own impressions, of matters within his personal knowledge. And since the Easter sermon he had
      been much on Elsmere's track; he had been filled with curiosity about him.
Catherine sat a little way from him, her blue dress lying in long folds about her, her head
      bent, her long fingers crossed on her lap. Sometimes she gave him a startled look, sometimes
      she shaded her eyes, while her other hand played silently with her watch-chain. Flaxman,
      watching her closely, however little he might seem to do so, was struck by her austere and
      delicate beauty as he had never been before.
She hardly spoke all through, but he felt that she listened without resistance, nay, at last
      that she listened with a kind of hunger. He went from story to story, from scene to scene,
      without any excitement, in his most ordinary manner, making his reserves now and then,
      expressing his own opinion when it occurred to him, and not always favourably. But gradually
      the whole picture emerged, began to live before them. At last he hurriedly looked at his
      watch.
'What a time I have kept you! It has been a relief to talk to you.'
'You have not had dinner!' she said, looking up at him with a sudden nervous bewilderment
      which touched him and subtly changed his impression of her.
'No matter. I will get some at home. Good-night!'
When he was gone she carried the child up to bed; her supper was brought to her solitary in
      the dining-room; and afterwards in the drawing-room, where a soft twilight was fading into a
      soft and starlit night, she mechanically brought out some work for Mary, and sat bending over
      it by the window. After about an hour she looked up straight before
       her, threw her work down, and slipped on to the floor, her head resting on the
      chair.
The shock, the storm, had come. There for hours lay Catherine Elsmere weeping her heart
      away, wrestling with herself, with memory, with God. It was the greatest moral upheaval she
      had ever known—greater even than that which had convulsed her life at Murewell.
</div></body></text></TEI>