<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER XX
Catherine's later convalescence dwelt in her mind in after years as a time of peculiar
      softness and peace. Her baby-girl throve; Robert had driven the squire and Henslowe out of his
      mind, and was all eagerness as to certain negotiations with a famous naturalist for a lecture
      at the village club. At Mile End, as though to put the rector in the wrong, serious illness
      had for the time disappeared; and Mrs. Leyburn's mild chatter, as she gently poked about the
      house and garden, went out in Catherine's pony-carriage, inspected Catherine's stores, and
      hovered over Catherine's babe, had a constantly cheering effect on the still languid mother.
      Like all theorists, especially those at second-hand, Mrs. Leyburn's maxims had been very much
      routed by the event. The babe had ailments she did not understand, or it developed likes and
      dislikes she had forgotten existed in babies, and Mrs. Leyburn was nonplussed. She would sit
      with it on her lap, anxiously studying its peculiarities. She was sure it squinted, that its
      back was weaker than other babies, that it cried more than hers had ever done. She loved to be
      plaintive; it would have seemed to her unladylike to be too cheerful, even over a first
      grandchild.
Agnes meanwhile made herself practically useful, as was her way, and she did almost more
      than anybody to beguile Catherine's recovery by her hours of Long Whindale chat. She had no
      passionate feeling about the place and the people as Catherine had, but she was easily
      content, and she had a good wholesome feminine curiosity as to the courtings and weddings and
      buryings of the human beings about her. So she would sit and chat, working the while with the
      quickest, neatest of fingers, till Catherine knew as much about Jenny Tyson's Whinborough
      lover, and Farmer Tredall's troubles with his son, and the way in which that odious woman
      Molly Redgold bullied her little consumptive husband, as Agnes knew, which was saying a good
      deal.
About themselves Agnes was frankness itself.
'Since you went,' she would say with a shrug, 'I keep the coach steady, perhaps, but Rose
      drives, and we shall have to go where she takes us. By the way, Cathie, what have you been
      doing to her here? She is not a bit like herself. I don't generally mind being snubbed. It
      amuses her and doesn't hurt me; and, of course, I know I am meant to be her foil. But, really,
      sometimes she is too bad even for me.'
Catherine sighed, but held her peace. Like all strong persons, she kept things very much to
      herself. It only made vexations more real to talk about them. But she and Agnes discussed the
      winter and Berlin.
'You had better let her go,' said Agnes significantly; 'she will go anyhow.'


A few days afterwards Catherine, opening the drawing-room door unexpectedly, came upon Rose
      sitting idly at the piano, her hands resting on the keys, and her great gray eyes straining
      out of her white face with an expression which sent the sister's heart into her shoes.
'How you steal about, Catherine!' cried the player, getting up and shutting the piano. 'I
      declare you are just like Millais's Gray Lady in that ghostly gown.'
Catherine came swiftly across the floor. She had just left her child, and the sweet dignity
      of motherhood was in her step, her look. She came and threw her arms round the girl.
'Rose, dear, I have settled it all with mamma. The money can be managed, and you shall go to
      Berlin for the winter when you like.'
She drew herself back a little, still with her arms round Rose's waist, and looked at her
      smiling, to see how she took it.
Rose had a strange movement of irritation. She drew herself out of Catherine's grasp.
'I don't know that I had settled on Berlin,' she said coldly. 'Very possibly Leipsic would
      be better.'
Catherine's face fell.
'Whichever you like, dear. I have been thinking about it ever since that day you spoke of
      it—you remember—and now I have talked it over with mamma. If she can't manage all the expense
      we will help. Oh, Rose,' and she came nearer again, timidly, her eyes melting, 'I know we
      haven't understood each other. I have been ignorant, I think, and narrow. But I meant it for
      the best, dear—I did——'
Her voice failed her, but in her look there seemed to be written the history of all the
      prayers and yearnings of her youth over the pretty wayward child who had been her joy and
      torment. Rose could not but meet that look—its nobleness, its humble surrender.
Suddenly two large tears rolled down her cheeks. She dashed them away impatiently.
'I am not a bit well,' she said, as though in irritable excuse both to herself and
      Catherine. 'I believe I have had a headache for a fortnight.'
And then she put her arms down on a table near and hid her face upon them. She was one
      bundle of jarring nerves—sore, poor passionate child, that she was betraying herself; sorer
      still that, as she told herself, Catherine was sending her to Berlin as a consolation. When
      girls have love-troubles the first thing their elders do is to look for a diversion. She felt
      sick and humiliated. Catherine had been talking her over with the family, she supposed.
Meanwhile Catherine stood by her tenderly, stroking her hair and saying soothing things.
'I am sure you will be happy at Berlin, Rose. And you mustn't leave me out of your life,
      dear, though I am so stupid
       and unmusical. You must write to me about all you do. We must begin a new time. Oh,
      I feel so guilty sometimes,' she went on, falling into a low intensity of voice that startled
      Rose, and made her look hurriedly up. 'I fought against your music, I suppose, because I
      thought it was devouring you—leaving no room for—for religion—for God. I was jealous of it for
      Christ's sake. And all the time I was blundering! Oh, Rose,' and she sank on her knees beside
      the chair, resting her head against the girl's shoulder, 'papa charged me to make you love
      God, and I torture myself with thinking that, instead, it has been my doing, my foolish clumsy
      doing, that you have come to think religion dull and hard. Oh, my darling, if I could make
      amends—if I could get you not to love your art less but to love it in God! Christ is the first
      reality; all things else are real and lovely in Him. Oh, I have been frightening you away from
      Him! I ought to have drawn you near. I have been so—so silent, so shut up, I have never tried
      to make you feel what it was kept me at His feet! Oh, Rose, darling, you think the
      world real, and pleasure and enjoyment real. But if I could have made you see and know the
      things I have seen up in the mountains—among the poor, the dying—you would have felt
      Him saving, redeeming, interceding, as I did. Oh, then you must, you would
      have known that Christ only is real, that our joys can only truly exist in Him. I should have
      been more open—more faithful—more humble.'
She paused with a long quivering sigh. Rose suddenly lifted herself, and they fell into each
      other's arms.
Rose, shaken and excited, thought, of course, of that night at Burwood, when she had won
      leave to go to Manchester. This scene was the sequel to that—the next stage in one and the
      same process. Her feeling was much the same as that of the naturalist who comes close to any
      of the hidden operations of life. She had come near to Catherine's spirit in the growing.
      Beside that sweet expansion, how poor and feverish and earth-stained the poor child felt
      herself!
But there were many currents in Rose—many things striving for the mastery. She kissed
      Catherine once or twice, then she drew herself back suddenly, looking into the other's face. A
      great wave of feeling rushed up and broke.
'Catherine, could you ever have married a man that did not believe in Christ?'
She flung the question out—a kind of morbid curiosity, a wild wish to find an outlet of some
      sort for things pent up in her, driving her on.
Catherine started. But she met Rose's half-frowning eyes steadily.
'Never, Rose! To me it would not be marriage.'
The child's face lost its softness. She drew one hand away.
'What have we to do with it?' she cried. 'Each one for himself.'


'But marriage makes two one,' said Catherine, pale, but with a firm clearness. 'And if
      husband and wife are only one in body and estate, not one in soul, why, who that believes in
      the soul would accept such a bond, endure such a miserable second best?'
She rose. But though her voice had recovered all its energy, her attitude, her look was
      still tenderness, still yearning itself.
'Religion does not fill up the soul,' said Rose slowly. Then she added carelessly, a
      passionate red flying into her cheek against her will, 'However, I cannot imagine any question
      that interests me personally less. I was curious what you would say.'
And she too got up, drawing her hand lightly along the keyboard of the piano. Her pose had a
      kind of defiance in it; her knit brows forbade Catherine to ask questions. Catherine stood
      irresolute. Should she throw herself on her sister, imploring her to speak, opening her own
      heart on the subject of this wild unhappy fancy for a man who would never think again of the
      child he had played with?
But the North-country dread of words, of speech that only defines and magnifies, prevailed.
      Let there be no words, but let her love and watch.
So, after a moment's pause, she began in a different tone upon the inquiries she had been
      making, the arrangements that would be wanted for this musical winter. Rose was almost
      listless at first. A stranger would have thought she was being persuaded into something
      against her will. But she could not keep it up. The natural instinct reasserted itself, and
      she was soon planning and deciding as sharply, and with as much young omniscience, as
      usual.
By the evening it was settled. Mrs. Leyburn, much bewildered, asked Catherine doubtfully,
      the last thing at night, whether she wanted Rose to be a professional. Catherine
      exclaimed.
'But, my dear,' said the widow, staring pensively into her bedroom fire, 'what's she to do
      with all this music?' Then after a second she added half severely: 'I don't believe her father
      would have liked it; I don't, indeed, Catherine!'
Poor Catherine smiled and sighed in the background, but made no reply.
'However, she never looks so pretty as when she's playing the violin—never!' said Mrs.
      Leyburn presently in the distance, with a long breath of satisfaction. 'She's got such a
      lovely hand and arm, Catherine! They're prettier than mine, and even your father used to
      notice mine.'
'Even.' The word had a little sound of bitterness. In spite of all his love, had
      the gentle puzzle-headed woman found her unearthly husband often very hard to live with?
Rose meanwhile was sitting up in bed, with her hands round her knees, dreaming. So she had
      got her heart's desire! There
       did not seem to be much joy in the getting, but that was the way of things, one was
      told. She knew she should hate the Germans—great, bouncing, over-fed, sentimental
      creatures!
Then her thoughts ran into the future. After six months—yes, by April—she would be home, and
      Agnes and her mother could meet her in London.
London. Ah, it was London she was thinking of all the time, not Berlin! She could
      not stay in the present; or rather the Rose of the present went straining to the Rose of the
      future, asking to be righted, to be avenged.
'I will learn—I will learn fast—many things besides music!' she said to herself feverishly.
      'By April I shall be much cleverer. Oh, then I won't be a fool so easily. We
      shall be sure to meet, of course. But he shall find out that it was only a child,
      only a silly soft-hearted baby he played with down here. I shan't care for him in the least,
      of course not, not after six months. I don't mean to. And I will make him know it—oh,
      I will, though he is so wise, and so much older, and mounts on such stilts when he
      pleases!'
So once more Rose flung her defiance at fate. But when Catherine came along the passage an
      hour later she heard low sounds from Rose's room, which ceased abruptly as her step drew near.
      The elder sister paused; her eyes filled with tears; her hand closed indignantly. Then she
      came closer, all but went in, thought better of it, and moved away. If there is any truth in
      brain-waves, Langham should have slept restlessly that night.
Ten days later an escort had been found, all preparations had been made, and Rose was
      gone.
Mrs. Leyburn and Agnes lingered a while, and then they too departed under an engagement to
      come back after Christmas for a long stay, that Mrs. Leyburn might cheat the northern spring a
      little.
So husband and wife were alone again. How they relished their solitude! Catherine took up
      many threads of work which her months of comparative weakness had forced her to let drop. She
      taught vigorously in the school; in the afternoons, so far as her child would let her, she
      carried her tender presence and her practical knowledge of nursing to the sick and feeble; and
      on two evenings in the week she and Robert threw open a little room there was on the
      ground-floor between the study and the dining-room to the women and girls of the village, as a
      sort of drawing-room. Hard-worked mothers would come, who had put their fretful babes to
      sleep, and given their lords to eat, and had just energy left, while the eldest daughter
      watched, and the men were at the club or the 'Blue Boar,' to put on a clean apron and climb
      the short hill to the rectory. Once there, there was nothing to think of for an hour but the
      bright room, Catherine's kind face, the rector's jokes, and the illustrated papers or the
       photographs that were spread out for them to look at if they would. The girls
      learned to come, because Catherine could teach them a simple dressmaking, and was clever in
      catching stray persons to set them singing; and because Mr. Elsmere read exciting stories, and
      because nothing any one of them ever told Mrs. Elsmere was forgotten by her, or failed to
      interest her. Any of her social equals of the neighbourhood would have hardly recognised the
      reserved and stately Catherine on these occasions. Here she felt herself at home, at ease. She
      would never, indeed, have Robert's pliancy, his quick divination, and for some time after her
      transplanting the North-country woman had found it very difficult to suit herself to a new
      shade of local character. But she was learning from Robert every day; she watched him among
      the poor, recognising all his gifts with a humble intensity of admiring love, which said
      little but treasured everything, and for herself her inward happiness and peace shone through
      her quiet ways, making her the mother and the friend of all about her.
As for Robert, he, of course, was living at high pressure all round. Outside his sermons and
      his school, his Natural History Club had perhaps most of his heart, and the passion for
      science, little continuous work as he was able to give it, grew on him more and more. He kept
      up as best he could, working with one hand, so to speak, when he could not spare two, and in
      his long rambles over moor and hill, gathering in with his quick eye a harvest of local fact
      wherewith to feed their knowledge and his own.
The mornings he always spent at work among his books, the afternoons in endless tramps over
      the parish, sometimes alone, sometimes with Catherine; and in the evenings, if Catherine was
      'at home,' twice a week to womankind, he had his nights when his study became the haunt and
      prey of half the boys in the place, who were free of everything, as soon as he had taught them
      to respect his books, and not to taste his medicines; other nights when he was lecturing or
      story-telling in the club or in some outlying hamlet; or others again, when with Catherine
      beside him he would sit trying to think some of that religious passion which burned in both
      their hearts, into clear words or striking illustrations for his sermons.
Then his choir was much upon his mind. He knew nothing about music, nor did Catherine; their
      efforts made Rose laugh irreverently when she got their letters at Berlin. But Robert believed
      in a choir chiefly as an excellent social and centralising instrument. There had been none in
      Mr. Preston's day. He was determined to have one, and a good one, and by sheer energy he
      succeeded, delighting in his boyish way over the opposition some of his novelties excited
      among the older and more stiff-backed inhabitants.
'Let them talk,' he would say brightly to Catherine. 'They will come round; and talk is
      good. Anything to make them think, to stir the pool!'


Of course that old problem of the agricultural labourer weighed upon him—his grievances, his
      wants. He went about pondering the English land system, more than half inclined one day to
      sink part of his capital in a peasant-proprietor experiment, and ingulfed the next in all the
      moral and economical objection, to the French system. Land for allotments, at any rate, he had
      set his heart on. But in this direction, as in many others, the way was barred. All the land
      in the parish was the squire's, and not one inch of the squire's land would Henslowe let young
      Elsmere have anything to do with if he knew it. He would neither repair nor enlarge the
      Workmen's Institute; and he had a way of forgetting the squire's customary subscriptions to
      parochial objects, always paid through him, which gave him much food for chuckling whenever he
      passed Elsmere in the country lanes. The man's coarse insolence and mean hatred made
      themselves felt at every turn, besmirching and embittering.
Still it was very true that neither Henslowe nor the squire could do Robert much harm. His
      hold on the parish was visibly strengthening; his sermons were not only filling the church
      with his own parishioners, but attracting hearers from the districts round Murewell, so that
      even on these winter Sundays there was almost always a sprinkling of strange faces among the
      congregation; and his position in the county and diocese was becoming every month more
      honourable and important. The gentry about showed them much kindness, and would have shown
      them much hospitality if they had been allowed. But though Robert had nothing of the ascetic
      about him, and liked the society of his equals as much as most good-tempered and vivacious
      people do, he and Catherine decided that for the present they had no time to spare for visits
      and county society. Still, of course, there were many occasions on which the routine of their
      life brought them across their neighbours, and it began to be pretty widely recognised that
      Elsmere was a young fellow of unusual promise and intelligence, that his wife too was
      remarkable, and that between them they were likely to raise the standard of clerical effort
      considerably in their part of Surrey.
All the factors of this life—his work, his influence, his recovered health, the lavish
      beauty of the country, Elsmere enjoyed with all his heart. But at the root of all there lay
      what gave value and savour to everything else—that exquisite home-life of theirs, that tender,
      triple bond of husband, wife, and child.
Catherine, coming home tired from teaching or visiting, would find her step quickening as
      she reached the gate of the rectory, and the sense of delicious possession waking up in her,
      which is one of the first fruits of motherhood. There, at the window, between the lamplight
      behind and the winter dusk outside, would be the child in its nurse's arms, little wondering,
      motiveless smiles passing over the tiny puckered face that was so oddly like Robert already.
      And afterwards, in the fire-lit
       nursery, with the bath in front of the high fender, and all the necessaries of baby
      life beside it, she would go through those functions which mothers love and linger over, let
      the kicking dimpled creature principally concerned protest as it may against the
      over-refinements of civilisation. Then, when the little restless voice was stilled, and the
      cradle left silent in the darkened room, there would come the short watching for Robert, his
      voice, his kiss, their simple meal together, a moment of rest, of laughter and chat, before
      some fresh effort claimed them. Every now and then—white-letter days—there would drop on them
      a long evening together. Then out would come one or the few books—Dante or Virgil or
      Milton—which had entered into the fibre of Catherine's strong nature. The two heads would draw
      close over them, or Robert would take some thought of hers as a text, and spout away from the
      hearthrug, watching all the while for her smile, her look of assent. Sometimes, late at night,
      when there was a sermon on his mind, he would dive into his pocket for his Greek Testament and
      make her read, partly for the sake of teaching her—for she knew some Greek and longed to know
      more—but mostly that he might get from her some of that garnered wealth of spiritual
      experience which he adored in her. They would go from verse to verse, from thought to thought,
      till suddenly perhaps the tide of feeling would rise, and while the wind swept round the
      house, and the owls hooted in the elms, they would sit hand in hand, lost in love and
      faith,—Christ near them—Eternity, warm with God, enwrapping them.
So much for the man of action, the husband, the philanthropist. In reality, great as was the
      moral energy of this period of Elsmere's life, the dominant distinguishing note of it was not
      moral but intellectual.
In matters of conduct he was but developing habits and tendencies already strongly present
      in him; in matters of thinking, with every month of this winter he was becoming conscious of
      fresh forces, fresh hunger, fresh horizons.
'One half of your day be the king of your world,' Mr. Grey had said to him;
       'the other half be the slave of something which will take you out of your world,
      into the general life, the life of thought, of man as a whole, of the universe.'
The counsel, as we have seen, had struck root and flowered into action. So many men of
      Elsmere's type give themselves up once and for all as they become mature to the life of doing
      and feeling, practically excluding the life of thought. It was Henry Grey's influence in all
      probability, perhaps, too, the training of an earlier Langham, that saved for Elsmere the life
      of thought.
The form taken by this training of his own mind he had been thus encouraged not to abandon,
      was, as we know, the study of history. He had well mapped out before him that book on the
       origins of France which he had described to Langham. It was to take him years, of
      course, and meanwhile, in his first enthusiasm, he was like a child, revelling in the treasure
      of work that lay before him. As he had told Langham, he had just got below the surface of a
      great subject and was beginning to dig into the roots of it. Hitherto he had been under the
      guidance of men of his own day, of the nineteenth century historian, who refashions the past
      on the lines of his own mind, who gives it rationality, coherence, and, as it were,
      modernness, so that the main impression he produces on us, so long as we look at that past
      through him only, is on the whole an impression of continuity, of
       resemblance.
Whereas, on the contrary, the first impression left on a man by the attempt to plunge into
      the materials of history for himself is almost always an extraordinarily sharp impression of
       difference, of contrast. Ultimately, of course, he sees that these men and
      women whose letters and biographies, whose creeds and general conceptions he is investigating,
      are in truth his ancestors, bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh. But at first the student who
      goes back, say, in the history of Europe, behind the Renaissance or behind the Crusades into
      the actual deposits of the past, is often struck with a kind of vertige. The men and
      women whom he has dragged forth into the light of his own mind are to him like some strange
      puppet-show. They are called by names he knows—kings, bishops, judges, poets, priests, men of
      letters—but what a gulf between him and them! What motives, what beliefs, what embryonic
      processes of thought and morals, what bizarre combinations of ignorance and knowledge, of the
      highest sanctity with the lowest credulity or falsehood; what extraordinary prepossessions,
      born with a man and tainting his whole ways of seeing and thinking from childhood to the
      grave! Amid all the intellectual dislocation of the spectacle, indeed, he perceives certain
      Greeks and certain Latins who represent a forward strain, who belong as it seems to a world of
      their own, a world ahead of them. To them he stretches out his hand: 'You,' he says
      to them, 'though your priests spoke to you not of Christ, but of Zeus and Artemis,
       you are really my kindred!' But intellectually they stand alone. Around them, after
      them, for long ages the world 'spake as a child, felt as a child, understood as a child.'
Then he sees what it is makes the difference, digs the gulf. 'Science,' the mind
      cries, 'ordered knowledge.' And so for the first time the modern recognises what the
      accumulations of his forefathers have done for him. He takes the torch which man has been so
      long and patiently fashioning to his hand, and turns it on the past, and at every step the
      sight grows stranger, and yet more moving, more pathetic. The darkness into which he
      penetrates does but make him grasp his own guiding light the more closely. And yet, bit by
      bit, it has been prepared for him by these groping half conscious generations, and the
      scrutiny
       which began in repulsion and laughter ends in a marvelling gratitude.
But the repulsion and the laughter come first, and during this winter of work Elsmere felt
      them both very strongly. He would sit in the morning buried among the records of decaying Rome
      and emerging France, surrounded by Chronicles, by Church Councils, by lives of the Saints, by
      primitive systems of law, pushing his imaginative impetuous way through them. Sometimes
      Catherine would be there, and he would pour out on her something of what was in his own
      mind.
One day he was deep in the life of a certain saint. The saint had been bishop of a diocese
      in Southern France. His biographer was his successor in the see, a man of high political
      importance in the Burgundian state, renowned besides for sanctity and learning. Only some
      twenty years separated the biography, at the latest, from the death of its subject. It
      contained some curious material for social history, and Robert was reading it with avidity.
      But it was, of course, a tissue of marvels. The young bishop had practised every virtue known
      to the time, and wrought every conceivable miracle, and the miracles were better told than
      usual, with more ingenuity, more imagination. Perhaps on that account they struck the reader's
      sense more sharply.
'And the saint said to the sorcerers and to the practisers of unholy arts, that they should
      do those evil things no more, for he had bound the spirits of whom they were wont to inquire,
      and they would get no further answers to their incantations. Then those stiff-necked sons of
      the devil fell upon the man of God, scourged him sore, and threatened him with death, if he
      would not instantly loose those spirits he had bound. And seeing he could prevail nothing, and
      being, moreover, admonished by God so to do, he permitted them to work their own damnation.
      For he called for a parchment and wrote upon it, "Ambrose unto Satan—Enter!" Then was
      the spell loosed, the spirits returned, the sorcerers inquired as they were accustomed, and
      received answers. But in a short space of time every one of them perished miserably and was
      delivered unto his natural lord Satanas, whereunto he belonged.'
Robert made a hasty exclamation, and turning to Catherine, who was working beside him, read
      the passage to her, with a few words as to the book and its author.
Catherine's work dropped a moment on to her knee.
'What extraordinary superstition!' she said, startled. 'A bishop, Robert, and an educated
      man?'
Robert nodded.
'But it is the whole habit of mind,' he said half to himself, staring into the fire, 'that
      is so astounding. No one escapes it. The whole age really is non-sane.'
'I suppose the devout Catholic would believe that?'
'I am not sure,' said Robert dreamily, and remained sunk in
       thought for long after, while Catherine worked, and pondered a Christmas
      entertainment for her girls.
Perhaps it was his scientific work, fragmentary as it was, that was really quickening and
      sharpening these historical impressions of his. Evolution—once a mere germ in the mind—was
      beginning to press, to encroach, to intermeddle with the mind's other furniture.
And the comparative instinct—that tool, par excellence, of modern science—was at
      last fully awake, was growing fast, taking hold, now here, now there.
'It is tolerably clear to me,' he said to himself suddenly one winter afternoon, as he was
      trudging home alone from Mile End, 'that some day or other I must set to work to bring a
      little order into one's notions of the Old Testament. At present they are just a chaos!'
He walked on a while, struggling with the rainstorm which had overtaken him, till again the
      mind's quick life took voice.
'But what matter? God in the beginning—God in the prophets—in Israel's best life—God in
      Christ! How are any theories about the Pentateuch to touch that?'
And into the clear eyes, the young face aglow with wind and rain, there leapt a light, a
      softness indescribable.
But the vivider and the keener grew this new mental life of Elsmere's, the more constant
      became his sense of soreness as to that foolish and motiveless quarrel which divided him from
      the squire. Naturally he was for ever being harassed and pulled up in his work by the mere
      loss of the Murewell library. To have such a collection so close, and to be cut off from it,
      was a state of things no student could help feeling severely. But it was much more than that:
      it was the man he hankered after; the man who was a master where he was a beginner; the man
      who had given his life to learning, and was carrying all his vast accumulations sombrely to
      the grave, unused, untransmitted.
'He might have given me his knowledge,' thought Elsmere sadly, 'and I—I—would have been a
      son to him. Why is life so perverse?'
Meanwhile he was as much cut off from the great house and its master as though both had been
      surrounded by the thorn hedge of fairy tale. The Hall had its visitors during these winter
      months, but the Elsmeres saw nothing of them. Robert gulped down a natural sigh when one
      Saturday evening, as he passed the Hall gates, he saw driving through them the chief of
      English science side by side with the most accomplished of English critics.
'"There are good times in the world and I ain't in 'em!"' he said to himself with a laugh
      and a shrug as he turned up the lane to the rectory, and then, boy-like, was ashamed of
      himself, and greeted Catherine with all the tenderer greeting.
Only on two occasions during three months could he be sure
       of having seen the squire. Both were in the twilight, when, as the neighbourhood
      declared, Mr. Wendover always walked, and both made a sharp impression on the rector's nerves.
      In the heart of one of the loneliest commons of the parish Robert, swinging along one November
      evening through the scattered furze bushes, growing ghostly in the darkness, was suddenly
      conscious of a cloaked figure with slouching shoulders and head bent forward coming towards
      him. It passed without recognition of any kind, and for an instant Robert caught the long
      sharpened features and haughty eyes of the squire.
At another time Robert was walking, far from home, along a bit of level road. The pools in
      the ruts were just filmed with frost, and gleamed under the sunset; the winter dusk was clear
      and chill. A horseman turned into the road from a side lane. It was the squire again, alone.
      The sharp sound of the approaching hoofs stirred Robert's pulse, and as they passed each other
      the rector raised his hat. He thought his greeting was acknowledged, but could not be quite
      sure. From the shelter of a group of trees he stood a moment and looked after the retreating
      figure. It and the horse showed dark against a wide sky barred by stormy reds and purples. The
      wind whistled through the withered oaks; the long road with its lines of glimmering pools
      seemed to stretch endlessly into the sunset; and with every minute the night strode on. Age
      and loneliness could have found no fitter setting. A shiver ran through Elsmere as he stepped
      forward.
Undoubtedly the quarrel, helped by his work, and the perpetual presence of that beautiful
      house commanding the whole country round it from its plateau above the river, kept Elsmere
      specially in mind of the squire. As before their first meeting, and in spite of it, he became
      more and more imaginatively preoccupied with him. One of the signs of it was a strong desire
      to read the squire's two famous books: one, The Idols of the Market-place, an attack
      on English beliefs; the other, Essays on English Culture, an attack on English ideals
      of education. He had never come across them as it happened, and perhaps Newcome's denunciation
      had some effect in inducing him for a time to refrain from reading them. But in December he
      ordered them and waited their coming with impatience. He said nothing of the order to
      Catherine; somehow there were by now two or three portions of his work, two or three branches
      of his thought, which had fallen out of their common discussion. After all she was not
      literary, and with all their oneness of soul there could not be an identity of
      interests or pursuits.
The books arrived in the morning. (Oh, how dismally well, with what a tightening of the
      heart, did Robert always remember that day in after years!) He was much too busy to look at
      them, and went off to a meeting. In the evening, coming home late from his night-school, he
      found Catherine
       tired, sent her to bed, and went himself into his study to put together some notes
      for a cottage lecture he was to give the following day. The packet of books, unopened, lay on
      his writing-table. He took off the wrapper, and in his eager way fell to reading the first he
      touched.
It was the first volume of The Idols of the Market-place.
Ten or twelve years before, Mr. Wendover had launched this book into a startled and
      protesting England. It had been the fruit of his first renewal of contact with English life
      and English ideas after his return from Berlin. Fresh from the speculative ferment of Germany
      and the far profaner scepticism of France, he had returned to a society where the first
      chapter of Genesis and the theory of verbal inspiration were still regarded as valid and
      important counters on the board of thought. The result had been this book. In it each
      stronghold of English popular religion had been assailed in turn, at a time when English
      orthodoxy was a far more formidable thing than it is now.
The Pentateuch, the Prophets, the Gospels, St. Paul, Tradition, the Fathers, Protestantism
      and Justification by Faith, the Eighteenth Century, the Broad Church Movement, Anglican
      Theology—the squire had his say about them all. And while the coolness and frankness of the
      method sent a shock of indignation and horror through the religious public, the subtle and
      caustic style, and the epigrams with which the book was strewn, forced both the religious and
      irreligious public to read, whether they would or no. A storm of controversy rose round the
      volumes, and some of the keenest observers of English life had said at the time, and
      maintained since, that the publication of the book had made or marked an epoch.
Robert had lit on those pages in the Essay on the Gospels where the squire fell to analysing
      the evidence for the Resurrection, following up his analysis by an attempt at reconstructing
      the conditions out of which the belief in 'the legend' arose. Robert began to read vaguely at
      first, then to hurry on through page after page, still standing, seized at once by the bizarre
      power of the style, the audacity and range of the treatment.
Not a sound in the house. Outside, the tossing moaning December night; inside, the faintly
      crackling fire, the standing figure. Suddenly it was to Robert as though a cruel torturing
      hand were laid upon his inmost being. His breath failed him; the book slipped out of his
      grasp; he sank down upon his chair, his head in his hands. Oh, what a desolate intolerable
      moment! Over the young idealist soul there swept a dry destroying whirlwind of thought.
      Elements gathered from all sources—from his own historical work, from the squire's book, from
      the secret half-conscious recesses of the mind—entered into it, and as it passed it seemed to
      scorch the heart.
He stayed bowed there a while, then he roused himself with a half-groan, and hastily
      extinguishing his lamp he groped his
       way upstairs to his wife's room. Catherine lay asleep. The child, lost among its
      white coverings, slept too; there was a dim light over the bed, the books, the pictures.
      Beside his wife's pillow was a table on which there lay open her little Testament and the
       Imitation her father had given her. Elsmere sank down beside her, appalled by the
      contrast between this soft religious peace and that black agony of doubt which still
      overshadowed him. He knelt there, restraining his breath lest it should wake her, wrestling
      piteously with himself, crying for pardon, for faith, feeling himself utterly unworthy to
      touch even the dear hand that lay so near him. But gradually the traditional forces of his
      life reasserted themselves. The horror lifted. Prayer brought comfort and a passionate healing
      self-abasement. 'Master, forgive—defend—purify,' cried the aching heart. 'There is none
       other that fighteth for us, but only Thou, O God!'
He did not open the book again. Next morning he put it back into his shelves. If there were
      any Christian who could affront such an antagonist with a light heart, he felt with a shudder
      of memory it was not he.
'I have neither learning nor experience enough—yet,' he said to himself slowly as he moved
      away, 'of course it can be met, but I must grow; must think—first.'
And of that night's wrestle he said not a word to any living soul. He did penance for it in
      the tenderest, most secret ways, but he shrank in misery from the thought of revealing it even
      to Catherine.
</div></body></text></TEI>