<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="17">

AN UNEXPECTED ADHERENT
THE train which brought Count Litvinoff from London was punctual to the minute, but the trap
     which was to take him to Thornsett Edge was not, and he was lounging discontentedly among his
     rugs and luggage at the melancholy little station of Firth Vale.
When Roland had left London, some weeks before, he had parted from Litvinoff with the
     understanding that he was to spend Christmas with him at Thornsett Edge. Young Ferrier had felt
     that the Count would be a thousand times better company than his own thoughts, and he preferred
     asking him to inviting any of his college friends, from whom Richard's absence would provoke
     comment, and to whom it would have to be explained. For Richard had gone away, leaving no
     address save that of a solicitor in London, and he had written to the trustees, and steps were
     being taken for closing the mill. Roland would rather have been anywhere than near the property
     he was so soon to lose, but Gates urged him to stay at Thornsett till the New Year, and with
     Count Litvinoff as his guest he hoped to keep ghosts of old times at bay as successfully in his
     old home as he could hope to do anywhere else. And Litvinoff had accepted the invitation with
     fervour, for the Stanleys were back at Aspinshaw.
The day he had pitched on for his journey was a bitterly cold one in the middle of December,
     and the waiting-room at Firth Vale had no big fires, soft carpets, and luxurious lounges.  It had nothing but a bench, a table, a Bible, a Prayer-book, and a large stone jug
     of cold water. Litvinoff was got up quite after the English manner, in a light, long travelling
     ulster with a hood, and a tourist hat of the same stuff; but in spite of his precautions
     against weather he was very cold, and not a little cross at his prolonged waiting. He was just
     debating whether it would not be better to walk, and trust his traps to the mercy of chance,
     when the station shivered and shuddered as the 'local' came slowly and heavily in.
As it stopped, a stout woman, of about forty-five, with the usual number of blue bandboxes,
     bundles in handkerchiefs, and brown baskets disposed about her person, came hurrying down the
     stone steps, accompanied by a hard-featured, grizzled man some years older. Litvinoff watched
     their descent with a smile, but as they reached the bottom step his face grew suddenly serious.
     He turned sharply, and, passing into the little waiting-room, became deeply absorbed in the
     'Scripture roll' which hung opposite the door, until the train had glided out of the
     station.
He saw without turning his head that only the woman had gone. The man remained on the
     platform, gazing after the retreating line of carriages till he started and turned round at
     Litvinoff's voice.
'I beg your pardon, but do you know a place about here called Thornsett Edge?'
'Ah do,' said the man, after a prolonged stare. 'It's a matter o' three miles off.'
'Can I get a trap here?' In reply he learned that there was no trap nearer than the fly at
     the 'Jolly Sailors,' and that was half a mile the other side of Thornsett.
'Then I suppose I must walk. Can you tell me the way?'
'Ah can show you,' said the man. 'Ah'm going up to the village; Ah live there.'
He spoke shortly; but Litvinoff had a reason for wishing to  talk to the man,
     and so was content to ignore a curtness of manner which at any other time he would have been
     the first to resent.
In a few minutes the two were walking over the hard road side by side.
'Do you happen to know Mr Ferrier?'
'Ay; Ah work i' their mill.'
'I suppose they are great favourites hereabouts?'
'They're good lads enow,' said the elder man; 'better nor most o' them.'
'Better than most of whom?'
'Most of the masters and gentlefolks and that like,' said the man, rather sullenly.
'You don't seem to like gentlemen, my friend.'
'Ah don't like them well enough to believe either as they're my friends or as Ah'm theirs,'
     was the answer, given with a haughty resentment of Litvinoff's epithet, which that gentleman
     found amusing.
'I'm afraid that's true enough in most cases.'
The man looked a little surprised at having his sentiments met by this ready echo from such
     an unlikely quarter.
'The toad don't love the harrow,' he said slowly; 'but it ain't often as you can get the
     harrow to see that.'
'Are you quite sure the toad sees it? It seems to bear it quietly enough.'
'What else can we do?' asked the man fiercely.
'That's exactly what I'm giving my life to trying to find out,' said Litvinoff, very
     quietly.
The workman stopped short, and looked at the gentleman from head to feet. His gaze was calmly
     returned.
He turned and went on with a half laugh:
'Have you came down here to find that out, and is Mr Roland going to help you?'
'I can't answer for Mr Roland Ferrier, but as for myself— look here, my friend'
     (with an emphasis on the word), 'in trying to help the "toads," as you call them, I was driven
     from my own country, and had to fly for my life, with a pack of soldier wolves at my back.'
'Ay? How was that?' The man was interested in spite of himself, and Litvinoff forthwith
     plunged into an account of the flight across the frontier on that most exciting night of all
     his life.
His listener had not heard many exciting stories—they are not rife in Firth Vale—and to this
     story the fact that it was told by the chief actor lent an unusual interest. The Count was a
     good story-teller, and the way in which he told his tale left room for no doubt of its truth.
     When the recital was ended the listener drew a long breath.
'Ah'm glad you gave them the slip,' he said; 'the devils! Eh, but you're a lucky man to have
     had such things in your life, and to have done something. You don't know what it's like to have
     your life all bearing and no doing. Why, sometimes when you see how things go wi' some poor
     folks you're most ready to curse the A'mighty as lets such things be.'
The tone of the words, and the words themselves, told Litvinoff that the man's icy distrust
     of him had melted in the warmth of admiring sympathy.
'Ah! here comes Mr Roland,' he said a minute after, as a tall figure came in sight; 'he'll
     show you now. My nearest way's over here,' pointing to one of those uncertain erections of
     loose stones which do duty for walls in that part of the country. 'Ah hope Ah shall see you
     again. If you have nothing better to do any time I shall be right glad to see you at our place.
     Any one at Thornsett'll tell you where I live. My name's Hatfield—John Hatfield.'
'As I thought,' said Litvinoff, as he advanced to meet Roland, and to receive his profuse
     regrets at the sudden casting of a shoe, which had prevented the mare from getting to the
     station with the dog-cart, which ought to have  been in attendance. 'But come
     along,' he said; 'it's a jolly day for a walk, and I'll send down for your things as soon as we
     get home. That was John Hatfield you were with. He's rather a character.'
'He seems to be one of us,' said Litvinoff, as they walked on together.
'How do you mean?'
'He doesn't appear to be particularly satisfied with the present system.'
'No; and he has good wages too,—nearly two pounds a week.'
'Affluence,' said Litvinoff.
'Ah, well,' said Roland, laughing—'it's very good as things go—but he has some reason for
     hating his betters.'
'Some reason besides the two pounds a week, do you mean?'
'Yes; his daughter, an awfully pretty, nice girl, made a fool of herself—but I'll tell you
     about that some other time. Shall we go this way? It is a little longer, but it leads round by
     Aspinshaw, and I want to call there to ask after Mrs Stanley; she has a cold. Old Stanley will
     be delighted to see you; he's always talking about you. I don't know how he stands your
     revolutionary ideas.'
Litvinoff laughed.
'I never air them to him. I never talk revolution unless there is some chance of making a
     convert; but some things are too impossible, and Mr Stanley as a revolutionist is not to be
     conceived.'
'Miss Stanley seems to be quite a convert, however, although she always had a leaning that
     way. But I don't think the conversion is a star in your crown. She lays the credit of it to
     some man—I forget his name—whom she heard in town. I suppose you know him?'
'Ah, yes; I remember Miss Stanley took me down splendidly one morning by saying that
      now she understood our views,  thanks to this man Petrovitch. And I, who
     had been vainly flattering myself that I had made them intelligible to her!'
'By George, yes!' said Roland, secretly pleased. 'That was rather a facer. But then she
     didn't hear you at the Agora. Is this Petrovitch a gentleman?'
'Upon my word, I don't know. It seems he knows me, but somehow or other we never seem to
     meet. It is not impossible that I may have known him under some other name. I must ask Miss
     Stanley to describe him to me.'
'Oh, she'll do that with a great deal of pleasure,' said Roland; 'it's her great topic at
     present. That's Aspinshaw, over there to the right.'
It was a very pretty house, and somehow managed to escape, even at this dreary season, such
     dreariness as hung over Thornsett Edge, though it was built of the same grey stone, and had the
     same moorland background. There was a good deal of ivy about it, and the grounds were less
     regular and more full of evergreens and shrubs than the Ferriers' garden.
As the two young men walked up the private road they heard from the rear of the house a
     confused barking of dogs, and above the noise a girl's clear voice, raised in vain endeavour to
     still the joyful tumult.
'La belle Clare,' Litvinoff spoke softly, raising his hat as though he saw her, and
     quickening his pace a little.
'Shall we go round this way?' said Roland; 'we don't stand on ceremony with each other down
     here.'
'By all means,' said Litvinoff, and they turned into the stable-yard, passing down by the
     laurel hedge that alone divided it from the garden.
'By God! what's that?' cried the Count, suddenly stopping; and then both men sprang through
     the hedge. No time to go round now, for there had been the sharp report of a gun, a woman's
     shriek, and a heavy fall.
</div></body></text></TEI>