<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">

A FORLORN HOPE
IF the frequenters of the Spotted Cow had only known, this was about the most unpropitious
     moment for obtaining a hearing for their petition. A hearing was all they could possibly obtain
     for it, but that they did not know either.
Litvinoff's host had not found him as great a comfort as he had expected. For one thing, the
     Count's almost universal sympathy seemed unaccountably to stop short at Roland Ferrier. The
     young man felt that he had been terribly ill-used and naturally expected every one else to see
     things in the same light, and it was 'riling' to find all the sympathy of his guest turned, not
     towards him, but towards his workmen, which did not seem reasonable; for, as Roland said, they
     could get other work, but where was he to get another mill? Then he did not like a certain
     change which he noticed in the other's tone when he spoke of Miss Stanley. He had sympathy
     enough for her, goodness knows—a trifle too much Roland sometimes thought.
For Litvinoff to be a bore was impossible; but still it did happen rather often that he would
     bring forward political economy of the most startling pattern when the other wanted to talk
     literature, or art, or personal grievances.
On this particular night Roland had been led, much against  his will, into a
     discussion of the nature which Litvinoff so much affected, and he had to admit to himself that,
     as usual, he had much the worst of it.
'It's all very well,' he said (people always say, 'It's all very well,' when they can find no
     other answer to an argument); 'it's all very well, and that sort of thing may do for Russia,
     but you will never get an economic or any other revolution here— Why what the deuce is all that
     row?'
'That row' was a tramping of many feet on the gravel, and a hum of voices just outside the
     window.
Litvinoff, who was sitting nearer the window, rose and looked through the laths of the
     venetian blinds.
'Well, my dear Ferrier,' he said, turning round with a smile, 'it strikes me that there
      is a revolution in England, and that it has begun at Thornsett. The whole population
     of Derbyshire appears to have assembled in your front garden—yes, that's it, evidently,' he
     went on, as a ring was given to the door bell, 'and they are going to try gentle measures to
     begin with, just as I have always advised,' he concluded, for the ring was not a loud one.
Roland had risen from his easy-chair and had made towards the window, when the door opened
     and the maid announced that Clayton and one or two of the hands wanted to speak to Mr
     Ferrier.
'Show them in,' said Roland curtly; and, as she withdrew, 'One or two,' echoed Litvinoff;
     'that young woman's ideas on the subject of numbers are limited and primitive. Now, Ferrier,
     just repeat those arguments you have been using against me, and I doubt not, so lucid and
     convincing are they, that they will reconcile Clayton and the "hands" here to the starvation
     that awaits them.'
Only three men followed old Clayton as he entered the room.
'Well, my men,' said Roland Ferrier, turning to them, and  with a faint
     irritation in his tone, as Litvinoff, leaning one elbow on the mantelpiece, waved a recognition
     to the deputation, 'What can I do for you at this time of night?'
'Well, sir,' began Clayton, 'me and my mates here has come to speak to you for ourselves and
     them as is outside.'
'Who are numerous and noisy,' murmured the Count softly to himself.
'Well, go on,' said Roland, chafing.
'We knows well enow,' continued the old man, 'as it ain't all your doing as t' mill's to
     stop, but we thowt as you might work things so as to make it easier for us. It's on'y nat'ral
     as you shouldn't know till it's put to you what stoppin' work 'ill mean to most of us. What
     'ill it mean? Why, hard want is what it 'ill mean, and clemming to more nor one. So wot we've
     come to ask is, won't you keep the works on till summer comes, and let the stoppin' be a bit
     less sudden like, and give us time to get other work? This is bitter weather, and it's bitter
     hard as we must all leave our homes just because—' He paused in some confusion.
'Because what?' asked Roland sharply.
'Because our masters has fell out,' struck in No. 2 of the deputation.
'Look here, my men,' Roland stamped his foot impatiently, 'I thought I made it perfectly
     clear to you a month ago that the closing of this mill was no fault of mine. Do you take me for
     a born fool? Do you suppose I should throw away this money if I could help it? Don't you know I
     lose as much as any of you? As much? I lose more than all of you put together.'
'Oh, just division of profits!' murmured Litvinoff confidentially to the clock on the
     mantelpiece.
'You've had long enough notice of this,' Roland went on, casting a goaded glance at
     Litvinoff; 'why didn't you get work elsewhere?'

'We hoped it 'ud blow over. We thought perhaps you'd make it up with Mr Richard; and we
     thought to-night as perhaps, if we told you straight out, you'd go to him.'
'Damn!' hissed Roland, between his teeth. 'I wish,' he went on, raising his voice, 'you
     wouldn't talk about things you don't understand. What's the use of coming up like this in the
     middle of the night, interfering in my private affairs; for I'd have you know my brother and I
     have a perfect right to close the mill or keep it open as we choose. As for you, Clayton,
     you're old enough to know better than to come up here at midnight with all the riff-raff of the
     village at your heels.'
'No more riff-raff than yourself!' this from the youngest deputy.
'Hold tha noise, Jim!' said old Clayton. 'The other lads has come up, sir, because they
     thought there mout be some good news, and they'd like to hear 'em as soon as mout be.'
'Well, they've had their tramp for nothing. That's all the news I've got for them, and much
     good may it do them.'
'Well, well, sir,' said Clayton, 'we didn't mean no harm. I'll tell 'em what you say.
     Good-night, sir!'
'Good-night, Clayton!' Roland spoke a little more gently. 'I'm sorry I can do nothing for
     you.'
The deputation turned to go. Litvinoff walked across the room and shook hands with each man
     as he passed out of the door.
'Good-night, my friends!' he said. 'Keep your tempers. This unfortunate business is no one's
     fault. It's the fault of the system we all live under.'
The door closed upon the last man. Roland turned angrily on his guest.
'I can't imagine,' he said, with asperity, 'how a man who is so sensible about most things
     can take the part of these unreasonable idiots!'
'My dear Ferrier,' relighting the cigar which had gone out  in the excitement of
     the moment, 'of course I've the very greatest sympathy with you in this painful business, and I
     know how little it is your fault, but now, as always, I'm on the side of the workers, and you
     know I never disguise my views.'
'So it appears,' Roland was beginning, when the murmur of voices outside gave place to a
     single voice—that of one of the deputies, who seemed to be speaking to the men. Ferrier and his
     guest could hear the shuffling of many feet on the gravel as the men crowded round the speaker.
     When he stopped there was a tumult of hissing and yelling and groaning—a noise as of a very
     Pandemonium let loose.
Roland turned to Litvinoff.
'I hope you're proud of your precious protégés?' he said, and at the same moment a
     voice outside cried,—
'Let's smash the cursed walls in!'
Old Clayton's voice sounded thin and shrill above the uproar.
'Don't be fools, lads! Come away! Let un alone! Come home! We'll do no good here.'
The men seemed to hesitate a minute, and then to obey, reluctantly moving towards the
     gate.
'They have gone without doing anything very serious, you see,' said the Count; but even as he
     spoke a big stone, thrown by some strong hand, came crashing through the window, and rolled,
     muddy and grey, on to the edge of the soft fur hearthrug.
'Damn!' cried Roland furiously, 'I'll have the fellow who did that, anyway.'
He made a dash for the door, but Litvinoff caught him by the shoulders, and there was a
     struggle, silent and brief, which ended in Roland's standing still, and looking at the other
     savagely.
'Stay where you are, for God's sake!' shouted the Count; 'they've only done you five
     shillings' worth of damage now, but they'll perhaps add murder to it if you go outside. Do  be reasonable, Ferrier. There, they've gone now; and if you went out you couldn't
     identify the man who did it.'
Roland turned away, and flung himself sulkily into a chair by the fire.
'I suppose you're right,' he said; 'but I shall be deuced glad to be out of the whole
     thing.'
It was perhaps as well for Roland's self-esteem and peace of mind that he did not hear the
     strictures that were passed upon him by the men as they returned towards the village. Hope
     deferred maketh the heart sick, but when a new-born hope is killed, and killed cruelly and
     suddenly, there comes sometimes something more terrible than heart-sickness and more
     dangerous.
The moon had flung aside the slight mist which had covered her face earlier in the evening,
     and now shone full on the valley, towards which the crowd were making their way. As they turned
     the corner which brought them in sight of the mill whose doors none of them were to pass again,
     a burst of curses and oaths broke from the men and fell on the still air, violating and
     outraging the peace and beauty of the night.
At this moment Hatfield and Murdoch, walking together from the village to meet them, came up
     and were promptly informed of the result of the interview.
'Ay, ay, lads!' said old Murdoch. 'What did Ah tell ye? as Ah thowt.' Then looking down at
     the mill he pointed towards it, and went on in a loud voice, 'Ye shall best have another try
     now. Go down and beg o' t' door-posts o' t' owd mill to take ye on again. Ye'll be as likely to
     get a good hearing fro' them as ye were fro' t' young puppy up yonder; and they'll not be
     laughing at ye as soon as yer turned, anyway.'
This last suggestion had the effect that Murdoch probably wished it to have. At once a dozen
     voices were raised for going back to Thornsett Edge, and not leaving a pane of glass  in the window-sashes. The man who had thrown the stone before at once became a small
     hero, and met with numerous offers of assistance in going back and completing the work he had
     begun. Not a few of the men were excited by drink as well as by rage, having taken considerably
     more than was good for them before they started on the forlorn hope, and the excitement of
     these men communicated itself by those mysterious means which only manifest themselves on these
     occasions to the men who were sober. Roland Ferrier's words, passing from mouth to mouth, had
     been added to and altered so much that in the prevailing state of mind each man felt that he
     personally had been insulted and outraged by the man of whom he had asked the small favour of
     being allowed to continue to work until the winter-tide had passed. The idea of returning and
     wrecking the Ferriers' house became every moment more and more popular, and the crowd had
     actually faced round and begun that swaying movement which in an undisciplined body always, for
     a moment or two, precedes a start, when Hatfield spoke out at the top of his voice,—
'See here,' he said. 'In a few weeks now we shall all be gone to different parts, some on us
     to "the house." Most like, when that's done, when we're tramping the country far an' wide, and
     seeking the work we're turned out of here, they two'—pointing towards Thornsett Edge—''ll get
     tired o' goin' without their brass so long, maybe, an' 'ill make up the quarrel, and come back
     and start the mill again, with a new lot o' hands, to live i' our homes and eat the bread we're
     done out off.'
This new view of the case was received with a moment's silence by the hands; then a voice
     from the rear spoke out,—'Na, na, they 'ont, not if I can stop it; let's break t' ow'd mill to
     bits, and give the new hands the job to build it up again afore they work it.'
This suggestion, probably because its adoption was a trifle  less dangerous than
     wrecking a house, some of whose inmates were young men—possibly young men with firearms—was
     received with almost unanimous applause. In less time than it takes to tell, a hundred pieces
     of the rock of which the Derbyshire walls are built had begun to rattle on the roof and smash
     the windows of the mill below, and two or three pairs of strong arms had torn away a huge
     boulder of grey stone which, held in its place by creepers and earth, overhung the descent, and
     had set it rolling down the steep decline. It bounded on to the slated roof of the mill, and
     with a great crash went right through it, leaving a large black gap. Then the men set up a yell
     that made the country round ring again. When it had died away old Murdoch, who was beside
     himself with excitement, shouted out, 'Why waste yer time i' chuckin' stones at the danged
     place, lads? Get down t' hill and burn it to the ground.' Another yell of approval greeted the
     proposition, and in a few seconds the hill-top was deserted, and the crowd, swayed by an
     irresistible impulse, was scrambling down the rocky decline and making for the mill.
The shout that had been sent up when the hole had been knocked in the roof had reached the
     quick ears of Count Litvinoff sitting smoking in silence opposite his host. He got out of his
     chair. 'I have a bit of a headache to-night,' he said, 'I don't think arguing agrees with me.
     I'll just go and take a turn across the moor.'
'All right,' said Roland. 'I won't turn in till you come back.'
Litvinoff sauntered out of the room and across the hall, took a stout oak stick from the
     hall-stand, and, opening the front-door, strolled leisurely down the carriage drive. But
     directly he was out in the road he pulled his hat down tightly upon his ears, vaulted a low
     stone wall and set off running in the direction of the mill as though a thousand devils were
     following at his heels.
</div></body></text></TEI>