<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">

A NARROW ESCAPE.
THE curtain had fallen on the last scene of the most popular play in London. The appreciative
     criticism of the pit and the tearful sympathy of the upper boxes were alike merging in one
     common thought, that of 'something nice for supper.' The gallery was already empty. Its
     occupants were thirstier and more prompt of action than the loungers in the stalls and boxes.
     Ladies, a little flushed by the exertion of fighting their way through the ranks of their
     peers, were silently disputing for precedence in front of the looking-glasses in the
     cloak-rooms, while their cavaliers, already invested with overcoat and wrapper, were pacing the
     carpeted corridor outside with a very poor show of patience. The most impatient of them all was
     a stout, rubicund old gentleman in a dark coat, who trotted fretfully up and down, and now and
     then even ventured to peep in through the door at the chaos of silks and laces, raised shawls,
     and suspended bonnets, in some component part of which he evidently had an interest.
His very manifest objection to being kept waiting made his fellow-sufferers glance at him
     with some amusement. A young man who had been going leisurely towards the outer door actually
     stopped and leaned against the wall while he rolled  himself a cigarette, and from
     time to time glanced with a certain interest at him. He looked very handsome leaning there; his
     light overcoat was open, and showed the gleam of some rather good diamonds in his shirt front.
     His pose was graceful—his face had less of boredom in it than is usually worn by young men who
     go to theatres alone. This, with his large dark eyes, Greek nose, and long drooping blonde
     moustache, gave him a rather striking appearance. He might have been a foreigner but for his
     want of skill in making cigarettes. The white hands seemed absolutely awkward in their
     manipulation. Just as his persevering efforts were crowned with success, and the cigarette was
     placed between his lips, a white muffled figure emerged from the tossing rainbow sea, and a
     little hand was slipped through the old gentleman's arm.
'Desperately tired of waiting, I suppose, papa?' said a very sweet voice.
'I should think so. What a time you've been, my dear! I thought I had lost you. All the cabs
     will be gone.'
'Oh no, dear; the theatre isn't half empty. I was quite the first lady to come out, I'm
     sure.'
'You may have been the first to go in, but there have been lots of ladies come out while I've
     been waiting—dozens, I should say.'
'Couldn't we walk back, papa?' said the girl. 'It's a lovely night, and the streets are so
     interesting. It isn't far, is it?'
'No, no—the idea! Make haste, and we'll get a cab right enough. Mamma will never let us have
     a trip together again if I take you back with a cold.'
By this time they had passed down the stairs, and the tall cigarette-maker sauntered
     streetwards also.
But getting a cab was not so easy. That white chenille  wrap had taken too long
     to arrange, and now there were so many people ready and waiting for cabs that a man not at home
     in this Babel had hardly a chance.
'Papa' was so intent on hailing a four-wheeler himself that he was deaf to the offers of
     assistance from the ragged battalions that infest the theatre doors, and seem to get their
     living, not by calling cabs, which they seldom if ever do, but by shutting the doors and
     touching their hats when people have called cabs for themselves.
He was a little short-sighted, and made several attempts to get into other people's
     broughams, under the impression that they were unattached 'growlers,' and was only restrained
     by his daughter's energetic interference.
At last, driven from the field by the crowds who knew their way about better than he did, he
     yielded to the girl's entreaties, and walked towards the Strand, hoping to be able to hail a
     passing vehicle. They advanced slowly, for the pavement was crowded.
'We really had better walk,' she was saying again, when the crowd round them was suddenly
     thrown into a state of disturbance and excitement, and they were pushed backwards against the
     wall.
'Oh, dear, what is it?' she cried.
'Look out, miss!' said a rough-looking man, in a fur cap, catching her shoulders, and pulling
     her back so violently that her hand was torn from her father's arm, and at the same moment the
     crowd separated to right and left.
Then she saw what it was. A pair of spirited carriage horses had either taken fright, or had
     grown tired of the commonplace routine of wood pavement and asphalte, and had decided to try a
     short cut home through the houses, utterly regardless of the coachman, who was straining with
     might and main at the reins.

Their dreadful prancing hoofs were half-way across the pavement, and the pole of the carriage
     was close to someone's chest—good heavens! her father's—and he, standing there bewildered,
     seemed not to see it. She would have sprung forward, but the rough man held her back.
'Papa! papa!' she screamed, and at the sound of her voice he started, and seemed to see for
     the first time what threatened him. He saw it too late—the pole was within six inches of his
     breast-bone. But someone else had seen it to more purpose, and at that instant the head of the
     off horse was caught in a grasp of iron, and the pair were dragged round, to the imminent
     danger of some score of lives, while the carriage was forced back on to a hansom cab, whose
     driver disappeared into the night in a cloud of blasphemy.
'Well, I'm damned!' remarked the gentleman in the fur cap, who had snatched the girl out of
     danger; 'it's the nearest shave as ever I see.'
It had been a near shave; but the old gentleman was unhurt, though considerably flustered,
     and immeasurably indignant.
'Hurt? No, I'm not hurt—no thanks to that fool of a driver; such idiots ought to be hanged.
     But I ought to thank the gentleman who saved me.'
As he spoke the young man came forward deadly pale and without a hat.
'I do hope you're not hurt,' he said, in a singularly low, soft voice, speaking with a little
     catching of the breath. It was he who had leaned against the wall in the theatre. His hands
     were evidently good for something better than twisting tobacco. 'I hope the pole did not touch
     you? I am afraid I was hardly quick enough, but I couldn't get through the people before.'
'My dear sir, you were quick enough to save me from  being impaled against this
     wall; but I really feel quite upset. I must get my daughter home. She looks rather queer.'
She was holding his arm tightly between her hands.
'Do let's go home,' she whispered.
'I'll get you a cab,' said the hero. 'You'll probably get one easily now the mischief's
     done.'
'He's lost his hat,' observed the rescued one, as the other disappeared. 'Do you feel very
     bad, my pet? Pull yourself together. Here he comes.'
A hansom drew up in front of them, and their new acquaintance threw back the apron
     himself.
'You'd better take it yourself,' said papa. 'You seem rather lame, and your hat's gone.'
'It doesn't matter at all. I can get another cab in an instant. Pray jump in.'
'No; but look here. I haven't half thanked you. After all, you saved my life, you know. Come
     and see me to-morrow evening, will you, and let me thank you properly. Here's my card—I'm at
     Morley's.'
'I will come with pleasure to see if you are all right after it, but please don't talk any
     more about thanks, Mr—Stanley. Here's my card. Good night—Morley's Hotel,' he shouted to the
     cabman, and as they drove off he mechanically raised his hand to the place where his hat should
     have been. Have you ever seen a man do that when hat there was none? The effect is
     peculiar—much like a rustic pulling a forelock when t'squire goes by.
'I hope he will come to-morrow,' said Mr Stanley as the hansom drove off.
'Why, I think he's staying at our hotel, papa. I am almost sure I've seen him at the
      table d'hôte.'
'Dear, dear! How extraordinary.'
Clare was more than 'almost sure' in fact, she knew per fectly well that this
     handsome stranger was not only staying at the hotel, but that he in his turn was quite aware of
     their presence there. Of her presence he could hardly be oblivious, since his eyes had been
     turned on her without much intermission all through dinner every evening since she had been in
     town.
Before Clare went to her room that night she managed to possess herself of the slip of
     cardboard on which was engraved—Michael Litvinoff.
What an uncommon name! How strange that he of all people should have been the one to come
     forward at the critical moment.
Yes, but not quite so strange as it seemed to Miss Stanley; for Litvinoff had gone to the
     theatre for no other purpose than to be near her. It was not only to gaze at her fair face that
     he thus followed her; but because he was determined to catch at any straw which might lead to
     an introduction, and the fates had favoured him, as they had often done before, in a degree
     beyond his wildest hopes. He was well contented to have lost his hat, and did not care much
     about his bruised foot. These were a cheap price to pay for admittance to the acquaintance of
     the girl who had occupied most of his thoughts during the few days that had passed since he had
     first seen her.
'A very fair beginning. The gods have certainly favoured me so far; and now, O Jupiter, aid
     us! or rather Cupid, for I suppose he's the proper deity to invoke in an emergency like
     this.'
And Michael Litvinoff stretched out his slippered feet to the blazing fire in his
     bedroom.
'By-the-way, I might as well look at the address. I know it's somewhere down North.'
He rose, walked with some difficulty to the chair, where he had flung his great-coat, and
     took the card from one of its pockets. 'Mr John Stanley, Aspinshaw, Firth Vale.'

'By Jove!' he said, sinking into his chair again. 'Firth Vale—Firth Vale. That's in
     Derbyshire. Ah me!'
He thrust his feet forward again to the warmth, and leaning back gazed long into the fire,
     but not quite so complacently as he had done before it had occurred to him to make that journey
     across the room to his great-coat.
</div></body></text></TEI>