<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">

AN HONEST MAN AND A BRAVE ONE
THANK God!' was Count Litvinoff's inward ejaculation, as, followed by Roland, he sprang
     through the laurel bushes into the gravel path that skirted the lawn. For what he saw was not
     what he had feared to see. Clare was safe. She was standing on the last of the stone steps that
     led down from the verandah, her hands clasped over her eyes, as if to shut out some intolerable
     sight.
On the lawn before her, half-a-dozen yards off, in brown shooting suit and gaiters, lay her
     father, face downwards, on the grass, his gun beside him, and his two sporting dogs sniffing
     round the hand that had held it.
The two young men were at his side in an instant, and had half raised him by the time Clare
     had shaken off the horror that had paralysed her and had sprung towards them. Roland glanced at
     Mr Stanley's face, and, passing his arm round the old man's neck, drew his head towards him,
     and bent over it in such a manner as to keep it from her eyes.
'Take her in, Litvinoff,' he said, still bending forward; 'make her go in.'
'Come in, Miss Stanley; you can do no good here,' said Litvinoff, rising and taking the girl
     by the arm. She shook him off.

'Let me alone,' she cried. 'How dare you interfere? Let me go to my father.'
'Miss Stanley, be reasonable. You can do much more good in the house. Don't you know we must
     bring your father in?—and your mother must be told.'
But Mrs Stanley needed no telling. From the window she had seen—when the barking of the dogs
     told of Mr Stanley's near approach—how Clare had run out bareheaded to meet him—how he had
     stopped in the middle of the lawn, as if expecting her to come to him—how he had taken his gun
     from his shoulder, and dropped the butt on the ground—how there had been a flash, a report, and
     how he had fallen. Now she came out.
'Go in,' she said to Clare, 'and send for Doctor Bailey. Thomas can go on Red Robin.'
By this time the servants were gathering from all directions.
'Come,' Litvinoff spoke in a low voice, but a voice of authority, and led her towards the
     stable-yard. Coming round the corner they met Thomas.
'Oh, Thomas—' she began, when Litvinoff interrupted.
'Saddle Red Robin, and ride for Doctor Bailey—ride fast for your life! Now, Miss Stanley, for
     Heaven's sake don't give way; keep up. They may want linen for bandages, and brandy.'
She looked at him with wide-open, frightened eyes, but she obeyed him; and when those things
     were brought she stood looking mutely at him, like a child asking for directions.
'Sit down,' he said; and, pouring out some brandy-and-water, held it to her lips.
'Drink, and then you will be able, perhaps, to be of some use.'
They were in the drawing-room. Litvinoff noticed, even at that moment, the hundred dainty
     tokens of a cultivated woman's daily presence. As he set down the glass, past the closed door
       came the heavy tread of the men who were bringing the master back to his
     home.
Then Clare rose up. 'I will go to my father,' she said, turning a white, resolute face
     towards the door. 'Twenty of you shall not stop me!'
Litvinoff caught her two hands and held them tightly.
'Wait, wait; they are getting him to his bed. You would only be in the way. Trust me, Miss
     Stanley. I would not keep you from him if you could be of any use to him. You may be of real
     service by-and-by.'
'Very well,' she said; 'I will do what you tell me. But, oh, tell me all you know; tell me
     where he's hurt; did you see? Will it be dangerous? For pity's sake tell me what you saw,
     whether—'
Here the door opened, and Roland came in. Her eyes searched his face for re-assurance, but
     found there something more terrible than her worst fears, and as he opened his lips to speak
     she cried in a high-pitched voice, quite unlike her own, as she held out her hands as if to
     keep off something, 'Don't tell me—don't tell me anything—let me go!'
And as Roland stood aside she rushed from the room. Litvinoff closed the door.
'He's dead,' said Roland.
'I know. I knew that directly I put my hand on him. I have had my hand on a man shot dead
     before to-day.'
Roland sat down on a low chair. It was the one Clare had occupied half-an-hour before. There
     on the little table by it lay her work-basket, and some pretty useless bit of sewing, and all
     the little gilt working implements which she had put down when she went to meet her father.
     Roland's eye fell on them, and he groaned.
'Good God, Litvinoff, what a terrible thing! What a frightful blow for them!'

'Does Mrs Stanley know?'
'Yes.'
'How soon can the doctor be here?'
'In half-an-hour; but he'll be no good when he does come.'
'Not for him, but Miss Stanley may need him. Her face as she passed out of the door was not
     reassuring.'
Roland groaned again.
'What a horrible world it is!' he said.
His father dead, his brother estranged, his sweetheart lost to him, and now this new calamity
     had fallen near him. 'It never rains but it pours.' And it seemed to be raining misfortunes in
     Firth Vale.
'It is a horrible world,' said the other; 'but reflecting on that truth will not aid
     anyone just now. Is there nothing we can do?'
'Not that I know of, but we won't go till the doctor comes.'
'Certainly not; and in the meantime let me suggest that a little of this brandy would not be
     amiss, if you don't want him to find a patient in you. You look uncommonly shaky.'
Roland accepted the suggestion and the proffered glass.
'Miss Stanley's mother seems to have her wits about her?'
'Yes, Mrs Stanley's a sensible woman—but she's not Miss Stanley's mother. Mr Stanley was
     married twice.'
'There are no other children?'
'No.'
'Poor woman,' said Litvinoff, sincerely enough, though for a certain reason he was not
     displeased to hear that Clare was an only child. 'He seems to have been a rich man,' went on
     Litvinoff, glancing round the room.
'Yes, he had more than he knew what to do with. It seems hard that he should have had to
     leave it all so suddenly,' said Roland, growing sentimental.

'It is a great pity men have to leave their wealth behind them. If they could only take it
     with them, there would not be so many young people growing up in vicious idleness.' Then, as it
     suddenly occurred to him that this might possibly be considered personal, he went on in his
     most approved didactic manner,—'Since death is inevitable, how lucky we ought to think it that
     so few people have anything to live for. I believe to a great many people the best thing in
     life is the certainty that some day or other they'll get out of it.'
Roland did not answer. There are moments when moral reflections are particularly hateful.
The doctor arrived sooner than they had hoped, the man-servant having met him about half-way
     between Aspinshaw and his own house, but of course he could only confirm what they all knew.
     The whole contents of the gun had lodged in the lungs, and death must have been instantaneous.
     He asked the two young men a good many questions as to the manner of the accident, but of
     course they had not seen it, and were unable to throw any light on the cause of the disaster.
     He must have been carrying the gun full-cock, and the concussion, when he brought the butt down
     on the ground, must have started it.
'Mrs Stanley bears up wonderfully well.'
'And his daughter?' put in Litvinoff.
'Well, the poor child's crushed at present, but she'll soon be all right. Young hearts soon
     throw off their troubles, thank Heaven! I shall have to trouble you two gentlemen at the
     inquest,' he said, as he got into his gig and was driven off.
Roland Ferrier and Michael Litvinoff walked home almost in silence, consumed a dinner
     enlivened by Miss Letitia's comments on the events of the day, and, when she had retired in  tears, passed one of the most melancholy evenings in the recollection of either.
     Roland did his best to perform the difficult part of genial host to the guest who had been
     introduced to Thornsett under such inauspicious circumstances; but he was a young man who had
     not that within him which enables men to resist the influence of the immediately surrounding
     circumstances, and his attempt was a dead failure. Litvinoff could, perhaps, have succeeded
     with a desperate effort in raising the cloud of gloom that hung over them both, but it did not
     seem to him that the game was quite worth the candle, and he let it alone.
Under the circumstances there could be no shooting, and none of such social entertainments as
     would certainly otherwise have enlivened his visit, and the prospect of his first Christmas in
     an English country-house looked very bleak.
'I suppose one mustn't smoke here,' he said aloud to himself, when, the long evening over, he
     reached his bedroom, and sank down into an easy-chair before the brightly-burning fire. 'That
     antiquated lady is the sort of person who would go mad if she smelt smoke in one of the
     bedrooms. It is a great bore. I want to think—and how the deuce am I to think if I can't
     smoke!—and I must think. Yes, it must be done; they must put it down to my foreign ways,' he
     added, as he drew out his cigar-case and lighted up.
Something in his surroundings reminded him of that night in October when he had saved the
     life of the man who was now lying dead at Aspinshaw.
'Poor old boy,' he said, 'I didn't renew his lease of life for very long, after all; but I
     expect he lived long enough to have done almost as much for me as he could have done had he
     lived longer. Perhaps my "views," as he would have called them, will not stand so much in the
     way now. My crushed young host told me that she is beginning to share those views 
     and to be enthusiastic—thanks to that mysterious entity, Petrovitch. I owe him that; I wonder
     if I owe him anything else? I do owe many sums to many people. He had me for ten pounds,
     though, any way. Pardieu! I hope he won't try that again, or I shall have to stay down here
     permanently. I shall attend a funeral in a few days, I suppose. I wonder when I shall attend a
     marriage? She was obedient to-day—a good sign. Things will go smoother so.'
He puffed at his cigar in silence a few minutes, then he spoke aloud again, 'And so that was
     John Hatfield, and he is one of us—or half one of us. By Jove! that makes me feel a cursed
     traitor—that merits death. Well, I'm not afraid of that, anyhow, nor of anything that may come
     after. I've got memories enough to make a hell of my own here, and death would be the end of
      them, at any rate, not the beginning. And yet one must live, I suppose, though I
     don't feel so sure of that to-night. Poor little girl—dear little girl! I wish you
     were the heiress of Aspinshaw. The real heiress is pretty and charming, and a lady,' with a
     rather bitter laugh, 'and she is beginning to have "views;" but somehow I can't get you out of
     my head to-night.' He moved his hand to and fro before his eyes, as though to clear away the
     smoke. Then he rose. 'Curses on conscience—curses on principle!' he said; 'I must see if sleep
     will do it;' and he went to bed.
During the next few days there was nothing to do except to call at Aspinshaw every day and
     ask after Mrs and Miss Stanley. This was an obvious duty, but as an occupation it was not
     engrossing. On the second day, young Ferrier offered to 'show his guest over' the mill, and
     Litvinoff, always glad of a new experience, joyfully consented. The mill was charmingly
     situated in a little hollow in the hills, with a big reservoir above it and a little stream
     below. On one side was a wood, where a good many hollies kept up the impression of greenness,
       though all the other trees were sere and brown. On the other side was a very
     steep incline which shot up almost like a high wall, and was bare and rugged and rocky, and
     from the top some rude steps cut out of the grey rock led down to the mill. While the workings
     of the machinery were being explained, and the various processes exhibited, it did not escape
     the Count's observation that the men looked particularly discontented, and that there was none
     of that deferential submission in their manner to Roland which he had been accustomed to see in
     the manner of workmen towards their masters.
'What's the matter with the men?' Litvinoff asked, as they walked back to Thornsett. 'They
     looked uncommonly disagreeable. My friend John Hatfield doesn't appear to be the only one who
     is dissatisfied with the munificent two pounds a week.'
'John Hatfield! What a memory you have for names. Oh, they're not dissatisfied with the
     amount of their wages. On the contrary, they only wish they could go on at the same rate. But
     they soon won't have any at all from me. The mill stops working at the end of the year, and
     they've somehow got it into their heads that I'm responsible for it, whereas it's just about as
     much my fault as it is that tree's.'
'Is it any one's fault?'
'You know that it is my brother's. He made the quarrel, and forced it on me, knowing what the
     results would be.'
'And the results to these men will be—'
'Starvation, I'm afraid, for some of them, poor fellows, and very short commons for them all;
     but it's rather hard that I should be blamed for it.'
'Oh, beautiful system!' said Litvinoff; 'splendid organisation of industry! Two brothers
     quarrel about nothing in particular, and a hundred men and their families have to starve in
     consequence.'

'It's not the fault of the system, but of my father's will and my brother's mad temper; but
     anyhow it is not my fault.'
'Well, your father's will is distinctly part of the system; but, as you say, you are not to
     blame. No, Ferrier; you are certainly the most hardly done by. As to these "hands," as you call
     them, qu'importe? It is you who are to be pitied. It is so much harder to be blamed
     than to starve.'
'What a cool fellow you are, Litvinoff!' Roland laughed, but was yet a little nettled too,
     for, like all Englishmen, he hated irony. 'You're always mocking at something or somebody. But
     perhaps you forget that I shall have hardly anything to live on either—a wretched hundred a
     year or so.'
'A hundred a year,' said the Count, in the tone of one who is dealing with a difficult
     arithmetical problem, 'is just about two pounds a week. Now the other day you said that two
     pounds a week was "not so bad" for a man with a family; and, with all your misfortunes, you are
     not what you English people call "a family man."'
'But then you must remember how differently those sort of people are brought up.'
'I do remember it.'
'They don't have the same needs as we do.'
'Don't they?'
'No. What do they care about music or art or poetry or travelling? Fortunately for them they
     haven't the tastes that run away with money.'
'They have a taste for food and for warmth, I suppose,' the Count was beginning, when Roland
     interrupted him.
'There, Litvinoff, it's no good; you'll never convert me. I'm a Radical, not a Socialist.
     Let's talk about something else.'
'By all means. To return to John Hatfield. I noticed in the mill to-day that he did not
     participate in the general scowl.'
'No. I don't think he bears me any ill-will. Our rela tions with the Hatfields
     are peculiar. When my mother died—it was before my aunt came to live with us—Mrs Hatfield took
     charge of my brother and me, and was a sort of foster-mother to us. Her daughter Alice was our
     playfellow, and a dear little girl she was.'
'Was that the girl you said had—well, not acted very wisely?' asked the Count, feeling an
     insensate longing to talk about Alice, or to hear some one else do so.
'Yes; that was the girl,' said Roland. 'She was as sweet a little girl as you would wish to
     see.'
Litvinoff mentally endorsed this statement to the full. Aloud he said,—
'What was it—the old story?'
'Yes. She met some fellow at Liverpool; I suppose lost her heart to him, and gave the world
     for love, and considered it well lost, as they say. Damn the brute! I wish I had the handling
     of him. I should like to have half an hour with him without the gloves.'
Litvinoff was conscious of an insane desire to give Roland his wish, and try which was the
     better man, but he said quietly,—
'You don't know him, then? I suppose nothing has been heard or seen of her?'
'No, only—it's rather funny—when I went to the Agora that night I fancied I saw her face, but
     it must have been fancy.'
'Of course; unless,' added the other, goaded by the Imp of the Perverse—'unless her lover was
     a gentleman interested in social reform.'
'Not he,' said Roland contemptuously; 'more likely some fool of a counter-jumper or clerk.
     You know I looked upon her quite as my sister, and I was very fond of her, and all that.'

'Yes?' interrogatively.
Roland had not meant to say anything more; but after that 'yes' he found himself going
     on,—
'And that's why it's so deuced hard that my brother should blame me for it. Upon my soul, I
     seem fated to be blamed by everybody I know for everything any one else has done!'
'That, then, was your brother's accusation?'
'Yes. At least if it wasn't I can make neither head nor tail of anything he said. But I
     didn't mean to have said anything about it—it's too preposterous! I don't know how it is, but
     I'm always finding myself telling you things that I didn't mean to tell any one. I wonder how
     it is? Natural affinity, I suppose.'
'I suppose it's because you know I am interested in you,' said Litvinoff cordially, as they
     turned in at the gate of Thornsett Edge.
'It will be very dull for you here,' said Roland, beating the shrubs lightly with his ash
     stick as they walked up the path; 'and, I am sorry to say I shall have to be out this evening.
     I must go down to our solicitor to arrange about several things. You won't think me an
     awful bear?'
'Don't mention it; I shall be very well amused, I doubt not. I can take a walk if I find I
     miss you very much, and then I shall be sure to lose myself, and there is some excitement to be
     got out of that.'
That evening John Hatfield was sitting on the oak settle by his hearth, his wife with her
     knitting in the substantial rocking-chair opposite. The interior was cosy and bright enough. A
     high wooden screen protected the inmates from any cold air that might else have come through
     the door, which opened straight from the house-place into the street. A short red curtain hung
     in front of the long low window, that was nearly  as wide as the room itself.
     There was a chintz flounce to the chimney-piece, and a bright round table, on three legs, in
     the middle of the room. There was a good deal of shining brass about, and a few pieces of old
     china. Mrs Hatfield, a small fair woman, with grey, short-sighted eyes, had more lines in her
     face than her years should have traced there. But the poor age much more rapidly than the rich.
     Significant reflection. And every trouble leaves its signet on our faces, and Mrs Hatfield's
     trouble had been a heavy one, and its traces were easily discernible. So thought Count
     Litvinoff, as he tapped at the door and entered John Hatfield's house, and the thought was not
     a pleasant one. Derbyshire was certainly not the place to come to for pleasant thoughts, or
     pleasant incidents either.
'Is't thee, man?' said Hatfield, leaning forward to discern the features of his visitor in
     the comparative gloom by the door where he stood. 'Come in—come to the fire. Here, lass, this
     is the chap I telled ye on.'
As Litvinoff held out his hand to Mrs Hatfield her husband went on,—
'Ay, shake his hand, lass; you don't so often get to shake hands wi' an honest man, and a
     brave man—'
Alice's father speaking of him to Alice's mother! Another pleasant incident for Count
     Litvinoff!
</div></body></text></TEI>