<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">

'YOU LIE!'
'Morley's Hotel,
Sunday Evening.DEAR MR FERRIER,—You were so full of Russia yesterday afternoon
      that you made me forget to say to you what might have saved you the trouble of answering this
      by post. Will you and your brother dine with us (papa says) to-morrow evening at seven? I hope
      you enjoyed yourselves last night. I am sure I should have done if I had been there. With
      papa's and my kind regards to you and Mr Roland,—I am, dear Mr Ferrier, yours very
       truly,'Clare Stanley.'P.S.—Count Litvinoff, your interesting
      Russian friend, will be here.'
Miss Stanley smiled to herself rather wickedly as she folded this note. She had noticed that
     her interest in the Russian acquaintance did not seem to enhance theirs, and she thought to
     herself that whatever the dinner might be at which those three assisted, it certainly would not
     be dull for her.
In Derbyshire, where her amusements were very limited, she would have thought twice before
     permitting herself to risk offending the masters of Thornsett, but here that risk only  seemed to offer a new form of amusement. But experimenting on the feelings of these
     gentlemen was an entertainment which was somehow not quite so enthralling as it had been, and
     she now longed, not for a fresh world to conquer—here was one ready to her hand—but for the
     power to conquer it. She would have given something to be able to believe that she had anything
     like the same power over this hero of romance, whom fate had thrown in her way, as she had over
     the excellent but commonplace admirers with whom she had amused herself for the last year.
Litvinoff had distinctly told her that the goddess of his idolatry, the one mistress of his
     heart, was Liberty, and though this statement was modified in her mind by her recollection of
     certain glances cast at herself, she yet believed in it enough to feel a not unnatural desire
     to enter into competition with that goddess. Her classical studies taught her that women had
     competed successfully with such rivals, and she was not morbidly self-distrustful, especially
     when a looking-glass was near her.
With the letter in her hand she glanced at the mirror over the mantelpiece, and the fair
     vision of dark-brown lashes, gold-brown waving hair, delicate oval face, and well-shaped if
     rather large mouth, might have reassured her had she felt any doubts of her own attractions.
     But the glance she cast at herself over her shoulder was one of saucy triumph, and the smile
     with which she sealed her letter one of conscious power.
Would she have been gratified if she could have seen the effect of her note? It was not at
     all with the sort of expression you would expect to see on the face of a man who had just
     received a dinner invitation transmitted through the lady of his heart from that lady's papa,
     that Richard Ferrier passed the note over to his brother next morning.

'Here you are,' he said. 'Bouquet de Nihilist, trebly distilled.'
'Well, don't let's go, then.'
'Why, I thought you were so fond of the Count. I wonder you don't jump at it. I thought it
     would please you.'
'So I do like him—he's a splendid speaker; but I didn't come to London to spend all my days
     and nights with him, any more than you did. Besides, I'm engaged for to-night.'
'Oh, are you? Well, I think I shall go.'
'You'd better leave it alone. You won't stand much chance beside a man with such a moustache
     as that. Besides, he sings, don't you know? and with all your solid and admirable qualities,
     Richard, you're not a nightingale.'
'Nor yet a runaway rebel.'
'I say, you'd better look a little bit after your epithets. Litvinoff doesn't look much of
     the running-away sort. According to what I heard last night, he can use a revolver with effect
     on occasion. By the way, Richard,' he went on, more seriously, 'I believe I saw a face at that
     club I knew, but it was only for a minute, and I lost sight of it, and I couldn't be sure.'
'Who did you think it was?'
'Little Alice.'
'Think—you think!' said his brother, turning fiercely on him. 'Do you mean to say you didn't
      know?'
'Know? Of course not, or I should say so. What the deuce do you mean?'
'I should like to ask you what the deuce you mean by even debating whether or no to accept
     that invitation when you know you've no earthly right to go near Miss Stanley—'
'You'd better mention your ideas to Mr Stanley. I don't in the least know what you're driving
     at—and I don't care;  but since you choose to bring her name in, I shall
     throw over my other engagement and go to Morley's to-night.'
'You can go to the devil if you choose!' said Dick, who seemed to have entirely lost his
     self-control, and he flung out, slamming the door behind him.
Clare's note was bearing more fruit than she desired or anticipated in setting the brothers
     not so much against Litvinoff as against each other, for what but her letter could have stirred
     Dick's temper to this sudden and unpremeditated outbreak? What but her note and Dick's comments
     thereon could have ruffled Roland's ordinarily even nature in this way? It is always a mistake
     to play with fire; but people, girls especially, will not believe this until they have burned
     their own fingers, and, en passant, more of other people's valuables than they can
     ever estimate.
'I wish I had spoken to that girl yesterday,' said Count Litvinoff to himself; 'it would have
     saved my turning out this vile afternoon. If fate has given England freedom, she has taken care
     to accompany the gift with a fair share of fog. I wish I could help worrying about other
     people's troubles. It is very absurd, but I can't get on with my work for thinking of that poor
     tired little face. Hard up, she looked, too. Ah, well! so shall I be very soon, unless
     something very unexpected turns up. I'll go now, and earn an easy conscience for this
     evening.'
He threw down his pen and rose. The article on the Ethics of Revolution on which he was
     engaged had made but small progress that afternoon. He had felt ever since lunch that go out he
     must sooner or later, and the prospect was dispiriting. He glanced out of his window as he put
     on his fur-lined coat. From the windows of Morley's Hotel the view on a fine day is about as
     cheerful as any that London can  present—though one may have one's private
     sentiments respecting the pepper-boxes which emphasise the bald ugliness of the National
     Gallery, and though one may sometimes wish that the slave of the lamp would bring St George's
     Hall from Liverpool and drop it on that splendid site. But this was not a fine day. It was a
     gloomy, damp, foggy, depressing, suicidal day. The fog had, with its usual adroitness, managed
     to hide the beauties of everything, and to magnify the uglinesses. Nelson was absolutely
     invisible, and the lions looked like half-drowned cats. Litvinoff shuddered as he lighted a
     large cigar and pulled his gloves on.
'This is a detestable climate,' he said, as he drew the first whiffs; 'but London is about
     the only place I know where good cigars can be had at a price to fit the pocket of an exile. I
     suppose I shall soon have to leave this palatial residence, and become one of the out-at-elbows
     gentlemen who make life hideous in Leicester Square and Soho.'
Like many men who have lived lonely lives, Michael Litvinoff had an inveterate habit of
     soliloquy. It had been strengthened by his life at the ancestral mansion on the Litvinoff
     estate, and had not grown less in his years of solitary wanderings.
His walk to-day was not a pleasant one, and more than once he felt inclined to turn back. But
     he persevered, and when he reached the house which he had seen her enter he asked a woman on
     the ground floor if Miss Hatfield lived there.
'There's a young person named Hatfield in the front attic,' was the reply, as the informant
     stared with all her eyes at the Count, who was certainly an unusual sort of apparition in
     Spray's Buildings.
As he strode up the dirty, rotten stairs, stumbling more than once, he thought to himself, as
     Dick had done, that  Alice did not make her new life profitable, whatever it
     was.
'Poor girl!' he thought; 'if she's of the same mind now as she was when I saw her last, I
     suppose I must find an opportunity of doing good by stealth.'
The house, though poor enough, did not seem to be one of those overcrowded dens of which we
     have heard so much lately, and which a Royal Commission is to set right, as a Royal Commission
     always does set everything right. Or perhaps the lodgers were birds of prey, who only came home
     to roost at uncertain hours; or beasts of burden, who were only stabled at midnight to be
     harnessed again at sunrise. At anyrate, the Count saw no one on the stairs, and he saw no one
     in the front attic either. Not only no one, but no thing. The door and window were both open.
     The room appeared to have been swept and garnished, but was absolutely empty of everything but
     fog. There was another door opposite, but it was closed and locked.
'She's evidently not here. We'll try lower down.' But before he had time to turn he heard a
     foot on the stairs, coming up with the light and springy tread which is the result of good and
     well-fitting boots, and which does not mark those who walk through life, from the cradle to the
     grave, shod in boots several sizes too large and several pounds too heavy.
He glanced over the broken banisters, and recoiled hastily.
'The gentle Roland, by all that's mysterious!' he said, 'Now, what on earth can he
     want here? At anyrate, he'd better not see me.'
The landing on which he stood was very dark, and there was a heap of lumber, old boxes, a
     hopelessly broken chair, a tub, and some boards. Litvinoff crept behind them, and in his black
     coat and the obscurity of the dusky landing and the dark afternoon he felt himself secure. He
     had hardly taken  up this position when Roland Ferrier's head appeared above the
     top stair, to be followed cautiously by the rest of him. He cast a puzzled look round the empty
     attic, tried the closed door, and, turning, went downstairs again.
Litvinoff was just coming out of his not over savoury lurking-place when he heard a voice on
     the landing below, which was not Roland's.
'Parbleu!' he said to himself; 'it rains Ferriers here this afternoon. Here's the engaging
     Richard, and evidently not in the best of tempers.'
He evidently was not—if one might judge by his voice, which was icy with contempt as he said
     sneeringly, 'So this was the engagement you were going to put off, was it?'
'Yes, it was. At least I am here to put off an engagement; but I don't know what you know
     about it,' said Roland, 'and I don't know what you mean by following me about like this. What
     business have you here? This isn't Aspinshaw, that you need dog my footsteps.'
'I came here to try and find out whether my father's son was a scoundrel or not, and you've
     answered the question for me by being here.'
'Upon my word,' said Roland's voice, 'I think you must be out of your mind.'
It isn't often that the thought which would restrain comes into one's mind at the moment when
     restraint is most needed; but just then Dick did think of his father and his dying
     wishes, and the remembrance helped him to speak more calmly than he would otherwise have
     done.
'Once for all, then, will you tell me why you are here, Roland?'
'Yes, I will, though I don't acknowledge your right to question me. I had an appointment,
     with that Frenchman we met last night, for this evening, but I've lost his address. I  knew it was in this court, and I was walking about on the chance of finding him, when
     I'm almost sure I saw Litvinoff come in here. I made after him, feeling sure he was going to
     the same place as I was.'
'And where is Litvinoff?'
'He seems to have disappeared, or else I was mistaken. Now, what have you got to say?'
'This. You lie!'
It sounded hardly like Richard's voice, so hoarse and choked with passion was it; and so full
     of insult and scorn that Roland at last lost control of himself.
'Stand back, you raving maniac,' he said, 'and let me pass! The same roof mustn't cover us
     two any longer, and don't speak again to me this side of the grave.'
The listener, leaning forward eagerly to catch every word, heard Roland's foot dash down the
     staircase. There was a moment of perfect silence, and then came a long-drawn sigh from Richard
     Ferrier.
'Now then, young man, what's all this to-do about? I should like to know what you mean by
     quarrelling in places that don't belong to you, and terrifying respectable married women out of
     their seven senses.' It was a shrill woman's voice that spoke, and a door opened on the landing
     where young Ferrier stood.
'I'm very sorry, madam,' said Richard, in tones calm enough now. 'I didn't intend to disturb
     anyone. Will you kindly tell me if anyone lives here named Hatfield?'
'There was a young woman of that name in the front attic, but she left sudden this
     morning.'
'Do you know where she's gone?'
'No, I don't.'
'Does anyone in the house know?'

'No. I'm the landlady, and she'd have told me if she told anyone.'
'Thank you,' he said, and turned to pass down the staircase.
'Stay, though,' he said; 'have you any Frenchmen lodging here?'
'I don't want no dratted furriners here, and I haven't got none, thank God!'
'Of course not,' said Ferrier to himself, and strode downstairs.
'No foreigners here? Don't be too sure, my good woman,' Litvinoff muttered to himself, as he
     heard the landlady's door close to a continued accompaniment of reiterated objections in that
     lady's shrill treble. 'I'd better get out of this house of mystery at once. I trust that the
     outraged female proprietor of this staircase will not demand my blood. Well, whatever happens,
     I suppose we shall not see the amiable brothers to-night, and that will mean a
      tête-à-tête,' he added, as he came out from his dusty retirement, and carefully
     removed all traces of the same from his clothes. When he found himself once more in the chill,
     foggy, outside air, he looked up and down the court, and smiled.
'The situation becomes interesting,' he said to himself, 'and demands another of these very
     excellent cigars.'
</div></body></text></TEI>