<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">

MAKING IT UP
THERE was rejoicing in the house of Robert Gates, as over a prodigal returned, when Richard
     Ferrier avowed that he had been mistaken all through in his quarrel with his brother, and that
     he was now only anxious to acknowledge his error, and to do his best to set things going again
     on the old footing. But he had some days to wait before he could make his confession.
Thornsett Edge had remained unoccupied, for there was some difficulty in letting a furnished
     house near a deserted village. People did not seem to care about the vicinity of all those
     empty shells of homes. So Roland had decided to occupy it again, and he was coming down there
     to get things ready for his aunt's reception, and was making a few visits to old friends on his
     way. He had written down to the old couple in charge to have the place ready, as he might come
     down any day.
Two days passed and he had not come, and Richard was getting tired of the constant inquiries
     and congratulations which assailed him at The Hollies. He thought he would go home, and be
     there to welcome Roland when he arrived. So he sent over his portmanteau, and took up his
     quarters in his old room at Thornsett Edge. He was in a very tender and remorseful frame of
     mind in those days. He wandered all  over the old house, full filled of memories
     of the time when he and his brother played together there as children; of the time when, later,
     they thrashed each other as schoolboys, with right good will. There were haunting thoughts of
     the dissension that had grown up between them, and of the shadow that the knowledge of it had
     cast upon their father's deathbed. The necessity which he felt himself to be under of keeping a
     sharp look-out for John Hatfield, fortunately served as a kind of antidote to the rush of
     memories and associations which came over Richard, now that he was once again in his home.
He walked down to the village to seek out the few 'hands' who had clung like rooks to their
     old haunts, and there he saw sad sights and heard sad stories enough to have driven him mad had
     he not known that it would soon be in his power to set things in some degree right again. He
     resolved, and felt sure of Roland's co-operation in his scheme, to seek out as many of the old
     'hands' as could be got word of, and to give each of them enough to get a home together
     again.
Of course he thought often of Miss Stanley; but the past months of unusual action and changed
     surroundings had altered his feeling for her, which was fortunate for him, since he had falsely
     accused his own brother to her—a meanness which he knew it to be quite impossible for such a
     woman as Clare ever to forget or forgive. He thought of her now without any of the old passion,
     as he might have thought of one who had died long before, or of one whom he had loved in some
     other life.
This did not prevent him from feeling furiously jealous of Litvinoff, to whom he seemed to
     have transferred all the anger that had burned in him against his brother, intensified by a
     galling consciousness of the complete success which Litvinoff had achieved in his attempt to
     deceive and mislead him. There should be a reckoning for that, Richard thought. He  felt glad he had always mistrusted the man. It showed that his judgment was worth something
     sometimes, and this pleased his self-love.
On the third day came a telegram from Matlock, which said that Roland would be at home that
     evening. Richard roamed about the house in restless impatience all day. How should they meet?
     He should not dare to go to the door to greet his brother lest he should imagine that it was a
     renewal of hostilities, not a welcome home, that was intended. Richard had no eye for dramatic
     effects, nor any leaning thereto, but he charged the old people to say nothing of his presence,
     and to leave him to announce himself to his brother when he should think well.
His brother would have done exactly the same thing from absolutely opposite motives.
So when Roland walked up to his home in the teeth of the wild March wind the only welcome
     that met him was that of the old woman in charge, and this seemed to him to be so
     inconsequently effusive, and the good lady herself seemed so unreasonably radiant, that he was
     quite flattered. It was pleasant to him to be appreciated and admired, even by a 'person in
     charge.'
'The fire's i' the dining-room, Mr Roland,' she said; 'an' I'll dish ye up the supper in less
     nor half a minute, sir. It's a glad day for Thornsett as sees yer back agen.'
Mrs Brock's son had worked in the mill—a fact which made the anticipated reconciliation
     peculiarly interesting to her.
Richard from his ambush in his own room heard the greeting, heard the well-known voice giving
     orders about rugs and hat-boxes in the well-known tones. Then he heard doors open and close.
     After a while a savoury smell from the hot supper that was being carried in rose to his
     altitude. The  dining-room door was opened, and shut several times. At last it was
     closed with a more decided touch, and in the noise of its closing was a settled sound as of a
     door that did not mean to open again just yet. Richard knew that the supper had been cleared
     away, and that Roland was most likely assisting digestion with tobacco and grog. This would be
     the time, he decided, to put in an appearance and to get through his proposed reconciliation.
     He went softly downstairs, and paused a moment with his hand on the dining-room door. The house
     was very still. As he stood there he heard a cinder fall from the fire in the dining-room, and
     the great hall clock at the foot of the stairs ticked louder than usual, as it seemed. He
     turned the handle and went in. Roland was sitting in the big arm-chair by the fire where their
     father had been used to sit. As the door opened he looked up with a sort of displeased
     curiosity to see who it was that had the assurance to enter unannounced. When he saw who it was
     he gave a start, and the expression of his face changed to something deeper and sterner.
He got up.
'I understood from Gates,' he said, 'that you renounced all claim to be in this house so long
     as half the possible rent was paid you. I mean to pay you your half. May I ask, then, what you
     want here?'
'I want to beg your pardon,' began Richard, his hand still on the lock—when his brother
     interrupted him with,—
'Hadn't you better close the door? I suppose you don't want all the world to hear anything
     you may have to say.'
His tone was so icily cold that the other found it hard to go on as he had intended. He did
     his best, however.
'I am very sorry for all that happened in the autumn. I was quite deceived and misled, and I
     beg your pardon. I can't say more, and I hope you'll let bygones be bygones.'

He held out his hand. At this point in the scene Dick had fancied that his brother would
     clasp his hand with reciprocating affection, and all would be forgiven and forgotten. But the
     other actor evidently intended a different 'reading' of the part assigned him. He made no
     movement to meet the outstretched hand. On the contrary, he put his hands in his pockets with a
     too expressive gesture, and was silent.
'Come, Roland,' said Dick, who, knowing himself to have been in the wrong, displayed a
     patience which surprised himself; 'make it up, old man.'
'I am not sure,' said the other slowly, 'that I care to make it up, as you call it. No
     "making-up" can alter all that has gone wrong through your foolishness. I've gone through the
     worst of the trouble now, and, to tell you the truth, I'm not inclined to lay myself open to
     any more experiences of this kind. You might be "deceived and misled" again.'
Richard, who had remained standing, gave the slightest possible stamp of impatience, which
     his brother did not observe.
'And as for the money,' he went on, 'I dare say I can do as well without it as with it.'
'Look here,' said Dick, his face flushing hotly; 'if you suppose I care a straw about the
     dirty money, you're mistaken; only one of us can't have any without the other now. Come,
     Roland, be friends, if it's only for the old dad's sake.'
Roland seemed to have what the children call the 'black dog on his shoulder,' but this appeal
     was not lost. He made an effort to overcome the resentment and bitterness that filled him, and
     after a moment held out his hand, saying,—
'Very well, I'll shake hands. I suppose we shall manage to scrape along together as well as a
     good many brothers.'
And this was the reconciliation that Richard had had his heart full of for the last three or
     four days. It was piteously unlike his dreams of it.

When they had shaken hands, Dick sat down. There was a silence—a very awkward silence. Roland
     passed the whisky along the table, and the other mechanically helped himself.
'I think,' Roland said presently, 'that you owe me an explanation of all this.'
'Of course I do,' assented Richard eagerly; 'but you are so—well, unapproachable; but I'll
     tell you every word about it,' which he did, omitting no particulars which bore on the
     case.
'So he called her Mrs Litvinoff, did he?' was Roland's comment on the Petrovitch-Ferrier
     episode at London Bridge. 'I should think she had just taken the name by chance, but for one
     thing.'
'And that is?'
'You say she lived in that house I saw Litvinoff go into the day we split. It must have been
     Litvinoff, and he must have been going to her; but it's very strange how he ever knew her. And
     was this really all the ground you had for doing what you did?' There was contempt in
     his tone.
'No,' said Richard. 'You went away on a "mysterious holiday" just when she disappeared, and
     that set all the village tongues wagging, and first made me wonder and suspect. Now I
      know I was wrong; but if you don't mind, Roland, I wish you'd tell me why
     you went just then. I've told you everything.'
'The whole thing is over and done with now,' he answered; 'and after to-night I don't want to
     ever speak about it; but I will tell you if you like. I went away because I saw you were
     beginning to care for Clare Stanley, and I was beginning to care too, and I thought that if I
     went away I could pull through it, and that you would make the running and be happy with her,
     but I found I couldn't do it, and I came back and did my best to cut you out, as you did by
     me.'
'Oh, Roland, what a good fellow you were to think of such a thing!' said Dick, to whom a
     generous action like this, even  though only attempted, could not fail to appeal
     most strongly. 'But how is it now?' he went on, stung by a host of conflicting feelings. 'Have
      you made the running? Have you won her?'
'No!' he answered bitterly. 'The closing of the mill settled that for me as well as for you.
     Some one else has had as good a chance as ours, though, and has made a better use of it. Count
     Litvinoff is a constant visitor at the house where she is, and I don't doubt she will marry
     him; unless, indeed, he is married already. I think we ought to try and find that out.'
'Married or not, he is a damned scoundrel!' cried Richard; 'and he shall not marry her. She
     would never look at me again, I know; but I hope you may win her yet, Roland.'
'My chance is gone for ever. I wish I'd never had that Litvinoff down here. But who could
     have foreseen this?'
'We've both been fools.'
Roland did not seem to relish this broad statement.
'I can't think how,' he was beginning, when Mrs Brock came in with coals, and almost purred
     with pleasure at seeing the two amicably drinking their whisky at the same hearth. When she had
     left the room Richard rose.
'Look here, old man,' he said; 'I'm as sorry as a fellow can be about all this, and I can't
     think how I could have been such a fool. That's what you were going to say, wasn't it? But
     since we're agreed on that, don't let's say any more about it. Forgive and forget, and I hope
     you will be happy yet—with Miss Stanley. Let's agree to let this subject alone for a bit. I
     think I'll have a run round the garden before I turn in. Good-night.'
'Good-night,' Roland answered, but in a manner whose evident effort after cordiality made the
     failure of that effort the more painful. 'I shall go to bed; I'm dead beat—been knocking about
     all day.' Then they shook hands again, and Richard went out.

He had thought that Roland would have met his apologies with ready acceptance—his revived
     brotherly love with equal enthusiasm—and the nature of the reconciliation jarred upon him. And
     yet, as he told himself, he thoroughly deserved it all. No doubt time would soften his
     brother's sense of injury, and some day they might be as good friends again as they had been
     before Clare Stanley's prettiness had come, like a will-o'-the-wisp, to lead them into all
     sorts of follies. He tried to think he would be glad if she married Roland. Anything, he
     thought, rather than that she should marry Litvinoff. He passed the limits of the garden and
     strolled down the road, deep in thought. It was only when he had nearly reached the mill that
     he remembered with a start that he had told his brother nothing about John Hatfield and his
     revengeful projects. However, Roland could come to no harm now—he was probably safe in bed—and
     he could tell him in the morning. So he strolled on, smoking reflectively, and with a heart not
     light.
</div></body></text></TEI>