<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">

BETWEEN TWO OPINIONS
DICK did not feel inclined to go to Morley's after this rencontre, so he turned back
     towards his hotel. The problem was not actually solved, certainly; but he was disposed to take
     all that had passed as a confirmation of his worst suspicions—so much so, that he felt he could
     not meet his brother just then, as if nothing had happened. He took two or three turns up and
     down that festive promenade, the Euston Road, thinking indignantly that his position ought to
     have been Roland's, and Roland's his—that he was suffering for his brother's misdeeds, while
     his brother was enjoying bright glances from eyes that would hardly look so kindly on him could
     their owner have known how Dick was spending the evening. For the first time, too, he saw,
     though only dimly, a few of the difficulties that would lie in his way. It would be harder than
     ever to keep on any sort of terms with his brother now that he could no longer respect him, and
     to respect a man who had brought misery into a family which he was bound by every law of honour
     to protect was not possible to Dick. As his rival he had almost hated Roland; as the man who
     had ruined Alice Hatfield he both hated and despised him, and he knew well enough that between
     partners in business these sort of feelings do not lead to commercial success. He did not  care to follow out all the train of thought that this suggested; but the remembrance
     of his father's strange will was very present with him as he went to bed.
In the morning things looked different. It is a way things have.

Colours seen by candle light
Will not look the same by day.
After all, was it proved? When he came to think over what the girl had said there seemed to
     be nothing positively conclusive in it all. It was a strange contradiction—he had been very
     eager to trace the matter out—to prove to himself that Roland was utterly unworthy to win Clare
     Stanley; and yet now he felt that he would give a good deal to believe that Roland had not done
     this thing. And this was not only because of the grave pecuniary dilemma in which he must
     involve himself by any quarrel with Roland. Perhaps it was partly because blood is, after all,
     thicker than water.
It did not seem to Dick that his knowledge was much increased by his conversation with Alice.
     The blackest point was still that mysterious holiday trip, taken at such an unusual time, and
     about which his brother had been so strangely reticent. And that might be accounted for in
     plenty of other ways. Alice's disappearance at that particular time was very likely only a
     rather queer coincidence.
Dick had thought all this, and more, before he had finished dressing, and he was ready to
     meet his brother at breakfast with a manner a shade more cordial than usual—the reaction
     perhaps from his recent suspicions. Roland was in particularly high spirits.
'Wherever did you get to last night?' he asked. 'I was quite uneasy till I heard you were
     safe in your bed.'
'What time did you get home?'
It seemed that Roland's uneasiness had been shown by his not turning in till about two.

'Good heavens!—you didn't stay there till that time?' asked Dick, with an air of outraged
     propriety that would have amused him very much in anyone else. 'How old Stanley must have
     cursed you!'
'Oh, no; we left there at eleven.'
'We? You didn't take Miss Stanley for a walk on the Embankment, I presume?'
'No such luck. Didn't I tell you? I met an awfully jolly fellow there—a Russian beggar—a real
     Nihilist and a count, and we went and had a smoke together.'
'My dear fellow, all exiled Russians are Nihilists, and most of them are counts.'
'Oh, no; he really is. I only found out he was a count quite by chance.'
'What's made old Stanley take up with him? Not community of political sentiments, I
     guess?'
'Oh, no; he saved the old boy from being smashed by some runaway horses, and of course he's
     earned his everlasting gratitude. I didn't like him much at first, but when you come to talk to
     him you find he's got a lot in him. I'm sure you'll like him when you see him.'
'Am I sure to have that honour?' asked Dick, helping himself to another kidney. 'Is he tame
     cat about the Stanleys already.'
'Why, he'd never been there before; what a fellow you are! I've asked him to come and have
     dinner with us to-night. I want you to see him. I'm sure you'll get on together. He seems to
     have met with all sorts of adventures.'
'A veritable Baron Munchausen, in fact?'
'I never met such a suspicious fellow as you are, Dick,' said Roland, a little huffily; 'you
     never seem to believe in any body.'
This smote Dick with some compunction, and he resolved not to dislike this
      soi-disant count until he had cause to do so,  which cause he did not
     doubt that their first meeting would furnish forth abundantly. But he was wrong.
Litvinoff came, and Dick found his prejudices melting away. The count seemed a standing proof
     of the correctness of the parallels which have been drawn between Russian and English
     character. He was English in his frankness, his modesty, his off-hand way of telling his own
     adventures without making himself the hero of his stories. Before the evening was over Dick
     began to realise that Nihilists were not quite so black as they are sometimes painted, and that
     there are other countries besides England where progressive measures are desirable. The
     brothers were both interested, and tried very hard to get more particulars of Nihilist
     doctrines, but as they grew more curious Litvinoff became more reticent. As he rose to go he
     said,—
'Well, if you want to hear a more explicit statement of our wrongs, our principles, and our
     hopes, and you don't mind rubbing shoulders with English workmen for an hour or two—and if
     you're not too strict Sabbatarians, by-the-way—you might come down to a Radical club in Soho. I
     am going to speak there at eight on Sunday evening. I shall be very glad if you'll come; but
     don't come if you think it will bore you.'
'I shall like it awfully,' said Dick. 'You'll go, won't you, Roland?'
'Of course I will.'
'We might have dinner together,' said Litvinoff. 'Come down to Morley's; we'll dine at
     six.'
This offer was too tempting to be refused. It presented an admirable opportunity for making
     an afternoon call on the Stanleys, and the brothers closed with it with avidity, and their new
     acquaintance took his leave.
When Dick was alone he opened a letter which had been brought to him during the evening. He
     read:—
'15 Spray's Buildings,
Porson Street, W.C.'Dear Mr Richard,—I promised to write to you but I
      did not mean to see you again. But it was a great comfort to meet a face I knew, and I feel I
      must see you again, if it's only to ask you so many questions about them all at home. I do not
      seem to have said half I ought to have said the other night. If you really care to see me
      again, I shall be in on Monday afternoon. Go straight up the stairs until you get to the very
      top—it's the right-hand door. I beg you not to say you have seen me—to Mr Roland or to anyone
      else.—Yours respectfully,'Alice Hatfield.'

This letter revived his doubts, but he was very glad of the chance of seeing her again, and
     he determined not to be deterred from pressing the question which he had at heart by any pain
     which it might cause her or himself. Jealousy, curiosity, regard for the girl—all these urged
     him to learn the truth, and besides them all a certain sense of duty. If her sorrow had come to
     her through his brother it surely was all the more incumbent on him to see that her material
     sufferings, at any rate, were speedily ended. If not....
Men almost always move from very mixed motives, and of these motives they only acknowledge
     one to be their spring of action. This sense of duty was the one motive which Dick now admitted
     to himself. At any rate he did not mean to think any more about it till Monday came, so he
     thrust the letter into his pocket, and let his fancy busy itself with Clare Stanley after its
     wonted fashion. It found plenty of occupation in the anticipation of that Sunday afternoon
     call.
When the call was made Mr Stanley was asleep, and though he roused himself to welcome them he
     soon relapsed into the condition which is peculiar to the respectable Briton on Sunday
     afternoons.

Miss Stanley was particularly cheerful, but as soon as she heard where they intended to spend
     the evening, the conversation took a turn so distinctly Russian, as to be almost a forestalment
     of the coming evening's entertainment. Nihilism in general and Nihilist counts in particular
     seemed to be the only theme on which she would converse for two minutes at a time. Roland made
     a vigorous effort to lead the conversation to things English, but it was a dead failure. Dick
     sought to elicit Miss Stanley's opinion of the reigning actress, but this, as he might have
     foreseen, only led to a detailed account of that adventure in which the principal part of hero
     had been played by a Russian, a Nihilist, or a count, and there were all the favoured subjects
     at once over again.
The young men felt that the visit had not been a distinct success, and when Clare woke her
     father up to beg him to take her to that Radical club in Soho, even his explosive refusal and
     anathematising of Radicals as pests of society failed to reconcile the Ferriers to their lady's
     new enthusiasm.
The conversation at dinner, however, was a complete change. Count Litvinoff appeared to feel
     no interest in life, save in the question of athletics at the English universities; but on this
     topic he managed to be so entertaining that his guests quite forgot, in his charm as talker,
     the irritation he had caused them to feel when he was merely the subject of someone else's
     talk. When dinner was over, and the three started to walk to Soho, they were all on the very
     best of terms with themselves and each other.
Would one of them have been quite so much at ease if he had known that the announcement of
     the coming lecture had been seen in the paper by Alice Hatfield, and that she—not being much by
     way of going to church—had made up her mind to be there?
</div></body></text></TEI>