<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">

'MY LITTLE GIRL.'
THE suggestion was a good one, and the dinner to which the two sat down had a steadying
     effect on the nerves of the younger man. He became calmer, and when they returned to his rooms
     he was able to bear his part in a long, earnest, quiet talk over events past and to come.
The talk lasted far into the night, and before they parted it was settled that Litvinoff
     should leave for Servia in two days, taking with him certain important papers from Petrovitch
     to another of the Nihilist leaders. That he should there wait instructions, and should enter
     Russia by the southern frontier, and rejoin the circle at St Petersburg, leaving his assumed
     name at Belgrade. That the following imaginative announcement should be inserted in as many
     English papers as possible for the special edification of the Russian Embassy.
'Count Michael Litvinoff left London for Dover this morning, en route for Belgrade.
     He was accompanied by Countess Litvinoff, an English lady to whom he was secretly married some
     time ago. Count Litvinoff, so well known to many of our readers through his "Social Enigma,"
     his "Hopes and Fears for Liberty," and his many revolutionary brochures, has never
     been a familiar figure in London society, his literary labours having compelled him to live in
     strict retirement. It will be remembered that he was the hero of an adventure on the  Russian frontier some years ago, was wounded, captured, and sent to a Russian
     prison, from which he escaped to England.'
It was also settled that the money for the journey should be taken from the remainder of the
     Litvinoff capital.
When Litvinoff began to speak of the money he had spent and the debts he had incurred,
     Petrovitch stopped him with,—
'I'll see to your debts—and what is gone is gone. Don't let us waste words over that.'
It was arranged that Petrovitch should seek out John Hatfield and his wife, and should let
     them know that their daughter was happily married. They judged it best not to subject Alice to
     an interview which could not but involve most painful explanations, and they agreed that it
     would be cruel both to her and to her parents to let them meet, merely to part again at once.
     Of Clare Stanley neither of them spoke one word.
A new day was some way into its small hours when they said good-bye.
'We meet in St Petersburg, then, as soon as may be,' Petrovitch said. 'I shall not see you
     again till then.'
'I hope by that time I shall have done something to prove to you that you have indeed brought
     me back to the ranks of duty and the Revolution.'
'I don't need proof,' said the other with one last hand-pressure. And so they parted.
Next morning early, Litvinoff went down into the City, where he paid a disproportionate sum
     of money for a paper which empowered him to marry his wife at once, instead of waiting three
     weeks for that privilege. Then he went down to Chislehurst. The sky was clear and pale and
     blue, and the sun shone divinely. The trees that had been brown seemed at a little distance to
     be wrapped in a grey gauze veil, as they always do when the green buds first break out to new
     life.
As Litvinoff walked up the hill to Chislehurst Common, he  tried to think what
     he should say to Alice, how she would look, how she would speak to him. With a touch of
     ingrained cynicism, he laughed at himself to find that his heart was beating tumultuously, and
     that his hands were trembling.
'And this is the man,' he said contemptuously to himself, 'who walked behind her for
     half-an-hour last autumn, and never spoke to her! No, not the same man,' he added, after a
     pause, 'I am purged of a crime since then.'
The house where he was to seek Alice was a little yellow-brick building near the church.
He looked at the pretty old-fashioned churchyard as he passed, and then at the building
     itself.
'I suppose,' he said to it, 'you will be the balm the child will choose to ease her
     sorrow—and you will bring comfort to her, as you have to thousands of others. I don't grudge
     them their comfort, but I do grudge you your influence. However, you won't keep it much longer.
      Tant mieux.'
His hand was on the garden gate—he unlatched it, and walked up to the smallest detached house
     he had ever beheld. He raised the diminutive knocker, and assaulted therewith the tiny brown
     door. Would she open it? She did not. It opened—and Litvinoff at first really thought it opened
     of its own accord. At anyrate it opened by some agency invisible to him. He stood and looked;
     but when the door slowly began to close again, he thought it was time for action. He came a
     step forward, and addressing nothing, said,—
'Is Mrs Litvinoff in?'
Then a very small girl in a yellow pinafore and a lilac frock showed herself from behind the
     door; but shyness and an incomplete knowledge of her native tongue combined to render her
     speechless. Litvinoff, with an impatient but perfectly gentle movement, lifted her bodily from
     her position as guard, and placed her outside the door.

'The air will brighten your wits, mon petit chou,' he said.
Then he walked straight into the house, and looked round the two rooms on the ground floor.
     Empty. He passed through the kitchen, whose proportions would have served for those of the
     corresponding apartment in a good-sized doll's house, and found himself in a brick-paved back
     yard, where there were a water-butt, a basket of wet linen, some clothes-lines, and the lady of
     the house. Regardless of her astonishment, he addressed himself to her.
'Oh, Mrs Litvinoff?' she answered curiously, 'she is out; she has gone to Orpington for some
     butter for me, sir, and she won't be long.'
'How long?'
'Perhaps an hour.'
'Is she alone?'
'Yes, sir.'
'If you'll be kind enough to tell me the way, I think I'll go and meet her.'
'And who shall I say called if you should miss her, and she comes back first?'
'Say her husband,' answered Litvinoff.
The woman gave him profuse directions, for which he thanked her with his usual
      empressement, and turned at the gate to raise his hat in farewell.
'My stars!' said Mrs Bowen, as she watched him out of sight, 'he's a real gentleman, and no
     mistake. Poor little Mrs Litvinoff,' she added, with a woman's instinctive interest in a
     romance, 'I hope they'll make it up and live happy ever after, that I do!'
Litvinoff walked along. His heart was lighter than it had been for many a long day. On these
     delicious fresh spring mornings—


When March makes sweet the weather
With daffodil, and starling,
And hours of fruitful breath,
just to be alive is a rapture. Of course it may be cancelled by care like any other joy. But
     Litvinoff felt as if he had no cares. He was going to meet the woman he loved, and the
     nearer he got to her the more he loved her. In love, as in friendship, nearness was everything
     to him.
Every figure in the distance he thought was her figure. If you have ever gone to meet a
     person whom you very intensely wished to meet, you will remember how constantly recurring is
     that illusion. You will remember the spasm of vindictive hate which seizes on you when the
     figure in the distance is neared, and dispels your illusion by being itself and not the one you
     wanted it to be.
Paul's Cray Common seemed a paradise to him. It does make a fairly good one under favourable
     circumstances, with its heather, and gorse, and larch, and oak saplings, and, fairest of all,
     its graceful swaying silver birches. The birds were singing madly, and as he felt the springy
     turf under his feet, and the warm spring sun on his shoulders, he began to sing, too, a tender
     little French song, all about green woodland paths, and youth, and love, and happiness.
Alice Hatfield's heart was very sad, but it was a quiet sadness, that did not shut out the
     charm of the spring. Under the influence of the young life blood of the year that seemed to be
     throbbing through that perfect day, she had felt strong, and had walked with more swiftness
     than usual, and now, as she was returning with a basket, in which her butter lay, under cool
     green leaves, she began to walk more slowly and to consider two pounds of butter heavier than
     she had thought it before. She had been revelling among the primroses and dog violets, and had
     filled up her basket with the pale, yellow primrose  stars and the delicate pink
     and white wind-flowers. She was tired, certainly, and she turned aside and sat down on a felled
     tree, in a certain little pine copse that runs along by the road-side. The pine needles lay
     brown, and soft, and thick under her feet. A little bright-eyed, red-brown squirrel came
     half-way down one of the trees to look at her, but seemed to find her not quite as nice as he
     had expected, for he whisked his tail with undisguised contempt, and went back to his home with
     a lightning-like spiral scramble. He must have been a squirrel hard to please, for it is a fact
     that, in spite of illness and trouble, Alice was far prettier now than when her sweet face had
     first caught Count Litvinoff's eyes on the Birkenhead Ferry.
She sat quietly gazing through the pine trees, with her head turned from the road. Presently
     she stooped to attempt the capture of a very young and very yellow frog which had hopped close
     to her feet, regardless of the pine needles. As she did so her heart stood still, for her ears
     caught the tramp, tramp of a man's footstep, and the ringing sound of a man's voice, a voice
     she knew,—

'Viens, suivons les sentiers ombreux,
Ou s'égarent les amoureux
Le printemps nous appelle,
Viens! Soyons heureux!'
She rose to her feet, and involuntarily uttered a low cry. She dared not turn her head. The
     singing stopped abruptly, there was a crash through the brambles, and in a moment a pair of
     strong arms were round her, and lips close to her ear murmured,—
'My little girl!'
She rested on his arm for one moment Then she said, in a choked sort of voice, as she tried
     to release herself,—
'It's no use, I cannot come back. You have not come here to ask me back. Do, do leave me
     alone!'

He held her fast.
'My darling,' he whispered, 'do you think I could leave you now I have found you? I
      have come to ask you to come back to me. I have come to ask you to marry me. You will
     not send me away. I cannot do without my little one any longer. You love me still?' he added, a
     sudden doubt striking him at her continued silence, and he raised her chin with his hand till
     he could look in her face. She shrank from his hand, and hid her face against his neck.
'You know,' she answered, 'you know.'
So it came about that Alice married her love who had not been true, and forgave him with all
     her heart; when she was leaving the church, leaning on her husband's arm, with a new world of
     love and joy opening before her, and Litvinoff was looking down at her with eyes in which love
     deepened every moment, her father lay dead at the bottom of the tank in Thornsett Mill. The
     Litvinoffs left England at once, and to this day Alice does not know of her father's death, and
     her husband does not know of the dire disaster that followed on his double dealing. I doubt if
     they will ever learn it now. There is a good deal more that Alice does not know. It is perhaps
     as well. Wives are none the happier for knowing too much of their husbands' past. As it is,
     Alice will follow him to the world's end, believing in him unquestioningly.
</div></body></text></TEI>