<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="28">
CHAPTER XXVIII.
So that night Jim does not see Amelia. After all, as Cecilia says, it is better to be on the
      safe side, and to-morrow she will be brighter, and he can sit by her, and tell her lovingly—oh
      very lovingly!—what a fright she has given him. Yes, to-morrow she will be brighter. The
      adjective is Cecilia's; but, apparently, he cannot improve upon it, for he not only keeps
      repeating it to himself as he runs downstairs, but employs it for the reassurance of Miss
      Wilson's anxious relatives.
"She will be brighter to-morrow; sick people are always worse at night, are not
      they?"—rather vaguely, with again that oppressive sense of his own inexperience in illness.
      "Not that she is worse"—this is hastily subjoined, as he sees her father's face
      fall—"Cecilia never said she was worse—oh, no, not worse, only not
      distinctly better; and, after all, it would have been irrational to expect that. She will be
      brighter to-morrow—oh, yes, of course she will be brighter to-morrow!"
He leaves the hotel with the phrase, which sounds cut and dried and unreal, still upon his
      lips, after bidding a kinder good-night than usual to Mr. Wilson, after having offered to
      supply Amelia's place by reading aloud to him, a feat he has not performed since the evening
      of his disastrous experience of the Provident Women of Oxford; and lastly, having even—as a
      reward to Sybilla, who has been understood to murmur something tearful about letting her maid
      look in upon Amelia at intervals through the night—tucked in her Austrian blanket, and picked
      up her smelling-bottle. He has expected to rejoin Byng outside, as he had promised to wait for
      him with such patience as a cigar could lend, and on the condition that his absence should not
      exceed a stipulated period. But either the promise has been broken, or the period exceeded,
      for Byng is gone. The fact does not greatly surprise Burgoyne, though it causes him a slight
      uneasiness, which is, perhaps, rather a blessing for him, distracting his mind in some slight
      measure from the heaviness of his own trouble.
He walks fast to the Piazza d'Azeglio; but he neither overtakes him of whom he is in
      pursuit, nor finds him at 12 bis. He has been there, has inquired with agitation for the
      telegrams, which have naturally not been received, and has then gone away again immediately.
      Whither? The Padrona, who has answered the door-bell herself and, with Italian suavity, is
      doing her best to conceal that she is beginning to think she has heard nearly enough of the
      subject, does not know. For a few moments Jim stands irresolute, then he turns his steps
      towards the Arno. It is not yet too late for the charming riverside promenade, the gay
      Lung'Arno, to be still alive with flâneurs; the stars have lit their lamps above, and
      the hotels below. The pale planets, and the yellow lights from the opposite bank of the river,
      lie together, sweet and peaceful upon her breast. In both cases the counterfeits are as clear
      and bright as the real luminaries; and it seems as if one had only to plunge in an arm to pick
      up stars and candles out of the stream's depths.
Leaning over the parapet near the Ponte Vecchio, Burgoyne soon discovers a familiar figure,
      a figure which starts when he touches its arm.
"I thought I would wait about here for an hour or so," says Byng, with a rather guilty air
      of apology, "until I could go back and inquire again. The telegram has not arrived yet—I
      suppose it is too early. Of course they would not telegraph until they get in to-night. You do
      not think"—with a look of almost terror—"that they are going through to England, and that they
      will not telegraph till they get there?"
"How can I tell?"
"There is nothing in the world less likely," cries Byng feverishly, irritated at not having
      drawn forth the reassurance he had hoped for. "I do not for a moment believe that they have
      gone home; I feel convinced that they are still in Italy! Why should they leave it, when
      they—when she is so fond of it?"
Jim looks down sadly at the calm, strong stream.
"I do not know, I cannot give an opinion—I have no clue."
"I will ask again in about an hour," says Byng, lifting his arms from the parapet, "in an
      hour it is pretty certain to have arrived; and meanwhile, I thought I would just stroll about
      the town, but there is no reason—none at all—why I should keep you! You—you must be wanting to
      go back to Amelia."
He glances at his friend in a nervous, sidelong way, as he makes this suggestion.
"I am not going back again to-night," replies Jim quietly, without giving any evidence of an
      intention to acquiesce in his dismissal. "There is nothing that I can do for her—there is
      nothing to be done."
His tone, in making this statement, must be yet more dreary than he is aware, as it arouses
      even Byng's self-absorbed attention.
"Nothing to be done for her?" he echoes, with a shocked look. "My dear old chap, you do not
      mean to say—to imply—"
"I mean to imply nothing," interrupts Jim sharply, in a superstitious panic of hearing some
      unfavourable augury as to his betrothed put into words. "I mean just what I say—neither more
      nor less; there is nothing to be done for her to-night, nothing but to let her sleep—a good
      sleep will set her up: of course a good sleep will quite set her up."
He speaks almost angrily, as if expecting and challenging contradiction. But Byng's spirit
      has already flown back to his own woes. He may make what sanguine statements he pleases about
      Amelia's to-morrow, without fearing any demurrer from his companion. What attention the latter
      has to spare is evidently only directed to the solving of the problem, how best, with amicable
      civility, to be rid of him. Before he can hit upon any expedient for attaining this desired
      end, Burgoyne speaks again, his eye resting with a compassionate expression upon his junior's
      face, whose wild pallor is heightened by the disorder of his hair, and the hat crushed down
      over his brows.
"You have not had anything to eat all day—had not you better come back to the hotel and get
      something to eat?"
"Eat!" cries the other, with almost a scream; "you must have very little comprehension of——"
      Then, checking himself and with a strong and palpable effort for composure: "It would not be
      worth while, I should not have time; in an hour—less than an hour now, for I must have been
      here quite ten minutes at the least—I have to return to the Piazza d'Azeglio."
"Then go to Doney's; why not get something to eat at Doney's? It will not take you five
      minutes to reach the Via Tornabuoni."
"What should I do when I got there?" asks Byng impatiently. "If I tried to swallow food, it
      would stick in my throat; no food shall pass my lips till I learn where she is; after
      that"—breaking out into a noisy laugh—"you may do what you please with me—we will make a night
      of it with all my heart, we will—

"'Drink, drink,
Till the pale stars blink!'"

Jim looks blankly at him. Is he going mad?
"If you think that you will get me to go back to the hotel to-night, you are very much
      mistaken," continues Byng recklessly; "no roof less high than this"—jerking back his head, to
      throw his fevered look up to the cool stars—"shall shelter my head; and besides, where would
      be the use of going to bed when I should have to be up again so early? I shall be off by one
      of the morning expresses: until I have learnt—as, of course, I shall do to-night—where she has
      gone, I cannot tell which; but neither of them starts much later than seven."
For a moment Jim stands dumb with consternation at the announcement of this intention; but,
      reflecting that it would not be a whit more irrational to attempt to reason with a madman who
      had reached the padded-room stage of lunacy, than with his present companion, he contents
      himself with saying:
"And supposing that you do not learn to-night where she has gone?"
"There is no use in supposing anything so impossible!"
But as the hours go by, the possibility becomes a probability, the probability a certainty!
      Midnight comes, and the closed telegraph-office puts a final extinguisher upon the
      expectation, which no one but the unhappy lover had ever entertained, that Florence would be
      enlightened before the dawn of another day as to the place whither her two truants have
      fled.
Burgoyne has accompanied his friend upon his last importunate visit to the now-going-to-bed
      and justly-incensed 12 bis. He has been ashamed again to present himself at the
      so-often-attacked door, so has awaited at the bottom of the stairs, has heard Byng's hoarse
      query, and the negative—curter and less suave than the last one—that follows it; has heard the
      door shut again, and the hopeless footsteps that come staggering down to him.
"You will go home now?"

"'Perchance, Iago, I shall ne'er go home!'"

replies Byng; and, though he is compelled to admit that there is no longer any possibility
      of his to-night obtaining the information for which he so madly hungers, that there can
      consequently be no question of his setting off by one of the early trains, since he would not
      know in which direction to go, and might only be fleeing further from her whom he would fain
      rejoin, yet he still keeps with fevered pertinacity to his project of spending the night à
       la belle étoile.
Finding it impossible to dissuade him, Jim resigns himself to bearing him company. It is
      with very little reluctance that he does so. There is no truer truism than that all sorrows,
      however mountainous, are more easily carried under God's high roof than man's low ones, and he
      who does not sleep has for compensation that at least he can have no dreadful waking. So the
      two men wander about all night in the boon southern air, and see—

"The moon exactly round,
And all those stars with which the brows of ample heaven are crown'd;
Orion, all the Pleiades, and those seven Atlas got;
The close-beam'd Hyades, the Bear, surnamed the Chariot,
That turns about heaven's axle-tree, holds ope a constant eye
Upon Orion, and of all the cressets in the sky,
His golden forehead never bows to the Ocean's empery."

There are not many hours of a summer's night during which the stir of life has ceased and
      has not yet reawaked in an Italian town, the talk and the tread and the mule bells, and the
      flutes of the voiceful people lasting on till near the small hours, and beginning again ere
      those hours have had strength to grow big. But yet there is a space of time when Florence lies
      silent, baring her beauty to the constellations alone; and under this unfamiliar and solemn
      and lovely aspect the two night-wanderers see her. They see her Campanile

"Commercing with the skies,"

with no distracting human bustle about her feet; they see her Perseus battling beneath her
      Loggia, and her San Giorgio standing wakeful at his post on Or san Michele. They see her
      scowling palace rows, her stealing river, and her spanning bridges—palaces out of which no
      head peeps, a river on which no boat oars, bridges upon which no horse-hoof rings. They have
      all her churches—Santa Croce, Arnolpho's great "Bride," that new Maria that is now
      four hundred years old or more, the humbly glorious San Marco—to themselves; all her treasure
      houses, all her memories, all her flower-embalmed air—for a few hours they possess them all.
      She is but a little city, this fair Firenze, and in these few hours they traverse her in her
      length and breadth, rambling aimlessly wherever Byng's feverishly miserable impulses lead
      them. Burgoyne offers no opposition to any of these, but accompanies his friend silently down
      slumbrous thoroughfare, or across sleeping Piazza, by Arno side, under colonnade or arch. It
      is all one to him; nor is he sensible of any fatigue, when at length, at about the hour when
      Byng had meant to have caught the early morning train, they return to the hotel, and the
      younger man, happily dead-beat at last, worn out with want of food, tears, and weariness,
      flings himself down, dressed, upon his bed, and instantly falls into a leaden sleep. Jim feels
      no desire, nor indeed any power of following his example. He is not easily tired, and his
      former life of travel and hardship has made him always willing to dispense with the—to
      him—unnecessary luxury of a bed; and, under ordinary circumstances, a night passed in the open
      air would have had an effect upon him rather exhilarating than otherwise. He has his bath,
      dresses, breakfasts, and then jumps into a fiacre, and has himself driven to the
      Anglo-Américain.
The day is so exactly the counterpart of its predecessor, in its even assured splendour,
      that Jim has a hazy feeling that they both make only one divided into two parts by the narrow
      dark blue ribbon of the exquisite brief night. When did yesterday end and to-day begin? As he
      is borne along, his memory, made more alert by sleeplessness, reproduces—merely, as it seems
      to him, the better to fill him with pain and remorse—the different states of mind in which he
      has passed over the often trodden ground. Here, at the street corner, what a nausea had come
      over him at the thought of the interest he would have to feign in those humdrum details, so
      dear to Amelia's soul, of their future ménage, with all its candle-end economies and
      depressing restrictions. Here, in the church shadow, how he had tried to lash himself up into
      a more probable semblance of pleasure in her expected and dreaded caresses. There seems to be
      scarcely an inch of the way where he has not had some harsh or weary thought of her; he is
      thankful when the brief transit, that has appeared to him so long, is over. And yet the change
      is only from the sharp sting of recollected unkindness to the dull bruising ache of
      anticipated ill. A garçon is sweeping out the salon, for the hour is not
      much beyond eight, so Jim goes into the dreary little dining-room, where two places are laid
      with coffee-cups and rolls. Only two. And, though he knows that nothing short of a miracle
      could have already restored Amelia so completely as to enable her to come down to breakfast,
      yet the ocular demonstration of the fact that her place is and will be empty, strikes a chill
      to his boding heart. He is presently joined by Cecilia, whose carelessly-dressed hair, heavy
      eyelids, and tired puffy face, sufficiently show that not to her, any more than to himself has
      night brought

"Sweet child sleep, the filmy-eyed."

"How fresh and cool you are!" she cries, with an almost reproachful intonation. "Do not look
      at me!"—covering her face with her hot hands—"I am not fit to be seen; but what does that
      matter? What do I care?"—beginning to cry—"Oh, she is so bad! We have spent such a dreadful
      night! As I tell you, I am a shocking sick-nurse; I never know what to do; I lose my head
      completely; and she has been so odd—she has been talking such gibberish!"
"Delirious?"
"Yes, I suppose that is what you would call it. I never saw anybody delirious before, so I
      do not know. I have seen Sybilla in hysterics, but I never believed that they were real—I
      always thought that a bucket of water would bring her round."
As a general rule, Jim may be counted upon for cordial co-operation in any hit directed
      against Sybilla, but now he is too spiritless even to notice it.
"I was so frightened," continues Cecilia; "it is not cheerful being all alone at the dead of
      night with a person talking such nonsense as she was. Amelia, of all people, to talk nonsense!
      I could not quite make out what it was about, but it seemed to have more or less reference to
      you. She was begging you to forgive her for something she had done, as far as I could gather;
      some treat she had prepared for you, and that you had not liked. Have you the least idea what
      she could have meant?"
He has every idea; but it would seem profanation to explain that her poor wandering brain is
      still distressedly labouring with the abortive project she had so happily framed for his
      enjoyment.
"She is quieter now. Sybilla's maid is with her; Sybilla really has not behaved
       badly—for her; she let her maid look in several times during the night; but still,
      for the most part I was alone with her! Oh, I do trust"—shuddering—"that I may never again
      have to be alone at night with a person who is not right in her head!"
This aspiration on the youngest Miss Wilson's part is, for the present occasion, at least,
      likely to be gratified; for, by the time that another night settles down on Florence, Amelia's
      illness has been declared by Dr. Coldstream to have every symptom of developing into the
      malarious Florentine fever, which not unfrequently lays low the chilled or over-fatigued, or
      generally imprudent foreign visitor to that little Eden. Amelia has Florentine fever; and the
      verification of this fact is followed by all the paraphernalia of serious sickness—night and
      day nurses, disinfectants, physic phials.
The announcement of her being attacked by a definite and recognised disease brings at first
      a sort of relief to Burgoyne's mind, which, under Cecilia's frightened and frightening
      word-pictures, had been beset by terrors great in proportion to their vagueness. Now that
      Amelia is confessedly sick of a fever, there is nothing abnormal in her being "odd," and
      "stupid," and "wandering," these being only the inevitable stages on a road which will—which
       must lead to ultimate recovery. His heart is heavy, yet scarcely so heavy as it had
      been upon his arrival in the morning, when, late in the afternoon—not sooner do the claims
      upon him of the disorganized and helpless family of his betrothed relax—he returns to the
      Minerva to look after Byng. Having had every reason to fear that he will not find him at the
      hotel, but will be obliged again to set off in pursuit of him through the streets and squares
      so repeatedly traversed last night, he is relieved to learn from the hotel servants that the
      young man is in his bedroom. He finds him there indeed; no longer stretched in the blessed
      oblivion of deep sleep upon his bed, but sitting on a hard chair by the open window, his arms
      resting upon the back, and his face crushed down upon them. By no slightest movement does he
      show consciousness of his friend's entrance.
"I am afraid I have been a long time away," says the latter kindly.
"Have you?" answers Byng, his voice coming muffled through lips still buried in his own
      coat-sleeve. "I do not know; I have done with time!"
"I do not know how you have managed that," rejoins Jim, still indulgently, though a shade
      dryly. "Have you been here all day?"
"I do not know where I have been. Yes,"—lifting his head—"I do; I have been to the Piazza
      d'Azeglio."
"Well?"
"They know where she is. They were packing her things; through the door I saw them tying the
      label on the box; if I had tried I could have read the address on the label, but I did not.
      She had forbidden them to give it to me; in her telegram she had forbidden them to give it to
      anyone."
</div></body></text></TEI>