<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
CHAPTER VI.
It is, perhaps, fortunate for Amelia that she cannot see the expression of the face which
      looks out above her prostrate head into space, with a blankness equal to what has been her
      own, a blankness streaked, as hers was not, with remorse. He would give anything to be able to
      answer her in her own key, to tell her that, as long as he can keep her, the going or coming
      of any lesser good hurts him as little as the brushing past his cheek of a summer moth or
      windblown feather. But when he tries to frame a sentence of this kind, his tongue cleaves to
      the roof of his mouth. He can only hold her to him in an affectionate clasp, whose dumbness he
      hopes that she attributes to silencing emotion. She herself indulges in no very prolonged
      manifestation of her passion. In a few moments she is again sitting up beside him with wiped
      eyes, none the handsomer, poor soul, for having cried, and listening with a deep attention to
      an exposition of her lover's position and prospects, which he is at no pains to tinge with a
      factitious rose colour.
"Have you realized," he says, "that I shall never be better off than I am now? never!
       never! For though of course I shall try to get work, one knows how successful that
      quest generally is in the case of a man with no special aptitudes, no technical training, and
      who starts in the race handicapped by being ten years too late!"
But the dismalness of this panorama raises no answering gloom in the young woman's face. She
      nods her head gently.
"I realize it."
"And this is what I have brought you to, after all these years' waiting," he continues, in a
      tone of profound regret. "All I can offer you at the end of them is a not particularly genteel
      poverty, not even a cottage with a double coach-house!"—laughing grimly.
"I do not want a double coach-house, nor even a single one!" replies Amelia stoutly, and
      laughing too, a little, through returning tears. "Do not you know that I had rather drive a
      costermonger's barrow with you than go in a coach and six without you!"
This is the highest flight of imagination of which Jim has ever known his matter-of-fact
      Amelia guilty, and he can pay her his thanks for it only in compunctious kisses. Perhaps it is
      they, perhaps it is the thought which dictates her next hesitating speech, that bring a light
      into Amelia's tear-reddened eyes.
"If you will never be better off——" She stops.
"Yes, dear, go on; 'if I shall never be better off'—I certainly never shall; I feel sure
      that you will be able to put my earnings for the next ten years into your eye, and see none
      the worse for them!"
 "If—you—will—never—be—better—off——" she repeats again, more slowly, and breaking off at the
      same place.
"Well, dear?"
"If you will never be better off"—this time she finishes her sentence; but it is rendered
      almost inaudible by the fact of her flushed face and quivering lips being pressed against his
      breast—"why should we wait any longer?"
Why should we wait any longer? To most persons, granted the usual condition of
      feeling of a betrothed couple, this would seem a very natural and legitimate deduction from
      the premises; but, strange to say, it comes upon Burgoyne with the shock of a surprise. He has
      been thinking vaguely of his change of fortune as a cause for unlimited delay, perhaps for the
      rupture of his engagement, never as a reason for its immediate fulfilment.
He gives a sort of breathless gasp, which is happily too low for Amelia with her still
      hidden face to hear. To be married at once! To sit down for all time to Amelia and £800 a
      year! To forego for ever the thrilling wandering life; the nights under the northern stars,
      the stealthy tracking of shy forest creatures; the scarce coarse delicious food, the cold, the
      fatigue, the hourly peril, that, since its probable loss is ever in sight, make life so
      sweetly worth having—all, in short, that goes to make up so many an Englishman's ideal of
      felicity; that has certainly hitherto gone to make up Jim's. To renounce it all! There is no
      doubt that the bitterness of this thought comes first; but presently, supplanting it, chasing
      it away, there follows another, a self-reproachful light flashing over his past eight years,
      showing him his own selfishness colossal and complete for the first time. In a paroxysm of
      remorse, he has lifted Amelia's face, and, framing it with his hands, looks searchingly into
      it.
"I believe," he says in a shaken voice, "that you would have married me eight years ago, on
      my pittance, if I had asked you!"
No "Yes" was ever written in larger print than that which he read in her patient pale eyes.
      Even at this instant there darts across him a wish that they were not quite so pale, but he
      detests himself for it.
"And I never suspected it!" he cries compunctiously. "I give you my word of honour, I never
      suspected it! I thought you looked upon my poverty in as prohibitory a light as I did
      myself."
"I do not call it such great poverty," replies Amelia, her practical mind resuming its
      habitual sway over her emotions. "Of course, it is an income that would require a little
      management; but if we cut our coat according to our cloth, and did not want to move about too
      much, we might live either in a not very fashionable part of London, or in some cheap district
      in the country very comfortably."
Despite his remorse, a cold shiver runs down Burgoyne's spine at the picture that rises,
      conjured up with too much distinctness by her words, before his mind's eyes; the picture of a
      snug Bayswater villa, with a picturesque parlour-maid, or the alternative cottage in some
      dreary Wiltshire or Dorsetshire village, with a shrubbery of three aucuba bushes, and a
      kitchen-garden of half an acre. It may be that, her frame being in such close proximity to
      his, she feels the influence of his shiver, and that it suggests her next sentence, which is
      in a less sanguine key.
"But it would not be fair; it would be asking you to give up too much."
The meek abnegation of her rather worn voice brings his remorse uppermost again on the
      revolving wheel of his feelings.
"Is not it my turn to give up something?" he asks tenderly; "and besides, it is time for me
      to settle! I am—I am tired of wandering!"
As this atrocious lie passes his lips, he catches his breath. Tired of the Sierras! Tired of
      the bivouacs among the dazzling snow! Tired of the august silence of the ever-lasting hills!
      Heaven forgive him for saying so! Perhaps there is no great air of veracity in his assertion,
      for she looks at him distrustfully; so distrustfully that he reshapes his phrase: "At least,
      if I am not, I ought to be!"
But still she gazes at him with a wistful and doubting intentness.
"If I could only believe that that was true!"
"It is true," replies he, evading her look; "at least, true enough for all working purposes;
      we all know that life is a series of compromises, a balancing of gain and loss. I shall lose
      something, I do not deny that, but I gain more—I gain you!"
"That is such a mighty gain, is it not?" she says with a melancholy smile, as that intuition
      of the truth which sometimes comes to unloved or tepidly loved women flashes upon her.
"A matter of taste—a mere matter of taste!" rejoins he hurriedly; aware of the unreal ring
      in his own words, and trying, with all his might, to feel as well as speak
      light-heartedly.
She shakes her head in a way which tells him how poorly he has succeeded. In a desperate if
      not very well-judged attempt to convince her of his sincerity, his next speech is uttered.
"Why should not we be married at once? to-morrow? the day after to-morrow? at the
      Consulate—of course there is a Consulate—or the English church; I suppose there are
      half a dozen English churches. Why not? We have nothing to wait for, and we are both of
      age!"
He has had no unkindly intention in the last words, but the moment that these are out of his
      mouth, a glance at Amelia's unblooming face and unyouthful figure tell him that they were not
      happily chosen. At the first instant that the suggestion of an immediate marriage reaches the
      hearer's brain, it sends a dart of joy over her features. To be married at once! To put an end
      for ever to the interminable waiting, to enter at last—at last upon the possession of the so
      long deferred Canaan. But in a second, that first bright flash is chased away, and gives place
      to a look of almost humiliation.
"You must be making fun of me, to suggest such a thing!" she says in a wounded voice; "you
      know how wildly impossible it would be that I should leave them all—my father—Sybilla—without
      any preparation."
"Without any preparation!" replies Jim, raising his eyebrows. "Have not you been preparing
      them for the last eight years?"
He feels a vague unjust irritation with her for opposing his proposition, though deep down
      in his heart he knows that he would have felt a much greater annoyance had she eagerly closed
      with it. As she does not answer a question, which the moment that it is uttered he feels to
      have been rather brutal, he goes on, against his will, in the same sarcastic key:
"I am afraid that you will have to leave them all some day; I am afraid that our Bayswater
      mansion—by-the-bye, I am sure it will not be a mansion, for I am sure it will not have a
      back-door—will not be likely to contain all. Your father—Sybilla—Sybilla and her physic
      bottles take up a good deal of room, do not they?"
It is fortunate for Amelia that she is too preoccupied by the thought of her own next speech
      to take in the full acerbity of the last remark.
"If you would consent to wait till we get home—father does not mean to stay in Italy beyond
      the end of next month—we might be married in June; that" (with a pink flush of happiness)
      "would not be so long to wait."
In a second a sum of the simplest description executes itself in Burgoyne's head. It is now
      the second week of April; they are to be married in June, he has then eight weeks left. It
      shocks himself to find that this is the way in which he puts it. All the overt action that he
      permits himself, however, is to say with a shrug:
"As you will, then, as you will!" adding, since he feels that there is something
      discourteous even to unchivalry in so bald an acquiescence in his prospective bliss, "Of
      course, dear, the sooner I get you the better for me!"
No lover could have been overheard giving utterance to a more proper or suitable sentiment;
      so that it is lucky that this is just the moment that Cecilia chooses for entering.
"Do not be afraid," she says, with a laugh. "I will not stay a minute, but I just wanted to
      say 'How do you do?' How well you are looking! and how young!"—with an involuntary glance of
      comparison from him to her sister; a glance of which they are both rather painfully conscious.
      "Ah!" (sighing) "with all your Rocky Mountain experiences, it is evident that you have been
      having an easier time than we have!"
"Are you alluding to Sybilla?" asks Jim gravely. "I have no doubt, from what I know of her
      powers in that line, that she has been extremely trying."
"Yes, partly," replies the girl doubtfully; "but I have had troubles of my own too. I dare
      say that Amelia has told you, or probably" (with a second and heavier sigh) "you have been
      more pleasantly employed."
"Amelia did hint at some disaster," replies Jim, struggling to conceal the rather grim smile
      which is curving his mouth, a feat the more difficult since he has no moustache to aid him;
      "but I have been waiting to hear all the details from yourself."
"I know that you are apt to think I fancy things," says Cecilia, sitting down on a third
      hard chair, "but there could be no fancy in this case; I am sure I was as much engaged as any
      girl ever was. I had chosen the drawing-room paper and bought the dining-room grate!"
"That is further than we ever got, is not it, Amelia?" says Jim, breaking, at the relation
      of this prosaic fact, into the laugh he has been with difficulty swallowing; "but, Cis, if I
      were you, I should keep the grate; one does not know how soon its services may be required
      again!"
"It is all very well for you to joke," returns Cecilia, with an offended air; "it may be
      play to you, but it is——"
"Not death, not quite death to you!" interrupts Burgoyne, glancing with an expressive smile
      at her buxom outline. "I think you will live to fight another day, will not you? But I really
      am extremely sorry; tell me all about it."
"He was perfectly right when we left England," says Cecilia, mollified at once, and
      apparently relieved by the invitation to unbosom herself of her woes; "nobody could have been
      more so; he came to see us off at Folkestone, and the tears were in his eyes; they were
      really, it was not my imagination, was it, Amelia? And at first he wrote all right, and said
      all the usual things; but then his letters gradually grew fewer and fewer, and after I had
      written and telegraphed a great many times—I do not know how many times I did not telegraph to
      ask whether he was ill, and you know how expensive foreign telegrams are—he sent me a few
      lines, oh, such cruel lines, were not they, Amelia? to say that, on reflection, he feared that
      the feeling he had for me was not such as to justify his entering on so sacred an engagement
      as marriage with me; but he ought to have thought of that before, ought not he?"
"Undoubtedly!"
"I will never engage myself to a clergyman again," says Cecilia pensively.
Burgoyne's thoughts have strayed at the mention of the cloth of his sister-in-law elect's
      truant admirer, to that member of the same profession who has lately robbed him of his
      heritage, and he replies with a good deal of feeling:
"They do play one dirty turns now and then, do not they? Yes, Cis, stick to laymen for the
      future!"
Cecilia receives this counsel with a melancholy sigh, fixing her large eyes on the carpet,
      but presently resumes the conversation in a livelier key.
"Let us talk about something pleasanter," she says. "Had you a good journey? Do you like
      your travelling companion? Why did not you bring him with you? Is he nice?"
"At all events, he is not a clergyman," replies Jim, with a rather malicious smile; "but no,
      my dear, do not let your thoughts turn in that direction! You must look at him as poor women
      look at diamonds!"
"I am sure I do not know what you mean!" replies Cecilia, reddening. "I have not the
      slightest wish to look at him! I am not in spirits to 'look,' as you call it, at anyone!"
A moment later, she adds, with a suspicion of malice in her tone:
"We are certainly an unlucky family in our loves! I, heartlessly thrown over, and Amelia
      engaged for eight years!"
Burgoyne smiles. "Amelia is not going to be engaged any longer," he says, putting his arm
      round his betrothed. "Amelia is going to be married at once!"
</div></body></text></TEI>