<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER XX.
There is always something in the nature of a mountain in a night that is interposed between
      us and either any promised pleasure or any threatened pain. In the case of pleasure, we are
      naturally in a hurry to scale it, in order to see how full of sunshine and flowers is the
      happy valley on the other side; and in the case of pain, we are all scarcely less eager to
      ascertain how deep is the abyss, how choking the swamp, how angry the waves that wait us
      beyond the dusty hill.
Burgoyne has no expectation of finding anything agreeable on the further slope of his
      mountain, and yet the time seems long to him, till he has climbed its crest, and slidden down
      its other side. Early and splendid as is the new light that takes possession of him and his
      shutterless bedroom, he upbraids it as a laggard; and the hours that pace by till the one
      appointed for the explanation of yesterday's mystery seem to him to hobble on crutches. What
      can Amelia have to say to him that needs such a pomp of preparation? What can have turned
      Amelia into a Tragedy Queen? What miracle can have made her take the imperative mood? For it
      was the imperative mood unquestionably which, contrary to all precedent, she had made use of
      when she had commanded him, most gently it is true, since, being by her nature gentle, she can
      do nothing ungently, to leave her. He absolutely laughs at the topsy-turviness of the idea.
      What can she have to say that requires so carefully selected a spot to say it in?—a spot where
      "it does not matter if she does break down." What, in Heaven's name, can she be going to say
      that inspires her with such a cold-blooded intention beforehand of breaking down?
Jim's state of mind is something that of the Baron's in "On ne badine pas avec l'amour," on
      hearing that his daughter's governess had been turning somersaults in a field of luzerne.
      "Non, en vérité, non, mon ami, je n'y comprends absolûment rien. Tout cela me paraît une
      conduite désordonnée, il est vrai, mais sans motif comme sans excuse." If she were any other
      woman, he should ascribe her behaviour to some tiresome but passing tantrum, evoked by his
      delay in appearing? But in the past eight years how many hundred times has he kept her
      waiting? and has she ever failed to meet him with the same meek good-humour that has not had
      even a tinge of reproachful forgiveness in it. As she herself had said, "In all these years
      how often have I been angry with you?" He has been angry with her times out of mind, angry
      with her on a thousand unjust and unkind counts; angry with her for her slowness, her bad
      complexion, her want of a sense of humour; for a hundred things that she cannot help, that she
      would have altered—oh, how gladly!—if she could! But how often has she been angry with him? In
      vain he searches his memory, hoping to overtake some instance of ill-humour, or even
      pettishness, that may make the balance between them hang a little more equal. But in vain. She
      has never been angry with him. And even now neither her face nor her manner—whatever else of
      strange and unparalleled they may have conveyed—have conveyed the idea of anger.
But if not anger, what then can be the cause that has produced a change so startling in one
      so little given to impulsive action or eccentricities of emotion? Can she have heard anything
      about him? anything to his discredit? He searches his conscience, but whether it be that that
      organ is not a particularly sensitive one, or that it really has no damaging facts to give up,
      it is silent, or almost so. He has perhaps been rather slack in his attendance upon her of
      late, but at her own bidding. At his visits to the Le Marchants' no one could take exception,
      dictated as they so obviously have been by philanthropy, and his conversations with
      Elizabeth—how few and scant! his heart heaves a rebellious sigh at their paucity—might be
      proclaimed without excision at the market cross. Our thoughts are our own, and are, moreover,
      so safely padlocked in our minds that he does not think it worth while to inquire whether, if
      his future wife could have looked in and seen the restive fancies capering, saddleless and
      bridleless, there, she might have been justified in assuming a crouching attitude and a
      sorrowfully commanding manner.
He is as far as ever from solving the problem, when—for once in his life before his time at
      the rendezvous—he presents himself at the familiar door. It is opened to him by Amelia
      herself. She has often done it before, seeming to know by instinct his ring from that of any
      other person, but to-day the familiar action disconcerts him. He had expected to be received
      with a formality and pomp of woe such as yesterday had seemed to threaten; and here is Amelia
      looking exactly like her ordinary self, except that she is perhaps rather more carefully
      dressed than usual; but that may be due to the fact of her having, for the first time, assumed
      the fresh calico gown, which the high summer of the Italian April morning seems to justify.
      Whether it be due to the calico gown or not, there is an indisputable air of gala about her,
      and she is smiling. A revulsion of feeling comes over the man, to whom her tragic
      semi-swooning airs had given a wakeful night. It was a tantrum after all, then; a storm in a
      teacup. And now her common sense has come to the rescue, and she has seen the folly of
      quarrelling with her bread and butter. These reflections naturally do not translate themselves
      into responsive smiles on his face, but she does not seem to notice his dour looks.
"I have a proposal to make to you," she says, still smiling. "Father is so well this
      morning, quite easy, and he has been wheeled into the sitting-room to see Sybilla. She has
      been very good about him this time, and quite believes that he has been really bad."
"How good of her!" comments Jim grimly; "it would be so easy and so amusing to play at
      having a swollen toe, would not it?"
"And so," continues Miss Wilson, wisely ignoring his fleer at her sister, "I am perfectly
      free, and I want you to take me somewhere, some little drive or expedition; you see," with a
      conciliatory glance at her own modest finery, "I counted upon your saying 'yes'; I dressed so
      as not to keep you waiting."
Every word of this sentence confirms Burgoyne in the idea implanted by her first address.
      This is her amende, and she is quite right to make it. But she would have been more
      right still if her conduct had not rendered it necessary.
Amelia is not the type of woman who through life will gain much by pouts. Perhaps,
      by-and-by, very kindly and delicately, he may obliquely hint this to her. But all that he says
      aloud is the rather stiff acquiescence conveyed in the words:
"By all means. I am quite at your service."
"And now where shall we go?" continues Amelia, shutting the door behind her and beginning to
      cross the hotel courtyard at his side; "that is the next thing—not to any gallery or church, I
      think, if you do not mind; I say such stupid things about Art, and the more I try, the
      stupider they are; let us go somewhere into the country—I can understand the country. I am not
      afraid of saying stupid things about it."
Into Burgoyne's mind comes the odious thought that he would not put it past his betrothed to
      say stupid things even about the Tuscan landscape, but he only awaits her decision in a
      respectful silence while helping her into a fiacre.
"It would be a sin to be under any roof to-day but this one," she says, looking up to the
      immeasurable azure bridge above her head; "would you mind—could you spare time to go to
      Fiesole?"
His only answer is to repeat the word Fiesole to the driver, who, with the inevitable tiny
      poodle-shaven dog beside him, is awaiting the order as to his destination. It is but a little
      way to Fiesole, as we all know, but yet, as the slow hired vehicle crawls up the steep ascent,
      with the driver walking alongside, or even lagging behind, there would be time and opportunity
      to say a good deal. But Amelia says next to nothing. Perhaps the heat makes her sleepy, for it
      is so hot, so hot between the garden walls, where the rose hedges are beginning to show a pale
      flush of plenteous pink among their multitude of green buds. Young, indeed, just born as the
      roses are, the highway dust has already powdered them with its ash-toned white. He does not
      know it at the time, but those dust-filmed rosebuds have found a home in his memory from which
      no after-sights, however numerous, will dislodge them. They have reached the village, and left
      their carriage, and begun, silently still, to ascend the steep lane up which the feet of most
      of Europe and America have in turn climbed to see the famous view that rewards the little
      effort. Past the cottages, whose inmates, tranquilly sitting in their doorways, or leaning
      idly against their door-posts, have probably seen all that is illustrious, notorious,
      history-making of the day, pass pantingly. Is there a prime minister, a princess, a poet, a
      prima donna, of the time, that has not toiled up the steep path to the welcome rest of the
      bench on the high plateau, on the hillside? Jim and Amelia are certainly not likely to figure
      in the annals of their time, but the peasants look at them with as much or as little interest
      as if they were. An immortal, unless his immortality is printed on his back in letters as
      large as those that announce Colman's mustard to the world, has, to the vulgar, very much the
      air of one of themselves.
Our friends have reached the haven of the stone seat, and, thanks to the earliness of the
      hour, have it all to themselves, save for a trio of sunburnt women of the people, with
      handkerchiefs tied over their tanned heads, who tease them to buy straw hand-screens. And when
      they have bought a couple, and made it kindly but distinctly evident that no amount of
      worrying will induce them to buy any more, even these leave them in peace and descend the hill
      again, in search of newer victims. They are alone under the sky's warm azure. Beneath their
      eyes spreads one of those nobly lovely spectacles that Italy and spring, hand in hand, alone
      can offer. To some, indeed, it may seem that the prospect from the Bellosguardo side of the
      valley is even more beautiful, since Fiesole, sitting so high as she does, dwarfs the opposite
      hills, and makes the looker lose their wavy line. They seem flat in comparison, the plain
      appears wider, the beloved city more distant, and does not show the same exquisite
      distinctness of separate tower and spire and palace. But yet such comparison is mere carping.
      Who can wish for a sight more divinely suave and fair than this from the bench above Fiesole?
      Not a breath of smoke dares to hang about the glorious old town, dimming its lustre, and
      between them and it what a spread of manifold colour, of more "mingled hue" than the rainbow's
      "purfled scarf doth show!" The moon-tinted olives, twilight and ghostly, even in the dazzling
      radiance of this superb morning hour, with the blinding green of the young corn about their
      gray feet, the cypress taper-flames, the gay white houses, terrace gardened, and, above all,
      the vast smile of the Tuscan heaven.
At first Amelia's muteness seems natural and grateful to Jim, as the outcome of the awe and
      hush that exceeding beauty breathes on the human heart, but by-and-by, as it is prolonged
      beyond the limits that seem to him fit or agreeable, it begins to get on his nerves. After
      having so genuinely and wantonly alarmed him, has she brought him here, without any
      expressions of regret or remorse, simply to steep herself in a silent luxury of selfish
      enjoyment? After brooding resentfully on this idea for a considerable time, he translates it
      into speech.
"I thought that you had something to say to me?"
It seems as if her soul had gone out into the sun and April-painted champaign country, and
      that it is only with an effort and a sigh that she fetches it home again:
"So I have."
"And how much longer am I to wait for it?"
There is no indication of any capacity for patience in his tone.
She brings her look back from the shining morning city, and fixes it wistfully upon him.
"Are you in such a hurry to hear?"
The pathetic streak in her voice, instead of conciliating, chafes him. What is the sense of
      this paraphernalia of preliminaries? Why not come to the point at once? if indeed there is a
      point—a fact of which he begins to entertain grave doubts.
"I do not know what you call hurry," he replies drily; "I have been awaiting this mystic
      utterance for sixteen or seventeen hours."
Her sallow cheek takes on a pinky tinge of mortification at his accent.
"You are quite right," she answers quickly; "I have no business to keep you waiting. I meant
      to tell you as soon as we got here; I asked you to bring me here on purpose, only——"
"You told me that you must make the communication at some place where it would not matter if
      you did break down," says he, rather harshly helping her memory; "you must allow that that was
      not an encouraging exordium. Do you look upon this"—glancing ironically round—"as a
      particularly suitable place for breaking down?"
Again that pain-evidencing wave of colour flows into her face. There is such an unloving
      mockery in his displeased voice.
"I shall not break down," she replies, forcing herself to speak with quiet composure; "you
      need not be afraid that I shall. I know that yesterday I was foolish enough to say the very
      words you quote, but I was not quite myself then; I did not quite know what I was saying; I
      had only just heard it."
"It? What IT? Is this a new riddle? For Heaven's sake let us hear the answer to the
      first before we embark on any fresh one!"
"It is no riddle," replies she, her low patient tones contrasting with his exasperated ones,
      "nothing could be plainer; it was only that I happened to overhear something rather—rather
      painful—something that was not intended for me."
His angry cheek blanches as his thought flies arrow-quick to the one subject of his
      perennial apprehension. Someone has been poisoning her ear with cowardly libels, or yet more
      dreadful truths about Elizabeth Le Marchant. For a moment or two his tongue cleaves to the
      roof of his mouth, then he says in a tone which he uselessly tries to make one of calm
      contempt alone:
"If you had lived longer in Florence, you would know how much importance to attach to its
      tittle-tattle and cancans."
She shakes her head with a sorrowful obstinacy.
"This was no tittle-tattle—no cancan."
Her answer seems but to confirm him in this first horrible suspicion.
"It is astonishing," he says, in a strangled voice, "how ready even the best women are to
      believe evil; what—what evidence have you of the truth of—of these precious stories?"
"What evidence?" she repeats, fastening her sad eyes upon him—"the evidence of my own heart.
      I realize now that I have known it all along."
Read by the light of his fears, this response is so enigmatic that it dawns upon him with a
      flash of inexpressible solace that perhaps he may be on the wrong track after all. His ideas
      are precipitated into such a state of confusion by this blessed possibility that he can only
      echo in a stupefied tone:
"Have known what all along?"
She has turned round on the stone bench upon which they have hitherto been sitting side by
      side, and, as he in the eagerness of his listening has done the same thing, they are now
      opposite to one another, and he feels as well as sees her hungry eyes devouring his face.
"That you are sick of me," she answers, in a heart-wrung whisper, "sick to death of me—that
      was what she said."
It is impossible to deny that Burgoyne's first impulse is one of relief. He has been
      mistaken, then. Elizabeth's secret is in the same state of precarious safety as her enemy's
      departure from Florence had left it in. His second impulse—our second impulses are mostly our
      best ones, equally free from the headlongness of our first, and the cold worldly wisdom of our
      third—is one of genuine indignation, concern, and amazement.
"What who said?"
"Mrs. Byng."
His stupefaction deepens.
"Mrs. Byng—Mrs. Byng told you that I was sick of you? Sick to death of you?"
"Oh, no," she cries, even her emotion giving way to her eagerness to correct this
      misapprehension, "she did not tell me so! How could you imagine such a thing? She is
      far, far too kind-hearted; she would not hurt a fly intentionally, and would be exceedingly
      pained if she thought I had overheard her."
He shrugs his shoulders despairingly.
"Je m'y perds! She told you, and she did not tell you; you heard, and you did not
      hear."
"I am telling it very stupidly, I know," she says apologetically, "very confusedly; and of
      course I can't expect you to understand by instinct how it was." She sighs profoundly, and
      then goes on quickly, and no longer looking at him. "You know she took me to the party, but
      when we reached the villa, I found that she knew so many people, and I so few, that I should
      only be a burden to her if I kept continually by her side, and as I was rather tired—you know
      that I had not been in bed for two or three nights—I thought I would go into the house and
      rest, so as to be quite fresh by the time you came. I fancied it was not unlikely you might be
      a little late."
His conscience, at the unintentional reproach of this patient supposition, reminds him of
      its existence by a sharp prick. How many times has her poor vanity suffered the bruise of
      being long first at the rendezvous?
"I discovered that chair by the window under the curtain, the one where you found me."
"Well?"
"It was so quiet there, as everybody was in the garden, that I suppose I fell asleep; at
      least I remember nothing more until suddenly I heard Mrs. Byng's voice saying——"
"Saying what?"
"Her son was with her—he had brought her in to have some tea; it was to him that she was
      speaking; she was asking him about me, where I was? where he had left me? whether he had seen
      me lately? And then she said, 'Poor Amelia, Jim really does neglect her shamefully; and yet
      one cannot help being sorry for him, too; it was such child-stealing in the first instance,
      and he is evidently dead-sick of her! It is so astonishing that she does not see it!'"
There is something almost terrible in the calm distinctness with which Amelia repeats the
      sentences that had laid the card-house of her happiness in the dust. Certainly she keeps her
      promise to him to the letter; she gives no lightest sign of breaking down. There is not a tear
      in her eye, not a quiver in her voice. After a moment's pause, she continues:
"And then he, Mr. Byng, answered, 'Poor soul, it—it is odd! She must have the hide
      of a hippopotamus.'"
Amelia has finished her narrative, repeating the young man's galling comment, with the same
      composure as his mother's humiliatingly compassionate ones; and for a space her sole auditor
      is absolutely incapable of making any criticism upon it. He is forbidden, if he had wished it,
      to offer her even the mute amends of a dumb endearment, by the reappearance on the scene of a
      couple of the sun-scorched peasant torments with their straw hand-screens. It is not likely
      that those so lately bought should have worn out already; but yet they renew their
      importunities with such a determined obstinacy, as if they knew this to be the case; and it is
      not until they are lightened of two more, that they consent once again to retire, leaving the
      warm bright plateau to the lovers—if indeed they can be called such.
</div></body></text></TEI>