<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="33">
CHAPTER III.
Notre Dame d'Afrique—Lady of Africa—is an ugly lady, homely and black; and the church that
      is dedicated to her is ugly too—new and mock-Moorish; but, like many another ugly lady, being
      very nobly placed, she has a great and solemn air. It is Our Lady of Africa who first gives us
      our greeting as we steam in from seawards; it is to Our Lady of Africa that the fisher-people
      climb to vespers, and to the touching office that follows, when priests and acolytes pass out
      of the church to the little plateau outside, where, sheer against the sky, stands a small
      Latin cross, with a plain and, as it seems, coffin-shaped stone beneath it, on which one reads
      the inscription:
"À la mémoire de tous ceux, qui ont péri dans la mer, et ont été ensevelis dans ses
       flots.""All those who have perished in the sea, and been buried in her
       waves."
What a gigantic company to be covered with one little epitaph!
Notre Dame d'Afrique stands grandly on the cliff-tops, overlooking the sea, whose cruel
      deeds she is so agonizedly prayed to avert, whose cruelty she is sometimes powerful to
      assuage, witness the frequent votive tablets with which the church walls are covered:

"Merci, oh ma mère."
"J'ai prie, et j'ai été exaucé."
"Reconnaissance à Marie."
"Reconnaissance à Notre Dame d'Afrique."

She does not look very lovable, this coal-black Marie, who stands in her stiff brocade, with
      her ebon hands stretched straight out above the high-altar; but how tenderly these poor
      fisherwives must have felt towards her when she brought them back their Pierre or their Jean,
      from the truculent deeps of the ocean!
Burgoyne has been told, both by his guide-book and by his table-d'hôte neighbour,
      that he ought to see Notre Dame d'Afrique; nor is he loth to pay further obeisance to that
      high lady who already yesterday beckoned to him across the blue floor of her waters. He does
      not tell Cecilia of his intention, as he knows that she would offer to accompany him; but on
      leaving her he takes his way through the gay French town, along its Arab-named streets,
      Bab-a-Zoun and Bab-el-Oued, towards the village of St. Eugène, and breasts the winding road
      that, with many an elbow and bend, heading a deep gorge that runs up from the sea to the
      church-foot, leads him within her portals. The congregation is sparse—a few peasants, a blue
      and red Zouave, and several inevitable English. Now and again a woman, clad in humble black
      that tells of prayers in vain, goes up with her thin candle, and, lighting it, sticks it in
      its sconce among the others that burn before the altar. For awhile Burgoyne finds it pleasant
      after his climb to sit and watch her, and speculate pityingly with what hope of still possible
      good to herself she is setting her slender taper alight—now that her treasure has all too
      obviously gone down beneath the waves; to sit and speculate, and smell the heady incense, and
      listen to the murmur of chanted supplication; but presently, growing weary of the
      uncomprehended service, he slips outside to the little plateau, with its view straight out—no
      importunate land-object intervening—towards the sea, across which a little steamer is cutting
      her way; and on the horizon two tiny shining sails are lying.
Here, on this bold headland, it seems as if one were one's self in mid-ocean; and one has to
      lean far over the low wall in order to realize that there is some solid earth between us and
      it; that two full cities of the dead—a Jewish and a Christian—lie below. From the
      land-cemeteries to the vast sea-cemetery—for read by the light of that plain inscription upon
      which his eyes are resting, what is even the azure Mediterranean but a grave? For the matter
      of that, what is all life but a grave?

"First our pleasures die, and then
Our hopes, and then our fears, and when
These are dead, the debt is due:
Dust claims dust, and we die too."

He turns away, and, muttering these words half absently between his lips, begins to make the
      circuit of the church; and in doing so, comes suddenly upon three persons who are apparently
      similarly employed. The party consists of a man and two ladies. Being a little ahead of him,
      they are, for the first moment or two, not aware of his presence, an ignorance by which he,
      rather to his own discomfiture, profits to overhear a scrap of their conversation certainly
      not intended for his ears.
"I suppose that you were wool-gathering, as usual?" Mr. Le Marchant is saying, with an
      accent of cold severity, to his daughter; "but I should have thought that even you
      might have remembered to bring a wrap of some kind for your mother!"
Jim starts, partly at having happened so unexpectedly upon the people before him, partly in
      shocked astonishment at the harshness both of voice and words.
In the old days Elizabeth had been the apple of her father's eye, to oppose whose lightest
      fancy was a capital offence, for whom no words could be too sugared, no looks too doting. Yet
      now she answers, with the sweetest good-humour, and without the slightest sign of surprise or
      irritation, or any indication that the occurrence is not a habitual one:
"I cannot think how I could have been so stupid; it was inexcusable of me."
"I quite agree with you," replies the father, entirely unmollified; "I am sure you have been
      told often enough how liable to chills insufficient clothing makes people in this beastly
      climate at sundown."
"But it is not near sundown," breaks in Mrs. Le Marchant, throwing herself anxiously, and
      with a dexterity which shows how frequently she is called upon to do so, between the two
      others; "look what a great piece of blue sky the sun has yet to travel."
"You shall have my jacket," cries Elizabeth impetuously, but still with the same perfect
      sweetness; "it will be absurdly short for you, but, at least, it will keep you warm." So
      saying, she, with the speed of lightning, whips off the garment alluded to, and proceeds to
      guide her mother's arms into its inconveniently tight sleeves, laughing the while with her odd
      childish light-heartedness, and crying, "You dear thing, you do look too ridiculous!"
The mother laughs too, and aids her daughter's efforts; nor does it seem to occur to any of
      the three that the fatal Southern chill may possibly strike the delicate little frame of
      Elizabeth, now exposed, so lightly clad in her tweed gown, to its insidious influence.
"I wish you had a looking-glass to see yourself in!" cries she, rippling into fresh mirth;
      "does not she look funny, father!" appealing to him with as little resentment for his past
      surliness as would be shown by a good dog (I cannot put it more strongly), and yet, as it
      seems to Jim, with a certain nervous deprecation.
The next moment one of them—he does not know which—has caught sight of himself, and the
      moment after he is shaking hands with all three. It is clear that the fact of his presence in
      Algiers has been notified to Mr. Le Marchant, for there is no surprise in his coldly civil
      greeting. He makes it as short as possible, and almost at once turns to continue his circuit
      of the church, his wife at his side, and his daughter meekly following. Doubtless they do not
      wish for his (Jim's) company; but yet, as he was originally, and without any reference to
      them, going in their direction, it would seem natural that he should walk along with them.
He is hesitating as to whether or no to adopt this course, when he is decided by a very
      slight movement of Elizabeth's head. She does not actually look over her shoulder at him, and
      yet it seems to him as if, were her gesture completed, it would amount to that; but it is
      arrested by some impulse before it is more than sketched. Such as it is, it suffices to take
      him to her side; and it seems to him that there is a sort of satisfaction mingled with the
      undoubted apprehension in her face, as she realizes that it is so. Her eyes, as she turns them
      upon him, have a hungry question in them which her lips seem afraid to put. Apparently she
      cannot get nearer to it than this—very tremblingly and hurriedly uttered, with a timid glance
      at her father's back, as if she were delivering herself of some compromising secret instead of
      the mere platitude which she so indistinctly vents:
"A—a—great many things have happened since—since we last met!"
Her eye travels for a moment to his hat, from which, unlike Cecilia's rainbow raiment, the
      crape band has not yet been removed; and he understands that she is comprehending his troubles
      as well as her own in the phrase.
"A great many!" he answers baldly.
He has not the cruelty to wish to keep her on tenterhooks, and he knows perfectly what is
      the question that is written in the wistful blue of her look, and whom it concerns; but it
      would be impertinence in him to take for granted that knowledge, and answer that curiosity
      which, however intense and apparent, has yet not become the current coin of speech. Probably
      she sees that he is unable or unwilling to help her, for she makes another tremendous
      effort.
"I hope that—that—all your friends are well."
"All my friends!" repeats he, half sadly; "they are not such a numerous band; I have not
      many friends left still alive."
His thoughts have reverted to his own loss, for, at the moment, Amelia is very present to
      him; but the words are no sooner out of his mouth than he sees how false is the impression
      produced by his reply—sees it written in the sudden dead-whiteness of her cheek and the terror
      in her eye.
"Do you mean"—she stammers—"that anybody—any of your friends—is—is lately dead?"
"Oh no! no!" he cries reassuringly; "you are making a mistake; nobody is dead—nobody, that
      is"—with a sigh—"that you do not already know of. All our friends—all our common friends—are,
      as far as I know——"
"Elizabeth!" breaks in Mr. Le Marchant's voice, in severe appellation; he has only just
      become aware that his daughter is not unaccompanied, and the discovery apparently does not
      please him.
Without a second's delay, despite her twenty-seven years, she has sprung forwards to obey
      the summons; and Jim has the sense to make no further effort to rejoin her. By the time that
      their circuit is finished, and they have again reached the front of the church, vespers are
      ended, and there is a movement outwards among the worshippers. They stream—not very
      numerous—out on the little terrace. The priests follow, tonsured, but—which looks strange—with
      beards and whiskers. The acolytes, in their red chasubles, carry a black and white pall, and
      lay it over the memorial stone below the cross. On either hand stand a band of decently clad
      youths—sons of drowned seamen—playing on brass instruments. It is a poor little music,
      doubtfully in tune; but surely no rolling organ, no papal choir, could touch the heart so much
      as this simple ceremonial. The little Latin cross standing sheer out against the sea; the
      black pall thrown over the stone that commemorates the sea's innumerable dead; the red-clad
      acolytes, standing with eyes cast down, holding aloft their high tapers, whose flickering
      flame the sea-wind soon puffs out; and the sons of the drowned sailors, making their homely
      music to the accompaniment of the salt breeze. The little service is brief and those who have
      taken part in it are soon dispersing. As they do so, Jim once more finds himself for a moment
      close to Elizabeth.
The sun has nearly touched the sea-line by this time, and he sees, or thinks he sees, her
      shiver.
"You are cold," he says solicitously; "you will get a chill."
She looks back at him, half surprised, half grateful, at the anxiety of his tone.
"Not I!" she answers, with a gentle air of indifference and recklessness; "naught never
      comes to harm!"
"But you shivered! I saw you shiver."
"Did I? It was only"—smiling—"that a goose walked over my grave. Does a goose never walk
      over your grave?"
And once more she is gone.
He does not see her again that day. Of the three places laid for dinner at the round table
      in the salle à manger, only two are occupied; hers is, and remains, empty. She is not
      with her parents, and, what is more, she does not appear to be missed by them. It fills Jim
      with something of the same shocked surprise as he had felt on hearing the cold and surly tone
      in which she had been addressed by her father, to see how much more, and more genially, that
      father talks; how much less morose his back looks than had been the case on the previous
      evening.
The next morning rises superb in steady splendour, and Jim, on issuing out on the little
      red-tiled terrace, finds the whole strength of the hotel gathered upon it. Even the worst
      invalids, who have not shown their noses outside their rooms for a fortnight, are sunning
      themselves, wrapped in apparently unnecessary furs. The Arabs and Turks have spread their gay
      rugs and carpets, and displayed their bits of stuff, their brasswork, and their embroidery.
      They make a charming garden of colour under the blue. One is lying beside his wares, in an
      azure jacket and a rose-red sash, twanging a "gunébri," or little Arab mandolin. Apart from
      the rest of the company, at the extreme end of the terrace, in a place which is evidently hers
      by prescriptive right, close to the balustrade, upon whose blue and white tiled top her books
      are lying, Elizabeth is sitting—and sitting alone, neither truculent father not frightened
      mother barring approach to her. He makes his way at once to her.
"You were not at dinner last night?"
"No."
"I hope that did not mean that you were ill?"
Her eyes are not lifted to his—resting rather on the balustrade, through whose pierced
      brickwork little boughs of Bougainvillia are pushing.
"No, I was not ill," she replies slowly; "but I had made such a figure of myself by crying
      that mammy thought I had better stay away. When I looked in the glass," she adds humorously,
      "I thought so myself."
"There was not much sign of tears about you when we parted at Notre Dame d'Afrique," he says
      brusquely.
"No, but"—with a sudden lifting of her pretty lashes—"you know there is never any medium in
      me; I am always either laughing or crying; and, of course, seeing you again brought—brought
      things back to me."
She looks wistfully at him as she makes this leading remark.
He can no longer have any doubt as to her wish to embark upon the subject which, even in the
      three minutes of their meeting on the previous day, she had sought to approach. If he is kind,
      he will enter into her wish, he will make her path easier for her; but for the moment he does
      not feel kind—angry, rather, and rebellious.
Is his intercourse with her to be a mere repetition of that which, although now seven months
      ago, makes him still writhe, in the recollection of his latter intercourse with Byng? Is he
      again to be spitted upon the skewer of reminiscences of the Vallombrosan wood?
      Never!
He looks obstinately away from her—towards where first an ivied bank rises, with red
      gladioli flowering upon it; then a little space of bare ground, then a row of orange-trees;
      then some young stone-pines, holding their heads against the blue to show what an exquisite
      contrast they make to it; then, topping, or seeming to top the hill, a white villa, with
      little blue jewels of sky, seen through the interstices of the balustrade on its roof, its
      whitewash making the solid wall of sapphire behind it look even more desperately and
      unnameably blue than elsewhere. What a blue! sapphire! turquoise! lapis! To what poor shifts
      are we driven to express it! How could we describe its glory to a blind person? If to such a
      one the colour of scarlet is represented by the sound of a trumpet, surely this divine tint
      above us can be best conveyed by the whole heavenly hierarchy of burning seraphs and winged
      angels, harping and quiring together.
"I always think," says Elizabeth, following the direction of his eyes—"perhaps it may be
      fancy—that this particular corner of the sky is much bluer than any other."
There is a shade of disappointment in her tone at his failure to take up her challenge, but
      she is far too gentle to make any further effort in a direction which, for some reason, is
      disagreeable to him; and since he will not follow her inclination, she is pliantly willing to
      follow his.
The Arabs have come up in might to-day, and, no longer fearing rain, have carpeted almost
      the whole terrace with their wares. They hang over the low wall, and cover the red tiles; blue
      and purple, and Moslem green, and Venetian red; dazzling white haiks, blinding in the
      blinding sunshine; carpets, embroidered jackets, flashing back gold in the gold light. A pert
      English miss is standing over them, and saying disparagingly about each:
"You can get this 7-1/2d. cheaper at Whiteley's. I saw a much better one than this for half
      the price at Marshall's," etc., etc.
One longs to ask the "miss" whether she saw the sunlight, and the cobalt sea, and the
      glorified whitewash, with its amethyst shadows, for 7-1/2d. at Whiteley's too, and, if so, why
      she did not stay there?
Burgoyne's friend in the red shirt is beating down a one-eyed Kabyle, and having a happy
      haggle with him over a Mozambique coat.
"She does not get on with her own family at home, and she has quarrelled with all her
      travelling companions!" says Elizabeth, in a delighted explanatory whisper. Wistfulness and
      disappointment have alike vanished out of her small face, which is one ripple of mischief.
      "The fat widow in the weepers, who is preening herself like a great pouter pigeon, is trying
      to marry the wizened old gentleman in the bamboo chair. Sometimes we think she will succeed;
      sometimes we think she will not: it is so interesting!"
Jim looks down at her with an astonishment bordering on indignation.
Is this the woman who cried herself sick last night over memories of the so recent past? In
      this mobile nature, is there nothing that one can lay hold of?
"Mammy and I get an infinity of amusement out of them," continues she, still playfully, but
      faltering a little under the severity of his look; "oh, we know a great deal about them all;
      and those that we do not know about we make stories for!"
"Indeed!"
His tone is so curt that the stream of her gaiety dries up under it, and she relapses into
      silence, looking towards the flashing sea, and the ficus-tree, that is casting its now
      grateful shade.
</div></body></text></TEI>