<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II.

"Tell me now in what hidden way is
Lady Flora the lovely Roman?
Where is Hipparchia, and where is Thais?
Neither of them the fairer woman.
Where is Echo beheld of no one,
Only heard on river and mere?
She whose beauty was more than human,
But where are the snows of yester-year?"

"There is no reason why we should not go home now; are you ready?" cries Brown, bustling up
      to his friend, who has not waited for this question to make straight, as the needle to the
      pole, for the corner where the collected umbrellas stand in their little area of lake.
Burgoyne would probably have laughed at the unconscious irony of this inquiry if he had
      heard it; but he has not, his attention being otherwise directed. On the same umbrella quest
      as himself, being helped on with her mackintosh by one of the two men who had accompanied her,
      a pepper-and-salt-haired, sturdy gentleman of an obviously unacademic cut, is the lady whose
      face had flashed upon him with that puzzling sense of unfamiliar familiarity. Since they are
      now in close proximity, and both employed alike in struggling into their wraps, there is
      nothing more natural than that she should turn her eyes full upon him. They are very fine
      eyes, though far from young ones. Is it a trick of his imagination, or does he see a look of
      half-recognition dawn in them, such as must have been born in his own when they first alighted
      on her? At all events, if there is such a look of half-recognition in her eyes, she is
      determined that it shall not have a chance of becoming a whole one. Either he is mistaken, and
      she has not recognised him, or she is determined not to acknowledge the acquaintance, for she
      looks away again at once, nor does she throw another glance in his direction. Indeed, it seems
      to him that she hurries on her preparations with added speed, and walks out into the night
      accompanied by her double escort before him.
The weather has changed, and for the better. The rollicking wind has lulled, the pattering
      rain ceased. Between the ragged, black cloud-sheets star-points shine, and a shimmering moon
      shows her wet face reflected in the puddles. Talk, which had been impossible on their way to
      the meeting, is not only possible but easy now, and Brown is evidently greatly inclined for
      it. Burgoyne, on the other hand, had never felt more disinclined. It is not so much that he is
      out of humour with his tiresome friend, though he is that too, as that his whole mind is
      centred on making his memory give up the secret of that face that has come back to him out of
      some vague cavern of his past.
Who is the woman whom he knows, and who knows him (for on reflection he is sure that that
      look of hers was one of half—of more than half—recognition), and yet whose place in his
      history, whose very name, he seeks so vainly? She does not belong to his Oxford days, as he
      has already ascertained. He has learnt from Brown that she does not belong to the Oxford of
      to-day, being apparently a stranger, and, with her husband, a visitor to the Warden of ——
      College, in whose company they had arrived. He explores the succeeding years of his life. In
      vain; she has no place there; in vain he dives and plunges into the sea of his memory; he
      cannot fish up the pearl he seeks. He must hark back to earlier days—his school-time, the six
      months he spent in Devonshire with a coach before he came up to New. Ah! he has it—he has it
      at last! just as they have reached Brown's door, while he is fumbling with his latch-key for
      the keyhole, imprecating the moon for withdrawing her shining at the very instant he most
      needs her, Burgoyne has come up with the shy object of his chase. It is conjured back into his
      mind by the word Devonshire.
"I have it," he says to himself; "her hair has turned white, that was why I did not
      recognise her; it used to be raven-black. But it is she—of course it is she! To think of my
      not knowing her again! Of course it is Mrs. Le Marchant."
What a door into the distance that name has opened!—a door through which he passes into a
      Devonshire garden, and romps with rose-faced Devonshire children. The very names of those
      children are coming back to him. Tom and Charles, those were the schoolboys; Rose and Miriam,
      and—Elizabeth. He recalls—absurd trick of freakish memory—those children's pets. Tom and
      Charles had guinea-pigs; Miriam had a white rat; Rose—what had Rose? Rose must have had
      something; and Elizabeth had a kangaroo. Elizabeth's kangaroo was short-lived, poor beast, and
      died about hay-time; the guinea-pigs and the white rat have been dead too for ages now, of
      course. And are Tom and Charles, and Rose and Miriam, and bright Elizabeth dead also? Absurd!
      Why should they be? Nothing more unlikely! Why, it is only ten years ago, after all.
He is roused from his meditations by Brown's voice, to find himself in Brown's study, where
      its owner is filling himself a pipe, and festally offering him whisky-and-water. But it is
      only an abstracted attention that Burgoyne lends, either to the whisky or the whisky's master;
      and his answers are sometimes inattentively beside the mark, to talk, which indeed is not
      without some likeness to the boasted exploits in Clement's Inn, and the affectionate inquiries
      after Jane Nightwork, of a more famous fool than he.
It is a relief to the guest when, earlier than he had expected—a blessing he, no doubt, owes
      to Mrs. Brown—his host breaks up the séance, and he is free to retire to his own room. At once
      he is back in that Devonshire garden, he is there almost all night, between sleep and wake. It
      is strange that persons and circumstances banished from his memory for ten long years should
      rush back with such tyrannous insistence now.
Such silly recollected trifles crowd back upon his mind. The day on which Tom nearly choked
      himself by swallowing a barley beard; the day on which the lop-eared rabbit littered—ah,
      rabbits, of course! those were what Rose had!—the day on which Tom pushed Miriam into the
      moat, and Elizabeth fell in, too, in trying to fish her out. Elizabeth, the eldest, the almost
      grown-up one, embarrassed by her newly lengthened petticoats, so harassing at cricket, in
      races, in climbing apple-trees. Elizabeth was sixteen; he remembers the fact, because her
      birthday had fallen two days before his own departure. He had given her a gold thimble set
      with turquoises upon the occasion; it was not a surprise, because he recalls measuring her
      finger for the size. He can see that small middle finger now. Elizabeth must now be twenty-six
      years of age. Where is she? What is she—maid, wife, or widow?
And why has Mrs. Le Marchant's hair turned snow-white? Had it been merely gray he would not
      have complained, though he would have deplored the loss of the fine smooth inky sweep he
      remembers. She has a fair right to be gray; Mrs. Le Marchant must be about forty-six or
      forty-seven, bien sonné. But white, snow-white—the hue that one connects with a venerable
      extremity of age. Can it be bleached? He has heard of women bleaching their hair; but not Mrs.
      Le Marchant, not the Mrs. Le Marchant he remembers. She would have been as incapable of bleach
      as of dye. Then why is she snow-haired? Because Providence has so willed it is the obvious
      answer. But somehow Burgoyne cannot bring himself to believe that she has come fairly by that
      white head.
With the morning light the might of the Devonshire memories grows weaker; and, as the day
      advances, the Oxford ones resume their sway. How can it be otherwise, when all day long he
      strays among the unaltered buildings in the sweet sedate college gardens, down the familiar
      "High," where, six years ago, he could not take two steps without being hailed by a jolly
      fresh voice, claiming his company for some new pleasure; but where now he walks ungreeted,
      where the smooth-faced boys he meets, and who strike him as so much more boyish than his own
      contemporaries had done, pass him by indifferently, unknown to the whole two thousand as he
      is. He feels a sort of irrational anger with them for not recognising him, though they have
      never seen him before.
Yes, there is no place where a man is so quickly superannuated as in Oxford. He is saying
      this to himself all day, is saying it still as he strolls in the afternoon down Mesopotamia,
      to fill up the time before the hour for college chapel. Yes, there is no place where men so
      soon turn into ghosts. He has been knocking up against them all day at every street-corner;
      they have looked out at him from every gray window in the Quad at New—jovial, athletic young
      ghosts, so much painfuller to meet than rusty, century-worn old ones. They are rather less
      plentiful in Mesopotamia than elsewhere; perhaps, because in his day, as now, Mesopotamia on
      Sundays was given over to the mechanic and the perambulator. Oh, that Heaven would put it into
      the head of some Chancellor of the Exchequer to lay a swingeing tax upon that all-accursed
      vehicle! But not even mechanic and perambulator can hinder Mesopotamia from being fair on a
      fine February day, when the beautiful floods are out, the floods that the Thames Conservators
      and the Oxford authorities have combined to put down, as they have most other beautiful things
      within their reach. But they have not yet quite succeeded. To-day, for instance, the floods
      are out in might.
Burgoyne is pacing along a brown walk, like a raised causeway, with a sheet of white water
      on either hand, rolling strong ripples to the bank. Gnarled willows stand islanded in the
      coldly argent water. A blackbird is flying out of the bushes, with a surprised look at finding
      himself turned into a sea-bird. No sun; an even sweep of dull silver to right and left. No
      sun; and yet as he looks, after days of rain, the "grand décorateur," as someone
      happily called him, rides out in royalty on a cleared sky-field, turning the whole drenched
      country into mother-of-pearl—a sheet of opal stretched across the drowned meadows; the
      distance opal too, a delicate, dainty, evanescent loveliness snatched from the ugly brown jaws
      of winter.
Burgoyne is leaning over the wooden bridge beneath which, in its normal state, the water of
      the lasher rushes down impetuously; but it is now raised to such a height that it lies level,
      almost flush with the planking. He is staring across the iridescent water-plain to where, in
      the poetic atmosphere of sun and mist, dome, and schools and soaring spires stand
      etherealized.
"Dear old place!" he says, under his breath, "everybody is dead; and I am dead; and Brown is
      deader than anyone. I am glad that you, at least, are still alive!"
Are these more ghosts coming round the corner? A man and a woman ghost strolling along, and
      looking about them as strangers look. When they are within a pace or two of him the woman says
      something—something about the floods—to her companion, and at the sound Burgoyne starts.
"She did not speak last night; if she had spoken I should have known her at once. She always
      had such a sweet voice."
He raises his arms from the bridge-top, and, turning, meets them face to face, eye to eye,
      and in an instant he has seen that both recognise him. At the same instant he is aware of a
      simultaneous inclination on the part of man and wife to avert their heads, and pass him
      without claiming his acquaintance. Perhaps, if he had had time to reflect, he would have
      allowed them to do so, but the impulse of the moment forbids it. Why should they wish to cut
      him? What has he done to deserve it? Ten years ago, they were his very good friends, and he
      was the familiar comrade of their children, the daily guest at their table. What has the
      unavoidable lapse of those years done to make him less fit for their company at twenty-nine
      than he was at nineteen? There must be some misconception, which a moment will set right.
"I am afraid that you do not remember me, Mrs. Le Marchant," he says, lifting his hat.
This is not quite true, as he is perfectly convinced that they are as much aware of his
      identity as he is of theirs. But what formula has a man to employ in such a case? They both
      look back at him with a sort of irresolution. To his astonishment, in their eyes is a velleity
      of flight, but apparently she—women's minds moving more quickly than men's—is the first to
      realize that flight is out of the question.
"I am sure that you have no intention of cutting me," Jim goes on, with a smile, seeing that
      she is apparently struggling with a difficulty in utterance; "at least, you must be very much
      changed from what you were ten years ago if you have. My name is——"
"I know—I know!" she interrupts, finding speech at last—speech low and hurried. "I remember
      perfectly. You are Mr. Burgoyne."
Her confusion—she used always to be such a placid, even-mannered woman—is so patent, born of
      whatever unaccountable feeling it may be, that he now heartily wishes he had let the poor
      woman pass unmolested. But such repentance is too late. He has arrested her; she is standing
      on the gravel path before him, and though he feels that her extraordinary shyness—mauvaise
       honte, whatever it may be—has infected himself, he must make some further remark to her.
      Nothing better occurs to him than the obvious one:
"It is a long time—it is ten years since we met."
"Yes, ten years; it must be quite ten years," she assents, evidently making a great effort
      to regain composure.
She does not feign the slightest pleasure in the meeting, and Burgoyne feels that the one
      thought that occupies her mind is how she can soonest end it. But his roused curiosity,
      together with the difficulty of parting without further observation after having forced his
      presence upon them, combine to prevent her succeeding.
"And how is the Moat?" he asks, reflecting that this, at least, is a safe question; a brick
      and mortar house, at all events, cannot be dead. "How is Devonshire?"
Apparently it is not so harmless a question as he had imagined; at least, Mrs. Le Marchant
      is obviously quite incapable of answering it. Her husband, for the first time, comes to her
      rescue.
"The Moat is let," he says, in a dry voice; "we have left Devonshire a long while—nine, nine
      and a half years ago."
The Moat let! Judging by the light of Burgoyne's recollections, it would have seemed less
      surprising to him to hear that Windsor Castle had been turned into a Joint Stock Company
      Hotel. It is probably, then, some money trouble that has turned Mrs. Le Marchant's hair
      white—snow white, as he now sees it to be. But no; he rejects the explanation as insufficient.
      She is not the woman to have taken a diminished income so much to heart.
Good manners forbid him to ask, "Why is the Moat let?" so all that he says is, "Nine and a
      half years ago? Why, that must have been very soon after I left Devonshire."
He addresses his remark involuntarily rather to the wife than the husband, but she does not
      answer it. Her eyes are fixed upon the bubbles sailing so fast upon the swollen river, which
      is distinguishable only by its current from the sameness of the surrounding water. A
      lark—there is always a lark in Mesopotamia—a tiny, strong-throated singer, that never seems to
      have to stop to take breath, fills up the silence, shouting somewhere out of sight among the
      black clouds, in and out of which the uncertain sun is plunging. Whether of a moneyed nature
      or not, there is evidently something very unpleasant connected with their leaving their native
      county and their immemorial home, so he had better get away from the subject as fast as
      possible.
"Anyhow," he says, with a rather nervous smile, "I hope that the world has been treating you
      kindly—that things have gone well with you since those dear old days when you were so good to
      me."
There is an instant's pause—perhaps he would not have noticed it had not his suspicions been
      already roused—before the husband, again taking upon him the task of replying, answers, with a
      sort of laboured carelessness:
"Oh, yes, thanks; we do not complain. It has not been a very rosy time for landlords lately,
      as you are aware."
"And you?" cries the wife, striking in with a species of hurry in her voice—a hurry
      due, as his instinct tells him, to the fact of her fear of his entering into more detailed
      inquiries. "And you? We must not forget you. Have you been well, flourishing, all
      this long time? Do you still live with your——"
She stops abruptly. It is apparent that she has entirely forgotten what was the species of
      relation with whom he lived. There is a little tinge of bitterness in his heart, though not in
      his tone, as he supplies the missing word "aunt." After all, he had forgotten her
      name; why should not she forget his aunt?
"With my aunt? Well, I never exactly lived with her; I made, and make my headquarters there
      when I am in England, which is not very often. I have been a rolling stone; I have rolled
      pretty well round the world since we parted."
They do not care in the least where he has rolled, nor how much nor how little moss he has
      collected in the process. They are only thinking how they can best get rid of him. But the
      past is strong upon him; he cannot let them slide out of his life again for another ten—twenty
      years perhaps, without finding out from them something about his five merry playmates. His
      inquiry must needs be a vague one. Who dares ask specifically after this or that man, woman,
      or even child, when ten years have rolled their tides between?
"And you are all well?" he says, with a certain wistfulness lurking in the indifferent
       banal phrase. "Dear me, what a jolly party we used to be! I suppose that—that they
      are all out in the world now?"
His eyes are fixed apprehensively upon the mother of those young comrades, to whom he thus
      cautiously alludes. Perhaps, carefully as he has worded his question, he may have touched some
      terrible raw. Her face is turned aside, presenting only its profile to him, but she answers
      almost at once:
"Yes; we are all scattered now. Charlie is planting oranges in Florida—he does not mind the
      heat; you know he always said no weather could be too hot for him; and Tom has an ostrich farm
      in Australia; and Rose has been married two years—she has a dear little baby; and Miriam is
      married too; we have just come down from her wedding."
"Miriam married!" repeats Burgoyne in a tone of wonder. "Miriam with a husband instead of a
      white rat!"
The mother laughs. It is the first time that he has heard her laugh, and she used to laugh
      so often.
"I think she likes the exchange."
There is another little pause, again filled by the lark's crowding notes. There are two
      words battering against the gate of Burgoyne's lips for egress—two words that he dares not
      utter.
"And Elizabeth?" She was the eldest. She would naturally have been mentioned first; but
      neither first nor last is there any speech of her. She must, then, be dead—dead long ago, too;
      for there is no trace of mourning in her parents' dress. Elizabeth is dead—bright Elizabeth,
      the beauty and the pet! Charles Lamb's tender lines come pensively back to him—

"My sprightly neighbour gone before
To that unknown and silent shore,
Shall we not meet as heretofore,
Some summer morning?"

Is it only fancy that he sees in the eye of Elizabeth's mother a dread lest he shall ask
      tidings of her, as she says, hastily, and with a smile, "Well, I am afraid we must be going;
      it has been very pleasant meeting you again, but I am afraid that the Warden will be expecting
      us"?
She adds to her parting hand-shake no wish for a repetition of that meeting, and he watches
      them down the Willow Walk with a sort of sadness in his heart.
"Elizabeth is dead! Elizabeth is undoubtedly dead!"
</div></body></text></TEI>