<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER XIV.
Presently they pass into the still, cloistered garden, in whose unmown grass-squares
      gray-blue flowers are blowing, beside whose walks pale pink peonies are flushing, and round
      whose well the grave rosemary bushes are set. Through the whole place is an atmosphere of deep
      peace, of silence, leisure, dignity. It is virtually a tête-à-tête, as their tonsured
      guide, seeing their evident harmlessness, has left them to their own devices; and Mrs. Le
      Marchant has sat down to rest upon a camp-stool which Elizabeth has been carrying ever since
      they left the carriage. It has fidgeted Jim to see her burdened with it; for let a man be ever
      so little in love with a woman, his tendency always is to think her as brittle as spun glass,
      to believe that any weight, however light, will bruise her arm—any pebble, however tiny, wound
      her tender foot. He has offered to relieve her of it, but she has refused—playfully at
      first—telling him she is sure that he will lose it; and afterwards, when he insists, more
      gravely, though with gentle gratitude, saying that it would never do for her to get into the
      habit of being waited upon, and that she always carries mammy's things. It is perhaps absurd
      that a woman of six-and-twenty should speak of her mother as "mammy," yet the homely and
      childish abbreviation seems to him to come "most fair and featously" from her lips.
They stay a long time in the sun-kissed garden, considering that there is after all not very
      much to see there. But Elizabeth's light steps, that to-day seem set to some innocent
      dancing-tune, are loath to leave it; she must smell the great new peonies,
      monthly-rose-coloured, faintly perfumed; she must steal a sprig of rosemary "to put into her
      coffin when she dies," at which he catches his breath, shuddering; she must peep into the
      well. He insists on her holding his hand for safety as she leans over to do so; her little
      fingers grip his tight as she cranes her neck and bends her lissom body. But what a small
      handful they are, compared to those other fingers—those kind, useful, but undoubtedly solid
      fingers—which he has held perfunctorily through many a matter-of-fact hour. By-and-by they
      stray away together out of the bounteous air of the hilltop into a semi-underground church, to
      see the fifteenth and sixteenth century monuments, which look as fresh as if their marble had
      left its home in Carrara but yesterday. They stand looking down at those three kin who lie
      side by side before the high altar, each with head dropped a little sideways on the shoulder,
      as if overcome by sudden sleep. They step on into the side chapel, where that yet nobler
      mitred figure, fashioned by Donatello's hand, stretches his prone length above his border of
      fruit and flowers, among which lies a carved skull, through whose empty eye-holes—strange and
      grisly fancy contrasting with so much beauty—a mocking ribbon runs. Elizabeth is perfectly
      silent the whole time, but no flood of talk could make Jim half so conscious of her presence,
      palpitating with sympathy and feeling, could give half the confidence he enjoys that she will
      introduce no allusion to either Kensal Green or Woking, as it is but too probable that the
      excellent companion of most of his Florentine rambles would have done.
Elizabeth has been perfectly silent, yet at last she speaks. It is in the Chapter House,
      where, as most of us have done, they have suddenly come upon another tomb, the tomb of one
      lying full-length on the pavement before the altar, with no separating edge of marble or
      wrought-iron railing to keep him from the foot of the passer-by. He lies there, portrayed with
      such an extraordinary vividness of life about his prostrate figure and his severe, powerful
      face, that one feels inclined to speak low, lest he should lift his white lids and look rebuke
      at us. In the lines about his mouth there is a hint of sardonic mirth. Is he—hearing our
      foolish chatter—touched with a grave contemptuous amusement at it? Or is he keeping in his
      sleep the memory of some four hundred years old jest? Elizabeth has involuntarily crept close
      to Burgoyne's side, with the gesture of a frightened child.
"Are you sure that he did not stir?" she asks tremulously under her breath. Her next thought
      is that her mother must see him too, this wonderful living dead man, and they presently set
      forth to return to the garden to fetch her. But apparently she has grown tired of waiting for
      them, for, as they enter the cloistered enceinte, they see her advancing to meet
      them.
"I would not be left alone with him at night for the wealth of the Indies," Elizabeth is
      saying, with a half-nervous laugh. "Oh, mammy, you would never have forgiven me if I had let
      you go without seeing him! Why, what is this?"—with a sudden change of key—"what has
      happened?" For as they draw near to Mrs. Le Marchant they see that her walk is a staggering
      one, and that the usually healthy, clear pallor of her face is exchanged for a livid
      whiteness. "What is it, darling?" cries Elizabeth in an accent of terror. "Oh, Jim, she is
      going to faint!" In the agitation of the moment she has unconsciously returned to the familiar
      address which she used always to employ towards him in their boy-and-girl days. "Put your arm
      round her on that side, I can hold her up on this. Let us get her back to the camp-stool."
A camp-stool is neither an easy nor a luxurious seat upon which to deposit a half-swooning
      woman, but the joint exertions of her daughter and of Burgoyne presently succeed in replacing
      her on her rickety resting-place; their arms interlace each other behind her back, and their
      anxious eyes look interrogation at one another above her head, half dropped on Elizabeth's
      slight shoulder.
"Does she often faint? Is she apt to do it?" asks Jim, in a whisper.
"Never—never!" replies the girl in a heart-rent voice, raining kisses on her mother's white
      face. "Oh, darling, darling, what has happened to you?"
Perhaps it is through the vivifying rain of those warm kisses, but a little colour is
      certainly beginning to steal back into the elder woman's cheek, and she draws a long
      breath.
"Oh, if she could have a glass of water!" cries Elizabeth, greedily verifying these slight
      signs of returning consciousness. "Get her a glass of water! Oh, please get her a glass of
      water—quick! quick!"
Burgoyne complies, though it is not without reluctant misgivings that he withdraws the
      efficacious support of his own solid arm, and leaves Elizabeth's poor little limb to bear the
      whole weight of her mother's inert body.
Their guide has, as before mentioned, disappeared; and Jim has not the slightest idea in
      which direction to seek him. It is five good minutes before he discovers him, standing near
      the door of the monastery, in conversation with a visitor who is apparently just in the act of
      departure. The stranger is in clerical dress; and, as he turns to nod farewell to the monk,
      Jim recognises in his features those of the Devonshire clergyman, whom he had last seen, and
      so unwillingly heard, by the well-brim of the Bellosguardo villa. In a second a light has
      flashed into his mind. Mrs. Le Marchant, too, has seen that stranger—has seen him for the
      first time for ten years, since it is evident that the recognition of mother and daughter in
      the Via Tornabuoni, to which the Moat's late rector had referred, could not have been
      reciprocal. It is to the fact of her having been brought suddenly and unpreparedly face to
      face with that mysterious past, which seems to be always blocking his own path to her
      friendship, that is to be attributed the poor woman's collapse. A rush of puzzled compassion
      flows over him as he realizes the fact, and his one impatient wish is to return with all the
      speed he may to the forlorn couple he has left, to reassure them as to the removal (even
      though it may only be a temporary one) out of their path of the object of their unexplained
      terror. Will the mother have imparted to her child the cause of her fainting, or will she have
      tried to keep it from her?
The first glimpse he gets when, having at length procured the desired glass of water, he
      comes into sight of them, answers the question for him. Mrs. Le Marchant is evidently
      partially recovered. She is sitting up, no longer supported by her daughter's arm, and that
      daughter is lying on her knees, with her head buried in her mother's lap. As he nears them, he
      sees the elder woman hurriedly pressing her daughter's arm to warn her of his approach, and
      Elizabeth obediently lifts her face. But such a face! He can scarcely believe it is the same
      that laid itself—hardly less bloomily fair than they—against the faint peony buds half an hour
      ago; a face out of which the innocent glad shining has been blown by some gust of brutal
      wind—scared, blanched, miserable.
"Oh, yes, I am better, much better—quite well, in fact," says Mrs. Le Marchant, pushing away
      the offered glass, and speaking with a ghastly shadow of her former even cheerfulness. "Give
      it to Elizabeth, she needs it more than I do! You see, I gave her a terrible fright!"
He silently holds out the water to Elizabeth, and she, without attempting to take the
      tumbler into her own trembling hand, drinks. He looks with impotent pity from the bent blonde
      head to the prematurely snow-white one. How can he word his reassurance to them without
      appearing to thrust himself with officious insolence into their confidence? It seems to
      himself that he solves the problem very clumsily.
"I am afraid you must have thought me but slow," he says, feeling that he is dragging in the
      piece of information he is anxious to give them with an awkward head-and-shoulder-ness: "but
      at first I couldn't find our monk, and when I did, he was engaged—he was talking to a
      visitor—a clergyman."
He pauses, conscious that at the last word a tremulous shiver has passed over the kneeling
      figure.
"Yes, a clergyman," he goes on with nervous haste, hurrying to put them out of their pain;
      "an elderly, gray-haired, English clergyman, who was just in the act of going away; indeed,
      before I left, he had gone. I saw him drive off!"
Ere he has finished his sentence, he is seized by the apprehension that there must appear to
      his listeners something suspicious in the laboured details into which he is entering;
      presupposing, as they do, that he is aware of there being for them an interest attaching to
      the fact of the stranger's departure. And indeed, as he speaks, he is conscious that Mrs. Le
      Marchant's frightened eyes, which have been taking surreptitious trips round the peaceful
      garden, now come home with a no less alarmed look to his face.
"Was he—was he—an acquaintance of yours?" she asks, with an attempt at a laugh—"this
      clergyman, I think you said he was—that you noticed him so particularly?"
"An acquaintance?" repeats Jim doubtfully; "what is an acquaintance? a man whom one knew
      very little, and disliked a good deal, ten years ago; and who passes one by without a gleam of
      recognition now—is that an acquaintance?"
Elizabeth's hat has fallen on the ground, and hitherto she has seemed unconscious of the
      evening sunbeams smiting her uncovered head; now she stoops and picks it up.
"And you did not make yourself known to him then?" continues Mrs. Le Marchant, still with
      that painful effort at lightness of tone. "You let him drive off without telling him who you
      were? or asking him where he was staying? or how long his visit to Florence is to last? or—or
      anything?"
Jim's eyes are fixed on her as she speaks with a compassionate steadiness, under which hers
      quail waveringly. Is it possible that she can imagine that she is deceiving him by this
      miserable pretence of indifference?
"I have no doubt that I shall be able to find out if you wish to know," he answers gravely;
      "for I think he must be as much an acquaintance of yours as of mine, since it was only at the
      Moat that I ever met him."
He had thought that Mrs. Le Marchant was already as colourless as a woman could be; but as
      he speaks, he sees her face take on a new degree of pallor. She struggles unsteadily to her
      feet.
"It is—it is getting late!" she says indistinctly; "we—ought—to be—going home!"
Even as she speaks she makes an uncertain step forward, but it is so uncertain that he
      catches her by the arm.
"You are not fit to move yet," he says with kind imperativeness; "rest five minutes longer;
      it is not late, really—the sun is quite high still."
Convinced, either by the young man's eloquence, or, as is more likely, by the shaking of her
      own limbs, Mrs. Le Marchant sits down again. Elizabeth has risen to her feet, and now stands
      beside her mother. She has said nothing, but he can see her trembling from head to heel. He
      hears her voice now addressing him, but in so subdued a key that her words are almost lost in
      the low blowing of the faint south wind that is fondling the blades of the unshorn grass.
"Did you say that he was gone? Are you sure of it?"
"Yes, yes, quite sure! I saw him go."
"Did you—did you happen to hear where he was staying?"
"No, but"—with the greatest eagerness—"I can easily find out; nothing can be simpler."
Elizabeth is standing quite close to him, so close that he can see her poor little heart
      leaping under the thin white gown, whose simple finery had piqued him earlier in the day. She
      has apparently, in her new terror, forgotten that there is any cause for concealing from him
      the occasion of it. She turns instinctively to him, as a hurt child to the nearest bystander.
      It seems to him the most natural thing in the world that she should. They are both recalled to
      themselves by her mother's voice.
"You must think that we have lost our wits," she says with a sickly smile; "but even if we
      have, I do not know what right we have to impose upon a—a comparative stranger like you, the
      task of helping us to gratify our—our idle curiosity."
"But I am not a comparative stranger!" cries Jim vehemently; by this time—he does not know
      how—he is holding a hand of each of the trembling women in his. "I am not a stranger at all! I
      am a friend! Why will not you treat me as one? Why will not you let me help you?"
He glances with pitying, affectionate eagerness from one to other of the woebegone faces on
      either side of him. The tears have come in sudden flood to the elder woman, and are pouring
      over her white cheeks, stopping the passage of her voice; but Elizabeth's fair eyes are
      drearily dry, and speech comes clear and hopeless from her.
"You are very good to us!" she says, giving the hand that holds hers a little pressure,
      which he feels to be as cold as it is grateful; "at least, I see that you want to be very good
      to us if we would let you; but as to helping us"—with a slight despairing shrug—"no one can do
      that; no one but God, and sometimes"—drawing a long, half-sobbing breath—"I think that it
      would pass even His power."
</div></body></text></TEI>