<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
CHAPTER XXII.

"Welcome ever smiles; and Farewell goes out sighing."

This last clause is not always true. For example, there is very little sighing in the
      farewells made to Mrs. Byng by the two young men who see her off at the Florence Railway
      Station. And Mrs. Byng herself has been too much occupied in manœuvring to get a few last
      private words with each of her escort to have much time for sighing either.
She would have been wounded if her old friend Jim had not come to see the last of her, and
      she would have been broken-hearted if her son had not paid her this final attention; and yet
      each necessarily destroys the tête-à-tête she is burning to have with the other. It
      is indelicate to implore your adored child not to go to the devil in the presence of an
      intimate friend, and it would give a not unnatural umbrage to that child if you urged the
      guardian friend to check his downward tendency while he himself is standing by. Nor do her two
      companions at all aid her in her strategy; rather, they show a tendency to unite in baffling
      her, hanging together round her like a bodyguard, and effectually hindering the last words
      which she is pining to administer. Only once for a very few minutes does she succeed in
      outwitting them, when she despatches Willy to the bookstall to buy papers for her—an errand
      from which he returns with an exasperating celerity. The instant that his back is turned, Mrs.
      Byng addresses her companion in an eager voice of hurry and prayer:
"You will keep an eye upon him?"
Silence.
"You will keep an eye upon him—promise?"
"I do not know what 'keeping an eye upon him' means in your vocabulary; often you and I do
      not use the same dictionary; until I know, I will not promise."
"You will look after him; do, Jim!"
"My dear madam"—with irritation—"let me go and buy your papers; and meanwhile urge
       him to look after me; I assure you that it is quite as necessary."
"Fiddlesticks, with your unimaginative, unemotional nature——"
"H'm!"
"Your head will always take care of your heart."
"Will it?"
"While he—promise me at least that, if you see him rushing to his ruin, you will telegraph
      to me?"
"Certainly, if you wish it; I will telegraph, 'Willy rushing Ruin.' At five-and-twenty
      centimes a word, it will cost you sevenpence halfpenny; not dear at the price, is it?"
The mother reddens.
"You have become a very mauvais plaisant of late, Jim; oh dear me! here he is back
      again, tiresome boy!"
It is with feelings tied into a knot of complications, which he scarcely seeks to unravel,
      that Burgoyne walks away from the station, and from the good-natured staunch woman, whose last
      few moments in fair Firenze he has done his best to embitter. He is glad that she is gone, and
      he is sorry that she is gone. He is remorseful at his gladness, and he is ashamed of his
      sorrow, knowing and acknowledging that it results from no regret for her companionship, which
      he had been wont to prize; but to the consciousness that she had stood like an angel with a
      drawn sword between her son and the Piazza d'Azeglio. Both angel and drawn sword are steaming
      away now, covered by a handsome travelling cloak down to the heels in a coupé
       toilette, and the road to the Piazza lies naked and undefended, open to the light feet
      that are so buoyantly treading the flags beside him.
The step of youth is always light, but there is something aggressively springy in Byng's
      this morning; and though he does not say anything offensively cheerful, there is a
      ring in his voice that makes his kind friend long to hit him. He, the kind friend, is thankful
      when their ways part, without his having done him any bodily violence.
"You are late to-day," says Cecilia, as he enters the salon, giving him a nod of
      indifferent friendliness, while Sybilla crossly asks him to shut the door more quietly, and
      Amelia lays her hand lingeringly in his, with a silent smile of rapture; "we began to think
      you had had a relapse. I was just telling Amelia that the pace had been too good to last—ha,
      ha!"
Burgoyne has always found it difficult to laugh at Cecilia's jokes, and his now perfect
      intimacy with her relieves him from the necessity of even feigning to do so.
"I have been seeing Mrs. Byng off," he replies, with that slight shade of awkwardness in his
      tone which has accompanied his every mention of the mother or son since his explanation with
      his betrothed.
"You let her go without getting that wedding present out of her, after all?" cries Cecilia,
      who is in a rather tryingly playful mood.
"Gone, is she?" says Sybilla, with a somewhat ostentatious sigh of resentful relief; "well,
      I, for one, shall not cry. I am afraid that she was not very simpatica to me; she was
      so dreadfully robust. Perhaps, now that she is no longer here to monopolise him, we shall be
      allowed to see something more of that nice boy."
No one answers. Not one of her three listeners is at the moment disposed to chant or even
      echo praises of the "nice boy." Sybilla perversely pursues the subject.
"I dare say that he has a delicacy about coming without a special invitation," she says,
      "where there is an invalid; but you might tell him that on my good days no one is more pleased
      to see their friends than I; it does not even send my temperature up; you might tell him that
      on my good days Dr. Coldstream says it does not even send my temperature up!"
Again no one answers.
"You do not seem to be listening to what I am saying," cries Sybilla fractiously; "will you
      please tell him, Jim?"
Jim lifts his heavy eyes from the ugly carpet on which they have been resting, and looks
      distastefully back at her.
"I do not think that I will, Sybilla," he replies slowly; "I do not think he cares a straw
      whether your temperature goes up or down. I think that he does not come here because—because
      he has found metal more attractive elsewhere."
He makes this statement for no other reason than because it is so intensely unpleasant to
      him, because he realizes that he must have to face the fact it embodies, and to present it not
      only to himself, but to others. And each day that passes proves to him more and more
      conclusively that it is a fact. He asks Byng no question as to the disposition of his
      day. He sees but little of him, having, indeed, changed the hours of his own breakfast and
      dinner in order to avoid having his appetite spoilt by the sight of so much unnecessary
      radiance opposite him; but he knocks up against him, flower-laden, at the Strozzi steps; he
      notes the splendour of his ties and waistcoats; he grows to know the Elizabeth-look
      on his face, when he comes singing home at evening, as one knows the look of the western
      clouds that the sun's red lips have only just ceased to kiss, though no sun is any longer in
      sight; and yet he does not interfere. He has received from the young man's mother a hasty
      letter, pencilled in the train, not an hour after she had quitted him; another more leisurely,
      yet as anxious, from Turin; a third from Paris, and lastly a telegram from Charing Cross. All
      bear the same purport.
"Write; keep an eye upon him!" "Write; keep an eye upon him! Write!"
And yet, though a full week has passed, though he sees the son of his old ally drifting,
      faster than ever autumn leaf drifted on a flush October river, to the whirlpool she had
      dreaded for him, yet he sends her never a word. He writes her long letters, it is true, covers
      telegram-forms with pregnant messages, but they all find their ultimate home in the wood fire.
      When the moment comes, he finds it impossible to send them, since, upon searching his heart
      for the motives that have dictated them, he finds those motives to be no fidelity to an
      ancient friendship, no care for the boy's welfare, but, simply and nakedly, the satisfaction
      of his own spite, the easing of his own bitter jealousy.
So the Florentine post goes out daily, bearing no tale of Byng's backslidings to his native
      land, and Jim, brushing past him, answering him curtly, never going nearer to the Piazza
      d'Azeglio than the Innocenti—a good long street off—devotes himself to the frantic prosecution
      of a suit long since won, to the conquest of a heart for eight weary years hopelessly,
      irrecoverably, pitiably his. His presence at the Anglo-Américain is so incessant, and his
      monopolizing of Amelia so unreasonable, that Sybilla—for the first time in her life really a
      little neglected—alternately runs up her pulse to 170 and drops it to 40.
"And then you wonder that I am anxious to be married," says Cecilia, accompanying her future
      brother-in-law to the door, on the day on which the latter phenomenon has occurred, and wiping
      the angry tears from her plump cheeks. "I make no secret of it, I am madly anxious, I
      would marry anyone, I am desperate. Just think what my life will be when Amelia is gone; and
      though of course I shall be a great deal with her—she has promised that I shall be almost
      always with her" (Jim winces)—"yet of course it can't be the same thing as having a home of
      your own."
"We will do our best for you," replies he, with a rather rueful smile and a sense of
      degradation; "but you know, my dear Cis, anybody can lead a horse to the water, but it is not
      so easy to make him drink."
"That is quite true," replies Cecilia, one of whose most salient merits is an extreme
      unreadiness to be affronted, wiping her eyes as she speaks, "and I have no luck; such
      promising things turn up, and then come to nothing. Now, that clergyman the other day, whom we
      met at the Villa Careggi—such a pleasant gentlemanlike man—he was on the look-out for a wife,
      he told me so himself, and I know so much about the working of a parish, and next day he was
      off, Heaven knows where!"
Jim gives a slight shudder.
"I do not think you had any great loss in him," he says hastily; then, seeing her surprised
      air, "I mean, you know, that it is always said that a man is a better judge of another man
      than a woman is, and I did not like his looks; give us time, and we will do better for you
      than that."
Cecilia can no longer accuse her future relation of any slackness in the matter of
      expeditions. There is something of fever in the way in which he arrives each morning, armed
      with some new plan for the day, giving no one any peace until his project is carried out. It
      seems as if he must crowd into the last fortnight of Amelia's stay in Florence all the
      sight-seeing, all the junkets, all the enjoyment which ought to have been temperately spread
      over the eight years of their engagement.
One day—all nearer excursions being exhausted—they drive to Monte Senario, that sweet and
      silent spot, happily too far from Florence for the swarm of tourists to invade, where
      earth-weary men have set up a rest scarcely less dumb than the grave in a lonely monastery of
      the Order of La Trappe. Through the Porta San Gallo, along the Bologna Road they go. It is a
      soft summer morning, with not much sun. Up, past the villas and gardens, where the Banksia
      roses and wistarias are rioting over wall, and berceau and pergola, climbing even the tall
      trees. Round the very head of one young poplar two rose-trees—a yellow and a white one—are
      flinging their arms; flowered so lavishly that hardly a pin's point could be put between the
      blossoms. Up and up, a white wall on either hand. The dust lies a foot thick on the road;
      thick too on the monthly roses, just breaking into full pink flush; thick on themselves as the
      endless mulecarts come jingling down the hill with bells and red tassels, and a general air of
      what would be jollity were not that feeling so given the lie to by the poor jaded, suffering
      beasts. Up and up, till they leave stone walls and villas and oliveyards behind them, and are
      away among the mountains. At a very humble little house that has no air of an inn they leave
      the carriage, and climb up a rocky road, and through a perfumed pine-wood, to where the
      Trappist Monastery stands, in its perfect silence and isolation, on its hilltop, looking over
      its fir-woods at the ranges of the Apennines, lying one behind the other in the stillness of
      the summer-day; looking to distant Florence, misty and indistinct in her Arno plain; looking
      to Fiesole, dwarfed to a molehill's dimensions.
"I am told that one of the brothers is an Englishman; I did not hear his name, but he is
      certainly English," says Cecilia, as they mount the shallow, grass-grown steps to the
      monastery door. "If I send up word that I am a fellow-countrywoman, perhaps he will come out
      and speak to me; I am sure that it would be a very nice change for him, poor fellow!"
And it is the measure of the amount of Cecilia's acquaintance with the rules of the Order,
      that it is only half in jest that she makes the suggestion. But she does not repeat it to the
      lay-brother who stands, civil yet prohibitory, at the top of the flight, and who, in answer to
      Burgoyne's halting questions as to where they may go, politely answers that they may go
      anywhere—anywhere, bien entendu, outside. So they wander aimlessly away. They push
      open a rickety gate, and passing an old dog, barking angry remonstrances at them from the
      retirement of a barrel, step along a grassy path that leads they know not whither. Two more
      young lay-brothers meet them, with their hands full of leopard's-bane flowers, which they have
      been gathering, probably to deck their altar with.
Amelia has passed her hand through Jim's arm—since his late increased kindness to her she
      has been led to many more little freedoms with him than she had hitherto permitted herself—and
      though she is very careful not to lean heavily or troublesomely upon him, yet the slight
      contact of her fingers keeps him reminded that she is there. Perhaps it is as well, since
      to-day he is conscious of such a strange tendency to forget everything, past, present, and to
      come. Has one of the monks' numb hands been laid upon his heart to lull it into so frozen a
      quiet? To-day he feels as if it were absolutely impossible to him to experience either
      pleasure or pain; as if to hold Elizabeth in his own arms, or see her in Byng's, would be to
      him equally indifferent. His apathy in this latter respect is to be put to the test sooner
      than he expects. Not indeed that Elizabeth is lying in Byng's arms—it would be a gross
      misrepresentation to say so, she being, on the contrary, most decorously poised on a
      camp-stool—least romantic of human resting places—when they come suddenly upon her and him in
      the course of their prowl round the inhospitable walls. She is sitting on her camp-stool, and
      he is lying on his face in the grass, just not touching her slim feet.
The advancing party perceive the couple advanced upon before the latter are aware of their
      nearness; long enough for the former to realize how very much de trop they will be,
      yet not long enough to enable them to escape unnoticed. Jim becomes aware of the very second
      at which Amelia recognises the unconscious pair, by an involuntary pinch of her fingers upon
      his arm, which a moment later she hastily drops. His own first feeling on catching sight of
      them—no, not his very first—his very first is as if someone had run a darning-needle
      into his heart—but almost his first is to shout out to them in loud warning:
"Be on your guard! we are close to you!"
He will never forgive either himself or them if they ignorantly indulge in any endearment
      under his very eyes. But they do not. There are no interlacing arms to disentwine, nothing to
      make them spring apart, when at length they look up and take in the fact—an unwelcome fact it
      must needs be—of their invasion.
On hearing approaching footsteps, Byng rolls over on his back in the grass; on perceiving
      that most of the footsteps are those of ladies, he springs to his feet. Elizabeth remains
      sitting on her camp-stool.
"What a coincidence!" cries Cecilia, breaking into a laugh.
They are all grateful to her for the remark, though it is rather a silly one, as there is no
      particular coincidence in the case. Burgoyne is irritatedly conscious that Amelia is covertly
      observing him, and before he can check himself he has thrown over his shoulder at her one of
      those snubbing glances from which, for the last ten days, he has painstakenly and remorsefully
      refrained. It is not a happy moment to look at poor Amelia, as she has not yet cooled down
      from the heat of her climb through the fir-wood—a heat that translates itself into patchy
      flushes all over her face, not sparing even her forehead. Elizabeth is flushed too. She has
      not met Miss Wilson since she had declined Burgoyne's offer of bringing his betrothed to see
      her, and in her deprecating eyes there is a guilty and tremulous recollection of this fact.
      But below the guilt and the deprecation and the tremor, what else is there in Elizabeth's
      eyes? What of splendid and startling, and that comes but once in a lifetime? Rather than be
      obliged to give a name to that vague radiance, Jim turns his look back upon his own too
      glowing dear one.
"Did you come here all alone? You two all alone? What fun!" asks Cecilia, with an air of
      delighted curiosity.
Again her companions inwardly thank her. It is the question that both—though with different
      degrees of eagerness—have been thirsting to ask.
"Alone?—oh no!" replies Elizabeth, with that uneasy, frightened look that Burgoyne has
      always noticed on her face when she has been brought into unwilling relation with strangers.
      "My mother is here—she came with us; why, where is she?"—looking round with a startled
      air—"she was here a moment ago."
A grim smile curves Jim's mouth. It is evident that the unhappy Mrs. Le Marchant, worn out
      with her rôle of duenna, has slipped away without being missed by either of her
      companions. Would they have even discovered her absence but for Cecilia's query?
"Mrs. Le Marchant was here a moment ago," echoes Byng, addressing the company generally;
      "but"—dodging his friend's eyes—"she said she was a little stiff from sitting so long; she
      must be quite close by."
"I will go and look for her," says Elizabeth, confused, and rising from her rickety seat as
      she speaks; but Amelia, who is nearest to her, puts out a friendly hand in prohibition.
"Oh, do not stir!" she cries, smiling kindly and admiringly. "You look so comfortable. Let
       me go and search for Mrs. Le Marchant; I—I—should be afraid to sit down, I am so
      hot. I should like to find her; Cecilia will help me, and Mr. Byng will show us the way."
It is not always that generous actions meet their meed of gratitude from those for whose
      sake they are performed; and, though Burgoyne recognises the magnanimity of his
       fiancée's line of conduct, thankfulness to her for it is not the feeling uppermost
      in his mind when, a few moments later, he finds himself standing in uneasy
       tête-à-tête over the seated Elizabeth.
"Will not you sit down?" she asks presently, adding, with a low, timid laugh, "I do not know
      why I should invite you, as if"—glancing round at the sun-steeped panorama—"this were my
      drawing-room."
He complies, taking care to occupy a quite different six feet of herbage from that which
      still bears the imprint of Byng's lengthy limbs. The grass grows cool and fresh, full of
      buttercups and tall blue bugle; out of them the gray monastery wall rises, in its utter
      lifeless silence, with its small barred windows. Was ever any building, within which is human
      life, so unutterably still? As he leans his elbow among the king-cups, Jim says to himself
      that the lovers had chosen their place well and wisely—that the consciousness of the austere,
      denied lives going on so close behind them, in their entire joylessness, must have given an
      added point, a keener edge to the poignancy of their own enjoyment of the sweet summer day
      outside.
"You have not been to see us for a long time," says Elizabeth presently, in a small and
      diffident voice, after having waited until the probability of his speaking first has become a
      mere possibility, and even that a faint one.
He replies baldly, "No."
His look is fixed on a knoll, whence the monks must have gathered their leopard's bane. They
      cannot have gathered much, so bounteously do the gay yellow flowers still wave on the hillock.
      Nearer stands a colony of purple orchises, and from them the eye travels away to the silent
      fir-wood, to the range of misty hills and the distant plain, touched now and again by a vague
      hint of sunshine, that makes one for the moment feel sure that one has detected Duomo or
      Campanile. How many hill ranges there are! One can count six or seven, like the ridges in a
      gigantic ploughed field, one behind another—all solemnly beautiful on this windless day of
      grave and ungaudy sweetness. Has the young man been reckoning the ranks of the Apennines, that
      it is so long before he adds a low-voiced, mocking question to his monosyllable?
"Have you missed me very much?"
The woman addressed seems in no hurry to answer. She has drawn her narrow brown brows
      together, as if in the effort to hit truth in her nicest shade in her answer. Then she speaks
      with a sort of soft self-remonstrance:
"Oh, surely! I must have missed you—you were so extraordinarily, so unaccountably
      kind to us!"
There is not one of us who would not rather be loved for what we are than for what
      we do; so it is perhaps no wonder if the young woman's reply strikes with an
      unreasonable chill upon the asker's heart.
"You must have been very little used to kindness all your life," he says, with some
      brusqueness, "to be so disproportionately grateful for my trumpery civilities."
She hesitates a moment, then:
"You are right," she replies; "I have not received any great kindness in my life—justice,
      well, yes, I suppose so—but no, not very much mercy."
Her candid and composed admission of a need for mercy whets yet farther that pained
      curiosity which has always been one of the strongest elements in his uncomfortable interest in
      her. But the very sharpness of that interest makes him shy away awkwardly from the subject of
      her past.
"I always think," he says, "that there is something fatuous in a man's apologizing to a lady
      for not having been to see her, as if the loss were hers, and not his."
"Is there? All the same, I am sorry that you did not come."
This simple and unsophisticated implication of a liking for him would have warmed again the
      uneasy heart that her former speech had chilled had not he, under the superficial though
      genuine regret of her face, seen, still shining with steady lustre, that radiance which has as
      little been called forth by, as it can be dimmed by him or anything relating to him. And so he
      passes by in silence the expression of that sorrow which he bitterly knows to be so
      supportable.
The still spirit of the day seems to have touched the very birds. They sing a few low notes
      in veiled, chastened voices from the fir-wood, and again are silent. The clock tells the hours
      in quarters to the doomed lives inside the monastery, self-doomed to suffering and penance and
      incarceration, even with the winning blue of the Tuscan sky above their tonsured heads, with
      the forget-me-nots pressing their feet, and the nightingales singing endless love-songs to
      them from the little dark forest nigh at hand.
"I suppose," says Elizabeth presently, in a reflective tone, "that the fact is, when people
      are in your position—I mean on the brink of a great deep happiness—they forget all lesser
      things?"
He snatches a hasty glance of suspicion at her. Is this her revenge for his neglect of her?
      But nothing can look more innocent or less ironical than her small profile, bent towards the
      gigantic forget-me-nots and the pulmonaria, azure as gentians.
"Perhaps."
"The big fish"—her little face breaking into one of her lovely smiles, which, by a turn of
      her head from side to full, she offers in its completeness to his gaze—"swallows up all the
      little gudgeons! Poor little gudgeons."
"Poor little gudgeons!" he echoes stupidly, and then begins to laugh at his own
      wool-gathering.
"And now I suppose you will be going directly—going home?" pursues she, looking at him and
      his laughter with a soft surprise.
"I hope so; and—and—you too?"
She gives a start, and the sky-coloured nosegay in her hand drops into her lap.
"We—we? Why should we go home? We have nothing pleasant to go to, and"—looking
      round with a passionate relish at mountain, and suffused far plain, and sappy spring grass—"we
      are so well—so infinitely well here!" Then, pulling herself together, and speaking in a more
      composed key, "But yes, of course we, too, shall go by-and-by; this cannot last for
      ever—nothing lasts for ever. That is the one thought that has kept me alive all these years;
      but now——"
She breaks off.
"But now?"
Even as he watches her, putting this echoed interrogation, he sees the radiance breaking
      through the cloud his question had gathered, as a very strong sun breaks through a very
      translucent exhalation.
"But now?" she repeats vaguely, and smiling to herself, forgetful of his very presence
      beside her—"But now? Did I say 'But now?' Ah, here they are back again!"
</div></body></text></TEI>