<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER XXVII.
The sun rides high, as Burgoyne issues into the open air, and beats, blinding hot, upon the
      great stone flags that pave the Florentine streets, and seem to have a peculiar power of
      absorbing and retaining light and heat. He must have been longer in the Piazza d'Azeglio than
      he had thought, and the reflection quickens his steps as he hurries, regardless of the
      midsummer blaze—for, indeed, it is more than equivalent to that of our midsummer—back to the
      Anglo-Américain. As he reaches it, he hears, with annoyance, the hotel clocks striking one. He
      is annoyed, both because the length of his absence seems to argue an indifference to the
      tidings he is expecting, and also because he knows that it is the Wilsons' luncheon hour, and
      that he will probably find that they have migrated to the salle-à-manger. In this
      case he will have to choose between the two equally disagreeable alternatives of following and
      watching them at their food, or that of undergoing a tête-à-tête with Sybilla, who,
      it is needless to say, does not accompany her family to the public dining-room; a
       tête-à-tête with Sybilla, which is, of all forms of social intercourse, that for
      which he has the least relish.
But as he apprehensively opens the salon door, he sees that his fears are
      unfounded. They have not yet gone to luncheon; they are all sitting in much the same attitudes
      as he had left them, except that Sybilla is eating or drinking something of a soupy nature out
      of a cup. There are very few hours of the day or night in which Sybilla is not eating
      something out of a cup. There is that about the entire idleness of the other couple which
      gives him a fright. Are they too unhappy? Have they heard too bad news to be able to settle to
      any occupation? Urged by this alarm, his question shoots out, almost before he is inside the
      door:
"Has not he come yet? Has not the doctor come yet?"
"He has been and gone; you see, you have been such a very long time away," replies Cecilia.
      She has no intention of conveying reproach, either by her words or tone; but to his sore
      conscience it seems as if both carried it.
"And what did he say?"
"He did not say much."
"Does he—does he think that it is anything—anything serious?"
"He did not say."
"Do you mean to tell me"—indignantly—"that you did not ask him?"
"If you had been here," replies Cecilia, with a not inexcusable resentment, "you might have
      asked him yourself."
"But did not you ask him?" in too real anxiety to be offended at, or even aware of, her
      fleer. "Did not he say?"
"I do not think he knew himself."
"But he must have thought—he must have had an opinion!" growing the more uneasy as there
      seems no tangible object for his fears to lay hold of.
"He says it is impossible to judge at so early a stage; it may be a chill—I told him about
      that detestable excursion yesterday, and he considered it quite enough to account for
      anything—it may be measles—they seem to be a good deal about; it may be malaria—there is a
      good deal of that too."
"And how soon will he know? How soon will it declare itself?"
"I do not know."
"But has he prescribed? Is there nothing to be done—to be done at once?" asks Jim
      feverishly, chafing at the idea of this inaction, which seems inevitable, with that helpless
      feeling which his own entire ignorance of sickness produces.
"Do not you suppose that if there was we should have done it?" cries Cecilia, rendered even
      more uncomfortable than she was before, by the contagion of his anxiety. "We are to keep her
      in bed—there is no great difficulty about that, poor soul; she has not the least desire to get
      up; she seems so odd and heavy!"
"So odd and heavy?"
"Yes; I went in to see her just now, and she scarcely took any notice of me; only when I
      told her that you had been to inquire after her, she lit up a little. I believe"—with a rather
      grudging smile—"that if she were dead, and someone mentioned your name, she would light
      up."
A sudden mountain rises in Jim's throat.
"If she is not better to-morrow, Dr. Coldstream will send a nurse."
"But does he think it will be necessary?"
"He does not know."
Jim writhes. It seems to him as if he were being blind-folded, and having his arms tied to
      his sides by a hundred strong yet invisible threads.
"Does no one know anything?" he cries miserably.
"I have told you exactly what the doctor said," says Cecilia, with the venial crossness bred
      of real anxiety. "I suppose you do not wish me to invent something that he did not say?"
"Of course not; but I wish I had been here—I wish I had been here!"—restlessly.
"Why were not you?"
No immediate answer.
"Why were not you?" repeats she, curiosity, for the moment, superseding her disquiet. "What
      prevented you? I thought, when you left us, that you meant to come back at once?"
"So I did, but——"
"But what?"
"I could not; I was with Byng."
"With Byng?" repeats Cecilia, too genuinely astonished to remember even to prefix a "Mr." to
      Byng's name. "Why, I should have thought that if there were one day of his life on which he
      could have done without you better than another, it would have been to-day!"
"Were not you rather de trop?" chimes in Sybilla's languid voice from the sofa.
      "Rather a bad third?"
"I was not a third at all."
"Do you mean to say," cries Cecilia, her countenance tinged with the pink of a generous
      indignation, "that you were four—that Mrs. Le Marchant stayed in the room the whole
      time? I must say that now that they are really and bonâ fide engaged, I think she
      might leave them alone together."
"Mrs. Le Marchant was not there at all." Then, seeing the open-mouthed astonishment depicted
      on the faces of his audience, he braces his mind to make the inevitable yet dreaded
      announcement. "I had better explain at once that neither Mrs. nor Miss Le Marchant was there;
      they are gone."
"Gone!"
"Yes; they left Florence at seven o'clock this morning." There is a moment of silent
      stupefaction.
"I suppose," says Cecilia, at last slowly recovering the power of speech, "that they were
      telegraphed for? Mr. Le Marchant is dead or ill? one of the married sisters? one of the
      brothers?"
Never in his life has Jim laboured under so severe a temptation to tell a lie, were it only
      the modified falsehood of allowing Cecilia's hypothesis to pass uncontradicted; but even if he
      were able for once to conquer his constitutional incapacity, he knows that in this case it
      would be useless. The truth must transpire to-morrow.
"I believe not."
"Gone!" repeats Cecilia, in a still more thunderstruck key than before—"and where are they
      gone?"
"I do not know."
"Why did they go?"
Jim makes an impatient movement, fidgeting on his chair. "I can only tell you their actions;
      they told me their motives as little as they did you."
"Gone! Why, they never said a word about it yesterday."
This being of the nature of an assertion—not an interrogation—Jim feels with relief that it
      does not demand an answer.
"Gone, at seven o'clock in the morning! Why, they could not have had time to pack their
      things!"
"They left them behind."
The moment that this admission is out of Burgoyne's mouth, he repents having made it; nor
      does his regret at all diminish under the shower of ejaculations from both sisters that it
      calls forth.
"Why, it was a regular flit! they must have taken French leave."
There is something so horribly jarring in the semi-jocosity of the last phrase that Jim
      jumps up from his chair and walks towards the window, where Mr. Wilson is sitting in dismal
      idleness.
Mr. Wilson has never cared much about the Le Marchants, and is now far too deeply absorbed
      in his own trouble to have anything but the most inattentive indifference to bestow upon the
      topic which to his daughters appears so riveting. Jim blesses him for his callousness. But the
      window of a small room is not so distant from any other part of it that sounds cannot, with
      perfect ease, penetrate thither, as Jim finds when Cecilia's next eager question pursues
      him.
"Did Mr. Byng know that they were going?"
"No."
There is a pause.
"It is absolutely incomprehensible!" says Cecilia, with almost a gasp. "I never saw any one
      human being so much in love with another as she was yesterday—there was so little disguise
      about it, that one was really quite sorry for her—and this morning at cockcrow she decamps and
      leaves him without a word."
"You are mistaken—she left a note for him."
"Poor dear boy!" sighs Sybilla, "is not he quite prostrated by the blow? I am not apt to
      pity men generally—they are so coarse-grained—but he is much more delicately strung than the
      general run."
"I suppose he is frightfully cut up," says Cecilia, with that inquisitiveness as to the
      details of a great affliction which we are all apt to experience.
For some perverse reason, inexplicable even to himself, Jim would like to be able to answer
      that his friend is not cut up at all; but truth again asserting its empire, he assents
      laconically, "Frightfully!"
"How did he take it?"
"How do people generally take such things?"
The impatience of the key in which this is uttered, coupled with the implied side-allusion
      to an acquaintance with sorrows of a somewhat similar nature on her own part, silences the
      younger and sounder Miss Wilson for a moment, but only for a moment—a moment long enough to be
      filled by another sighing "Poor dear boy!" from Sybilla.
"You say that she left a note for him?"—with a renewed light of curiosity in her eyes—"have
      you any idea what was in it?"
Jim hesitates; then, "Yes," he replies; "but as it was not addressed to me, I do not think
      that I have any right to repeat it."
"Of course not!"—reluctantly; "but did it throw no light—absolutely no light at all—upon
      this extraordinary stampede?"
"No."
"Did not she even tell him where they were going?"
"No."
"Nor whether they were coming back?"
"No."
"Nor ask him to follow her?"
"If she did not tell him where she was going, is it likely that she would ask him to follow
      her?" cries Jim irritably, deeply annoyed to find that he is, by the series of negatives that
      is being forced from him, doing the very thing which he had just denied his own right to
      do.
"It is the most incomprehensible thing I ever heard in my life. I wonder"—with an air of
      even alerter interest than before—"what Mr. Greenock will say? Perhaps he will now tell what
      he knows about them; if they are gone, there will no longer be any need to conceal it. I am
      afraid this looks rather as if there were something!"
For the second time in one day the mention of an amiable flâneur's name makes Jim
      vault to his feet.
"Well, I will not keep you any longer from your luncheon," he cries hastily. "I will call in
      again later."
"Are you going?" asks Mr. Wilson dully, lifting his head from his chest, upon which it is
      sunk. "Well, you are about right; we are not much good to anyone when our mainspring is
      gone."
The phrase strikes cold on Jim's heart.
"Are you going back to the poor dear boy?" inquires Sybilla as he passes her. "By-the-bye,
      if it is not too much trouble, would you mind tucking the Austrian blanket a little closer in
      on the left side?" and as he stoops to perform the asked-for service, she adds: "Let him know
      how sincerely I sympathize with him; and if he wants anything quieting for his nerves, tell
      him that there is nothing that I can more conscientiously recommend than——"
But what Sybilla can conscientiously recommend is shut into the closing door. Outside that
      door Jim finds that Cecilia has joined him. Anxiety has quite banished the not altogether
      disagreeable curiosity of five minutes ago, from the troubled face she lifts to his.
"You will come back, will not you?" she asks. "You are not of much use, I suppose; but
      still, one feels that you are there, and we are all so much at sea. You have not an idea how
      much we are at sea—without her."
"I think that I have a very good idea," he answers mournfully. "Tell me, Cis; do you think
      she is really very ill?"
As he puts the question, he feels its irrationality. He knows that the person to whom he is
      making his futile appeal has already given him all the scanty tidings she has to give; yet he
      cannot help indulging a faint hope that her response to this last query of his may perhaps set
      Amelia's condition in a slightly more favourable light. A look of helpless distress clouds
      Cecilia's already cloudy face.
"I tell you I do not know; I am no judge; I have seen so little real illness. Sybilla would
      kill me if she heard me say so, would not she"—with a slight parenthetical smile—"but I have
      seen so little real illness, that I do not know what things mean; I do not know what it means
      that she should be so heavy and stupid. As I told you before, the only time that she roused up
      at all was when I mentioned your—"
He stops her, breaking rudely into her sentence. He cannot bear to hear that it is only at
      the magic of his name that his poor faithful love lifts her sick head.
"Yes, yes; I remember."
"Some one ought to sit up with her, I am sure," pursues Cecilia, still with that same
      helpless air of disquiet; "she ought not to be left alone all night; but who? I should be more
      than willing to do it, but I know that I should fall asleep in five minutes, and I am such a
      heavy sleeper that, when once I am off, there is no possibility of waking me. I am a
      dreadfully bad sick-nurse; father can never bear to have me near him when he has the
      gout."
Burgoyne is too well aware of the perfect truth of this last statement to attempt any
      contradiction of it.
"Amelia has always been the one to sit up when any one was ill," continues she woefully;
      "and even now, by a stupid confusion of ideas, I catch myself thinking, 'Oh, Amelia will sit
      up with her!' before I can realize that her is Amelia herself."
Jim can well sympathize with this same confusion, when, several times during his walk back
      to the Piazza d'Azeglio, a muddled thought of comfort, in the idea that he will go and tell
      Amelia what a terrible day of anxiety about some one he has been having, taps at the door of
      his brain. The portals of No. 12 are once again opened to him by Annunziata, who indicates to
      him, by a series of compassionate gestures and liquid Tuscan sentences, that the
       povero is still within, and the Padrona, who this time also appears on the scene,
      and who is possessed of somewhat more English than her handmaid, intimates, albeit with a good
      deal of sympathy for his sufferings, yet with still more of determination, that it would be no
      bad thing were he to be removed, since, whether the sun shines or the rain falls, people must
      live, and the apartment has to be prepared for new occupants.
Anything that speaks less intention of removing than Byng's pose, when his friend rejoins
      him, it would be difficult to imagine. He is stretched upon the parquet floor, with his head
      lying on the small footstool that has been wont to support Elizabeth's feet; her rifled
      workbasket stands on the floor beside him, while her bit of embroidery half shrouds his
      distorted face. The needle, still sticking in it, may prick his eyes out for all he cares; the
      book she last read is open at the page where she has put her mark of a skein of pale silk; and
      the yellow anemones, that he must have plucked for her yesterday in drenched Vallombrosa, are
      crushed under his hot cheek. But outwardly he is quite quiet. Jim puts his hand on his
      shoulder.
"Come away, there is no use in your staying here any longer."
As he receives no answer, he repeats the exhortation more imperatively, "Come."
"Why should I come? Where should I come to?" says the young man, lifting his head, "where
      can I find such plain traces of her as here? I will stay."
He says this with an air of resolution, and once more lays down his face upon the footstool,
      which, being entirely worked in beads, has impressed the cheek thrust against it with a design
      in small hollows, a fact of which the sufferer is quite unaware.
"You cannot stay!" cries Burgoyne, the more impatiently that his own share of anxiety is
      fretting his temper almost past endurance; "you cannot stay, it is out of the question; they
      want to come into the rooms, to prepare them for new occupants."
"New occupants!" repeats Byng, turning over almost on his face, and flattening his
      nose and lips against the beaded surface of his stool, "other occupants than her.
      Never! never!"
It is to be placed to the credit side of Mr. Burgoyne's account that he does not, upon this
      declaration, withdraw the resting-place from his young friend's countenance and break it over
      his head. It is certainly not the temptation to do so that is lacking. Instead, he sits down
      at some distance off, and says quietly:
"I see, you will force them to call in the police. You will make a discreditable
       esclandre. How good for her; how conducive to her good name. I congratulate
      you!"
The other has lifted his head in a moment.
"What do you mean?"
"Do you think," asks Jim indignantly, "that it is ever very advantageous to a woman to have
      her name mixed up in a vulgar row? And do you suppose that hers will be kept out of it?
      Come"—seeing a look of shocked consternation breaking over the young man's face, and
      determined to strike while the iron is hot—"I will call a fiacre, and we will go home to the
      hotel. Put back her things into her basket. What right have you to meddle with them? You have
      no business to take advantage of her absence to do what you would not do if she were
      here."
Byng obeys with a scared docility; his eyes are so dim, and his fingers tremble so much,
      that Jim has to help him in replacing Elizabeth's small properties. His own heart is pricked
      with a cruel smart that has no reference to Amelia's illness, as he handles the departed
      girl's spools and skeins, and awkwardly folds her scrap of broidery. Byng offers no further
      resistance, and, equally indifferent to his own bunged-up eyes, bead-marked cheeks, and
      dishevelled locks, follows his companion dully, down the stone stairs, compassionately watched
      from the top by Annunziata, whose heart is an inconveniently tender one to be matched with so
      tough a face. They get into the fiacre, and drive in dead silence to the Minerva. Arrived
      there, Jim persuades his friend, who now seems prepared to acquiesce meekly in whatever he is
      told to do, to lie down on his bed, since the few words that he utters convey the fact of his
      being suffering from a burning headache, a phenomenon not very surprising, considering his
      late briny exercises, since, even at the superb age of twenty-two, it is difficult to spend
      six hours in banging your forehead against a parquet floor, in moaning, bellowing, and
      weeping, without leaving some traces of these gymnastics on your physique.
Burgoyne stands or sits patiently beside him, bathing his fiery temples with eau-de-Cologne,
      not teasing him with any questions, having, indeed, on his own part, the least possible desire
      for conversation; and so the heavy hours go by. The day has declined to evening before
      Burgoyne quits his protégé's side to dine, shortly and solitarily, previous making a
      third visit to the Anglo-Américain, to learn the latest news of his betrothed.
He had left Byng still stretched upon his bed, apparently asleep, and is therefore the more
      surprised, on returning to take a final look at him before setting out on his own errand, to
      find him up, with hat and stick in hand, evidently prepared for a walk.
"You are going out?"
"Yes."
"Where are you going?"
The other hesitates.
"I am going back there."
"Impossible!"
"But I am," replies Byng doggedly; "it will not do her any injury, for I shall not
      attempt to go in, I shall only ask at the door whether any telegram has yet been received
      from—from them; they must telegraph to direct where their things are to be sent to, and it is
      most probable that they have done so already."
"It is most improbable."
"Well, at all events, it is possible, it is worth trying, and I mean to try it."
There is such a fixed resolution in his voice, which is no longer quavering with sobs, and
      in his ashy face, that Jim offers no further resistance. The only concession he can obtain
      from him is that of permitting him to accompany him.
"You will not mind coming with me to the Anglo-Américain first, will you?" inquires Jim, as
      they set off walking across the Piazza.
"It will delay us quite half-an-hour," answers the other restlessly. "But stay" (a hazy look
      of reminiscence dawning over his preoccupied haggard face), "did you tell me that Amelia was
      ill—or did I dream it?"
"No, you did not dream it," replies the other sadly. "She is ill."
Perhaps the wretchedness that pierces through his friend's quiet tones recalls the young
      dreamer to the fact that the world holds other miseries than his own. There is at all events
      something of his old quick sympathy in his next words, and in the way in which they are
      uttered:
"Oh, poor Amelia, I am sorry! By all means let us go at once and ask after her. Is
      there nothing that we can get?—nothing that we can do for her?"
It is the question that Jim, in baffled anxiety, puts when he is admitted inside the dull
       salon, where no love-glorified, homely face to-night lights up the tender candles of
      its glad eyes, from over its stitching, at his entry.
Sybilla is lying less comfortably than usual on her sofa, her cushions not plumped up, and
      her bottle of smelling-salts rolled out of her reach. Mr. Wilson is walking uneasily up and
      down the room, instead of sitting placidly in his chair, with the soothing voice—which he had
      always thought as much to be counted on, and as little to be particularly thankful for, as the
      air that fills his lungs—lullingly reading him to sleep.
"Cecilia is with her just now," he says, in a voice of forlorn irritation. "I wish she would
      come down again; I have no great opinion of Cecilia as a sick-nurse, and she must know how
      anxious we are." A moment later, still pursuing his fidgety ramble from wall to wall, and
      exclaiming peevishly, as he stumbles over a footstool: "If it would only declare itself! There
      seems to be nothing to lay hold of, we are so completely in the dark—if it would only declare
      itself!"
A not very subdued sob from the sofa is the only answer he gets, an answer which evidently
      irritates still further his fretted nerves.
"I cannot think what Cecilia is doing!" he cries, hastening to the door, opening it noisily,
      and then listening.
"Let me run up and see," says Jim, his heart going out to the fractious old man in a
      sympathy of suffering. "Yes, I know where her room is—au troisième, is not it?" (a
      flash of recollection lighting up the fact that Amelia's is distinctly the worst room of the
      suite occupied by the Wilson family; the room with most stairs to climb to, and least
      accommodation when you reach it). "I will knock quite gently. Do not be afraid, I will not
      disturb her, and I will come down immediately to tell you."
Without waiting for permission, he springs up the stairs, and, standing on the landing, taps
      cautiously on the closed door, whose number (by one of those quirks of memory that furnish all
      our minds with insignificant facts) he has recollected. His first knock is so superfluously
      soft that it is evidently inaudible within, since no result follows upon it. His second, a
      shade louder, though still muffled by the fear of breaking into some little fitful yet
      salutary sleep, brings Cecilia out. His first glance at her face shows him that she has no
      good news, either to warm his own heart, or for him to carry down as a solace to the poor old
      man below.
"Oh, it is you, is it?" says she, shutting the door behind her with a clumsy carefulness
      that makes it creak. "No, I do not think she is any better; but it is so difficult to tell, I
      am no judge. She does not complain of anything particular; but she looks so odd."
It is the same adjective that Cecilia had applied earlier in the day to her sick sister, and
      it fills Jim with an impotent terror.
"If she is asleep, might not I just look in at her?" he asks. "I do not know what you mean
      when you say she looks odd."
"She is not asleep," replies Cecilia, in a noisy whisper, much more likely to pierce sick
      ears than a voice pitched in its normal key; "at least, I think not. But I am sure you ought
      not to see her; Dr. Coldstream said she was to be kept very quiet, and nothing would upset her
      so much as seeing you."
"She need not see me; I would only take just one look at her from behind the door," persists
      Jim who feels a desire, whose gnawing intensity surprises himself, to be assured by the
      evidence of his own eyes that his poor love's face has not undergone some strange and gruesome
      change, such as is suggested by Cecilia's disquieting epithet.
"Do you think she would not know you were there?" asks she scornfully, "Why, she hears your
      step three streets off!"
</div></body></text></TEI>