<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="40">
CHAPTER X.
Though "February Fill-dyke" was never and nowhere truer to her name than this year, and in
      Algiers—coming laden with wet days to make the green Sahel, if possible, greener than it was
      before; yet the inhabitants of the Grand Hotel do not again, for a matter of three weeks,
      relieve their ennui or let off their energies in far from Dumb Crambo, or loud charade. The
      voice of the battledore is silent in the entrance-hall, and the shuttlecock sleeps. M.
      Cipriani has scarcely had to do more than mention his request that they would lay aside their
      more noisy pastimes, for they are, most of them, rather good-natured persons than otherwise,
      since, indeed, it is quite as uncommon to be very ill-natured as to be very selfless, or very
      foolish, or very wise. Those of them who have been fortunate enough to be present at the
      catastrophe have carried away such a moving image of a wounded Adonis, apparently several
      yards long, stretched upon Mrs. Le Marchant's Persian carpet, that they have infected those
      less happy persons who know of him only by hearsay with a compassionate interest scarcely
      inferior to their own.
The only person in the hotel who makes much noise is poor Byng himself, and for awhile he
      falls it with clamour enough to furnish two or three of those bump suppers of which, not so
      long ago, he was a conspicuous ornament.
There had never, even when he was in his wits, been much disguise as to the state of his
      feelings; now that he is out of them, the whole house rings with his frantic callings upon the
      name of Elizabeth, uttered in every key of rage, expostulation, tenderness, and appeal. These
      cries reach Elizabeth herself as she sits cowering in that one of the little suite of rooms
      which is nearest the door of entrance—sits there cowering, and yet with the door, through
      which those dreadful sounds penetrate to her, ajar, in order the better to hear them—cowering,
      and for several days alone.
Owing to various accidents, similar in their results, though differing in character, almost
      a week elapses from the first breaking out of Byng's malady before the arrival of either the
      hospital nurse or of Mrs. Byng. When the latter event occurs, Mrs. Le Marchant retires from
      her post at the sick man's bedside with the same unostentatious matter-of-factness with which
      she had assumed it, and Elizabeth is no longer alone. But to set against this advantage is the
      counterbalancing evil that, after the arrival of Byng's mother, she can no longer steal out,
      as she had before done a hundred times a day, to his door, to glean fragments of tidings from
      any outcomer thence. She is never able to repeat those little surreptitious excursions after
      that occasion when Mrs. Byng, coming suddenly out upon her, passes her with such speaking, if
      silent, hostility and scorn in her tired and grief-stricken eyes, that the luckless spy slinks
      back sobbing to her own tender mother; and there Jim, flying out a while after to carry them a
      crumb of reassurance, finds them, to his indignation, mingling their bitter tears.
Whatever else his faults may be, Mr. Burgoyne is a man of his word; he certainly keeps his
      promise to Elizabeth that Byng shall be well nursed. He keeps his other promise, too—though
      that is more by good luck than good management—that Byng shall not die. Whether to hinder his
      friend from being made a liar, or because he himself is loth to leave a world which he has
      found so pretty, cruel, and amusing, Byng does not die—Byng lives.
By her 25th day February has dried her tears, though they still hang on her green lashes,
      and a great galleon of a sun steers through a tremendous sea of blue, as Jim persuades Byng's
      mother to go out for her first delicious drive in that fresh and satin-soft air of the
      Algerian February, which matches our best poets' May. He takes her along the Route des
      Aqueduques, that lovely route which runs high along the hillside among the villas above the
      town, so high as to be on a level with the roofs of the lofty-standing Continental and Orient
      Hotels. It is a most twisting road, which in curves and loops winds about the head of narrow
      deep gorges, full of pale olive-trees, caroubiers, and ilex. Below lies the red-roofed white
      town. Slowly they trot past the campagne of the "English Milor," "L'Epicier Anglais," and many
      others, over whose high walls bougainvillias light their now waning purple fires, and big
      bushes of fleurs de Marie stoop their milky stars.
Mrs. Byng's eyes, sunk and diminished by watching and weariness, have been lying restfully
      on the delightful spring spectacle—on the great yellow sorrels by the wayside; she now turns
      them tear-brimmed to her companion.
"I could jump out of my skin!" she says shakily. "What a sun! what a sea! And to think that,
      after all, we have pulled him through."
Jim's only answer is a sympathetic pressure of the extremely well-fitting glove nearest him.
      If Willy had died instead of lived, her gloves would have fitted all the same.
"But we are not out of the wood yet," continues she, with a shake of the head. "He is cured,
      or nearly cured, of one disease, but what about the other?"
"What other?" inquires he, obstinately stupid, and with somewhat of a heart-sinking at the
      prospect of the engagement which he sees ahead of him.
How many elbows the road makes! It seems to have been cut in places right through the wet
      red rock, now overhung by such a torrent of vegetation.
At the head of one of the deep clefts that run up from the sea they pause, and look down
      upon a second sea of greenery that would seem to belong to no month less leafy than June. To
      June, too, belong the murmur and hum and summer trickle of running water at the ravine
      bottom.
"I do not see why, if he goes on as swimmingly as he is now doing," says Mrs. Byng in a
      restless voice—"why we should not get him off in a week, even if he were carried on board the
      boat."
"A week? Is not that rather sanguine?"
"I do not think so, the sooner the better; and during that week I should think she could
      hardly make any attempt to see him."
"Has she shown any signs of making one hitherto?"
"Well, no"—rather grudgingly. "In fact, between you and me, considering that it is they who
      have brought him into this plight, I think they might have shown a little more solicitude
      about him. In the last ten days I do not believe that they have been once to the door to
      inquire."
"You do not seem to be aware," says Jim, in a voice which, though quiet, is not pacific,
      "and that is odd, considering how often I told you, that until you came Mrs. Le Marchant
      nursed him like a mother; not like a mother, indeed"—correcting himself with a somewhat
      malicious intention—"for mothers grow flurried, and she never did."
"You mean that she nursed him better than I do," in a jealous tone. "Well"—more
      generously—"how shabby of me to mind, if she did! I do not mind. God bless her for it! I
      always thought"—compunctiously—"that she looked a nice woman."
"She is nice—as nice"—descending into a slang unworthy of his ripe years—"as they
      make 'em."
"And the girl—I suppose one can hardly call her a girl—looks nice too."
They are passing the Casbah, the solid Moorish fortifications, about which now hang only a
      few gaitered, sunburnt, baggy Zouaves.
Jim has a silly hope that, if he maintains an entire silence, the current of his companion's
      ideas may drift into another channel; but he is soon undeceived.
"I suppose that she must have been quite, quite young when—when those dreadful
      things happened that Willy talked about in his delirium?"
"Is it possible"—indignantly—"that you take the ravings of a fever-patient au pied de la
      lettre?"
"No, I do not; but"—with an obstinate sticking to her point—"there was a substratum of truth
      in them; that was only too evident."
Jim shuts his teeth tight together. His vow of silence is harder to keep than he had
      thought.
"Since he came to himself he has never mentioned her to me," continues his companion
      anxiously; "has he to you?"
"No."
"I quite tremble whenever he opens his lips, lest he should be going to begin the subject,
      and one could not contradict him yet awhile; he is so quixotic, it is quite likely that he may
      have some distorted idea that her being—how shall I say?—flétrie—is an additional
      reason for standing by her, rehabilitating her, marrying her. He is so chivalrous."
They have left the Prison Civile and the Zouave Barracks behind them. A longer interval than
      that usually supposed to elapse between a remark and its rejoinder has passed, before Jim can
      bring himself to utter the following sentence with the calmness which he wishes:
"Has it never occurred to you that she may be chivalrous too?"
Perhaps Mrs. Byng does not readily find a response to this question; perhaps it sets her off
      upon a train of speculation which does not conduce to garrulity. Certain it is that, for the
      rest of the drive, she is as silent as Jim could wish her. It is a sharp surprise to him two
      days later to be mysteriously called outside the sick man's door by her, in order to be
      informed that she has invited Miss Le Marchant to accompany her on a drive.
"I went to call upon them," she says, avoiding—or so he fancies it—his eye as she speaks;
      "and I asked the girl to drive with me to the Mole, and get a good blowing about."
"How kind of you!" cries Jim, a flash of real pleasure in his serious look; "how like
      you—like your real self, that is!"
And he takes her hand to thank it by a friendly pressure. But she draws it away rather
      hastily.
"Oh, it was nothing so very wonderful—nothing to thank me for."
She seems confused and a little guilty, and escapes with some precipitation from his
      gratitude. Mrs. Byng is not a woman addicted to double-dealing, and if she ever makes any
      little essays in that direction, she does them, as on this present occasion, villainously.
Burgoyne is not at the hall-door to help the ladies into the carriage when they set off.
      Perhaps this may be because he is in attendance upon the invalid. Perhaps because—glad as he
      had at first felt and expressed himself at their friendliness—some misgiving may, upon
      reflection, have beset him at so strange a conjunction. At all events, it is only Fritz who
      throws the light Arab rug over their knees and gives them his encouraging parting smile.
Poor Miss Le Marchant needs his encouragement, for, indeed, it is in a very frightened
      spirit that she sets forth on her pleasuring. But before the horse-bells have jingled to the
      bottom of Mustapha Supérieur, her spirits are rising. The sun shines, and he has shone so
      seldom in Elizabeth's life that a very few of his beams, whether real or metaphorical, suffice
      to send up her quicksilver. She does not consciously admit for a second the hope that in the
      present overture on the part of her companion lies any significance. But yet a tiny trembling
      bliss now and then taps at her heart's door, and she pushes it away but feebly.
Before they have reached the Amirauté, where they are to get out, she has thanked Mrs. Byng
      with such pretty and unsuspecting gratitude for bringing her, and has made her laugh so
      irrepressibly by her gay and naïve comments upon the motley passers-by, that the latter is
      filled with a compunctious regret that a person with such lovely manners, and such a sense of
      a joke, should have made so disastrous a fiasco of her life as renders necessary the extremely
      distasteful errand on which she herself is at present bound. At the Amirauté, as I say, they
      get out; and, turning under a groined roof that looks as if it were the crypt of a church,
      find themselves presently upon the long stone breakwater that runs out into the bay. It was
      built, they tell us, in old days by the wretched Christian captives; but the sea has taken
      care that not much of the original labour of blood and tears has survived.
The wind is high, and the sunshine ardent and splendid. On their right as they walk, with
      the wind officiously helping them from behind, is a world of dancing sapphire, each blue
      billow white-tipped. On their left are great blocks of masonry, built strong and square, with
      narrow intervals between to break the might of the water. How little their strength has
      availed against that of their tremendous opponent is seen at every step, since nearly half the
      blocks are overthrown or in semi-ruin; though the date engraved upon them shows for how few
      seasons they have been exposed to the ravages of the tempestuous sea. They walk on to the end,
      till they can go no further, since, just ahead of them, the waves are rolling in half-fierce
      play—though the day is all smiles—over the breakwater; and even where they stand, their
      footing is made unsure by lengths of slimy seaweed that set them slipping along. Elizabeth
      insists upon the elder woman taking her slight arm—insists upon carrying her wraps, and
      generally waiting upon and ministering to her. From the bottom of her heart Mrs. Byng wishes
      that she would not, since every instance of her soft helpfulness, so innocent and spontaneous,
      makes more difficult the answer to that question which she has been asking herself ever since
      they set foot upon the Mole:
"How shall I begin?"
It is unanswered still, when, retracing their steps a little, they sit down under the lee of
      one of the half-wrecked blocks to enjoy the view.
From here the sea is a lake, the distant mountains and the breakwater seeming—though in
      reality parted by how wide a wet waste—to join in embracing it. The mountains are dim and
      filmy to-day, Cape Matifou scarcely visible; but the Koubah shows white-domed on the hillside,
      and all the dazzling water is shot through with blinding light. The town, Arab-French, is
      dazzling too; the arcaded quay, the fortifications, one can scarcely look at any of them. Two
      or three steamers, with a little vapour issuing from their ugly black and red funnels, lie
      moored; and other smaller craft lift their spars against the heaven. Near by a man is sitting
      with his legs dangling over the water, fishing with a line; and two or three Arabs, draped in
      the dignity of their poetic rags, lie couched round a fire that they have kindled. Beneath and
      around them is the banging and thundering of the sea. August noise! "A voice like the sound of
      many waters." Could there be a more awful comparison? Just underneath them, where the sea has
      made a greater breach than usual, it is boiling as in a caldron. Looking down and in, they see
      the water comparatively quiet for a moment; then, with a shout of its great jubilant voice,
      rushing and surging in, tossing its mane. Elizabeth's eyes are resting on the heavenly
      sapphire plain.
"How blue!" she says, under her breath; "one cannot believe that it is not really
      blue; one feels that if one took up a little in a spoon it would be just as blue as it is
      now."
"I dare say it will not feel so blue when we are on it," replies Mrs. Byng, lugging
      in somewhat awkwardly, as she feels, the subject which she finds it so hard to introduce, "as
      I suppose we shall be within a week now."
Her charity bids her not glance at her companion as she speaks, so she is not quite sure
      whether or not she gives a start.
"Mr. Burgoyne thinks that I am sanguine; but I am all for moving him as soon as possible; it
      cannot be too soon."
She tries to throw as much significance as they are capable of holding into the latter
      words, and feels that she has succeeded.
"Of course he may refuse to go," continues she, with a rather strained laugh. "Do you
      remember Victor Hugo's definition of heaven as a place where children are always little and
      parents are always young? I am continually quoting it. But, unfortunately, one's children will
      not stay little; they grow big, and get wills of their own, and it is quite possible he may
      refuse to go."
"Yes?" almost inaudibly.
"But"—reddening slightly at the patently-intended application of her next sentence—"anyone
      that was fond of him—anyone that liked him really and—and disinterestedly, I
      mean, must see that the only happy course for him would be to go; that it would be his
      salvation to get away; they—they would not try to hinder him."
"I should think that no one would do that."
There is not a touch of asperity in the dove-soft voice; but there is a shade of
      dignity.
"When he was ill—while he was delirious" ("How dreadfully unpleasant it is!" in an anguished
      internal aside)—"I could not help hearing—gathering—drawing inferences."
The ardour of the chase has vanquished her charity, and she is looking at her victim. But,
      to do her justice, the success of her labours shocks her. Can this little aged, pinched face,
      with its dilated eyes, so full of woe and terror, be the same one that dimpled into riotous
      laughter half an hour ago at the sight of the two dirty old men, in Jewish gaberdines and with
      gingham umbrellas, kissing each other by the Mosquée de la Pêcherie?
"Of course it was all incoherent," she goes on hurriedly, snatching at the first expression
      that occurs to her as likely to undo, or at least a little modify, her work—"nothing that one
      could make sense of. Only your name recurred so incessantly; it was nothing but 'Elizabeth,
      Elizabeth.' I am sure"—with a remorseful if clumsy attempt to be kind, and a most uneasy
      smile—"that I do not wonder at it!"
In the narrow interspace between the blocks and the path—not more than a couple of fingers
      wide—how the sea forces itself! and up race its foam-fountains, throwing their spray aloft in
      such mighty play, as if they would hit heaven's arch. What exhilaration in its great glad
      noise, superb and battle-ready!
"I cannot express how distasteful a task this is to me"—in a tone that certainly gives no
      reason to doubt the truth of her statement; "but, after all, I am his mother; he is all I have
      in the world, and I am sure that you are the very last person who would wish to do him an
      injury."
"No; I do not think that I would do him an injury."
How curiously still and slow her voice is! Mrs. Byng has resolutely averted her eyes, so
      that her purpose may not again be shaken by the sight of the havoc she has wrought, and has
      fixed them upon some sea gulls that are riding up and down upon the merry waves, making them,
      with their buoyant motion, even more jocund than they were before.
"It seems an impossible thing to say to you—a thing too bad to apologize for—but yet I
       must say it"—in a tone of excessive distress, yet firmness. "Under the
      circumstances, it would—would throw a blight over his whole life."
"Yes, I know that it would; I have always known it; that is why we left Florence."
"And very good it was of you, too! Not that I am quite certain of the judiciousness of the
      way in which you did it; but, however, I am sure you meant it for the best."
"Yes, I meant it for the best."
The sea-gulls have risen from the billow, and are turning and wheeling in the air. The light
      is catching their wings, and making them look like whitest silver. It seems as if they were at
      conscious play with it, trying experiments as to how they can best catch their bright
      playfellow, and again shake it off, and yet again recapture it.
"What a monster you must think me!" breaks out the elder woman presently.
Now that the impression has somehow been conveyed to her mind that her mission is likely to
      be completely successful, the full brutality of the method by which she has accomplished it
      bursts upon her mind.
"How treacherous! luring you out here, under the pretence of friendliness, to say such
      horrible things to you!"
Elizabeth's narrow hands are clasped upon her knee, and her small heart-broken, white face
      is looking out straight before her.
"No, I do not think you a monster," she answers—"you are a kind-hearted woman! and it must
      have been very, very unpleasant to you. I am quite sorry"—with a sort of smile—"for you,
      having to do it; but you are his mother. If I had been his mother, I should have done the
      same; at least, I suppose so."
"I am sure, if things had been different, there is no one that I should have—I do not know
      when I ever saw anyone whom I took such a fancy to. If it had not been for the disparity—I
      mean, if he had been less young and unfit to take upon himself the serious responsibilities of
      life——"
How deplorably lame even to Mrs. Byng's ears sound her tardy efforts to place the grounds of
      her objection on a less cruel basis than that which she has already made so nakedly plain to
      be the real one! Even the sweet-mannered Elizabeth does not think it necessary to express
      gratitude for such insulting civilities.
"I do not quite understand what you wish me to do," she says, with quiet politeness; "if you
      will explain to me——"
"Oh, I do not want to dictate to you; please do not imagine I could think of being so
      impertinent; but, of course, he will be asking for you. Since he came to himself, he has not
      mentioned you as yet; but of course he will. I am expecting it every moment; probably he has
      not felt up to embarking on the subject. He will ask for you—will want to see you."
"And you wish me not to see him?"
Her delicate suffering mouth quivers; but she is perfectly composed.
"Oh, but of course you must see him! you quite, quite misunderstand me! Much chance
      there would be"—with a wretched stunted laugh—"of getting him away without a sight of you! How
      little you know him!"
Elizabeth does not dispute the fact of her want of acquaintance with Byng's character, nor
      does she help his floundering parent by any suggestion. She merely goes on listening to her
      with that civil white look, while the sportive sea-mews still play at hide-and-seek with the
      sun-rays on the wide blue fields of heaven.
"It is dreadful that I should have to say these things to you," says Mrs. Byng, in a voice
      of the strongest revolt and ire against her destiny—"insult you in this unprovoked way; but,
      in point of fact, you are the only person in the world who can convince him that—that—it is
      impossible—that it cannot be. Of course he will be very urgent and pressing, and I know how
      persuasive he is. Do not you suppose that I, his own mother, know how hard it is to refuse him
      anything? and of course, in his present weak state, it must be very carefully done. He could
      not stand any violent contradiction. You would have to be very gentle; dear me!"—with a fresh
      access of angry remorse—"as if you ever could be anything else."
This compliment also its pale object receives in silence.
"You know one has always heard that there are two kinds of 'No,'" goes on Mrs. Byng with
      another dwarfish laugh, which has a touch of the hysteric in it—"a woman's 'No,' as it is
      called, that means 'Yes'; and a 'No' which anyone—which even he—must understand to be
      final. If you could—I dare say I am asking you an impossibility—but if you
       could make him understand that this time it is final!"
There is a silence between them. An unrulier billow than usual, yet more masterless in its
      Titan play, is hurling itself with a colossal thud and bang against the causeway; and
      Elizabeth waits till its clamour is subsided before she speaks.
"Yes," she answers slowly, "I understand; thank you for telling me what you wish. I think I
      may promise that I shall be able to—that I shall make him understand that it is final."
A moment or two later they are on their way back to the Amirauté. The ocean is at its
      glorious pastimes all around them; the hill-climbing, shining town smiles upon them from its
      slope; but upon both has fallen a blindness. The feelings of Mrs. Byng are perhaps the least
      enviable of the two.
They are nearly back at the beginning of the breakwater, when she stops short. Probably when
      cool reflection comes, when she is removed from the charm and pathos of Elizabeth's meek white
      presence, lovely and unreproachful, she will not repent her work; but at the present moment of
      impulse and remorse she feels as if the expunging of the last half-hour would be cheaply
      purchased by the sacrifice of six months of her remaining life.
"I suppose it is not the least use my asking you to try and forgive me—to make allowances
      for me?" she says, with unsteady-toned humility; "oh, how you must hate me! If the
      case were reversed, how I should hate you! How you will hate me all your life!"
The tears are rolling down her cheeks, and in an instant Elizabeth's hand has gone out to
      her. As it does so, the grotesque regret flashes across the elder woman's mind that any future
      daughter-in-law of hers will be most unlikely to be the possessor of such a hand.
"Why should I hate you? you cannot"—with a heart-wrung smile—"possibly think me more
      undesirable than I do myself; and even if it were not so, I do not think it is in me to hate
      anyone very much."
On their drive home they meet with one or two little incidents quite as funny as the old
      Jews kissing each other; but this time they do not move poor Miss Le Marchant to any
      laughter.
</div></body></text></TEI>