<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>New Grub Street: A Novel</title><author>Gissing, George (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1891</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="37">
CHAPTER XXXVII REWARDS
When the fitting moment arrived, Alfred Yule underwent an operation for cataract,
      and it was believed at first that the result would be favourable. This hope had but short
      duration; though the utmost prudence was exercised, evil symptoms declared themselves, and in
      a few months' time all prospect of restoring his vision was at an end. Anxiety, and then the
      fatal assurance, undermined his health; with blindness, there fell upon him the debility of
      premature old age.
The position of the family was desperate. Marian had suffered much all the winter from
      attacks of nervous disorder, and by no effort of will could she produce enough literary work
      to supplement adequately the income derived from her fifteen hundred pounds. In the summer of
      1885 things were at the worst; Marian saw no alternative but to draw upon her capital, and so
      relieve the present at the expense of the future.
       She had a mournful warning before her eyes in the case of poor Hinks and his
      wife, who were now kept from the workhouse only by charity. But at this juncture the rescuer
      appeared. Mr. Quarmby and certain of his friends were already making a subscription for the
      Yule's benefit, when one of their number — Mr. Jedwood, the publisher — came forward with a
      proposal which relieved the minds of all concerned. Mr. Jedwood had a brother who was the
      director of a public library in a provincial town, and by this means he was enabled to offer
      Marian Yule a place as assistant in that institution; she would receive seventy-five pounds a
      year, and thus, adding her own income, would be able to put her parents beyond the reach of
      want. The family at once removed from London, and the name of Yule was no longer met with in
      periodical literature.
By an interesting coincidence, it was on the day of this departure that there appeared a
      number of The West End in which the place of honour, that of the week's Celebrity,
      was occupied by Clement Fadge. A coloured portrait of this illustrious man challenged the
      admiration of all who had literary tastes, and two columns of panegyric recorded his career
      for the encouragement
       of aspiring youth. This article, of course unsigned, came from the pen of Jasper
      Milvain.
It was only by indirect channels that Jasper learnt how Marian and her parents had been
      provided for. Dora's correspondence with her friend soon languished; in the nature of things
      this could not but happen; and about the time when Alfred Yule became totally blind the girls
      ceased to hear anything of each other. An event which came to pass in the spring sorely
      tempted Dora to write, but out of good feeling she refrained.
For it was then that she at length decided to change her name for that of Whelpdale. Jasper
      could not quite reconcile himself to this condescension; in various discourses he pointed out
      to his sister how much higher she might look if she would only have a little patience.
'Whelpdale will never be a man of any note. A good fellow, I admit, but borné in
      all senses. Let me impress upon you, my dear girl, that I have a future before me, and that
      there is no reason — with your charm of person and mind — why you should not marry
      brilliantly. Whelpdale can give you a decent home, I admit, but as regards society he will be
      a drag upon you.'

'It happens, Jasper, that I have promised to marry him,' replied Dora, in a significant
      tone.
'Well, I regret it, but — you are of course your own mistress. I shall make no
      unpleasantness. I don't dislike Whelpdale, and I shall remain on friendly terms with him.'
'That is very kind of you,' said his sister suavely.
Whelpdale was frantic with exultation. When the day of the wedding had been settled, he
      rushed into Jasper's study and fairly shed tears before he could command his voice.
'There is no mortal on the surface of the globe one-tenth so happy as I am 'he gasped. 'I
      can't believe it! Why in the name of sense and justice have I been suffered to attain this
      blessedness? Think of the days when I all but starved in my Albany Street garret, scarcely
      better off than poor, dear old Biffen! Why should I have come to this, and Biffen have
      poisoned himself in despair? He was a thousand times a better and cleverer fellow than I. And
      poor old Reardon, dead in misery! Could I for a moment compare with him?'
'My dear fellow,' said Jasper, calmly, 'compose yourself and be logical. In the first place,
      success has nothing whatever to do with moral
       deserts; and then, both Reardon and Biffen were hopelessly unpractical. In such
      an admirable social order as ours, they were bound to go to the dogs. Let us be sorry for
      them, but let us recognise causas rerum , as Biffen would have said. You have
      exercised ingenuity and perseverance; you have your reward.'
'And when I think that I might have married fatally on thirteen or fourteen different
      occasions. By-the-by, I implore you never to tell Dora those stories about me. I should lose
      all her respect. Do you remember the girl from Birmingham?' He laughed wildly. 'Heaven be
      praised that she threw me over! Eternal gratitude to all and sundry of the girls who have
      plunged me into wretchedness!'
'I admit that you have run the gauntlet, and that you have had marvellous escapes. But be
      good enough to leave me alone for the present. I must finish this review by mid-day.'
'Only one word. I don't know how to thank Dora, how to express my infinite sense of her
      goodness. Will you try to do so for me? You can speak to her with calmness. Will you ell her
      what I have said to you?'
'Oh, certainly. — I should recommend a cooling
       draught of some kind. Look in at a chemist's as you walk on.'
The heavens did not fall before the marriage-day, and the wedded pair betook themselves for
      a few weeks to the Continent. They had been back again and established in their house at
      Earl's Court for a month, when one morning about twelve o'clock Jasper dropped in, as though
      casually. Dora was writing; she had no thought of entirely abandoning literature, and had in
      hand at present a very pretty tale which would probably appear in The English Girl .
      Her boudoir, in which she sat, could not well have been daintier and more appropriate to the
      charming characteristics of its mistress. Mrs. Whelpdale affected no literary slovenliness;
      she was dressed in light colours, and looked so lovely that even Jasper paused on the
      threshold with a smile of admiration.
'Upon my word,' he exclaimed, 'I am proud of my sisters! What did you think of Maud last
      night? Wasn't she superb?'
'She certainly did look very well. But I doubt if she's very happy.'
'That is her own look out; I told her plainly enough my opinion of Dolomore. But she was in
      such a tremendous hurry.'

'You are detestable, Jasper! Is it inconceivable to you that a man or woman should be
      disinterested when they marry?'
'By no means.'
'Maud didn't marry for money any more than I did.'
'You remember the Northern Farmer: "Doän't thou marry for money, but go where money is." An
      admirable piece of advice. Well, Maud made a mistake, let us say. Dolomore is a clown, and now
      she knows it. Why, if she had waited, she might have married one of the leading men of the
      day. She is fit to be a duchess, as far as appearance goes; but I was never snobbish. I care
      very little about titles; what I look to is intellectual distinction.'
'Combined with financial success.'
'Why, that is what distinction means.' He looked round the room with a smile. 'You are not
      uncomfortable here, old girl. I wish mother could have lived till now.'
'I wish it very, very often,' Dora replied in a moved voice.
'We haven't done badly, drawbacks considered. Now you may speak of money as scornfully as
      you like; but suppose you had
       married a man who could only keep you in lodgings? How would life look to
      you?'
'Who ever disputed the value of money? But there are things one mustn't sacrifice to gain
      it.'
'I suppose so. Well, I have some news for you, Dora. I am thinking of following your
      example.'
Dora's face changed to grave anticipation.
'And who is it?'
'Amy Reardon.'
His sister turned away, with a look of intense annoyance.
'You see, I am disinterested myself,' he went on. 'I might find a wife who had wealth and
      social standing. But I choose Amy deliberately.'
'An abominable choice!'
'No; an excellent choice. I have never yet met a woman so well fitted to aid me in my
      career. She has a trifling sum of money, which will be useful for the next year or two — '
'What has she done with the rest of it, then?'
'Oh, the ten thousand is intact, but it can't be seriously spoken of. It will keep up
      appearances till I get my editorship and so on. We shall be married early in August, I think.
       I want to ask you if you will go and see her.'
'On no account! I couldn't be civil to her.'
Jasper's brows blackened.
'This is idiotic prejudice, Dora. I think I have some claim upon you; I have shown some
      kindness — '
'You have, and I am not ungrateful. But I dislike Mrs. Reardon, and I couldn't bring myself
      to be friendly with her.'
'You don't know her.'
'Too well. You yourself have taught me to know her. Don't compel me to say what I think of
      her.'
'She is beautiful, and high-minded, and warm-hearted. I don't know a womanly quality that
      she doesn't possess. You will offend me most seriously if you speak a word against her.'
'Then I will be silent. But you must never ask me to meet her.'
'Never?'
'Never!'
'Then we shall quarrel. I haven't deserved this, Dora. If you refuse to meet my wife on
      terms of decent friendliness, there's no more
       intercourse between your house and mine. You have to choose. Persist in this
      fatuous obstinacy, and I have done with you!'
'So be it!'
'That is your final answer?'
Dora, who was now as angry as he, gave a short affirmative, and Jasper at once left her.
But it was very unlikely that things should rest at this pass. The brother and sister were
      bound by a strong mutual affection, and Whelpdale was not long in effecting a compromise.
'My dear wife,' he exclaimed, in despair at the threatened calamity, 'you are right, a
      thousand times, but it's impossible for you to be on ill terms with Jasper. There's no need
      for you to see much of Mrs. Reardon — '
'I hate her! She killed her husband; I am sure of it.'
'My darling!'
'I mean by her base conduct. She is a cold, cruel, unprincipled creature! Jasper makes
      himself more than ever contemptible by marrying her.'
All the same, in less than three weeks Mrs. Whelpdale had called upon Amy, and the call was
      returned. The two women were perfectly conscious of reciprocal dislike, but they
       smothered the feeling beneath conventional suavities. Jasper was not backward in
      making known his gratitude for Dora's concession, and indeed it became clear to all his
      intimates that this marriage would be by no means one of mere interest; the man was in love at
      last, if he had never been before.
Let lapse the ensuing twelve months, and come to an evening at the end of July, 1886. Mr.
      and Mrs. Milvain are entertaining a small and select party of friends at dinner. Their house
      in Bayswater is neither large nor internally magnificent, but it will do very well for the
      temporary sojourn of a young man of letters who has much greater things in confident
      expectation, who is a good deal talked of, who can gather clever and worthy people at his
      table, and whose matchless wife would attract men of taste to a very much poorer abode.
Jasper had changed considerably in appearance since that last holiday that he spent in his
      mother's house at Finden. At present he would have been taken for five-and-thirty, though only
      in his twenty-ninth year; his hair was noticeably thinning; his moustache had grown heavier; a
      wrinkle or two showed beneath his eyes; his voice was softer, yet firmer. It goes without
       saying that his evening uniform lacked no point of perfection, and somehow it
      suggested a more elaborate care than that of other men in the room. He laughed frequently, and
      with a throwing back of the head which seemed to express a spirit of triumph.
Amy looked her years to the full, but her type of beauty, as you know, was independent of
      youthfulness. That suspicion of masculinity observable in her when she became Reardon's wife
      impressed one now only as the consummate grace of a perfectly-built woman. You saw that at
      forty, at fifty, she would be one of the stateliest of dames. When she bent her head towards
      the person with whom she spoke, it was an act of queenly favour. Her words were uttered with
      just enough deliberation to give them the value of an opinion; she smiled with a delicious
      shade of irony; her glance intimated that nothing could be too subtle for her
      understanding.
The guests numbered six, and no one of them was insignificant. Two of the men were about
      Jasper's age, and they had already made their mark in literature; the third was a novelist of
      circulating fame, spirally crescent. The three of the stronger sex were excellent modern
      types,
       with sweet lips attuned to epigram, and good broad brows.
The novelist at one point put an interesting question to Amy.
'Is it true that Fadge is leaving The Current? '
'It is rumoured, I believe.'
'Going to one of the quarterlies, they say,' remarked a lady. 'He is getting terribly
      autocratic. Have you heard the delightful story of his telling Mr. Rowland to persevere, as
      his last work was one of considerable promise?'
Mr. Rowland was a man who had made a merited reputation when Fadge was still on the lower
      rungs of journalism. Amy smiled and told another anecdote of the great editor. Whilst
      speaking, she caught her husband's eye, and perhaps this was the reason why her story, at the
      close, seemed rather amiably pointless — not a common fault when she narrated.
When the ladies had withdrawn, one of the younger men, in a conversation about a certain
      magazine, remarked:
'Thomas always maintains that it was killed by that solemn old stager, Alfred Yule. By the
      way, he is dead himself, I hear.'
Jasper bent forward.
'Alfred Yule is dead?'

'So Jedwood told me this morning. He died in the country somewhere, blind and fallen on evil
      days, poor old fellow.'
All the guests were ignorant of any tie of kindred between their host and the man spoken
      of.
'I believe,' said the novelist, 'that he had a clever daughter who used to do all the work
      he signed. That used to be a current bit of scandal in Fadge's circle.'
'Oh, there was much exaggeration in that,' remarked Jasper, blandly. 'His daughter assisted
      him, doubtless, but in quite a legitimate way. One used to see her at the Museum.'
The subject was dropped.
An hour and a half later, when the last stranger had taken his leave, Jasper examined two or
      three letters which had arrived since dinner-time and were lying on the hall table. With one
      of them open in his hand, he suddenly sprang up the stairs and leaped, rather than stepped,
      into the drawing-room. Amy was reading an evening paper.
'Look at this!' he cried, holding the letter to her.
It was a communication from the publishers who owned The Current ; they stated that
      the
       editorship of that review would shortly be resigned by Mr. Fadge, and they
      inquired whether Milvain would feel disposed to assume the vacant chair.
Amy sprang up and threw her arms about her husband's neck, uttering a cry of delight.
'So soon! Oh, this is great! this is glorious!'
'Do you think this would have been offered to me but for the spacious life we have led of
      late? Never! Was I right in my calculations, Amy?'
'Did I ever doubt it?'
He returned her embrace ardently, and gazed into her eyes with profound tenderness.
'Doesn't the future brighten?'
'It has been very bright to me, Jasper, since I became your wife.'
'And I owe my fortune to you, dear girl. Now the way is smooth!'
They placed themselves on a settee, Jasper with an arm about his wife's waist, as if they
      were newly plighted lovers. When they had talked for a long time, Milvain said in a changed
      tone:
'I am told that your uncle is dead.'
He mentioned how the news had reached him.

'I must make inquiries to-morrow. I suppose there will be a notice in The Study ,
      and some of the other papers. I hope somebody will make it an opportunity to have a hit at
      that ruffian Fadge. By-the-by, it doesn't much matter now how you speak of Fadge; but I was a
      trifle anxious when I heard your story at dinner.'
'Oh, you can afford to be more independent. — What are you thinking about?'
'Nothing.'
'Why do you look sad? — Yes, I know, I know. I'll try to forgive you.'
'I can't help thinking at times of the poor girl, Amy. Life will be easier for her now, with
      only her mother to support. Someone spoke of her this evening, and repeated Fadge's lie that
      she used to do all her father's writing.'
'She was capable of doing it. I must seem to you rather a poor-brained woman in comparison.
      Isn't it true?'
'My dearest, you are a perfect woman, and poor Marian was only a clever school-girl. Do you
      know, I never could help imagining that she had ink-stains on her fingers. Heaven forbid that
      I should say it unkindly! It was touching to me at the time, for I knew how fearfully hard she
      worked.'

'She nearly ruined your life; remember that.'
Jasper was silent.
'You will never confess it, and that is a fault in you.'
'She loved me, Amy.'
'Perhaps! as a school-girl loves. But you never loved her .'
'No.'
Amy examined his face as he spoke.
'Her image is very faint before me,' Jasper pursued, 'and soon I shall scarcely be able to
      recall it. Yes, you are right; she nearly ruined me. And in more senses than one. Poverty and
      struggle, under such circumstances, would have made me a detestable creature. As it is, I am
      not such a bad fellow, Amy.'
She laughed, and caressed his cheek.
'No, I am far from a bad fellow. I feel kindly to everyone who deserves it. I like to be
      generous, in word and deed. Trust me, there's many a man who would like to be generous, but is
      made despicably mean by necessity. What a true sentence that is of Landor's: "It has
       been repeated often enough that vice leads to misery; will no man declare that misery leads
       to vice?" I have much of
       the weakness that might become viciousness, but I am now far from the
      possibility of being vicious. Of course there are men, like Fadge, who seem only to grow
      meaner the more prosperous they are; but these are exceptions. Happiness is the nurse of
      virtue.'
'And independence the root of happiness.'
'True. "The glorious privilege of being independent" — yes, Burns understood the matter. Go
      to the piano, dear, and play me something. If I don't mind, I shall fall into Whelpdale's
      vein, and talk about my "blessedness." Ha! isn't the world a glorious place?'
'For rich people.'
'Yes, for rich people. How I pity the poor devils! — Play anything. Better still if you will
      sing, my nightingale!'
So Amy first played, and then sang, and Jasper lay back in dreamy bliss.
THE END
</div></body></text></TEI>