<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of John Sherman and Dhoya, by
      Ganconagh (William Butler Yeats)</title><author>Yeats, William Butler (1865–1939)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1891</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="25">
III.
He kept the servant talking for a moment or two before she went for Miss Carton. The old
      rector, she told him, was getting less and less able to do much work. Old age had come almost
      suddenly upon him. He seldom moved from the fireside. He was getting more and more
      absent-minded. Once lately he had brought his umbrella into the reading-desk. More and more
      did he leave all things to his children—to Mary Carton and her younger sisters.
When the servant had gone Sherman looked round the somewhat gloomy room. In the window hung
      a canary in a
       painted cage. Outside was a narrow piece of shaded ground between the window and
      the rectory wall. The laurel and holly bushes darkened the window a good deal. On a table in
      the centre of the room were evangelistic books with gilded covers. Round the mirror over the
      mantlepiece were stuck various parish announcements, thrust between the glass and the gilding.
      On a small side table was a copper ear-trumpet.
How familiar everything seemed to Sherman. Only the room seemed smaller than it did three
      years before, and close to the table with the ear-trumpet, at one side of the fireplace before
      the arm-chair, was a new threadbare patch in the carpet.
Sherman recalled how in this room he and Mary Carton had sat in winter by the fire, building
      castles in the air for each other. So deeply meditating was he that she came in and stood
      unnoticed beside him.

 “John,” she said at last, “it is a great pleasure to see you so soon again. Are
      you doing well in London?”
“I have left London.”
“Are you married, then? You must introduce me to your wife.”
“I shall never be married to Miss Leland.”
“What?”
“She has preferred another—my friend William Howard. I have come here to tell you something,
      Mary.” He went and stood close to her and took her hand tenderly. “I have always been very
      fond of you. Often in London, when I was trying to think of another kind of life, I used to
      see this fireside and you sitting beside it, where we used to sit and talk about the future.
      Mary—Mary,” he held her hand in both his—“you will be my wife?”
“You do not love me, John,” she answered, drawing herself away. “You have come to me because
      you think it your duty.
       I have had nothing but duty all my life.”
“Listen,” he said. “I was very miserable; I invited Howard to stay with us. One morning I
      found a note on the smoking-room table to say that Margaret had accepted him, and I have come
      here to ask you to marry me. I never cared for any one else.”
He found himself speaking hurriedly, as though anxious to get the words said and done with.
      It now seemed to him that he had done ill in this matter of Miss Leland. He had not before
      thought of it—his mind had always been busy with other things. Mary Carton looked at him
      wonderingly.
“John,” she said at last, “did you ask Mr. Howard to stay with you on purpose to get him to
      fall in love with Miss Leland, or to give you an excuse for breaking off your engagement, as
      you knew he flirted with every one?”

 “Margaret seems very fond of him. I think they are made for each other,” he
      answered.
“Did you ask him to London on purpose?”
“Well, I will tell you,” he faltered. “I was very miserable. I had drifted into this
      engagement I don’t know how. Margaret glitters and glitters and glitters, but she is not of my
      kind. I suppose I thought, like a fool, I should marry some one who was rich. I found out soon
      that I loved nobody but you. I got to be always thinking of you and of this town. Then I heard
      that Howard had lost his curacy, and asked him up. I just left them alone and did not go near
      Margaret much. I knew they were made for each other. Do not let us talk of them,” he
      continued, eagerly. “Let us talk about the future. I will take a farm and turn farmer. I dare
      say my uncle will not give me anything when he dies because I have left his office. He will
      call
       me a ne’er-do-weel, and say I would squander it. But you and I—we will get
      married, will we not? We will be very happy,” he went on, pleadingly. “You will still have
      your charities, and I shall be busy with my farm. We will surround ourselves with a wall. The
      world will be on the outside, and on the inside we and our peaceful lives.”
“Wait,” she said; “I will give you your answer,” and going into the next room returned with
      several bundles of letters. She laid them on the table; some were white and new, some slightly
      yellow with time.
“John,” she said, growing very pale, “here are all the letters you ever wrote me from your
      earliest boyhood.” She took one of the large candles from the mantlepiece, and, lighting it,
      placed it on the hearth. Sherman wondered what she was going to do with it. “I will tell you,”
      she went on, “what I had thought to carry to the
       grave unspoken. I have loved you for a long time. When you came and told me you
      were going to be married to another I forgave you, for man’s love is like the wind, and I
      prayed that God might bless you both.” She leant down over the candle, her face pale and
      contorted with emotion. “All these letters after that grew very sacred. Since we were never to
      be married they grew a portion of my life, separated from everything and every one—a something
      apart and holy. I re-read them all, and arranged them in little bundles according to their
      dates, and tied them with thread. Now I and you—we have nothing to do with each other any
      more.”
She held the bundle of letters in the flame. He got up from his seat. She motioned him away
      imperiously. He looked at the flame in a bewildered way. The letters fell in little burning
      fragments about the hearth. It was all like a terrible dream. He
       watched those steady fingers hold letter after letter in the candle flame, and
      watched the candle burning on like a passion in the grey daylight of universal existence. A
      draught from under the door began blowing the ash about the room. The voice said—
“You tried to marry a rich girl. You did not love her, but knew she was rich. You tired of
      her as you tire of so many things, and behaved to her most wrongly, most wickedly and
      treacherously. When you were jilted you came again to me and to the idleness of this little
      town. We had all hoped great things of you. You seemed good and honest.”
“I loved you all along,” he cried. “If you would marry me we would be very happy. I loved
      you all along,” he repeated—this helplessly, several times over. The bird shook a shower of
      seed on his shoulder. He picked one of them from the collar of his coat and turned it over in
      his
       fingers mechanically. “I loved you all along.”
“You have done no duty that came to you. You have tired of everything you should cling to;
      and now you have come to this little town because here is idleness and irresponsibility.”
The last letter lay in ashes on the hearth. She blew out the candle, and replaced it among
      the photographs on the mantlepiece, and stood there as calm as a portion of the marble.
“John, our friendship is over—it has been burnt in the candle.”
He started forward, his mind full of appeals half-stifled with despair, on his lips gathered
      incoherent words: “She will be happy with Howard. They were made for each other. I slipped
      into it. I always thought I should marry some one who was rich. I never loved any one but you.
      I did not know I loved you at first. I thought about you always. You are the root of my
      life.”

 Steps were heard outside the door at the end of a passage. Mary Carton went to
      the door and called. The steps turned and came nearer. With a great effort Sherman controlled
      himself. The door opened, and a tall, slight girl of twelve came into the room. A strong smell
      of garden mould rose from a basket in her hands. Sherman recognized the child who had given
      him tea that evening in the schoolhouse three years before.
“Have you finished weeding the carrots?” said Mary Carton.
“Yes, Miss.”
“Then you are to weed the small bed under the pear-tree by the tool-house. Do not go yet,
      child. This is Mr. Sherman. Sit down a little.”
The child sat down on the corner of a chair with a scared look in her eyes. Suddenly she
      said—
“Oh, what a lot of burnt paper!”

 “Yes; I have been burning some old letters.”
“I think,” said John, “I will go now.” Without a word of farewell he went out, almost
      groping his way.
He had lost the best of all the things he held dear. Twice he had gone through the fire. The
      first time worldly ambition left him, on the second love. An hour before the air had been full
      of singing and peace that was resonant like joy. Now he saw standing before his Eden the angel
      with the flaming sword. All the hope he had ever gathered about him had taken itself off, and
      the naked soul shivered.
</div></body></text></TEI>