<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dodo, A Detail of the Day, by
      E.F. Benson.</title><author>Benson, Edward Frederic (1867-1940).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1893</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER TWENTY
If Dodo had felt some excusable pride in having torn up the Prince's photograph, her refusal
      to let him know where she was gave her a still more vivid sense of something approaching
      heroism. She did not blame anyone but herself for the position into which she had drifted
      during those weeks in Switzerland. She was quite conscious that she might have stopped any
      intimacy of this sort arising, and consequently the establishment of this power over her. But
      she felt she was regaining her lost position. Each sensible refusal to admit his influence
      over her was the sensible tearing asunder of the fibres which enveloped her. It was hard work,
      she admitted, but she was quite surprised to find how comfortable she was becoming. Jack
      really made a very satisfactory background to her thoughts. She was very fond of him, and she
      looked forward to their marriage with an eager expectancy, which, was partly, however, the
      result of another fear.
She was sitting in the drawing-room next day with Miss Grantham, talking about nothing
      particular very rapidly.
"Of course, one must be good to begin with," she was saying; "one takes that for granted.
      The idea of being wicked never comes into my reckoning at all. I should do lots of things if I
      didn't care what I did, that I shouldn't think of doing at all now. I've got an admirable
      conscience. It is quite good, without being at all priggish. It isn't exactly what you might
      call in holy orders, but it is an ecclesiastical layman, and has great sympathy with the
      Church. A sort of lay-reader, you know."
"I haven't got any conscience at all," said Miss Grantham. "I believe I am fastidious in a
      way, though, which prevents me doing conspicuously beastly things."
"Oh, get a conscience, Grantie," said Dodo fervently, "it is such a convenience. It's like
      having someone to make up your mind for you. I like making up other people's minds, but I
      cannot make up my own; however, my conscience does that for me. It isn't me a bit. I just give
      it a handful of questions which I want an answer upon, and it gives me them back, neatly
      docketed, with 'Yes' or 'No' upon them."
"That's no use," said Miss Grantham. "I know the obvious 'Yeses' and 'Noes' myself. What I
      don't know are the host of things that don't matter much in themselves, which you can't put
      down either right or wrong."
"Oh, I do all those," said Dodo serenely, "if I want to, and if I don't, I have an excellent
      reason for not doing them, because I am not sure whether they are right. When I set up my
      general advice office, which I shall do before I die, I shall make a special point of that for
      other people. I shall give decided answers in most cases, but I shall reserve a class of
      things indifferent, which are simply to be settled by inclination."
"What do you call indifferent things?" asked Miss Grantham, pursuing the Socratic
      method.
"Oh, whether you are to play lawn tennis on Sunday afternoon," said Dodo, "or wear mourning
      for second cousins, or sing alto in church for the sake of the choir; all that sort of
      thing."
"Your conscience evidently hasn't taken orders," remarked Miss Grantham.
"That's got nothing to do with my conscience," said Dodo. "My conscience doesn't touch those
      things at all. It only concerns itself with right and wrong."
"You're very moral this morning," said Miss Grantham. "Edith," she went on, as Miss Staines
      entered in a howling wilderness of dogs, "Dodo has discovered a conscience."
"Whose?" asked Edith.
"Why, my own, of course," said Dodo; "but it's no discovery. I always knew I had one."
"There's someone waiting to see you," said Edith. "I brought his card in."
She handed Dodo a card.
"Prince Waldenech," she said quietly to herself, "let him come in here, Edith. You need not
      go away."
Dodo got up and stood by the mantelpiece, and displayed an elaborate attention to one of
      Edith's dogs. She was angry with herself for needing this minute of preparation, but she
      certainly used it to the best advantage; and when the Prince entered she greeted him with an
      entirely natural smile of welcome.
"Ah, this is charming," she said, advancing to him. "How clever of you to find out my
      address."
"I am staying at a house down here," said the Prince, lying with conscious satisfaction as
      he could not be contradicted, "and I could not resist the pleasure."
Dodo introduced him to Edith and Miss Grantham, and sat down again.
"I sent no address, as I really did not know where I might be going," she said, following
      the Prince's lead. "That I was not in London was all my message meant. I did not know you
      would be down here."
"Lord Chesterford is in England?" asked the Prince.
"Oh, yes, Jack came with me as far as Dover, and then he left me for the superior
      attractions of partridge-shooting. Wasn't it rude of him?"
"He deserves not to be forgiven," said the Prince.
"I think I shall send you to call him out for insulting me," said Dodo lightly; "and you can
      kill each other comfortably while I look on. Dear old Jack."
"I should feel great pleasure in fighting Lord Chesterford if you told me to," said the
      Prince, "or if you told him to, I'm sure he would feel equal pleasure in killing me."
Dodo laughed.
"Duelling has quite gone out," she said. "I sha'n't require you ever to do anything of that
      kind."
"I am at your service," he said.
"I wish you'd open that window then," said Dodo; "it is dreadfully stuffy. Edith, you really
      have too many flowers in the room."
"Why do you say that duelling has done out?" he asked. "You might as well say that devotion
      has gone out."
"No one fights duels now," said Dodo; "except in Prance, and no one, even there, is ever
      hurt, unless they catch cold in the morning air, like Mark Twain."
"Certainly no one goes out with a pistol-case, and a second, and a doctor," said the Prince;
      "that was an absurd way of duelling. It is no satisfaction to know that you are a better shot
      than your antagonist."
"Still less to know that he is a better shot than you," remarked Miss Grantham.
"Charming," said the Prince; "that is worthy of Lady Chesterford. And higher praise—"
"Go on about duelling," said Dodo, unceremoniously.
"The old system was no satisfaction, because the quarrel was not about who was the better
      shot. Duelling is now strictly decided by merit. Two men quarrel about a woman. They both make
      love to her; in other words, they both try to cut each other's throats, and one succeeds. It
      is far more sensible. Pistols are stupid bull-headed weapons. Words are much finer. They are
      exquisite sharp daggers. There is no unnecessary noise or smoke, and they are quite
      orderly."
"Are those the weapons you would fight Lord Chesterford with, if Dodo told you to?" asked
      Edith, who was growing uneasy.
The Prince, as Dodo once said, never made a fool of himself. It was a position in which it
      was extremely easy for a stupid man to say something very awkward. Lady Grantham, with all her
      talent for asking inconvenient questions, could not have formed a more unpleasant one. He
      looked across at Dodo a moment, and said, without a perceptible pause,—
"If I ever was the challenger of Lady Chesterford's husband, the receiver of the challenge
      has the right to choose the weapons."
The words startled Dodo somehow. She looked up and met his eye.
"Your system is no better than the old one," she said. "Words become the weapons instead of
      pistols, and the man who is most skilful with words has the same advantage as the good shot.
      You are not quarrelling about words, but about a woman."
"But words are the expression of what a man is," said the Prince. "You are pitting merit
      against merit."
Dodo rose and began to laugh.
"Don't quarrel with Jack, then," she said. "He would tell the footman to show you the door.
      You would have to fight the footman. Jack would not speak to you."
Dodo felt strongly the necessity of putting an end to this conversation, which was
      effectually done by this somewhat uncourteous speech. The fencing had become rather too
      serious to please her, and she did not wish to be serious. But she felt oppressively conscious
      of this man's personality, and saw that he was stronger than she was herself. She decided to
      retreat, and made a desperate effort to be entirely flippant.
"I hope the Princess has profited by the advice I gave her," she said. "I told her how to be
      happy though married, and how not to be bored though a Russian. But she's a very bad
      case."
"She said to me dreamily as I left," said the Prince, "'You'll hear of my death on the
      Matterhorn. Tell Lady Chesterford it was her fault.'"
Dodo laughed.
"Poor dear thing," she said, "I really am sorry for her. It's a great pity she didn't marry
      a day labourer and have to cook the dinner and slap the children. It would have been the
      making of her."
"It would have been a different sort of making," remarked the Prince.
"I believe you can even get blasé of being bored," said Miss Grantham, "and then,
      of course, you don't get bored any longer, because you are bored with it."
This remarkable statement was instantly contradicted by Edith.
"Being bored is a bottomless pit," she remarked. "You never get to the end, and the deeper
      you go the longer it takes to get out. I was never bored in my life. I like listening to what
      the dullest people say."
"Oh, but it's when they don't say anything that they're so trying," said Miss Grantham.
"I don't mind that a bit," remarked Dodo. "I simply think aloud to them. The less a person
      says the more I talk, and then suddenly I see that they're shocked at me, or that they don't
      understand. The Prince is often shocked at me, only he's too polite to say so. I don't mean
      that you're a dull person, you know, but he always understands. You know he's quite
      intelligent," Dodo went on, introducing him with a wave of her hand, like a showman with a
      performing animal. "He knows several languages. He will talk on almost any subject you wish.
      He was thirty-five years of age last May, and will be thirty-six next May."
"He has an admirable temper," said the Prince, "and is devoted to his keeper."
"Oh, I'm not your keeper," said Dodo. "I wouldn't accept the responsibility. I'm only
      reading extracts from the advertisement about you."
"I was only reading extracts as well," observed the Prince. "Surely the intelligent animal,
      who knows several languages, may read its own advertisement?"
"I'm not so sure about your temper," said Dodo, reflectively: "I shall alter it to 'is
      believed to have an admirable temper.'"
"Never shows fight," said the Prince.
"But is willing to fight if told to," said she. "He said so himself."
"Oh, but I only bark when I bite," said the Prince, alluding to his modern system of
      duelling.
"Then your bite is as bad as your bark," remarked Dodo, "which is a sign of bad temper. And
      now, my dear Prince, if we talk any more about you, you will get intolerably conceited, and
      that won't do at all. I can't bear conceited men. They always seem to me to be like people on
      stilts. They are probably not taller than oneself really, and they're out of all proportion,
      all legs, and no body or head. I don't want anyone to bring themselves down to my level when
      they talk to me. Conceited people always do that. They get off their stilts. If there's one
      thing that amuses me more than another, it is getting hold of their stilts and sawing them
      half through. Then, when they get up again they come down 'Bang,' and you say: 'Oh, I hope you
      haven't hurt yourself. I didn't know you went about on stilts. They are very unsafe, aren't
      they?'"
Dodo was conscious of talking rather wildly and incoherently. She felt like a swimmer being
      dragged down by a deep undercurrent. All she could do was to make a splash on the surface. She
      could not swim quietly or strongly out of its reach. She stood by the window playing with the
      blind cord, wishing that the Prince would not look at her. He had a sort of deep, lazy
      strength about him that made Dodo distrust herself—the indolent consciousness of power that a
      tiger has when he plays contemptuously with his prey before hitting it with one deadly blow of
      that soft cushioned paw.
"Why can't I treat him like anyone else?" she said to herself impatiently. "Surely I am not
      afraid of him. I am only afraid of being afraid. He is handsome, and clever, and charming, and
      amiable, and here am I watching every movement and listening to every word he says. It's all
      nonsense. Here goes."
Dodo plunged back into the room, and sat down in the chair next him.
"What a charming time we had at Zermatt," she said. "That sort of place is so nice if you
      simply go there in order to amuse yourself without the bore of entertaining people. Half the
      people who go there treat it as their great social effort of the year. As if one didn't make
      enough social efforts at home!"
"Ah, Zermatt," said the Prince, meditatively. "It was the most delightful month I ever
      spent."
"Did you like it?" said Dodo negligently. "I should have thought that sort of place would
      have bored you. There was nothing to do. I expected you would rush off as soon as you got
      there, and go to shoot or something."
"Like Lord Chesterford and the partridges," suggested Edith.
"Oh, that's different," said Dodo. "Jack thinks it's the duty of every English landlord to
      shoot partridges. He's got great ideas of his duty."
"Even when it interferes with what must have been his pleasure, apparently," said the
      Prince.
"Oh; Jack and I will see plenty of each other in course of time. I'm not afraid he will go
      and play about without me."
"You are too merciful," said the Prince.
"Oh, I sha'n't be hard on Jack. I shall make every allowance for his shortcomings, and I
      shall expect that he will make allowance for mine."
"He will have the best of the bargain;" said the Prince.
"You mean that he won't have to make much allowance for me?" asked Dodo. "My dear Prince,
      that shows how little you really know about me. I can be abominable. Ask Miss Staines if I
      can't. I can make a man angry quicker than any woman I know. I could make you angry in a
      minute and a quarter, but I am amiable this morning, and I will spare you."
"Please make me angry," said the Prince.
Dodo laughed, and held out her hand to him.
"Then you will excuse my leaving you?" she said. "I've got a letter to write before the
      midday post. That ought to make you angry. Are you stopping to lunch? No? Au revoir,
      then. We shall meet again sometime soon, I suppose. One is always running up against
      people."
"Dodo shook hands with elaborate carelessness and went towards the door, which the Prince
      opened for her.
"You have made me angry," he murmured, as she passed out, "but you will pacify me again, I
      know."
Dodo went upstairs into her bedroom. She was half frightened at her own resolution, and the
      effort of appearing quite unconcerned had given her a queer, tired feeling. She heard a door
      shut in the drawing-room below, and steps in the hall. A faint flush came over her face, and
      she got up quickly from her chair and rah downstairs. The Prince was in the hall, and he did
      not look the least surprised to see Dodo again.
"Ah, you are just off?" she asked.
Then she stopped dead, and he waited as if expecting more. Dodo's eyes wandered round the
      walls and came back to his face again.
"Come and see me in London any time," she said in a low voice. "I shall go back at the end
      of the week."
The Prince bowed.
"I knew you would pacify me again," he said.
</div></body></text></TEI>