<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's Ships That Pass In The Night, by Beatrice
      Harraden</title><author>Harraden, Beatrice (1864-1936).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1893</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER XIX.
"SHIPS THAT SPEAK EACH OTHER IN PASSING."
MANY of the guests in the foreign quarter had made a start downwards into the plains; and
      the Kurhaus itself, though still well filled with visitors, was every week losing some of its
      invalids. A few of the tables looked desolate, and some were not occupied at all, the
      lingerers having chosen, now that their party was broken up, to seek the refuge of another
      table. So that many stragglers found their way to the English dining-board, each bringing with
      him his own national bad manners, and causing much annoyance to the Disagreeable Man, who was
      a true John Bull in his contempt of all foreigners. The English table was, so he said, like
      England herself: the haven of other nation's offscourings.
There were several other signs, too, that the season was far advanced. The food had fallen
      off in quality and quantity. The invalids, some of them better and some of them worse, had
      become impatient. And plans were being discussed, where formerly temperatures and coughs and
      general symptoms were the usual subjects of conversation! The caretakers, too, were in a state
      of agitation; some few keenly anxious to be of to new pastures; and others, who had perhaps
      formed attachments, an occurrence not unusual in Petershof, were wishing to hold back time
      with both hands, and were therefore delighted that the weather, which had not yet broken up,
      gave no legitimate excuse for immediate departure.
Pretty Fräulein Müller had gone, leaving her Spanish gentleman quite disconsolate for the
      time being. The French Marchioness had returned to the Parisian circles where she was
      celebrated for all the domestic virtues, from which she had been taking such a prolonged
      holiday in Petershof. The little French danseuse and her poodle had left for Monte Carlo. M.
      Lichinsky and his mother passed on to the Tyrol, where Madame would no doubt have plenty of
      opportunities for quarrelling: or not finding them, would certainly make them without any
      delay, by this means keeping herself in good spirits and her son in bad health. There were
      some, too, who had hurried off without paying their doctors: being of course those who had
      received the greatest attention, and who had expressed the greatest gratitude in their time of
      trouble, but who were of opinion that thankfulness could very well take the place of francs:
      an opinion not entirely shared by the doctors themselves.
The Swedish professor had betaken himself off, with his chessmen and his chessboard. The
      little Polish governess who clutched so eagerly at her paltry winnings, caressing those
      centimes with the same fondness and fever that a greater gambler grasps his thousands of
      francs, she, had left too; and, indeed, most of Bernardine's acquaintances had gone their
      several ways, after six months' constant intercourse, and companionship, saying good-bye with
      the same indifference as though they were saying good-morning or good-afternoon.
This cold-heartedness struck Bernardine more than once, and she spoke of it to Robert
      Allitsen. It was the day before her own departure, and she had gone down with him to the
      restaurant, and sat sipping her coffee, and making her complaint.
"Such indifference is astonishing, and it is sad too. I cannot understand it," she said.
"That is because you are a goose," he replied, pouring out some more coffee for himself, and
      as an after thought, for her too. "You pretend to know something about the human heart, and
      yet you do not seem to grasp the fact that most of us are very little interested in other
      people: they for us and we for them can spare only a small fraction of time and attention. We
      may, perhaps, think to the contrary, believing that we occupy an important position in their
      lives; until one day, when we are feeling most confident of our value, we see an unmistakable
      sign, given quite unconsciously by our friends, that we are after all nothing to them: we can
      be done without, put on one side, and forgotten when not present. Then, if we are foolish, we
      are wounded by this discovery, and we draw back into ourselves. But if we are wise, we draw
      back into ourselves without being wounded: recognizing as fair and reasonable that people can
      only have time and attention for their immediate belongings. Isolated persons have to learn
      this lesson sooner or later; and the sooner they do learn it, the better."
"And you," she asked, "you have learnt this lesson?"
"Long ago," he said decidedly.
"You take a hard view of life," she said.
"Life has not been very bright for me," he answered. "But I own that I have not cultivated
      my garden. And now it is too late: the weeds have sprung up everywhere. Once or twice I have
      thought lately that I would begin to clear away the weeds, but I have not the courage now. And
      perhaps it does not matter much."
"I think it does matter," she said gently. "But I am no better than you, for I have not
      cultivated my garden."
"It would not be such a difficult business for you as for me," he said, smiling sadly.
They left the restaurant, and sauntered out together.
"And to-morrow you will be gone," he said.
"I shall miss you," Bernardine said.
"That is simply a question of time," he remarked. "I shall probably miss you at first. But
      we adjust ourselves easily to altered circumstances: mercifully. A few days, a few weeks at
      most, and then that state of becoming accustomed, called by pious folk, resignation."
"Then you think that the every-day companionship, the every-day exchange of thoughts and
      ideas, counts for little or nothing?" she asked.
"That is about the colour of it," he answered, in his old gruff way.
She thought of his words when she was packing: the many pleasant hours were to count for
      nothing; for nothing the little bits of fun, the little displays of temper and vexation, the
      snatches of serious talk, the contradictions, and all the petty details of six months' close
      companionship.
He was not different from the others who had parted from her so lightly. No wonder, then,
      that he could sympathise with them.
That last night at Petershof, Bernardine hardened her heart against the Disagreeable
      Man.
"I am glad I am able to do so," she said to herself. "It makes it easier for me to go."
Then the vision of a forlorn figure rose before her. And the little hard heart softened at
      once.
In the morning they breakfasted together as usual. There was scarcely any conversation
      between them. He asked for her address, and she told him that she was going back to her uncle
      who kept the second-hand book- shop in Stone Street.
"I will send you a guide-book from the Tyrol," he explained. "I shall be going there in a
      week or two to see my mother."
"I hope you will find her in good health," she said.
Then it suddenly flashed across her mind what he had told her about his one great sacrifice
      for his mother's sake. She looked up at him, and he met her glance without flinching.
He said good-bye to her at the foot of the staircase.
It was the first time she had ever shaken hands with him.
"Good-bye," he said gently. "Good luck to you."
"Good-bye," she answered.
He went up the stairs, and turned round as though he wished to say something more. But he
      changed his mind, and kept his own counsel.
An hour later Bernardine left Petershof. Only the concierge of the Kurhaus saw her off at
      the station.
</div></body></text></TEI>