<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dodo, A Detail of the Day, by
      E.F. Benson.</title><author>Benson, Edward Frederic (1867-1940).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1893</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Dodo was up again in London at the end of the week, as she had told the Prince. Jack was
      also staying in town, and they often spent most of the day together; riding occasionally in
      the deserted Row, or sitting, as they were now, in Dodo's room in the Eaton Square house. They
      were both leaving for the country in a few days' time, where they had arranged to come across
      one another at various houses, and Dodo, at least, was finding these few days rather trying.
      She and Jack had arranged to have them together, quite alone, while they were in Switzerland,
      and Dodo had overlooked the fact that they might be rather hard to fill up. Not that she was
      disappointed in Jack. He was exactly what she had always supposed him to be. She never thought
      that he was very stimulating, though never dull, and she was quite conscious of enough
      stimulus in herself for that. For the rest he was quite satisfactory. But she was distinctly
      disappointed in herself. She felt as if her taste had been vitiated by drinking brandy. Mild
      flavours and very good bouquets of vintages that had pleased her before, sent no message from
      her palate to her brain. It was like the effect produced by the touch of hot iron on the skin,
      that forms a hard numb surface, which is curiously insensitive to touch. Dodo felt as if her
      powers of sensation had been seared in this way. Her perceptions no longer answered quickly to
      the causes that excited them; a layer of dull, unresponsive material lay between her and her
      world. She thought that her nerves and tissues were sound enough below. This numbness was only
      superficial, the burn would heal, and her skin would become pliant and soft again; and if she
      was conscious of all this and its corresponding causes, it could hardly be expected that Jack
      would be unconscious of it and its corresponding effects.
On this particular morning Dodo was particularly aware of it. It was raining dismally
      outside, and the sky was heavy and grey. The road was being repaired, and a traction engine
      was performing its dismal office in little aimless runs backwards and forwards. The official
      with a red flag had found there were no vehicles for him to warn and he had sat down on a heap
      of stones, and was smoking. There was a general air of stagnation, a sense of the futility of
      doing anything, and no one was more conscious of it than Dodo. She felt that there was only
      one event that was likely to interest her, and yet, in a way, she shrank from that. It was the
      searing process over again.
She wondered whether it would do any good to tell Jack of the fact that the Prince was down
      at Wokingham. She found the burden of an unshared secret exceptionally trying. Dodo had been
      so accustomed to be before the footlights all her life, that anything of the nature of a
      secret was oppressive. Her conduct to her first husband she did not regard as such. It was
      only an admirable piece of by-play, which the audience fully appreciated. Did Dodo then never
      think of her late husband with tenderness? Well, not often.
A thought seldom remained long in Dodo's mind without finding expression. She turned round
      suddenly.
"Jack, Prince Waldenech was at Wokingham."
"What was he there for?" asked Jack quickly.
"I think he came to see me," remarked Dodo serenely.
"I hope you didn't see him," he replied.
Dodo felt a slight stimulus in this subject.
"I saw him," she said, "because he came to see me, as they say in the French exercise books.
      I couldn't hide my head under the hearthrug like an ostrich—hot that they hide their heads
      under hearth-rugs, but the principle is the same. He walked in as cool as a cucumber, and
      said, 'Howdy?' So we talked, and he said he'd be glad to call you out, and you'd be glad to
      call him out, and we generally chattered, and then I made him angry."
"Why did he propose to call me out?" asked Jack coldly.
"Oh, he said he wouldn't call you out," remarked Dodo. "He said nothing would induce him to.
      I never said he proposed to call you out. You're stupid this morning, Jack."
"That man is an unutterable cad."
Dodo opened her eyes.
"Oh, he's nothing of the kind," she said. "Besides, he's a great friend of mine, so even if
      he was a cad it wouldn't matter."
"How did you make him angry?" demanded Jack.
"I told him I was going away to write some letters. It was rather damping, wasn't it? I
      hadn't got any letters to write, and he knew it, and I knew he knew it, and so on."
Jack was silent. He had been puzzled by Dodo's comparative reserve during the last few days.
      He felt as if he had missed a scene in a play, that there were certain things unexplained. He
      had even gone so far as to ask Dodo if anything was the matter, an inquiry which she detested
      profoundly. She laid down a universal rule on this occasion.
"Nothing is ever the matter," she had said, "and if it was, my not telling you would show
      that I didn't wish for sympathy, or help, or anything else. I tell you all I want you to
      know."
"You mean something is the matter, and you don't want me to know it," said Jack, rather
      unwisely.
They had been riding together when this occurred, and at that point Dodo had struck her
      horse savagely with her whip, and put an end to the conversation by galloping furiously off.
      When Jack caught her up she was herself again, and described how a selection of Edith's dogs
      had kept the postman at bay one morning, until the unusual absence of barking and howling had
      led their mistress to further investigations, which were rewarded by finding the postman
      sitting in the boat-house, and defending himself with the punt pole.
Jack was singularly easy-going, and very trustful, and he did not bother his head any more
      about it at the time. But we have to attain an almost unattainable dominion over our minds to
      prevent thoughts suddenly starting up in front of us. When a thought has occurred to one, it
      is a matter of training and practice to encourage or dismiss it, but the other is beyond the
      reach of the general. And as Dodo finished these last words, Jack found himself suddenly face
      to face with a new thought. It was so new that it startled him, and he looked at it again. At
      moments like these two people have an almost supernatural power of intuition towards each
      other. Dodo was standing in the window, and Jack was sitting in a very low chair, looking
      straight towards her, with the light from the window full on his face, and at that moment she
      read his thought as clearly as if he had spoken it, for it was familiar already to her.
She felt a sudden impulse of anger.
"How dare you think that?" she said.
Jack needed no explanation, and he behaved well.
"Dodo," he said gently, "you have no right to say that, but you have said it now. If there
      is not anything I had better know, just tell me so, for your own sake and for mine. I can only
      plead for your forgiveness. It was by no will of mine that such a thought crossed my mind. You
      can afford to be generous, Dodo."
Something in his speech made Dodo even angrier.
"You are simply forcing my confidence," she said. "If it was something you had better know,
      do you suppose that——"
She stopped abruptly.
Jack rose from his chair and stood by her in the window.
"You are not very generous to me," he said. "We are old friends though we are lovers."
"Take care you don't lose my friendship, then," said Dodo fiercely. "It is no use saying
      'auld lang syne' when 'auld lang syne' is in danger. It would be like singing 'God save the
      Queen' when she was dying. You should never recall old memories when they are strained."
Jack was getting a little impatient, though he was not frightened yet.
"Dodo, you really are rather unreasonable," he said. "To begin with, you quarrel with an
      unspoken thought, and you haven't even given me a definite accusation."
"That is because it is unnecessary, and you know it," said Dodo. "However, as you like. You
      think you have cause to be jealous or foolish or melodramatic about Prince Waldenech. Dear me,
      it is quite like old times."
Jack turned on her angrily.
"If you propose to treat me as you treated that poor man, who was the best man I ever knew,"
      he said, "the sooner you learn your mistake the better for us both. It would have been in
      better taste not to have referred to that."
"At present that is beside the point," said Dodo. "Was that your unspoken thought, or was it
      not?"
"If I would not insult you by speaking my thought whether you are right or not," said Jack,
      "I shall not insult you by answering that question. My answer shall take another form. Listen,
      Dodo. The Prince is in love with you. He proposed to you at Zermatt. That passionless inhuman
      piece of mechanism, his sister, told me how much he was in love with you. She meant it as a
      compliment. He is a dangerous, bad man. He forces himself on you. He went down to Wokingham to
      see you; you told me so yourself. He is dangerous and strong. For God's sake keep away from
      him. I don't distrust you; but I am afraid you may get to distrust yourself. He will make you
      afraid of crossing his will. Dodo, will you do this for me? It is quite unreasonable probably,
      but I am unreasonable when I think of you."
"Oh, my dear Jack," said Dodo impatiently, "you really make me angry. It is dreadfully bad
      form to be angry, and it is absurd that you and I should quarrel. You've got such a low
      opinion of me; though I suppose that's as much my fault as yours. Your opinion is fiction, but
      I am the fact on which it is founded, and what do you take me for? The Prince telegraphed from
      Dover to ask if I would see him, and I deliberately sent no answer. How he found out where I
      was I don't know. I suppose he got hold of the telegram I sent here to say my address was
      uncertain. Does that look as if I wanted to see him so dreadfully?"
"I never said you did want to see him," said Jack. "I said he very much wanted to see you,
      and what you say proves it."
"Well, what then?" said Dodo. "You wanted to see me very much when I was married. Would you
      have thought it reasonable if Chesterford had entreated me never to see you—to keep away for
      God's sake, as you said just now?"
"I am not the Prince," said Jack, "neither am I going to be treated as you treated your
      husband. Do not let us refer to him again; it is a desecration."
"You mean that in the light of subsequent events it would have been reasonable in him to ask
      me to keep away from you?"
"Yes," said he.
Jack looked Dodo full in the face, in the noble shame of a confessed sin: In that moment he
      was greater, perhaps, and had risen higher above his vague self-satisfied indifference than
      ever before. Dodo felt it, and it irritated her, it seemed positively unpardonable.
"Perhaps you do not see that you involve me in your confession," she said with cold scorn.
      "I decline to be judged by your standards, thanks."
Jack felt a sudden immense pity and anger for her. She would not, or could not, accept the
      existence of other points of view than her own.
"Apparently you decline to consider the fact of other standards at all."
"I don't accept views which seem to me unreasonable," she said.
"I only ask you to consider this particular view. The story you have just told me shows that
      he is anxious to see you, which was my point. That he is dangerous and strong I ask you to
      accept."
"What if I don't?" she asked.
"This," said he. "When a man of that sort desires anything, as he evidently desires you,
      there is danger. If you are alive to it, and as strong as he is, you are safe. That you are
      not alive to it you show by your present position; that you are as strong as he, I doubt."
"You assume far too much," said Dodo. "What you mean by my present position I don't care to
      know. But I am perfectly alive to the whole state of the case. Wait. I will speak. I entirely
      decline to be dictated to. I shall do as I choose in this matter."
"Do you quite realise what that means?" said Jack, rising.
Dodo had risen too; she was standing before him with a great anger burning in her eyes. Her
      face was very pale, and she moved towards the bell.
When a boat is in the rapids the cataract is inevitable.
"It means this," she said. "He will be here in a minute or two; I told him I should be in at
      twelve. I am going to ring the bell and tell the man to show him up. You will stay here, and
      treat him as one man should treat another. If you are insolent to him, understand that you
      include me. You will imply that you distrust me. Perhaps you would ring the bell for me, as
      you are closer to it."
She sat down by her writing-table and waited.
Jack paused with his hand on the bell.
"I will be perfectly explicit with you," he said. "If you see him, you see him alone. I do
      not wish to hear what he has to say to you. As he enters the door I leave it. That is all. You
      may choose."
He rang the bell.
"There is no reason for you to wait till then," said Dodo. "I am going to see him as soon as
      he comes. Tell Prince Waldenech that I am in," she said to the footman. "Show him up as soon
      as he comes."
Jack leant against the chimney-piece.
"Well?" said Dodo.
"I am making up my mind."
There was a dead silence. "What on earth are we quarrelling about?" thought Jack to himself.
      "Is it simply whether I stop here and talk to that cad? I wonder if all women are as obstinate
      as this."
It did seem a little ridiculous, but he felt that his dignity forbade him to yield. He had
      told her he did not distrust her; that was enough. No, he would go away, and when he came back
      to-morrow Dodo would be more reasonable.
"I think I am going," remarked he. "I sha'n't see you again till to-morrow afternoon. I am
      away to-night."
Dodo was turning over the pages of a magazine and did not answer. Jack became a little
      impatient.
"Really, this is extraordinarily childish," he said. "I sha'n't stop to see the Prince
      because he is a detestable cad. Think it over, Dodo."
At the mention of the Prince, if Jack had been watching Dodo more closely, he might have
      seen a sudden colour rush to her face, faint but perceptible. But he was devoting his
      attention to keeping his temper, and stifling a vague dread and distrust, which he was too
      loyal to admit.
At the door he paused a moment.
"Ah, Dodo," he said, with entreaty in his voice.
Dodo did not move nor look at him.
He left the room without more words, and on the stair he met the Prince. He bowed silently
      to his greeting, and stood aside for him to pass.
The Prince glanced back at him with amusement.
"His lordship does me the honour to be jealous of me," he said to himself.
Next day Jack called at Dodo's house. The door was opened by a servant, whose face he
      thought he ought to know; that he was not one of Dodo's men he felt certain. In another moment
      it had flashed across him that the man had been with the Prince at Zermatt.
"Is Lady Chesterford in?" he asked.
The man looked at him a moment, and then, like all well-bred servants, dropped his eyes
      before he answered,—
"Her Serene Highness left for Paris this morning."
</div></body></text></TEI>