<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAPTER XII
THE MAN RETURNS
HEMMING was there now, sitting on the hard sofa opposite, very bronzed since she had
     last seen him, but studiously correct in his town clothes and his frothy white tie.
At the first instant, when she had gone into the drawing-room to meet him, they had stared at
     each other as if they were strangers. Then Vincent Hemming had advanced to meet her with his
     unemotional smile, holding in his hand a new, shiny hat, and a minute later it seemed natural
     enough to both of them that her blonde head should be resting on the young man's shoulder, and
     that he should be murmuring vague phrases which for once had nothing to do with the
     enfranchisement of the women of the Anglo-Saxon race.
Like all people who have been separated for a long time, they found little or nothing to
     say.
‘And did you have a good passage across the Atlantic?’ asked Mary, when she had made him sit
     on the hard little sofa, and she had taken a
      stiff, high chair some little way off, and was looking at
     him with all her eyes. Was this neatly turned-out young man, in his tightly-buttoned dog-skin
     gloves, the lover with whom she had corresponded all these months and months? She felt
     strangely shy in the midst of her happiness.
‘Fairly good. Yes. I may say it was a tolerably agreeable experience. There were some
     pleasant people on board. And I was not troubled with sea-sickness.’
‘I'm glad you came back by way of the Canadian Pacific. And you went to Ottawa—and Niagara—’
     added Mary vaguely, as people always talk of places and countries they have never seen. ‘And
     what is Niagara like?’
‘Niagara,’ said Hemming, with a certain solemnity, ‘Niagara is something like London. The
     great falls, you know, are not beautiful; neither is London. But they are, like London, a
     unique, a terrifying spectacle. The roar, the immensity, the sense of a great power for ever
     driving forward; all these things are identical. Some day, Niagara will have dried up,
     retreated, become a mere dribble among waterfalls. Some day, London will be a handful of
     ruins.’
‘What an unpleasant idea! said Mary, laughing; ‘what dreadful things you always think of!’
     And then, with a childish, frank outburst, she
      crossed to the sofa, knelt down on the floor, and, putting
     her two hands on his shoulders, she shook him gently.
‘Why didn't you come yesterday,’ she whispered. ‘You old silly, you stopped and talked to
     somebody at the club, I suppose?’
But Vincent did not hear. He had gathered her up in his arms, the little, pale face, on which
     overwork had already told, the charming, childish mouth, with its curved upper lip, the ruffled
     fair hair. There was a long silence.
Presently Hemming sighed. Mary had almost forgotten her disappointment of yesterday in the
     emotion of to-day. Men were like that, she thought. The horror of waiting, waiting, and waiting
     did not occur to them. They never had to do it; how could they know?
‘Dear, aren't you glad you're back?’ she asked, raising her head a little so that the brown
     eyes and the gray eyes met.
‘Of course, of course,’ he muttered, glancing vaguely round the room; ‘but there are so many
     things to be thought of’
‘Is that,’ said Mary, gently disengaging herself from his arms, ‘is that—why you didn't come
     yesterday?’
‘My dear child, I had a thousand things to think of. I was obliged to see the Colonial
     Secretary on my arrival in London. I had a
      confidential message of the highest importance from the
     Governor-General of Canada.’ Vincent Hemming had assumed his most official manner —a manner
     that Mary had always instinctively disliked.
‘Ah!’ she said, looking down at her belt, where the roses had dropped off one by one
     yesterday, ‘I see.’
‘And afterwards some friends—some rather important people with whom I crossed over—insisted
     on my joining them at the theatre. And for reasons which I need not go into now, I thought it
     better to go,’
‘And did you amuse yourself? Was it a good piece?’ said the girl frigidly. ‘I should not like
     to think you had been bored—the first night of your home-coming.’
He looked at her in slight surprise. It was so rarely she said anything sarcastic.
‘What's the matter with you, little one? You look fatigued. I am afraid this sultry weather
     is too much for you; you must go away. We must get the roses back to those pale cheeks,’ he
     said in his old-fashioned way.
‘Oh, I can't go away. I'm hard at work. You don't know how hard I've worked. I didn't mind,
     you know. It was all for you, so that we—we—’ She almost broke down, covering her face with her
     bloodless, nervous hands.

‘You are unstrung, overwrought,’ said Hemming, in his kind voice—a voice which always meant
     twice as much as he intended to say. He touched her wrist tentatively. ‘Don't, little woman,
     don't.’
‘Oh, it's nothing. I'm—I'm a little over-tired. I didn't sleep last night. Please don't
     bother about me; perhaps it's the weather. You see I don't remember,’ she added, ‘ever being in
     London so late in the summer. Yes, I daresay it's that.’
‘No doubt the sultriness of the weather may have a good deal to do with your indisposition.
     Poor little Mary! You must try change of air.’
‘I don't know where,’ said Mary, with a little shrug. ‘If I went to Aunt Julia's at
     Bournemouth, I should have to sleep in a bedroom hung with framed photographs of tombs, and
     talk to ritualistic curates——’
‘But Lady Jane Ives? She will be sure to want you at Ives Court.’
‘They're going to Aix on Monday, and later on the house will be full. It would mean many more
     frocks and much higher spirits than I've got just now. But we'll go down and have long days in
     the country together, won't we? she asked wistfully, twisting with two white fingers one of the
     buttons on his coat. ‘There's the river—the river at Goring or Marlowe,
      Vincent, so cool, and green, and quiet on a week-day! Or the
     Surrey Hills, places that are mauve with heather; and pine-woods, beautiful, solemn
     pine-woods—don't you remember—like the place where we went the day before you sailed? We'll go
     there again, won't we?’
‘Y—es, I hope so, if possible,’ said Hemming; ‘but for the next week or two I am afraid I
     shall be a good deal engaged.’
There was a silence which Mary, as hostess, did her best to break. She did not look at him in
     the eyes any more during his visit. It was almost as if he had struck her. There was a sort of
     ball in her throat. Her cheeks had got hot; there was colour enough in them now, and her hands
     shook as she poured out the tea which the maid-of-all-work had brought in. But she must not
     look as if she cared. A woman—especially in her own house—should always smile. It was on that
     acquiescent feminine smile that the whole fabric of civilisation rested. And for the next
     half-hour, as Vincent Hemming discoursed of the unusual opportunities he had enjoyed in
     Calcutta, in Sydney, and in Ottawa of studying the different systems of government which
     obtained in various parts of the British Empire, Mary was a model hostess.
And soon, too, he was gone. Afterwards, she remembered, he had spoken of seeing her again
      very soon, as he kissed her cheek at the door—of taking her
     and Jimmie to the theatre. And then his close-cropped greyish hair, the back of his shining
     collar, and his well-cut frock coat, were seen descending the dingy staircase.
And that was all. The meeting for which she had longed with all the ardour of a frank, loyal,
     and direct nature, had come and was over. She went into the little dreary bedroom and threw
     herself on the narrow bed. No tears came. She lay blankly staring at the blue and green
     kingfisher, with the text in large German letters, ‘Come unto Me all ye that are heavy laden,
     and I will give you rest.’ She wondered, vaguely, what connection there was between a
     kingfisher and that exquisitely touching phrase. And then she remembered how her Aunt Julia,
     from the seclusion of her gabled Bournemouth villa, had once written her a long letter
     foreshadowing, with the perverse joy of the righteous, the day when her niece Mary would
     infallibly need the consolations of religion. Her Aunt Julia had spoken of her as ‘hardened.’
     Well, that exactly described her state of mind. Mary felt not only hardened, but petrified.
     What did it all mean? He was hers, was he not, the man who had just left her? All her thoughts
     turned naturally to him; she was incapable now of comprehending a life which they
      were not to share together. She was perfectly aware of his
     little poses, his not altogether amiable peculiarities, but she had got to the stage when they
     made no difference. A French wit has it that ‘C'est le ridicule qui
      tue,’ an aphorism which may be true of politics, fashions, or art, but which, alack!
     does not apply to the vagaries of human passion.
Vincent Hemming, once outside the door, felt in his breast-pocket for his cigar case,
     carefully chose a promising cigar, and thrust it firmly between his teeth while he stopped in a
     door-way to strike a match. His sensations that afternoon were mixed. It had been, he reminded
     himself, delightful to see little Mary again. If only he had not been so imprudent as to speak
     before he went away. And yet what could he do? Curiously enough, the girl appealed to the
     sensuous side of his nature. Her slight, thin shoulders, her long, delicate throat, the rather
     pathetic curve of her jaw, belonged to the type of beauty he preferred. The nervous energy,
     which was her special characteristic, touched, while it troubled him. As on the day that he
     asked her to wait for him, he always, whatever she announced her intention of doing, felt
     constrained to interfere. He admired her pluck, her perseverance, her dogged determination to
     get on, her fine appreciation of all that
      was best in literature and art. ‘She's a little girl in a
     thousand,’ he said to himself, ‘and not at all likely to make unpleasantness if things become
     impossible. Not that one would dream of doing anything but what was best for her; but she's
     young—she may see some one she likes better. By Jove! she ought to make a really good match.’
     And in his modesty Mr. Hemming allowed himself to caress this idea. He pictured her, in many
     diamonds, at the head of a long dinner-table—a table scintillating with silver and crimson with
     roses, with a vague, undefined husband at the other end. And he, Vincent, sat by her side, and
     she—his little Mary—looked at him, as he talked, with her emotional eyes, and murmured pretty,
     sympathetic phrases with her deliciously curved lips. ‘Who knows?’ he muttered, throwing away
     the end of his cigar, ‘odder things have happened.’
And then he went over his year of travel as he strolled down Regent Street on his way to call
     at the Métropole. Everything, from the very beginning, had gone off smoothly. He had enjoyed it
     from first to last. His letters of introduction—he had had excellent letters, he reminded
     himself—had brought him in touch with all the important men in India and the colonies. He had
     ample material for a book.
      The thing, it was true, had been somewhat overdone, but then
     he was sure of his style; the book would not be written after the manner of the globe-trotting
     M.P. And yet, by the time the volumes were out, he, too, would be among England's legislators.
     (It was typical of Hemming that he always thought of the hedge-row member of parliament as a
     ‘legislator.’) He had quite made up his mind about that. Marriage might well be postponed a
     year or two, but for a man to have any real influence on politics, he must be in the House. As
     luck would have it, the member for Northborough was known to be seriously ill, a lingering
     illness which must terminate fatally, and the party were already making arrangments for
     contesting the seat. He had reason to know that his candidature would be highly appreciated by
     the Conservatives. All that was wanted were funds.
And it was then that his mind ran back to his meeting with his new friends. He had found them
     first, Mr., Mrs., and Miss Violet Higgins, of Northborough, Lancashire, engaged in a protracted
     quarrel with the black porter in a train bound New York-wards from Niagara. The Higgins family
     had wished to have the windows of the long compartment opened, but the black porter, having no
     per-
      sonal objection to tropical heat, had insisted on shutting
     every aperture. Finally, Vincent had effected a compromise, and the perspiring mayor and
     mayoress of Northborough had been, he thought, somewhat unduly thankful. The daughter, a young
     lady with beady eyes, a high colour and a complete absence of chin, had watched him all the
     rest of the journey with extreme interest. He had not liked her appearance or her manners; her
     clothes were trimmed all over with gold braid, and she looked unnecessarily conscious on being
     addressed; but this first aversion had worn off during the seven days on the steamer, for they
     met again on the wharf at New York, in the rush and bustle of embarkation. The father, a
     manufacturer of the staunchest Tory principles, took a curious fancy to the young man. Vincent
     remembered how impressed the Mayor of Northborough had been when he found out that this was
     ‘young Hemming,’ the son of the late cabinet minister. How confidential he had got, exercising
     with him on the summer nights; how easily the parents had surrendered Miss Violet to his care
     did that young lady evince a desire to pace the hurricane deck. Their wealth was abundant, but
     not ostentatious, like that of the Chicago pork-packers' wives and daughters who graced the
     steamer with their presence.
      Violet was their only child, and Elijah Higgins took
     occasion, one night when the smoking-room was empty, save for a select party of San Franciscans
     who were playing poker and emitting fantastic oaths in the midst of a cloud of smoke in a
     distant corner, to mention that he was prepared to settle a considerable fortune on his
     daughter if she chose a husband of whom he approved. Yes, old Higgins was inclined to be
     friendly. He had offered to be president of his committee should he think of standing for
     Northborough; he had talked of heading a subscription to defray Vincent's election expenses. He
     thought, on the whole, he should accept their invitation to run up north and look around him at
     his future constituents. One couldn't put things in motion too soon, he told himself, as he
     crossed Trafalgar Square, and stepped down Northumberland Avenue to the Métropole. Miss Violet
     had had a headache, the night before, at the theatre; it would only be civil to go and ask how
     she was. He had an idea they expected him, and so, it appeared, they did. They not only
     expected him, but they expected him to stop to dinner.
The next day Mary received a note from Vincent, to the effect that he was running up north on
     parliamentary business, but that he
      hoped to see her very soon. The postscript was typical of
     the man: ‘I rejoice to think that you are continuing your literary and artistic studies with
     your usual courage and energy. Only I implore you to consider your health, mental and physical.
     You tell me you are writing stories now—love stories, I presume. Remember that work which
     entails a drain on both the imagination and the feelings is more exhausting than you perhaps
     imagine.’
A month later, Vincent was still at Northborough, and Mary, whose drawing for the Academy had
     again been refused, was working, all through the dog-days, at her new profession of
     journalist.
</div></body></text></TEI>