<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
CHAPTER VI
THE CENTRAL LONDON SCHOOL OF ART
THE Central London School of Art, though backed by all the majesty of State support,
     was, at the first blush, a somewhat disillusionising place to the youthful aspirant for fame.
     To the over-nice, to be sure, it lacked an art ‘atmosphere,’ except such a material one as is
     generated by ancient paint-tubes, oily rags, furtively-munched sandwiches, and the presence of
     a preponderance of people to whom the daily tub is possibly not of vital importance. Outwardly,
     the Art School was only No. 55, in a dreary by-street near Portland Road; a small thoroughfare
     of sinister aspect, in which the houses seemed to be frowning at each other's dubious
     appearance. The white blinds—now grey with age and dirt—seemed always drawn; no one ever seemed
     to emerge from those faded, bespattered front doors. It was a dreary, mysterious street, of
     which, when Mary thought of it, she invariably saw the two ends swallowed up in a blurred,
     yellowish fog.

Inside, this temple of the fine arts consisted of one long room with a glass roof, divided,
     towards one end, by a serge curtain of bronze green. The walls were tinted a dingy-olive
     colour, throwing up the plaster Laocoon, the torso of the Theseus, the Apollo Belvedere, with
     its slightly supercilious air, the frowning Moses of Michael Angelo, and the simpering Clytie,
     with startling distinctness. A small écorché stood on a
     shelf, and all around, looking like the frozen remains of some monster operating-theatre, were
     eerie-looking arms, legs, feet, and hands cut off above the wrist.
Here, too, were the candidates for the Royal Academy, all laboriously stippling their
     drawings of the Laocoon with twists of bread and stumps; a process in which they had been
     engaged for some six months past; while in the other division of the room was posed a child
     dressed like an Italian contadina, surrounded by easels on every side. It was the afternoon on
     which the model sat. Painting from the life was carried on at the Central London School of Art
     on but two afternoons a week, being looked upon as a kind of frivolous extra which should not
     be allowed to occupy the mind of the serious student to the detriment of the stippled
     Laocoon.
It was a raw December day, but inside the
      fumes of a charcoal stove made the students' heads feel
     queer. They were an odd-looking collection of people, who were gathered there that winter
     afternoon in the falling light. The young women were of the lower middle class; daughters of
     retail shopkeepers, who dressed in gowns of orange or green serge, cut rather low about the
     throat, and beautified by strings of amber or Venetian glass beads, while some, on gala days,
     had been known to appear adorned with iridescent beetles' wings, a trimming understood to be
     dear to the female artist the wide world over. And though perhaps their hair left, like their
     speech, something to be desired, on the whole the girls were less objectionable than the
     boy-students, whose linen was not irreproachable, and who used to disappear in groups of five
     or six during the sitting, to return to their places presently, bringing with them a suspicious
     odour of bitter beer and inexpensive tobacco. An English art school has none of the boisterous,
     contagious hilarity of a French atelier. Decent silence
     reigned, broken only by the hoarse, repressed chuckles of a couple of boys as they exchanged a
     whispered witticism, or the rare, high-pitched, but almost inaudible titter of a student with
     ringlets as she bent over her easel.
Mary Erle, with her neat hair and her well
      made black dress, looked like a little princess as she sat,
     with a slight frown and tight-shut lips, among the outer ring of easels. She wore the same
     expression as of old, in the summerhouse in St. John's Wood, when she sat alone notching and
     slicing at her wooden fleet. And indeed, the girl was as much alone now, in this studio full of
     human beings, as in the silence of the leafy garden. Vincent had gone on his travels—had been
     gone, indeed, for nearly six months, and all that she had to remind her of that unexpected
     demonstration of affection in the Harley Street drawing-room was a crumpled letter with an
     Indian post-mark which she carried about in her pocket. Yes, she was alone, for had she spoken
     to the boys, she was sure they would have tried to be jocose; and she dreaded the confidences
     of the young ladies, some of whom had prosperous flirtations, carried on in neighbouring
     pastry-cooks' shops, or in the rooms of Burlington House with the ‘advanced’ male students.
     Indeed, the only person she ever spoke to was an old student who had been through the Academy
     schools, and who came to the Central London to work from the draped model, his studio on
     Haverstock Hill being just now in the hands of workmen.
Mr. Perry Jackson was an under-sized, drab-faced young man of about thirty, who gave the
      casual spectator the impression that he was a grown-up London
     gutter-boy. But in truth he had had no such dramatic beginnings. His parents, the well-to-do
     proprietors of a small upholsterer's shop in the Hampstead Road, had given him a fair
     education, and were now proud of having turned their only child into an ‘artist and a
     gentleman.’ To Mary, Mr. Jackson was so frankly, so completely himself, representing such an
     unknown, unguessed-at type, that he ended by amusing her. Perry Jackson, to be sure, was
     already a rising man; he had an extraordinary facility for drawing pretty faces. His black and
     white work in Illustrations was much admired at the railway stations, while
     already he had had one or two flashy pictures on the line at the Royal Academy.
How well Mary remembered the day she had begun her Laocoon, for the next competition. It
     would take, with its infinitely minute stippling, six months to complete.
‘I'd advise you to look sharp and begin, Miss Erle,’ Mr. Jackson had said, who, though rather
     abashed by his neighbour's manners, was inclined to be friendly. ‘That serpent'll take you
     every day of six weeks, let alone the figure. They're awfully down on a fellow, I can tell you,
     at the Academy, if the shading ain't quite up to the mark. Anybody can correct the
      drawing for you, don't you see, but you've got to do that
     blessed stippling yerself.’
‘Thanks. I think I will begin at once.’
‘Right you are. Take this place, Miss Erle, there's a better light,’ suggested Mr. Jackson,
     who was good-nature itself. ‘Let me fix your easel. There. You may use the plumb-line as much
     as you like,’ continued the young man, his small, pale eyes twinkling with vivacity; ‘and I'll
     correct your outline for you. I ought to know something about it,’ he added with sudden
     candour. ‘Why, I went up for the R.A. Schools three times myself.’
There were two or three girls, besides herself, who were competing for the Academy, and
     several men, one of whom was verging on fifty years of age, and whose hair and unkempt beard
     were already turned grey. A legend current in the school related that this person had been
     competing for the Royal Academy Schools ever since he was eighteen years old. There was Miss
     Simpkins, a strapping young woman with a large, vague face, which somehow suggested a muffin,
     and who carried a small edition of Modern Painters about in a leather hand-bag,
     together with a pocket-comb, a hand-mirror, some ham sandwiches, and a selection of different
     kinds of chalk, and who had many confidences to impart to a pale girl with red
      ringlets, whom Mary remembered as the daughter of a
     confectioner in St. John's Wood, a girl who affected peacock-blue velveteen, and was understood
     to be intermittently in love with Mr. Jackson.
On the December day in question the glass door opened, and a small, pale man, wearing a frock
     coat and a narrow black necktie, and having the appearance and manner of an attorney's head
     clerk, stood bending over the first easel. Mr. Sanderson, the headmaster, was a person who
     rarely committed himself to a definite opinion, and especially to an adverse one. He wished,
     above all things, to be well with the students, so that his usual criticism took the form
     of:—
‘Going on ve-r-y nicely, Miss Simpkins. Perhaps, on the whole, you might look to the movement
     of that head. Yes, just so. The arms, now, should you say they were just a little out of
     drawing? And the right leg, eh? perhaps, too, it might be as well to reconsider the position of
     the torso. Coming on nicely, Miss Simpkins.’
And Miss Simpkins, a lady whose devotion to the doctrines of Mr. Ruskin was perhaps more
     remarkable than her artistic skill, settled her amber necklace and continued to paint.
At the next easel was heard, ‘Ah, a very ambitious view of the model, Miss Erle. It
      might be perhaps as well to reconsider the position of the
     figure. Just as well, on the whole, for the artist not to hamper himself with unnecessary
     difficulties. Very good, very good. In quite a promising condition, Miss Erle.’ At the Central
     London, it will be seen, everything worked smoothly. The advent of the headmaster was the
     signal for general amenities. Every daub, every ill-drawn head, and every smeared, smooth
     drapery received its meed of praise. There were no tears, such as water the upward path of the
     student in a Parisian atelier; there were no ambitions, no
     heart-burnings, no rivalries. No one at the Central London had ever been known to have a theory
     to express, or if he had, it remained locked in his own breast.
It had already begun to dawn upon Mary that the whole thing was a foolish pretence at work.
     Slipping from her seat, she dropped back to the easel on which still stood her drawing of the
     Laocoon, a drawing which was beginning to assume, as it was destined to do, the appearance of a
     dotted engraving. She was standing, somewhat desponding and disheartened, before this thing
     which had cost her so much toil, and on the success of which so much depended, when the door
     burst open, and there appeared a radiant vision of velvet
      and sables, and of an audacious hat which only Alison Ives in
     one of her ‘worldly’ fits could have invented.
‘Nom d'un chien!’ cried that young lady, descending on
     Mary, and forcibly removing her drawing-board; ‘am I to stand by and see you become a British
     female artist? You've got to come to a tea—a tea at home in Portman Square. We're driving
     straight back. Mother's out there in the carriage. Come on.’
‘I can't,’ said Mary: ‘I told you I couldn't. I'm not going out; and I ought to work for
     another hour. The thing goes in in a day or two.’
‘Pooh!’ said Alison, as she found the girl's hat and cloak, and bundled her unceremoniously
     into the carriage; ‘the whole thing is a farce.’
‘But I believe these schools are excellent things for—for the kind of persons whom dear Mary
     describes so amusingly,’ put in Lady Jane.
‘Nonsense, mother,’ said Alison. ‘You've never been inside one. The whole thing is
     impossible. Schools of cooking, and not schools of art, are what we want,’ shouted Alison as
     they rattled over the stones. ‘You may leave your painter genius to find his way to the front,
     whereas boiled potatoes are a daily necessity. Go and talk,’ continued the girl, with a smile,
     ‘about your stippled gladiators and Laocoons
      in a serious French studio, where they work.
     Why, they would laugh in your face.’
‘How nice it must be in Paris,’ said Mary with a sigh. A place where they disapproved of the
     Laocoon as an exercise in art seemed to her to open out a vista of delightful
     possibilities.
</div></body></text></TEI>