<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daughters of Danaus : VWWP edition </title><author>Caird, Mona (1854-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">
CHAPTER XXIV.
HADRIA tried to avoid Professor Theobald, but he was not easily avoided. She
       frequently met him in her walks. The return of spring had tempted her to resume her old habit
       of rising with the sun. But she found, what she had feared, that her strength had departed,
       and she as fatigued instead of invigorated, as of yore. She did not regard this loss in a
       resigned spirit. Resignation was certainly not her strong point. The vicar's wife and the
       doctor's wife and the rest of the neighbours compared their woes and weariness over five
       o'clock tea, and these appeared so many and so severe that Hadria felt half ashamed to count
       hers at all. Yet why lower the altars of the sane goddess because her shrine was deserted?
       Health was health, though all the women of England were confirmed invalids. And with nothing
       less ought reasonable creatures to be satisfied. As for taking enfeeblement as a natural
       dispensation, she would as soon regard delirium tremens in that light.
She chafed fiercely against the loss of that blessed sense of well-being and overflowing
       health, that she used to have, in the old days. She resented the nerve-weariness, the fatigue
       that she was now more conscious of than ever, with the coming of the spring. The impulse of
       creative energy broke forth in her. The pearly mornings and the birds' songs stirred every
       instinct of expression. The outburst did not receive its usual check. The influences of
       disenchantment were counteracted by Professor Fortescue's presence. His sympathy was
       marvellous in its penetration, brimming the cold
        hollows of her spirit, as a flooded river fills the
       tiniest chinks and corners about its arid banks. He called forth all her natural buoyancy and
       her exulting sense of life, which was precisely the element which charged her sadness with
       such a fierce electric quality, when she became possessed by it, as a cloud by storm.
Valeria too was roused by the season.
“What a parable it all is, as old as the earth, and as fresh, each new year, as if a
       messenger-angel had come straight from heaven, in his home-spun of young green, to tell us
       that all is well.”
If Hadria met Professor Theobald in her rambles, she always cut short her intended walk.
       She and Valeria with Professor Fortescue wandered together, far and wide. They watched the
       daily budding greenery, the gleams of daffodils among their sword-blades of leaves, the
       pushing of sheaths and heads through the teeming soil, the bursts of sunshine and the absurd
       childish little gushes of rain, skimming the green country like a frown.
“Truly a time for joy and idleness.”
“If only,” said Hadria, when Professor Theobald thus grew enthusiastic on the subject, “if
       only my cook had not given a month's notice.”
She would not second his mood, be it what it might. Each day, as they passed along the
       lanes, the pale green had spread, like fire, on the hedges, caught the chestnuts, with their
       fat buds shining in the sun, which already was releasing the close-packed leaflets.
Hadria (apparently out of sheer devilry, said Professor Theobald) kept up a running
       commentary on the season, and on her hapless position, bound to be off on the chase for a
       cook at this moment of festival. Nor was this all. Crockery, pots and pans, clothes for the
       children, clothes for herself, were urgently needed, and no experienced person, she declared,
       could afford to regard the matter as simple because it was trivial.

“One of the ghastliest mistakes in this trivial and laborious world.”
Valeria thought that cooks had simply to be advertised for, and they came.
“What naïveté!” exclaimed Hadria. “Helen was persuaded to
       cross the seas from her Spartan home to set Troy ablaze, and tarnish her fair fame, but it
       would take twenty sons of Priam to induce a damsel to come over dry land to Craddock Dene, to
       cook our dinners and retain her character.”
“You would almost imply that women don't so very much care about their characters,” said
       Valeria.
“Oh, they do! but sometimes the dulness that an intelligent society has ordained as the
       classic accompaniment to social smiles, gets the better of a select few—Helen par exemple.”
It frequently happened that Hadria and Miss Du Prel came across Lady Engleton and her
       guests, in the Priory garden. From being accidental, the meetings had become intentional.
“I like to fancy we are fugitives—like Boccaccio's merry company—from the plague of our
       daily prose, to this garden of sweet poetry!” cried Miss Du Prel.
They all kindled at the idea. Valeria made some fanciful laws that she said were to govern
       the little realm. Everyone might express himself freely, and all that he said would be held
       as sacred, as if it were in confidence. To speak ill or slightingly of anyone, was forbidden.
       All local and practical topics were to be dropped, as soon as the moss-grown griffins who
       guarded the Garden of Forgetfulness were passed.
Hadria was incorrigibly flippant about the banishment of important local subjects. She said
       that the kitchen-boiler was out of order, and yet she had to take part in these
       highly-cultivated conversations and smile, as she complained, with that kitchen-boiler
       gnawing at her vitals. She claimed to be set on a level with the Spartan boy, if not above
       him.
        Valeria might scoff, as those proverbially did who never
       felt a wound. Hadria found a certain lack of tender feeling among the happy few who had no
       such tragic burdens to sustain.
Not only were these prosaic subjects banished from within the cincture of the gentle
       griffins, but also the suspicions, spites, petty jealousies, vulgar curiosities, and all the
       indefinable little darts and daggers that fly in the social air, destroying human sympathy
       and good-will. Each mind could expand freely, no longer on the defensive against the rain of
       small stabs. There grew up a delicate, and chivalrous code among the little group who met
       within the griffins' territory.
“It is not for us to say that, individually, we transcend the average of educated mortals,”
       said Professor Theobald, “but I do assert that collectively we soar high above that
       depressing standard.”
Professor Fortescue observed that whatever might be said about their own little band, it
       was a strange fact that bodies of human beings were able to produce, by union, a condition
       far above or far below the average of their separate values. “There is something chemical and
       explosive in human relationships,” he said.
These meetings stood out as a unique experience in the memory of all who took part in them.
       Chance had brought them to pass, and they refused to answer to the call of a less learned
       magician.
Lady Engleton and Mrs. Temperley alternately sent tea and fruit to the terrace, on the days
       of meeting, and there the little company would spend the afternoon serenely, surrounded by
       the beauties of the garden with its enticing avenues, its chaunting birds, its flushes of
       bloom, and its rich delicious scents.
“Why do we, in the nineteenth century, starve ourselves of these delicate joys?” cried
       Valeria. “Why do we so seldom leave our stupid pre-occupations and open our souls to the sun,
       to the spring, to the gentle invitations of gardens, to the
        charm of conversation? We seem to know nothing of the
       serenities, the urbanities of life.”
“We live too fast; we are too much troubled about outward things—cooks and dressmakers,
       Mrs. Temperley,” said Professor Theobald.
“Poor cooks and dressmakers!” murmured Professor Fortescue, “where are their
       serenities and urbanities?”
“I would not deprive any person of the good things of life,” cried Valeria; “but at
       present, it is only a few who can appreciate and contribute to the delicate essence that I
       speak of. I don't think one could expect it of one's cook, after all.”
“One is mad to expect anything of those who have had no chance,” said Professor Fortescue.
       “That nevertheless we consistently do,—or what amounts to the same thing: we plume ourselves
       on what chance has enabled us to be and to achieve, as if between us and the less fortunate
       there were some great difference of calibre and merit. Nine times in ten, there is nothing
       between us but luck.”
“Oh, dear, you are democratic, Professor!” cried Lady Engleton.
“No; I am merely trying to be just.”
“To be just you must apply your theory to men and women, as well as to class and class,”
       Valeria suggested.
“Mon Dieu! but so I do; so I always have done, as soon as
       I was intellectually short-coated.”
“And would you excuse all our weaknesses on that ground?” asked Lady Engleton, with a
       somewhat ingratiating upward gaze of her blue eyes.
“I would account for them as I would account for the weaknesses of my own sex. As for
       excusing, the question of moral responsibility is too involved to be decided off-hand.”
The atmosphere of Griffin-land, as Professor Theobald called it, while becoming to his
       character, made him a little recklessly frank at times.
He admitted that throughout his varied experience of life, he had found flattery the most
       powerful weapon in a skilled
        hand, and that he had never known it fail. He related
       instances of the signal success which had followed its application with the trowel. He
       reminded his listeners of Lord Beaconsfield's famous saying, and chuckled over the
       unfortunate woman, “plain as a pike-staff,” who had become his benefactress, in consequence
       of a discreet allusion to the “power of beauty” and a well-placed sigh.
“The woman must have been a fool!” said Joseph Fleming.
“By no means; she was of brilliant intellect. But praises of that were tame to her; she
       knew her force, and was perhaps tired of the solitude it induced.” Professor Theobald laughed
       mightily at his own sarcasm. “But when the whisper of ‘beauty’ came stealing to her ear
       (which was by no means like a shell) it was surpassing sweet to her. I think there is no
       yearning more intense than that of a clever woman for the triumphs of mere beauty. She would
       give all her powers of intellect for the smallest tribute to personal and feminine charm.
       What is your verdict, Mrs. Temperley?”
Mrs. Temperley supposed that clever women had something of human nature in them, and valued
       overmuch what they did not possess.
Professor Theobald had perhaps looked for an answer that would have betrayed more of the
       speaker's secret feelings.
“It is the fashion, I know,” he said, “to regard woman as an enigma. Now, without
       professing any unusual acuteness, I believe that this is a mistake. Woman is an enigma
       certainly, because she is human, but that ends it. Her conditions have tended to cultivate in
       her the power of dissimulation, and the histrionic quality, just as the peaceful ilex learns
       to put forth thorns if you expose it to the attacks of devouring cattle. It is this instinct
       to develop thorns in self-defence, and yet to live a little behind the prickly outposts, that
       leads to our notion of mystery in woman's nature. Let a man's subsistence and career be
       subject to the same powers and chances as the success of a woman's life now hangs on, and see
       whether he too does not become a histrionic enigma.”

Professor Fortescue observed that the clergy, at times, developed qualities called
       feminine, because in some respects their conditions resembled those of women.
Theobald assented enthusiastically to this view. He had himself entered the church as a
       young fellow (let not Mrs. Temperley look so inconsiderately astonished), and had left it on
       account of being unable to conscientiously subscribe to its tenets.
“But not before I had acquired some severe training in that sort of strategy which is
       incumbent upon women, in the conduct of their lives. Whatever I might privately think or
       feel, my office required that I should only express that which would be more or less grateful
       to my hearers. (Is not this the woman's case, in almost every position in life?) Even
       orthodoxy must trip it on tiptoe; there was always some prejudice, some susceptibility to
       consider. What was frankness in others was imprudence in me; other men's minds might roam at
       large; mine was tethered, if not in its secret movements, at least in its utterance; and it
       is a curious and somewhat sinister law of Nature, that perpetual denial of utterance ends by
       killing the power or the feeling so held in durance.”
Hadria coloured.
“That experience and its effect upon my own nature, which has lasted to this day,” added
       Theobald, “served to increase my interest in the fascinating study of character in its
       relation to environment.”
“Ah!” exclaimed Hadria, “then you don't believe in the independent power of the human
       will?”
“Certainly not. To talk of character overcoming circumstance is to talk of an effect
       without a cause. Yet this phrase is a mere commonplace in our speech. A man no more overcomes
       his circumstance than oxygen overcomes nitrogen when it combines with it to form the air we
       breathe. If the nitrogen is present, the combination takes place; but if there is no nitrogen
       to be had, all the oxygen in the world will not produce our blessed atmosphere!”

Joseph Fleming caused a sort of anti-climax by mentioning simply that he didn't know that
       any nitrogen was required in the atmosphere. One always heard about the oxygen.
Professor Theobald remarked, with a chuckle, that this was one of the uses of polite
       conversation; one picked up information by the way-side. Joseph agreed that it was
       wonderfully instructive, if the speakers were intelligent.
“That helps,” said the Professor, tapping Joseph familiarly on the shoulder.
“When shall we have our next meeting?” enquired Lady Engleton, when the moment came for
       parting.
“The sooner the better,” said Valeria. “English skies have Puritan moods, and we may as
       well profit by their present jocund temper. I never saw a bluer sky in all Italy.”
“I certainly shall not be absent from the next meeting,” announced Theobald, with a glance
       at Hadria.
“Nor I,” said Lady Engleton. “Such opportunities come none too often.”
“I,” Hadria observed, “shall be cook-hunting.”
Professor Theobald's jaw shut with a snap, and he turned and left the group almost
       rudely.
</div></body></text></TEI>