<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daughters of Danaus : VWWP edition </title><author>Caird, Mona (1854-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="48">
CHAPTER XLVIII.
AUTUMN had come round again. Craddock Dene had calmed down after the exciting
       event of the summer. Martha's little cottage was now standing empty, the virginia creeper
       trailing wildly, in thick festoons and dangling sprays over the porch and creeping up round
       the windows, even threatening to cover them with a ruddy screen, since now the bright little
       face no longer looked out of the latticed panes, and the cottage was given over to dust and
       spiders.
Mrs. Temperley was often seen by the villagers passing along the road towards Craddock. She
       would sometimes pause at the cottage, to gather a few of the flowers that still came up in
       the tiny garden. It was said that she gathered them to lay on Ellen Jervis's grave.
“Dear, dear, she do take on about that child!” Dodge used to say, as she passed up the
       street of Craddock. And Mrs. Gullick, good soul, would shake her head and express her
       sympathy, in spite of not “holding” with Mrs. Temperley's “ways.”
Her poorer neighbours understood far more than the others could understand, how sorely she
       was grieving about the child. Because she said nothing on the subject, it was generally
       supposed that she had ceased to care. After all, it was an act of charity that she had
       undertaken, on an impulse, and it was quite as well that she should be relieved of the
       responsibility.
Hannah used to write regularly, to let her know how Martha was. Professor Theobald had
       directed Hannah to do this. The nurse had to admit that he was very good and very devoted to
       the child. She throve in her new home, and seemed perfectly happy.

Hadria was now delivered over to the tender mercies of her own thoughts. Her memories
       burnt, as corrosive acids, in her brain. She could find no shadow of protection from her own
       contempt. There was not one nook or cranny into which that ruthless self-knowledge could not
       throw its cruel glare. In the hours of darkness, in the haunted hours of the early morning,
       she and her memories played horrible games with one another. She was hunted, they the
       hunters. There was no thought on which she could rest, no consoling remembrance. She often
       wished that she had followed her frequent impulse to tell Miss Du Prel the whole wretched
       story. But she could not force herself to touch the subject through the painful medium of
       speech. Valeria knew that Hadria was capable of any outward law-breaking, but she would never
       be prepared for the breaking of her own inner law, the real canon on which she had always
       laid so much stress. And then she had shrunk from the idea of betraying a secret not solely
       her own. If she told the story, Valeria would certainly guess the name. She felt a still
       greater longing that Professor Fortescue should know the facts; he would be able to help her
       to face it all, and to take the memory into her life and let its pain eat out what was base
       and evil in her soul. He would give her hope; his experience, his extraordinary sympathy,
       would enable him to understand it all, better than she did herself. If he would look at this
       miserable episode unflinchingly, and still hold out his hand to her, as she knew he would,
       and still believe in her, then she might believe still in herself, in her power of rising
       after this lost illusion, this shock of self-detection, and of going on again, sadder, and
       perhaps stronger; but if he thought that since she was capable of a real treason against her
       gods, that she was radically unsound at heart, and a mass of sophistication, then—Hadria
       buried her face in the pillow. She went through so often now, these paroxysms of agony. Do
       what she would, look where she might, she saw no relief. She was afraid to trust herself. She
       was afraid to accept her own suggestions of comfort, if ever a ray of it came to her, lest it
       should be but
        another form of self-deception, another proof of moral
       instability. In her eternal tossing to and fro, in mental anguish, the despairing idea often
       assailed her: that after all, it did not matter what she did or thought. She was but an atom
       of the vast whole, a drop in the ocean of human life.
She had no end or motive in anything. She could go on doing what had to be done to the
       last, glad if she might bring a little pleasure in so acting, but beyond that, what was there
       to consider? The wounds to her vanity and her pride ached a little, at times, but the
       infinitely deeper hurt of disillusion overwhelmed the lesser feeling. She was too profoundly
       sad to care for that trivial mortification.
Sometimes, Professor Fortescue used to write to Hadria, and she looked forward to these
       letters as to nothing else. She heard from Valeria also, who had met the Professor at Siena.
       She said he did not look as well as she had hoped to find him. She could not see that he had
       gained at all, since leaving England. He was cheerful, and enjoying sunny Italy as much as
       his strength would allow. Valeria was shocked to notice how very weak he was. He had a look
       in his face that she could not bear to see. If he did not improve soon, she thought of trying
       to persuade him to return home to see his doctor again. When one was ill, home was the best
       place after all.
“You and Professor Fortescue,” she said, in closing her letter, “are the two people I love
       in the world. You are all that I have in life to cling to. Write to me, dearest Hadria, for I
       am very anxious and wretched.”
The affairs of life and death mix themselves incongruously enough, in this confused world.
       The next news that stirred the repose of Craddock Dene, was that of Algitha's engagement to
       Wilfrid Burton. In spite of his socialistic views, Mrs. Fullerton was satisfied with the
       marriage, because Wilfrid Burton was well-connected and had good expectations. The mother had
       feared that Algitha would never marry at all, and she not only raised no objection, but
       seemed relieved. Wilfrid Burton had come down to stay at the Red House,
        during one of Algitha's holidays, and it was then that the
       betrothal had taken place. The marriage promised to be happy, for the couple were deeply
       attached and had interests in common. They intended to continue to work on the same lines
       after they were married. Both parents were favourably impressed by the son-in-law elect, and
       the Cottage became the scene of exciting arguments on the subject of socialism. Mr. Fullerton
       insisted on holding Wilfrid Burton responsible for every sort of theory that had ever been
       attributed not merely to socialists, but to communists, anarchists, collectivists, nihilists,
       and the rest; and nothing would persuade him that the young man was not guilty of all these
       contradictory enormities of thought. Wilfrid's personality, however, overcame every prejudice
       against him, on this account, after the first meeting.
Joseph Fleming, among others, congratulated Algitha heartily on her engagement.
“I can see you are very happy,” he said naïvely. She laughed and coloured.
“Indeed I ought to be. Life is gloriously worth living, when it is lived in the presence of
       good and generous souls.”
“I wish I had married,” said Joseph pensively.
“It is not too late to mend,” suggested Algitha.
“How reckless you are!” exclaimed her sister. “How can you recommend marriage in the
       abstract? You happen to have met just the right person, but Mr. Fleming hasn't, it would
       seem.”
“If one person can be so fortunate, so can another,” said Algitha.
“Why tempt Providence? Rather bear the ills you have—”
“I am surprised to hear you take a gloomy view of anything, Mrs. Temperley,” said Joseph;
       “I always thought you so cheerful. You say funnier things than any lady I have ever met,
       except an Irish girl who used to sing comic songs.”
Both sisters laughed.

“How do you know that, in the intervals of her comic songs, that girl has not a gloomy
       disposition?” asked Hadria.
“Oh no, you can see that she is without a care in the world; she is like Miss Fullerton,
       always full of good cheer and kindness.”
“Had she also slums to cheer her up?” asked Hadria.
“No, not at all. She never does anything in particular.”
“I am surprised that she is cheerful then,” said Algitha. “It won't last.”
“It is her slums that keep my sister in such good spirits,” said Hadria.
“Really! Well, if you are fond of that sort of thing, Mrs. Temperley, there are some nasty
       enough places at the lower end of Craddock—”
“Oh, it isn't that one clings to slums for slums' sake,” cried Hadria laughing.
“I am afraid they are already overrun with visitors,” Joseph added. “There are so many Miss
       Walkers.”
It was not long after this conversation, that Craddock Dene was thrilled by another piece
       of matrimonial news. Joseph Fleming was announced to be engaged to the Irish girl who sang
       comic songs. She was staying with Mrs. Jordan at the time. And the Irish girl, whose name was
       Kathleen O'Halloran, came and sang her comic songs to Craddock Dene, while Joseph sat and
       beamed in pride and happiness, and the audience rippled with laughter.
Kathleen was very pretty and very fascinating, with her merry, kind-hearted ways, and she
       became extremely popular with her future neighbours.
Little changes had taken place in the village, through death or marriage or departure.
       Dodge had laid to rest many victims of influenza, which visited the neighbourhood with great
       severity. Among the slain, poor Dodge had to number his own wife. The old man was broken down
       with his loss. He loved to talk over her illness and death with Hadria,
        whose presence seemed to comfort him more than anything
       else, as he assured her, in his quaint dialect.
Sometimes, returning through the Craddock Woods, Hadria would pass through the churchyard
       on her way home, after her walk, and there she would come upon Dodge patiently at work upon
       some new grave, the sound of his pickaxe breaking the autumn silence, ominously. His head was
       more bent than of yore, and his hair was whiter. His old face would brighten up when he heard
       Hadria's footstep, and he would pause, a moment or two, for a gossip. The conversation
       generally turned upon his old “missus,” who was buried under a yew tree, near the wicket
       gate. Then he would ask after Hadria's belongings; about her father and mother, about Hubert,
       and the boys. Mr. Fullerton had made the gravedigger's acquaintance, and won his hearty
       regard by many a chat and many a little kindness. Dodge had never ceased to regret that
       Martha had been taken away from Craddock. The place seemed as if it had gone to sleep, he
       said. Things weren't as they used to be.
Hadria would often go to see the old man, trying to cheer him and minister to his growing
       ailments. His shrewdness was remarkable. Mr. Fullerton quoted Dodge as an authority on
       matters of practical philosophy, and the old gravedigger became a sort of oracle at the
       Cottage. Wilfrid Burton complained that he was incessantly confronted with some saying of
       Dodge, and from this there was no appeal.
The news from Italy was still far from reassuring. Valeria was terribly anxious. But she
       felt thankful, she said, to be with the invalid and able to look after him. The doctors would
       not hear of his returning to England at the approach of winter. It would be sheer suicide. He
       must go further south. Valeria had met some old friends, among them Madame Bertaux, and they
       had decided to go on together, perhaps to Naples or Sorrento. Her friends had all fallen in
       love with the Professor, as every one did. They were a great help and comfort to her. If it
       were not for the terrible
        foreboding, Valeria said she would be perfectly happy. The
       Professor's presence seemed to change the very atmosphere. He spoke often about Hadria, and
       over and over again asked Valeria to watch over her and help her. And he spoke often about
       his wife. Valeria confessed that, at one time, she used to be horribly and shamefully jealous
       of this wife, whom he worshipped so faithfully, but now that feeling had left her. She was
       thankful for the great privilege of his friendship. A new tone had come over Valeria's
       letters, of late; the desperate, almost bitter element had passed away, and something
       approaching serenity had taken its place.
No one, she said, could be in the Professor's presence every day, and remain exactly the
       same as before. She saw his potent, silent influence upon every creature who crossed his
       path. He came and went among his fellows, quietly, beneficently, and each was the better for
       having met him, more or less, according to the fineness and sensitiveness of the nature.
“My love for him,” said Valeria, “used at one time to be a great trouble to me. It made me
       restless and unhappy. Now I am glad of it, and though there must be an element of pain in a
       hopeless love, yet I hold myself fortunate to have cherished it.”
Hadria received this letter from the postman when she was coming out of Dodge's
       cottage.
It threw her into a conflict of strong and painful feeling: foreboding, heart-sickness, a
       longing so strong to see her friends that it seemed as if she must pack up instantly and go
       to them, and through it all, a sense of loneliness that was almost unbearable. How she envied
       Valeria! To love with her whole heart, without a shadow of doubt; to have that element of
       warmth in her life which could never fail her, like sunshine to the earth. Among the cruelest
       elements of Hadria's experience had been that emptying of her heart; the rebuff to the need
       for love, the conviction that she was to go through life without its supreme emotion.
       Professor Theobald had thrown away what might have been a master-passion.
        The outlook was so blank and cold, so unutterably lonely!
       She looked back to the days at Dunaghee, as if several lifetimes had passed between her and
       them. What illusions they had all harboured in those strange old days!
“Do you remember our famous discussion on Emerson in the garret?” she said to Algitha.
“Do I? It is one of the episodes of our youth that stands out most distinctly.”
“And how about Emerson's doctrine? Are we the makers of our circumstances?
        Does our fate ‘fit us like a glove?’”
Algitha looked thoughtful. “I doubt it,” she said.
“Yet you have brilliantly done what you meant to do.”
“My own experience does not overshadow my judgment entirely, I hope,” said Algitha. “I have
       seen too much of a certain tragic side of life to be able to lay down a law of that sort. I
       can't believe, for instance, that among all those millions in the East End, not
        one man or woman, for all these ages, was born with great capacities, which
       better conditions might have allowed to come to fruition. I think you were right, after all.
       It is a matter of relation.”
The autumn was unusually fine, and the colours sumptuous beyond description. The vast old
       trees that grew so tall and strong, in the genial English soil, burnt away their summer life
       in a grand conflagration.
Hubert had successfully carried the day with regard to the important case which had taken
       him abroad, and had now returned to Craddock Dene. Henriette came to stay at the Red
       House.
She followed her brother, one day, into the smoking-room, and there, with much tact and
       circumlocution, gave him to understand that she thought Hadria was becoming more sensible;
       that she was growing more like other people, less opinionated, wiser, and better in every
       way.
“Hadria was always very sweet, of course,” said Henriette, “but she had the faults of her
       qualities, as we all have. You have had your trials, dear Hubert, but I rejoice to believe
       that
        Hadria will give you little further cause for pain or
       regret.” Hubert made no reply. He placed the tips of his fingers together and looked into the
       fire.
“I think that the companionship of Lady Engleton has been of great service to Hadria,” he
       observed, after a long pause.
“Unquestionably,” assented Henriette. “She has had an enormous influence upon her. She has
       taught Hadria to see that one may hold one's own ideas quietly, without flying in everybody's
       face. Lady Engleton is a pronounced agnostic, yet she never misses a Sunday at Craddock
       Church, and I am glad to see that Hadria is following her example. It must be a great
       satisfaction to you, Hubert. People used to talk unpleasantly about Hadria's extremely
       irregular attendance. It is such a mistake to offend people's ideas, in a small place like
       this.”
“That is what I told Hadria,” said Hubert, “and her mother has been speaking seriously to
       her on the subject. Hadria made no opposition, rather to my surprise. She said that she would
       go as regularly as our dining-room clock, if it gave us all so much satisfaction.”
“How charming!” cried Henriette benevolently, “and how characteristic!”
As Hadria sank in faith and hope, she rose in the opinion of her neighbours. She was never
       nearer to universal unbelief than now, when the orthodox began to smile upon her.
Life presented itself to her as a mere welter of confused forces. If goodness, or
       aspiration, or any godlike thing arose, for a moment—like some shipwrecked soul with hands
       outstretched above the waves—swiftly it sank again submerged, leaving only a faint ripple on
       the surface, soon overswept and obliterated.
She could detect no light on the face of the troubled waters. Looking around her at other
       lives, she saw the story written in different characters, but always the same; hope,
       struggle, failure. The pathos of old age wrung her heart;
        the sorrows of the poor, the lonely, the illusions of the
       seeker after wealth, the utter vanity of the objects of men's pursuit, and the end of it
       all!
“I wonder what is the secret of success, Hadria?”
“Speaking generally, I should say to have a petty aim.”
“Then if one succeeds after a long struggle,” said Algitha pensively.
“One finds it, I doubt not, the dismalest of failures.”
A great cloud of darkness seemed to have descended over the earth. Hadria felt cut off even
       from Nature. The splendours of the autumn appeared at a vast distance from her. They belonged
       to another world. She could not get near them. Mother earth had deserted her child.
A superficial apathy was creeping over her, below which burnt a slow fire of pain. But the
       greater the apathy, which expressed itself outwardly in a sort of cheerful readiness to take
       things as they came, the more delighted everybody appeared to be with the repentant sinner.
       Her associates seemed to desire earnestly that she should go to church, as they did, in her
       best bonnet—and why not? She would get a best bonnet, as ridiculous as they pleased, and let
       Mr. Walker do his worst. What did it matter? Who was the better or the worse for what she
       thought or how she acted? What mattered it, whether she were consistent or not? What mattered
       it if she seemed, by her actions, to proclaim her belief in dogmas that meant nothing to her,
       except as interesting products of the human mind? She had not enough faith to make it worth
       while to stand alone.
Lord Engleton said he thought it right to go to church regularly, for the sake of setting
       an example to the masses, a sentiment which always used to afford Hadria more amusement than
       many intentional witticisms.
She went often to the later service, when the autumn twilight lay heavy and sad upon the
       churchyard, and the peace of evening stole in through the windows of the church. Then, as the
       sublime poetry of psalmist or prophet rolled through
        the Norman arches, or the notes of the organ stole out of
       the shadowed chancel, a spirit of repose would creep into the heart of the listener, and the
       tired thoughts would take a more rhythmic march. She felt nearer to her fellows, at such
       moments, than at any other. Her heart went out to them, in wistful sympathy. They seemed to
       be standing together then, one and all, at the threshold of the great Mystery, and though
       they might be parted ever so widely by circumstance, temperament, mental endowment, manner of
       thought, yet after all, they were brethren and fellow sufferers; they shared the weakness,
       the longing, the struggle of life; they all had affections, ambitions, heart-breakings, sins,
       and victories; the differences were slight and transient, in the presence of the vast
       unknown, the Ultimate Reality for which they were all groping in the darkness. This sense of
       brotherhood was strongest with regard to the poorer members of the congregation: the
       labourers with their toil-stained hands and bent heads, the wives, the weary mothers, their
       faces seamed with the ceaseless strain of child-bearing, and hard work, and care and worry.
       In their prematurely ageing faces, in their furrowed brows, Hadria could trace the marks of
       Life's bare and ruthless hand, which had pressed so heavily on those whose task it had been
       to bestow the terrible gift. Here the burden had crushed soul and flesh; here that insensate
       spirit of Life had worked its will, gratified its rage to produce and reproduce, it mattered
       not what in the semblance of the human, so long only as that wretched semblance repeated
       itself, and repeated itself again, ad nauseum, while it
       destroyed the creatures which it used for its wild purpose—
And the same savage story was written, once more, on the faces of the better dressed women:
       worry, weariness, apathy, strain; these were marked unmistakeably, after the first freshness
       of youth had been driven away, and the features began to take the mould of the habitual
       thoughts and the habitual impressions.

And on these faces, there was a certain pettiness and coldness not observable on those of
       the poorer women.
Often, when one of the neighbours called and found Hadria alone, some chance word of
       womanly sympathy would touch a spring, and then a sad, narrow little story of trouble and
       difficulty would be poured out; a revelation of the bewildered, toiling, futile existences
       that were being passed beneath a smooth appearance; of the heart-ache and heroism and
       misplaced sacrifice, of the ruined lives that a little common sense and common kindness might
       have saved; the unending pain and trouble about matters entirely trivial, entirely absurd;
       the ceaseless travail to bring forth new elements of trouble for those who must inherit the
       deeds of to-day; the burdened existences agonizing to give birth to new existences, equally
       burdened, which in their turn, were to repeat the ceaseless oblation to the gods of Life.
“Futile?” said Lady Engleton. “I think women are generally fools, entre nous; that is why they so often fill their lives with sound and fury,
       accomplishing nothing.”
Hadria felt that this was a description of her own life, as well as that of most of her
       neighbours.
“I can understand so well how it is that women become conventional,” she said, apparently
       without direct reference to the last remark, “it is so useless to take the trouble to act on
       one's own initiative. It annoys everybody frightfully, and it accomplishes nothing, as you
       say.”
“My dear Hadria, you alarm me!” cried Lady Engleton, laughing. “You must really be very ill
       indeed, if you have come to this conclusion!”
In looking over some old papers and books, one afternoon, Hadria came upon the little
       composition called Futility, which a mood had called forth at Dunaghee, years
       ago. She had almost forgotten about it, and in trying it over, she found that it was like
       trying over the work of some other person.
It expressed with great exactness the feelings that overwhelmed her now, whenever she let
       her imagination dwell
        upon the lives of women, of whatever class and whatever
       kind. Futility! The mournful composition, with its strange modern character, its suggestion
       of striving and confusion and pain, expressed as only music could express, the yearning and
       the sadness that burden so many a woman's heart to-day.
She knew that the music was good, and that now she could compose music infinitely better.
       The sharpness of longing for her lost art cut through her. She half turned from the piano and
       then went back, as a moth to the flame.
How was this eternal tumult to be stilled? Facts were definite and clear, there was no room
       for doubt or for hope. These facts then had to be dealt with. How did other women deal with
       them? Not so much better than she did, after all, as it appeared when one was allowed to see
       beneath the amiable surface of their lives. They were all spinning round and round, in a
       dizzy little circle, all whirling and toiling and troubling, to no purpose.
Even Lady Engleton, who appeared so bright and satisfied, had her secret misery which
       spoilt her life. She had beauty, talent, wealth, everything to make existence pleasant and
       satisfactory, but she had allowed externals and unessentials to encroach upon it, to govern
       her actions, to usurp the place of her best powers, to creep into her motives, till there was
       little germ and heart of reality left, and she was beginning to feel starved and aimless in
       the midst of what might have been plenty. Lady Engleton had turned to her neighbour at the
       Red House in an instinctive search for sympathy, as the more genuine side of her nature began
       to cry out against the emptiness of her graceful and ornate existence. Hadria was startled by
       the revelation. Hubert had always held up Lady Engleton as a model of virtue and wisdom, and
       perfect contentment. Yet she too, it turned out, for all her smiles and her cheerfulness, was
       busy and weary with futilities. She too, like the fifty daughters of Danaus, was condemned to
       the idiot's labour of eternally drawing water in sieves from fathomless
       wells.
</div></body></text></TEI>