<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daughters of Danaus : VWWP edition </title><author>Caird, Mona (1854-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="51">
CHAPTER LI.
“QUITE hopeless!”
Joseph Fleming repeated the words incredulously.
“Yes,” said Lady Engleton, “it is the terrible truth.”
The Professor had been growing worse, and at length, his state became so alarming that he
       decided to return to England. Miss Du Prel and an old friend whom she had met abroad,
       accompanied him.
“I understand they are all at the Priory,” said Joseph.
“Yes; Miss Du Prel telegraphed to Mrs. Temperley, and Mrs. Temperley and I put our heads
       together and arranged matters as well as we could in the emergency, so that the Professor's
       wish might be gratified. He desired to return to the Priory, where his boyhood was
       spent.”
“And is there really no hope?”
“None at all, the doctor says.”
“Dear me, dear me!” cried Joseph. “And is he not expected to live through the summer?”
“The summer! ah no, Mr. Fleming, he is not expected to live many days.”
“Dear me, dear me!” was all that Joseph could say. Then after a pause, he added, “I fear
       Mrs. Temperley will feel it very much. They were such old friends.”
“Oh! poor woman, she is heart-broken.”

The Professor lingered longer than the doctor had expected. He was very weak, and could not
       bear the fatigue of seeing many people. But he was perfectly cheerful, and when feeling
        little better at times, he would laugh and joke in his old
       kindly way, and seemed to enjoy the fragment of life that still remained to him.
“I am so glad I have seen the spring again,” he said, “and hat I am here, in the old
       home.”
He liked to have the window thrown wide open, when the day was warm. Then his bed would be
       wheeled closer to it, so that the sunshine often lay across it, and the scent of the
       flowering shrubs and the odour of growth, as he called it, floated in upon him. He looked out
       into a world of exquisite greenery and of serene sky. The room was above the drawing-room,
       and if the drawing-room windows were open, he could hear Hadria playing. He often used to ask
       for music.
The request would come generally after an exhausting turn of pain, when he could not bear
       the fatigue of seeing people.
“I can't tell you what pleasure and comfort your music is to me,” he used to say, again and
       again. “It has been so ever since I knew you. When I think of the thousands of poor devils
       who have to end their lives in some wretched, lonely, sordid fashion, after hardships and
       struggles and very little hope, I can't help feeling that I am fortunate indeed, now and all
       through my life. I have grumbled at times, and there have been sharp experiences—few escape
       those—but take it all round, I have had my share of good things.”
He had one great satisfaction: that he had discovered, before the end of his days, the
       means which he had so long been seeking, of saving the death-agony of animals that are killed
       for food. Some day perhaps, he said, men might cease to be numbered among the beasts of prey,
       but till then, at least their victims might be spared as much pain as possible. He had
       overcome the difficulty of expense, which had always been the main obstacle to a practical
       solution of the problem. Henceforth there was no need for any creature to suffer, in dying
       for man's use. If people only knew and realized how much needless agony is inflicted on these
       helpless creatures, in order to supply the daily demands of a vast flesh-eating
        population, they would feel that, as a matter of fact, he
       had been doing the human race a good turn as well as their more friendless fellow-beings. It
       was impossible to imagine that men and women would not suffer at the thought of causing
       suffering to the helpless, if once they realized that suffering clearly. Men and women were
       not devils! Theobald had always laughed at him for this part of his work, but he felt now, at
       the close of his life, that he could dwell upon that effort with more pleasure than on any
       other, although others had won him far more applause, and this had often brought him
       contempt. If only he could be sure that the discovery would not be wasted.
“It shall be our business to see that it is not,” said Valeria, in a voice tremulous with
       unshed tears.
The Professor heaved a sigh of relief, at this assurance.
“My earlier work is safe; what I have done in other directions, is already a part of human
       knowledge and resource, but this is just the sort of thing that might be so easily lost and
       forgotten. These sufferings are hidden, and when people do not see a wrong, they do not think
       of it; make them think, make them think!”
A week had gone by since the Professor's arrival at the Priory. He was in great pain, but
       had intervals of respite. He liked, in those intervals, to see his friends. They could
       scarcely believe that he was dying, for he still seemed so full of interest in the affairs of
       life, and spoke of the future as if he would be there to see it. One of the most distressing
       interviews was with Mr. Fullerton, who could not be persuaded that the invalid had but a
       short time to live. The old man believed that death meant, beyond all question, annihilation
       of the personality, and had absolutely no hope of meeting again.
“Don't be too sure, old friend,” said the Professor; “don't be too sure of anything, in
       this mysterious universe.”
The weather kept warm and genial, and this was favourable to his lingering among them a
       little longer. But his suffering,
        at times, was so great that they could scarcely wish for
       this delay. Hadria used always to play to him during some part of the afternoon. The robin
       had become a constant visitor, and had found its way to the window of the sick-room, where
       crumbs had been scattered on the sill. The Professor took great pleasure in watching the
       little creature. Sometimes it would come into the room and hop on to a chair or table,
       coquetting from perch to perch, and looking at the invalid, with bright inquisitive eyes. The
       crumbs were put out at a certain hour each morning, and the bird had acquired the habit of
       arriving almost to the moment. If, by chance, the crumbs had been forgotten, the robin would
       flutter ostentatiously before the window, to remind his friends of their neglected duty.
During the last few days, Hadria had fancied that the Professor had divined Valeria's
       secret, or that she had betrayed it.
There was a peculiar, reverent tenderness in his manner towards her, that was even more
       marked than usual.
“Can't we save him? can't we save him, Hadria?” she used to cry piteously, when they were
       alone. “Surely, surely there is some hope. Science makes such professions; why doesn't it do
       something?”
“Ah, don't torture yourself with false hope, dear Valeria.”
“The world is monstrous, life is unbearable,” exclaimed Valeria, with a despairing break in
       her voice.
But one afternoon, she came out of the sick-room with a less distraught expression on her
       worn face, though her eyes shewed traces of tears.
The dying man used to speak often about his wife to Hadria. This had been her room, and he
       almost fancied her presence about him.
“Do you know,” he said, “I have found, of late, that many of my old fixed ideas have been
       insidiously modifying. So many things that I used to regard as preposterous have been borne
       in upon me, in a singular fashion, as by no means so out
        of the question. I have had one or two strange experiences
       and now a hope—I might say a faith—has settled upon me of an undying element in our
       personality. I feel that we shall meet again those we have loved here—some time or
       another.”
“What a sting that would take from the agony of parting,” cried Hadria.
“And, after all, is it less rational to suppose that there is some survival of the Self,
       and that the wild, confused earthly experience is an element of a spiritual evolutionary
       process, than to suppose that the whole universe is chaotic and meaningless? For what we call
       mind exists, and it must be contained in the sum-total of existence, or how could it arise
       out of it? Therefore, some reasonable scheme appears more likely than a reasonless one. And
       then there is that other big fact that stares us in the face and puts one's fears to shame:
       human goodness.”
Hadria's rebellious memory recalled the fact of human cruelty and wickedness to set against
       the goodness, but she was silent.
“What earthly business has such a thing as goodness or pity to appear in a fortuitous,
       mindless, soulless universe? Where does it come from? What is its origin? Whence sprang the
       laws that gave it birth?”
“It gives more argument to faith than any thing I know,” she said, “even if there had been
       but one good man or woman since the world began.”
“Ah, yes; the pity and tenderness that lie in the heart of man, even of the worst, if only
       they can be appealed to before they die, may teach us to hope all things.”
There was a long silence. Through the open window, they could hear the soft cooing of the
       wood-pigeons. Among the big trees behind the house, there was a populous rookery, noisy now
       with the squeaky voices of the young birds, and the deeper cawing of the parent rooks.
“I have been for many years without one gleam of hope,”
        said the Professor slowly. “It is only lately that some of
       my obstinate preconceptions have begun to yield to other suggestions and other thoughts,
       which have opened up a thousand possibilities and a thousand hopes. And I have not been false
       to my reason in this change; I have but followed it more fearlessly and more faithfully.”
“I have sometimes thought,” said Hadria, “that when we seem to cling most desperately to
       our reason, we are really refusing to accept its guidance into unfamiliar regions. We confuse
       the familiar with the reasonable.”
“Exactly. And I want you to be on your guard against that intellectual foible, which I
       believe has held me back in a region of sadness and solitude that I need not have lingered
       in, but for that.”
There was a great commotion in the rookery, and presently a flock of rooks swept across the
       window, in loud controversy, and away over the garden in a circle, and then up and up till
       they were a grey little patch of changing shape, in the blue of the sky.
The dying man followed them with his eyes. He had watched such streaming companies start
       forth from the old rookery, ever since his boyhood. The memories of that time, and of the
       importunate thoughts that had haunted him then, at the opening of life, returned to him
       now.
He had accomplished a fraction of what he had set out to attempt, with such high hopes. His
       dream of personal happiness had failed; many an illusion had been lost, many a
       bitterly-regretted deed had saddened him, many an error had revenged itself upon him. He drew
       a deep sigh.
“And if the scheme of the universe be a reasonable one,” he said half dreamily, “then one
       can account better for the lives that never fulfil themselves; the apparent failure that
       saddens one, in such numberless instances, especially among women. For in that case, the
       failure is only apparent, however cruel and however great. If the effort has been sincere,
       and the thought bent upon the best that could be conceived by
        the particular soul, then that effort and that thought
       must play their part in the upward movement of the race. I cannot believe otherwise.”
Hadria's head was bent. Her lips moved, as if in an effort to speak, but no sound came.
“To believe that all the better and more generous hopes of our kind are to be lost and
       ineffectual, that genius is finally wasted, and goodness an exotic to be trampled under foot
       in the blind movements of Nature—that requires more power of faith than I can muster. Once
       believe that thought is the main factor, the motive force of the universe, then everything
       settles into its place, and we have room for hope; indeed it insists upon admission; it falls
       into the shadow of our life like that blessed ray of sunlight.”
It lay across the bed, in a bright streak.
“The hope leads me far. My training has been all against it, but it comes to me with
       greater and greater force. It makes me feel that presently, when we have bid one another
       farewell, it will not be for ever. We shall meet again, dear Hadria, believe me.” She was
       struggling with her tears, and could answer nothing.
“I wish so much that I could leave this hope, as a legacy to you. I wish I could leave it
       to Valeria. Take care of her, won't you? She is very solitary and very sad.”
“I will, I will,” Hadria murmured.
“Do not turn away from the light of rational hope, if any path should open up that leads
       that way. And help her to do the same. When you think of me, let it be happily and with
       comfort.”
Hadria was silently weeping.
“And hold fast to your own colours. Don't take sides, above all, with the powers that have
       oppressed you. They are terrible powers, and yet people won't admit their strength, and so
       they are left unopposed. It is worse than folly to underrate the forces of the enemy. It is
       always worse than folly to deny facts in order to support a theory. Exhort people
        to face and conquer them. You can help more than you
       dream, even as things stand. I cannot tell you what you have done for me, dear Hadria.” (He
       held out his hand to her.) “And the helpless, human and animal—how they wring one's heart! Do
       not forget them; be to them a knight-errant. You have suffered enough yourself, to know well
       how to bind their wounds.” The speaker paused, for a moment, to battle with a paroxysm of
       pain.
“There is so much anguish,” he said presently, “so much intolerable anguish, even when
       things seem smoothest. The human spirit craves for so much, and generally it gets so little.
       The world is full of tragedy; and sympathy, a little common sympathy, can do so much to
       soften the worst of grief. It is for the lack of that, that people despair and go down. I
       commend them to you.”

The figure lay motionless, as if asleep. The expression was one of utter peace. It seemed
       as if all the love and tenderness, all the breadth and beauty of the soul that had passed
       away, were shining out of the quieted face, from which all trace of suffering had vanished.
       The look of desolation that used, at times, to come into it, had entirely gone. Hadria and
       Valeria stood together, by the bedside. At the foot of the bed was a glass vase, holding a
       spray of wild cherry blossom; Hadria had brought it, to the invalid's delight, the day
       before. There were other offerings of fresh flowers; a mass of azaleas from Lady Engleton;
       bunches of daffodils that Valeria had gathered in the meadows; and old Dodge had sent a
       handful of brown and yellow wallflower, from his garden. The blind had been raised a few
       inches, so as to let in the sunlight and the sweet air. It was a glorious morning. The few
       last hot days had brought everything out, with a rush. The boughs of the trees, that the
       Professor had loved so to watch during his illness, were swaying gently in the breeze, just
       as they had done when his eyes had been open to see
        them. The wood-pigeons were cooing, the young rooks cawing
       shrilly in the rookery. Valeria seemed to be stunned. She stood gazing at the peaceful face,
       with a look of stony grief.
“I can't understand it!” she exclaimed at last, with a wild gesture, “I can't
       believe he will never speak to me again! It's a horrible dream—oh, but too horrible—ah, why
       can't I die as well as he?” She threw herself on her knees, shaken with sobs, silent and
       passionate. Hadria did not attempt to remonstrate or soothe her. She turned away, as a flood
       of bitter grief swept over her, so that she felt as one drowning.
Some minutes passed before Valeria rose from her knees, looking haggard and desolate.
       Hadria went towards her hastily.
“What's that?” cried Valeria with a nervous start and a scared glance towards the
       window.
“The robin!” said Hadria, and the tears started to her eyes.
The bird had hopped in at his usual hour, in a friendly fashion. He picked up a few stray
       crumbs that had been left on the sill from yesterday, and then, in little capricious flights
       from stage to stage, finally arrived at the rail of the bed, and stood looking from side to
       side, with black, bright eyes, at the motionless figure. Hitherto it had been accustomed to a
       welcome. Why this strange silence? The robin hopped round on the rail, polished his beak
       meditatively, fluffed out his feathers, and then, raising his head, sang a tender
       requiem.
</div></body></text></TEI>