<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER XI
THE WOMAN WAITS
‘SAPRISTI!’ cried Alison, ‘he's come back, you say? I think I shall insist on the
     marriage coming off at once.’
‘No, you won't,’ answered Mary, reddening, ‘because we've got to earn enough between us to
     set up house.’
‘What a pity!’ rejoined the other girl. ‘I'm in the vein for weddings. I had an interview
     yesterday with Evelina's baby's papa. Don't stare, you idiot. I've been arranging a match.’
It was a sultry day at the end of July, and the two girls sat in the dingy lodgings in
     Bulstrode Street. Vincent Hemming had telegraphed from Liverpool; he was to be in London that
     afternoon.
‘Alison! you don't mean to say you——?’
‘Certainly. I found the young man open to reason, especially when he comprehended that I
     might be likely to give Evelina a small dot, though it took some time to overcome
     his moral scruples——’

‘His moral scruples!’ ejaculated Mary.
‘My dear, you must know that the average man is, in theory, enamoured of virtue, but in
     practice his devotion usually takes the form of insisting on that of his female
     belongings——’
‘A vicarious offering to the gods,’ said Mary, ‘which it is to be hoped is sometimes
     efficaciousl’
‘It's astonishing,’ said the elder girl thoughtfully, ‘what a lot of human nature one sees
     down there in Whitechapel.’
‘More, I dare say, than in Mayfair.’
‘The wedding,’ observed Alison, ‘will come off in the autumn—I shall give the bride away. You
     may come and look on if you like.’
‘Poor little Evelina,’ said Mary abstractedly.
‘Poor!’ laughed Alison. ‘What do you think she asked for when I told her she might choose a
     wedding present? A white silk dress! She knew, she said, where she could get one, second-hand,
     for twelve and sixpence, but what she held out for most was a white tulle veil and a wreath of
     orange blossoms.’
‘The veil and the orange blossoms are quite pathetic,’ murmured Mary, getting up and pushing
     the window wide open. There was a long silence, during which a large bumble-bee swayed in and
     buzzed ponderously round the little room.
‘You ought now,’ said Alison, jumping up,
      ‘to be getting into your most becoming dress, and a proper
     frame of mind in which to receive so estimable a young man——’
‘Oh, don't go. It's so dreadful to wait, all alone. He can't be in London till four o'clock,
     so I don't imagine I shall see him till six or seven, or perhaps not till after dinner.’
‘Ah,’ said Alison Ives thoughtfully, ‘then you had better come with me. I'm going to take a
     lot of poor girls over the National Gallery at three o'clock.’
‘Oh, I can't. It's too far. And he might come while I was out.’
‘And considering,’ laughed Alison, ‘that you intend spending the rest of your natural
     existence with Mr. Hemming, that would be nothing short of a calamity.’
‘You are an unsympathetic demon, and you can be off to your East-end young women,’ said Mary
     sternly.
‘Pooh,’ said Alison calmly, ‘I shall stay till the last moment, and give you the benefit of
     my mature advice. It's wonderful,’ she added, snatching up her big Gainsborough hat and putting
     it on at an extraordinary angle, ‘how kind I am to young people. I believe I've been making a
     mistake all this time. I ought to have been the mother of six boys—for Heaven forbid that I
     should bring another woman into the world.’

‘You would have been bored to death with them,’ said Mary.
‘Nonsense, depend upon it, I should have been a pattern parent. All we people make the
     mistake of doing everything more or less badly. Here are you,’ she continued, taking up with an
     impatient gesture a small book bound in red calico, which was lying on the table, ‘reading a
     ninepenny translation of Epictetus, when I'll be bound you can't make a pudding properly
     without it “catching”—or whatever the cook calls it.’
‘I know I can't; but it's eccentric—to say the least of it,’ rejoined Mary, ‘for a young
     woman like you to want to make puddings at all.’
‘I suppose it is an affectation,’ said Alison candidly, fastening her velvet strings firmly
     with a diamond scorpion, ‘but it's so much more amusing than going to balls. Oh, those old club
     hacks who go out to exercise their livers, and the boys who dance till they stream with
     perspiration, because they want to make acquaintances—in society.’
‘It's doubtfully alluring—the London ball of to-day,’ assented Mary, ‘but why go?’
‘I don't,’ said Alison, ‘it's what I remember out of the dim past. Well, good-bye, I'm off to
     explain Mantegna to my girls. I only hope
      they won't all come in ostrich feathers. Your
     most becoming gown, remember, and your most angelic manners, please. This is the supreme
     moment, remember.’
After she had gone, she put her head in at the door to say—
‘That baby of Evelina's makes my joy. You never saw such a dumpling, and it doesn't cry now.
     I have it to spend the day at the flat, and it crawls all over me, and sticks its fat little
     fists in my eye.’
When the street door had finally closed, Mary felt horribly restless. After much inward
     debate, she put on her hat and went out. Secretly, she would have liked to go to Euston to meet
     her lover, but he had said nothing about it, and she thought it best to wait. So she walked to
     the Regent's Park, and there, in the trim flower-garden, where the avenue of chestnuts was
     making long shadows on the neatly-swept paths, Mary sat down and waited. It was high midsummer
     now; there was a velvety smoothness on the trim lawns, the green light filtered through a
     canopy of broad chestnut leaves, and the beds were odorous with heliotrope, purple with
     pansies, and aglow with geraniums. Half past four! Now perhaps the train was thundering into
     Euston Station. Vincent Hemming was getting out
      of his compartment, collecting his manifold baggage, hailing
     a cab. London was the richer for one important person; London contained her lover!
The people who haunt the parks on fine afternoons were there as usual, but to-day they seized
     her imagination. There was a young woman with restless eyes and a hard mouth, keeping a
     rendezvous with a lover who had not yet appeared; a nurse or two with a swarm of children from
     the surrounding Georgian terraces, racing and squealing and looking like white rabbits with
     their pink noses and creamy boots, while, erect and military, the figure of a park-keeper in
     his gilt buttons and his peaked cap gave an official air to the trim paths.
Yes, he was driving now to his chambers in the Temple; passing, actually rolling on London
     streets, in a London cab, not so very far from where she sat. It seemed incredible, and yet it
     was true. The only drawback to her happiness was Jimmie, for her brother was back for the
     holidays, and being as yet unaware of the understanding between them, he would be sure to
     insist on being there when Vincent came. Mary could not picture the scene with a third
     person.
Over yonder was the girl with the hard mouth, still pacing up and down alone. Mary
      felt drawn towards her; she would like to have gone up and
     said something kind.
‘If that tawdry-looking girl could write down her story,’ thought Mary, as she passed her,
     ‘we should have another masterpiece! It is because they suffer so that women have written
     supremely good fiction.’
Everything, to-day, seemed imprinted on her brain; the delicate arrangement of mauves and
     lilacs in the distant flower-beds; the foolish faces of the nurses bent over a penny novelette
     as they pushed forward their perambulators; but above all, the figure of the girl with the hard
     mouth, who was still looking from right to left, for some one who did not appear. She had sat
     down on a green bench opposite, her shabby boots stuck hopelessly out. Her hair was untidy; in
     her hat was a dirty pink-bow; her dark stuff gown was frayed at the edge. The woman in her was
     dead; she was past the stage of caring about her appearance. ‘Poor girl,’ thought Mary, ‘she is
     waiting, too, for her lover. But he will not come to-day; she didn't expect it,
     really, when she came out.’ No, he had not come, and there was something in her blank eyes—eyes
     which seemed to look into an abyss, which suggested the thought that in all human probability
     he never would.
By-and-by the nurses began to put by their
      tatting and gather their chattering, swooping broods
     together. Perambulators were pushed forward on the creaking gravel, and little white boots and
     gaiters were seen trotting in the direction of the shining, columned terraces. A clock on a
     neighbouring church struck five.
And now, suddenly, Mary began to hurry. It was five o'clock! If the express had been
     punctual, Vincent might be at his chambers by this. Supposing he came, and she were out? Her
     heart thumping at the thought, she walked rapidly through the gates. She wanted to buy some
     flowers, too; lots of flowers, to disguise the terrible ugliness of those lodgings. At a
     florist's she bought an armful of roses, peonies, and tiger-lilies; and then she almost ran
     home to Bulstrode Street. There were the flowers to arrange, and she would like to change her
     gown. Vincent didn't like black, she remembered; she would wear the little grey dress she had
     just had made, and fasten some roses in her belt. At home, in the drawing-room, the interior in
     which she was so soon to receive her lover was not enticing. The tea-cups—common thick-lipped
     earthenware—were laid out on a battered tin tray; a small glass jug contained a bluish white
     fluid, and a moulded glass basin was half filled with dubious looking lumps of sugar. And to
     complete the picture,
      Jimmie had apparently taken a seat for the afternoon at the
     table, and only raised his head from a novel to clamour for his tea.
‘Presently, dear, presently,’ said Mary, hastily filling all the available bowls and vases
     with flowers. What could she do with the boy? she wondered, as she ran into her bedroom, put on
     the grey gown, and pinned some roses at her waist.
‘I say, dearest,’ said Jimmie, banging at the door, ‘aren't we ever going to have tea? Or are
     you waiting for old Hemming?’
‘Oh, no,’ said Mary faintly, still pondering what she could do with her young brother. ‘Tell
     them to bring up the tea.’
It was past six now; he probably would come after dinner. That would be very nice —they would
     have a beautiful long evening. The rooms, too, did not look quite so dreadful at night. She had
     brought a small copper lamp, with a rose-coloured shade, in expectation of Vincent's arrival,
     so that those dreadful milky glass gas-globes would not have to be lighted. And then she had an
     idea. It was an extravagance which she would not have permitted herself, but then——
‘Jimmie!’ she called out, as she stood at the looking-glass, her hands trembling as she tried
     to fasten the over-blown roses at her waist,
      while one by one the petals fell away and left a bare
     stalk.
‘Yes, dearest.’
‘Would you like, for a treat, to go to the theatre to-night? There's that piece still at
     Drury Lane with the real railway-engine in it, and you might go with Smith major, you know.’
     She opened a drawer and took out her purse. There were ten shillings left out of her last
     cheque. Four shillings had been spent on flowers, but there was enough still to send the two
     boys to the theatre.
‘Here's six shillings, and mind you're back at half-past eleven.’
And Jimmie was nothing loth. He insisted, however, on having fried eggs and bacon with his
     tea, and Mary resolved, when the sitting-room was finally saturated with the odour of fried
     fat, that she would say she was not at home if Vincent called. But at last the room was aired,
     and the house quiet again. Jimmie had finally disappeared.
The twilight of a summer evening settled on the dingy room. Mary paced the floor, after
     crowding all her flowers on to the centre table, and opening the two windows wide to let in the
     sultry evening air. When she neared the window she listened intently for the sound of
     cab-wheels, or for that of on-coming footsteps.
      Yes, there were footsteps—footsteps coming to the door.
     There was an agitated ring of the bell, and some one hurrying up the stairs. Mary got up from
     her chair, and stood with tightly-clasped hands, looking vaguely down at the faded true-lovers'
     knots which meandered with foolish reiteration over the carpet. The door opened. It was
     Jimmie.
‘Oh, I say, dearest, I quite forgot the six shillings you gave me! Where can I have left
     them?’ And then a hunt began for the missing money. Presently it was found, and Jimmie had gone
     for the evening.
It was very hot; stuffy with the damp, vitiated air of a London night verging on August. Few
     people passed. Bulstrode Street is a quiet thoroughfare. Once, about eight o'clock, cab-wheels
     were audible, and then Mary shrank into the farthest corner of the room, clasping her little
     hands tight, and listening for the sound of the door-bell and that well-known step on the
     stair. But neither came. The cab drove on, having emptied its fare two doors off. It was nine
     o'clock now.
‘I am so lonely, so tired,’ thought the girl. ‘I wish he would come. I want to talk to some
     one who cares for me, to get my little share of happiness. I am so tired of drawing the
     Discobolus, of writing for The Fan. I wonder
      if any man alive really knows how dreadful it is to be a
     woman, and to have to sit down, and fold your hands, and wait?’
Half-past nine now. Still he might come. He would have dined at his club, in all probability,
     and he would come on, after exchanging gossip with the men he would meet. Mary lighted the
     copper lamp now, and placed the pink shade over it. How pretty the flowers looked! Only the
     roses at her belt were faded. Going into the next room, she pinned in a fresh bunch. A quarter
     to ten? He would hardly come now; he always had a nice eye to the proprieties. But his cab
     might have broken down; he might have been detained at the club. The march up and down the room
     continued. Mary never knew how much she walked that night. The long, empty hours seemed
     interminable. But at last, in the still, sultry air, she could hear Big Ben strike eleven. Oh,
     eleven! Then it was all over; she might as well take off the pretty grey dress, unpin the bunch
     of roses.
At half-past eleven Jimmie returned, full of the delights of the play.
‘Oh, I say, dearest, are you sitting up? I'm so jolly hungry, darling! Can't you get me
     something to eat? It was sweet and dear of you to send me to the theatre.
      But, I say, where's old Hemming? Hasn't he been?’
‘I haven't seen anything of him,’ said Mary. ‘I suppose he was too tired to come
     to-night.’
And though she went to bed soon after, she lay with her eyes wide open, until the grey dawn
     began to creep in behind the dingy white blind. Oddly enough, the face of the girl she had seen
     in the Regent's Park rose up again and again. And yet what had they in common?
</div></body></text></TEI>