<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daughters of Danaus : VWWP edition </title><author>Caird, Mona (1854-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="50">
CHAPTER L.
HADRIA had found the autumn saddening, and the winter tempt her to morbid
       thoughts, but the coming of spring made her desperate. It would not allow her to be passive,
       it would not permit her emotions to lie prone and exhausted. Everything was waking, and she
       must wake too, to the bitterest regret and the keenest longings of which she was capable.
She had tried to avoid everything that would arouse these futile emotions; she had
       attempted to organise her life on new lines, persisting in her attitude of non-surrender, but
       winning, as far as she was able, the rest that, at present, could only be achieved by means
       of a sort of inward apathy. It was an instinctive effort of self-preservation. She was like a
       fierce fire, over which ashes have been heaped to keep down the flames, and check its ardour.
       She had to eat her heart out in dullness, to avoid its flaming out in madness. But the spring
       came and carried her away on its torrent. She might as well have tried to resist an
       avalanche. She thought that she had given up all serious thought of music; the surrender was
       necessary, and she had judged it folly to tempt herself by further dallying with it. It was
       too strong for her. And the despair that it awoke seemed to break up her whole existence, and
       render her unfit for her daily task. But now she found that, once more, she had underrated
       the strength of her own impulses. For some time she resisted, but one day, the sun shone out
       strong and genial, the budding trees spread their branches to the warm air, a blackbird
       warbled ecstatically from among the Priory shrubberies, and Hadria passed into the garden of
       the Griffins.

The caretaker smiled, when she saw who stood on the doorstep.
“Why ma'am, I thought you was never coming again to play on the piano: I have
       missed it, that I have. It makes the old place seem that cheerful—I can almost fancy it's my
       poor young mistress come back again. She used to sit and play on that piano, by the hour
       together.”
“I am glad you have enjoyed it,” said Hadria gently. The blinds were pulled up in the
       drawing-room, the piano was uncovered, the windows thrown open to the terrace.
“You haven't had much time for playing since your mamma has been ill,” the woman continued,
       dusting the keys and setting up the music-rest.
“To-day my mother has a visitor; Mrs. Joseph Fleming is spending the afternoon with her,”
       said Hadria.
“To be sure, ma'am, to be sure, a nice young lady, and so cheerful,” said the good woman,
       bustling off to wind up the tall old clock with the wise-looking face, that had been allowed
       to run down since Hadria's last visit. “Seems more cheerful like,” observed the caretaker, as
       the steady tick-tack began to sound through the quiet room.
“And have you fed my birds regularly, Mrs. Williams?” asked Hadria, taking off her hat and
       standing at the open window looking out to the terrace.
“Yes indeed, ma'am, every day, just as you used to do when you came yourself. And they has
       got so tame; they almost eats out of my hand.”
“And my robin? I hope he has not deserted us.”
“Oh, no, he comes right into the room sometimes and hops about, just as he did that
       afternoon, the last time you was here! I think it's the same bird, for he likes to perch on
       that table and pick up the crumbs.”
“Poor little soul! If you will give me a scrap of bread, Mrs. Williams—”
The caretaker left the room, and returned with a thick slice, which Hadria crumbled and
       scattered on the window-sill, as she stepped out to the terrace.

The calm old mansion with its delicate outlines, its dreamy exquisite stateliness, spoke of
       rest and sweet serenity. The place had the melancholy but also the repose of greatness. It
       was rich in all that lies nearest to the heart of that mysterious, dual-faced divinity that
       we call beauty, compounded of sorrow and delight.
Ah! if only its owner could come and take up his abode here. If only he would get well!
       Hadria's thoughts wandered backwards to that wonderful evening, when she had played to him
       and Algitha, and they had all watched the sunset afterwards, from the terrace. How long was
       it since she had touched the piano in this old drawing-room? Never since she returned from
       Pari. Even her own piano at home had been almost equally silent. She believed that she had
       not only quite abandoned hope with regard to music, but that she had prepared herself to face
       the inevitable decay of power, the inevitable proofs of her loss, as time went on. But so
       far, she had only had proofs that she could do astonishingly much if she had the chance.
To-day, for the first time, the final ordeal had to be gone through. And her imagination
       had never conceived its horror. She was to be taken at her word. The neglected gift was
       beginning to show signs of decay and enfeeblement. It had given fair warning for many a year,
       by the persistent appeal that it made, the persistent pain that it caused; but the famine had
       told upon it at last. It was dying. As this fact insinuated itself into the consciousness, in
       the teeth of a wild effort to deny it, despair flamed up, fierce and violent. She regretted
       that she had not thrown up everything long ago, rather than endure this lingering death; she
       cursed her hesitation, she cursed her fate, her training, her circumstances, she cursed
       herself. Whatever there was to curse, she cursed. What hideous nonsense to imagine herself
       ready to face this last insult of fate! She was like a martyr, who invites the stake and the
       faggot, and knows what he has undertaken only when the flames begin
        to curl about his feet. She had offered up her power, her
       imperious creative instinct, to the Lares and Penates; those greedy little godlets whom there
       was no appeasing while an inch of one remained that they could tear to pieces. She clenched
       her hands, in agony. The whole being recoiled now, at the eleventh hour, as a fierce wild
       creature that one tries to bury alive. She looked back along the line of the past and saw,
       with too clear eyes, the whole insidious process, so stealthy that she had hardly detected
       it, at the time. She remembered those afternoons at the Priory, when the restless,
       ill-trained power would assert itself, free for the moment, from the fetters and the
       dismemberment that awaited it in ordinary life. But like a creature accustomed to the yoke,
       she had found it increasingly difficult to use the moments of opportunity when they came. The
       force of daily usage, the necessary bending of thoughts in certain habitual directions, had
       assisted the crippling process, and though the power still lay there, stiffer than of yore,
       yet the preliminary movements and readjustments used up time and strength, and then
       gradually, with the perpetual repetition of adverse habits, the whole process became slower,
       harder, crueler.
“Good heavens! are all doors going to be shut against me?”
It was more than she could bear! And yet it must be borne—unless—no, there was no “unless.”
       It was of no use to coquet with thoughts of suicide. She had thought all that out long ago,
       and had sought, at more than one crisis of desperate misery, for refuge from the horror and
       the insults of life. But there were always others to be considered. She could not strike them
       so terrible a blow. Retreat was ruthlessly cut off. Nothing remained but the endurance of a
       conscious slow decay; nothing but increasing loss and feebleness, as the surly years went by.
       They were going, going, these years of life, slipping away with their spoils. Youth was
       departing, everything was vanishing; her very self, bit by bit, slowly but surely, till the
       House of Life would grow
        narrow and shrunken to the sight, the roof descend. The
       gruesome old story of the imprisoned prince flashed into her mind; the wretched captive,
       young and life-loving, who used to wake up, each morning, to find that of the original seven
       windows of his dungeon, one had disappeared, while the walls had advanced a foot, and
       to-morrow yet another foot, till at length the last window had closed up, and the walls
       shrank together and crushed him to death.
“I can't, I can't endure it!”
Hadria had leaned forward against the key-board, which gave forth a loud crash of
       discordant notes, strangely expressive of the fall and failure of her spirit.
She remained thus motionless, while the airs wandered in from the garden, and a broad ray
       of sunlight showed the strange incessant gyrations of the dust atoms, that happened to lie
       within the revealing brightness. The silence was perfect.
Hadria raised her head at last, and her eyes wandered out to the sweet old garden, decked
       in the miraculous hues of spring. The unutterable loveliness brought, for a second, a
       strange, inconsequent sense of peace; it seemed like a promise and a message from an unknown
       god.
But after that momentary and inexplicable experience, the babble of thought went on as
       before. The old dream mounted again heavenwards, like a cloud at sunset; wild fancies
       fashioned themselves in the brain. And then, in fantastic images, Hadria seemed to see a
       panorama of her own life and the general life pass before her, in all their incongruity and
       confusion. The great mass of that life showed itself as prose, because the significance of
       things had not been grasped or suspected; but here and there, the veil was pierced—by some
       suffering soul, by some poet's vision—and the darkness of our daily, pompous, careworn,
       ridiculous little existence made painfully visible.
“It is all absurd, all futile!” (so moved the procession of the thoughts); “and meanwhile
       the steady pulse of life
        beats on, not pausing while we battle out our days, not
       waiting while we decide how we shall live. We are possessed by a sentiment, an ideal, a
       religion; old Time makes no comment, but moves quietly on; we fling the thing aside as
       tawdry, insufficient; the ideal is tarnished, experience of the world converts us—and still
       unmoved, he paces on. We are off on another chase; another conception of things possesses us;
       and still the beat of his footstep sounds in our ears, above the tumult. We think and aspire
       and dream, and meanwhile the fires grow cold upon the hearth, the daily cares and common
       needs plead eloquently for our undivided service; the stupendous movement of Existence goes
       on unceasingly, at our doors; thousands struggling for gold and fame and mere bread, and
       resorting to infamous devices to obtain them; the great commercial currents flow and flow,
       according to their mystic laws; the price of stocks goes up, goes down, and with them, the
       life and fate of thousands; the inconsequent bells ring out from Craddock Church, and the
       people congregate; the grave of the schoolmistress sleeps in the sunshine, and the sound of
       the bells streams over it—meaning no irony—to lose itself in the quiet of the hills; rust and
       dust collect in one's house, in one's soul; and this and that, and that and this,—like the
       pendulum of the old time-piece, with its solemn tick—dock the moments of one's life, with
       each its dull little claim and its tough little tether, and lead one decorously to the
       gateway of Eternity.”
There was a flutter of wings, in the room. A robin hopped in at the window and perched
       daintily on the table-ledge, its delicate claws outlined against the whiteness of the
       dust-sheet, its head inquisitively on one side, as if it were asking the reason of the
       musician's unusual silence. Suddenly, the little creature fluffed out its feathers, drew
       itself together, and warbled forth a rich ecstatic song, that seemed to be deliberately
       addressed to its human companion. Hadria raised her bowed head. Up welled the swift
       unaccustomed tears, while the robin, with increasing enthusiasm, continued
        his song. His theme, doubtless, was of the flicker of
       sun-lit shrubberies, the warmth of summer, the glory of spring, the sweetness of the
       revolving seasons. For cure of heartache, he suggested the pleasantness of garden nooks, and
       the repose that lingers about a dew-sprinkled lawn. All these things were warmly commended to
       the human being whose song of life had ceased.
“But they break my heart, little singer, they break my heart!”
The robin lifted up its head and warbled more rapturously than ever.
The tears were falling fast know, and silently. The thoughts ran on and on. “I know it all,
       I know it all, and my heart is broken—and it is my own fault—and it does not matter—the world
       is full of broken hearts—and it does not matter, it does not matter. But, oh, if the pain
       might stop, if the pain might stop! The robin sings now, because the spring is here; but it
       is not always spring. And some day—perhaps not this winter, but some day—the dear little
       brown body will agonize—it will die alone, in the horrible great universe; one thinks little
       of a robin, but it agonizes all the same when its time comes; it agonizes all the same.”
The thoughts were drowned, for a moment, in a flood of terrible, unbearable pity for all
       the sorrow of the world. The robin seemed to think that he had a mission to cheer his
       companion, for he warbled merrily on. And beside him, the dust-motes danced the wildest of
       dances, in the shaft of sunshine.
“It is very lovely, it is very lovely—the world is a miracle, but it is all like a taunt,
       it is like an insult, this glory of the world. I am born a woman, and to be born a woman is
       to be exquisitely sensitive to insult and to live under it always, always. I wish that I were
       as marble to the magic of Life, I wish that I cared for nothing and felt nothing. I pray only
       that the dream and the longing may be killed, and killed quickly!”

In the silence, the bird's note sounded clear and tender. The dance of the dust-motes, like
       the great dance of Life itself, went on without ceasing.
The robin seemed to insist on a brighter view of things. He urged his companion to take
       comfort. Had the spring not come?
“But you do not understand, you do not understand, little soul that sings—the spring is
       torturing me and taunting me. If only it would kill me!”
The robin fluffed out his feathers, and began again to impart his sweet philosophy. Hadria
       was shedding the first unchecked tears that she had shed since her earliest childhood. And
       then, for the second time to-day, that strange unexplained peace stole into her heart. Reason
       came quickly and drove it away with a sneer, and the horror and the darkness closed round
       again.
“If I might only die, if I might only die!”
But the little bird sang on.
</div></body></text></TEI>