<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="17">
CHAPTER XVII
NUMBER TWENTY-SEVEN
THE vast, mud-coloured building loomed out of the fog as the doctor's coachman drew
     up, with a jerk, under the portico. Against the dark lining of the carriage the fine drawing of
     a man's profile was visible by the light of a portable lamp. There were irritable folds at the
     corners of the mouth, a restless look in the keen eyes, as they travelled over the page he was
     reading. Dr. Dunlop Strange only folded up the medical paper he had been studying as he went up
     the steps of the Whitechapel Hospital. It was his habit to allow himself no time for vagrant
     thoughts, so that even to-day, when he was to meet Alison and take her over the hospital along
     with Mary Erle, even to-day his mind ran on professional matters.
Inside the large bare hall, where a marble statue of the Queen loomed chillily out of the
     vague half-light, Alison and Mary, the latter carrying a leather note-book, were already
     awaiting him. Dunlop Strange looked at Alison,
      taking in every detail of her radiant personality with his
     swift professional glance. In the after years he always preferred to think of her as he saw her
     that instant, standing by the white marble statue of the Queen, for never again did she look at
     him with the same clear, cordial eyes.
The doctor and Alison met as people meet who are more than interested in each other. For some
     time past she had known that he was devoted to her, and the girl had almost made up her mind,
     if he asked her, she would accept him. It was a busy, sensible life, that of a doctor's wife,
     she told herself; and, after all, in her world, one had to marry some day or other. One
     couldn't permit one's self the luxury of being an old maid, unless one had an income of over
     £5,000 a year. But there was no particular hurry, she said, when well-meaning friends bothered
     her about it. They were both of a certain age. They both had their own occupations, their own
     hobbies.
The doctor never took his eyes from her face. To have this woman for his wife would be the
     crowning act of a brilliantly successful career. He only hesitated to speak until he had
     received the baronetcy which was in store for him. Not that Alison herself would care; she had
     none of the usual small feminine ambitions; but the doctor was quite aware that it would
     influence
      Lady Jane, who had made up her mind that Alison, when she
     married, should only make, if she could help it, what she called a ‘sensible match.’
They went up a stone staircase, to which a somewhat false air of cheerfulness was imparted by
     a grass-green painted dado, surmounted by a bright lavender-toned wall, passing a large window
     giving out on a grimy back garden, a garden whose sodden grass plot was closed in by high,
     brown brick walls, and over which hung a heavy, fog-laden sky, etched with sooty branches. On
     the first landing there was a closed door, and outside, an empty stretcher, beside which two
     hospital porters were waiting. Suddenly the door was pushed ajar, and for an instant there was
     a vision of anxious, inquisitive faces, lit up by a glare of gas; of a nurse's back, bending
     forward, and of a surgeon's face, blowing spray on to something that was invisible. Over all an
     intense silence, broken only by the hoarse whispers of the porters with the stretcher,
     wondering how long they would have to wait.
‘There don't seem to be many students in there,’ said Alison in her practical voice.
‘No, they don't crowd in here like they do in the other hospitals. We've so many operations,
     you see. Two or three every afternoon all the year round.’

Upstairs, in the ‘Charlotte Ward,’ the fifty red-quilted beds effaced themselves in the gloom
     of the winter afternoon. There was a vague odour of medicine, overpowered by that of patent
     disinfectants. All the beds were alike; there were blue-and-white checked curtains and
     vallance, a rope by which the patient could pull herself into a sitting posture, a cupboard
     with food and medicines inside, and a cardboard overhead, on which the number, age, disease,
     and diet of the patient were all duly inscribed. Yes, the little beds, thought Mary, were
     curiously alike, and yet on every mattress a different form of pain was being endured.
‘Congestion of the lungs, peritonitis,’ said the doctor in a brief undertone, as the two
     girls passed down the room. A screen was placed round one of the narrow bedsteads.
‘What is that for?’ whispered Mary.
‘Hopeless case,’ answered the doctor gravely. ‘It is probably all over by now. We do that to
     spare the other patients. Death scenes have a bad moral effect.’
‘And—and how long do they stay there after it's all over?’
‘Oh, they are removed to the mortuary at once.’
At intervals down the long room, with its shining white boards, blazed large fires, lighting
      up, here and there, the bland, unemotional features of a
     nurse, under her smooth hair and white cap—the sexless features of a woman who has learnt to
     witness suffering without a sign. Yet they brightened the room, these girls, in their lilac
     cotton gowns and ample aprons, with their practical faces, and their strong, helpful hands,
     suggesting an out-of-doors where people were healthy and happy, a place where no one was
     agonising.
On hearing that Dr. Strange was taking visitors round, Sister Charlotte, the superintendent
     of the ward, emerged from her private room and hurried forward. The Sister was a long-nosed
     woman of thirty-five, with small, bright eyes and a cordial manner. The doctor introduced the
     three ladies to each other, and Sister Charlotte talked, moving forward all the time, with a
     professional look on her bright face. They stopped, now, at every bed. Mary asked questions in
     an undertone, and Dunlop Strange, whose hospital manner was proverbial, addressed each sick
     woman in the same tone he would have employed to a duchess. His way with women was one of the
     things for which he was justly famous. And in this manner the little procession moved somewhat
     slowly along.
They had come to the end of one line of beds,
      and were now about to turn up the other side of the room.
     Sister Charlotte stopped.
‘We have a new patient there, doctor,’ she said briskly. ‘Number twenty-seven. A hopeless
     case of rapid consumption. Poor creature,’ she whispered to Alison, ‘she was in a terrible
     state when she came. I can't tell you. They brought her in from one of the common
     lodging-houses. It seems she tried to commit suicide last summer, but the police fished her out
     of the canal, and managed to pump back the life into her. That was the beginning of her
     lung-trouble. Since then she must have sunk very low.’
All four stepped up to the foot of the narrow bed. The patient's back was turned to them. She
     was only a shapeless lump, breathing heavily under the red coverlet.
‘Don't let's disturb her,’ said Alison, in a faintly disgusted tone. ‘Why hadn't
     they let the wretched woman drown in that muddy canal water, before she could be sucked down in
     the awful whirlpool of vice?’
But the irony of actualities has little to do with any mere human volition. There are things
     written by the great penman we call destiny, which no man's remorse can erase and no woman's
     tears wash out. Number Twenty-seven tossed over and lay on her back, and the course of two
     lives was altered.

Number Twenty-seven lay on her back, her vicious face, with its hard mouth and the
     brownish-pink flush on each cheek-bone, looking sharply emaciated against the whiteness of the
     pillow. Her fringe, reaching nearly to her eye-brows, was faded and lank; the mouth, with its
     singularly hard lines, was swollen and livid.
‘Oh! Alison,’ whispered Mary, ‘I remember her, although she's terribly changed. I once saw
     her, waiting, poor soul, in the Regent's Park, for someone—’
Dr. Dunlop Strange bent forward with his searching, professional glance, for he was famous at
     diagnosis. He put his hand on her wrist, and their eyes met. Good God! Could it be? His heart
     absolutely stood still. Was this horrible wreck the girl he had taken such a fancy to only half
     a dozen years ago—the girl who had been so fond of him, but who had grown so bad-tempered and
     suspicious, that he had been obliged to break off all relations with her? And, merciful God!
     could it be that this woman—the unsightly corpse, as it were, of his dead pleasure—was going to
     speak; was about to spoil the happiness of his whole future life? In all his forty-five years
     Dr. Dunlop Strange had never known such an odious moment.
But Number Twenty-seven only laughed—an unmirthful, coarse, and empty laugh.

‘Lord, are you here?’ she muttered, staring the doctor straight in the eyes.
     Then she tossed over.
It was a curious scene. The doctor drew a long breath; he had grown visibly paler before he
     spoke. The nurse stared. Alison's eyes were fixed on the bed-quilt. Mary looked perplexed.
‘Poor creature! She mistakes me for some one else,’ he said at last, in a voice which he
     tried hard to make natural. ‘They often do just at the last,’ he added in a lower tone. And
     then, taking down the card hung over the bed, on which the patient's age, disease, and diet, as
     well as the physician's name in charge of the case were written, he continued in his
     sympathetic voice—
‘Quite right; perfectly right. Dr. Brown, I see, has ordered everything that could possibly
     be of use. Sister, look after this case specially.’
Alison roused herself, bent over the patient, saying something kind, and passed on in a kind
     of dream. Not an incident of the strange scene had escaped her. She felt a curious kind of
     nausea; perhaps it was the air of the ward. It sounded far off, the chat and the talk round the
     other beds, as they passed up the ward, and she was conscious only of an irresistible desire to
     go back and speak to that poor
      outcast on the hospital mattress. They passed to another
     girl—the battered leavings of the vice of a great city—and further on a sallow, bright-eyed
     young woman sitting up in bed, whom, Sister Charlotte whispered, they must make haste to cure
     and discharge, as in a month or two she would become a mother.
‘She will become a mother,’ thought Alison, ‘the mother, perhaps, of a baby-girl, destined,
     before she is born, to become like one of these!’
The face of Number Twenty-seven became an obtrusion. She must go back and hear her story;
     perhaps she could help her, save her, send her out to a farm she knew of at the Cape, where
     even such as she might begin a new life. People often got well at the Cape when they were far
     gone in consumption.
The doctor and Mary were a little way in front as Alison detained the Sister for a
     moment.
‘I should like, Sister Charlotte,’ she said, trying to make her voice sound indifferent, ‘to
     come and see that poor woman—Number Twenty-seven—to-morrow. I have taken an interest in her
     case. Tell me, where does she come from—what sort of a girl was she before—?’
‘Oh, she's not a Londoner. Came from Sussex five or six years ago.’

‘I might,’ said Alison, ‘be able to do something for her. I will talk it all over with you if
     you will let me come to-morrow.’
‘You must allow me to drive you both home,’ said Dr. Dunlop Strange, in his decided way, as
     they stepped out into the grey mud, the orange gas-lights, and the shuffling crowd of the
     Whitechapel Road. But there was not much conversation as the carriage rolled westward through
     the deepening gloom. Mary and the doctor talked spasmodically. Alison hardly spoke.
</div></body></text></TEI>