<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER IX
PERRY CONSOLES
THE next day—the day which was to decide her fate with the Academy schools—revealed
     itself shrouded with fog. By the light of one gas-burner Mary tried to eat some breakfast, but
     the doubtful allurements of the boiled egg which usually awaited her appealed to her to-day in
     vain. She had slept badly and risen late; it was now half-past ten. Already, at the art school,
     in the grimy little office, the names of the successful candidates would be nailed up. No, she
     could not eat; she must know. It meant so much to her, so much more, she thought, than to any
     of the others. It meant independence, a profession, a happy union. How many hoped-for marriages
     she had seen fail among professional people just for the want of a mere hundred or so a year.
     If she were good enough for the Academy schools, she felt that there was a future before her.
     She saw herself, in imagination, working, earning, helping.

Putting on her coat and hat she was soon outside in the fog, and threading her away along the
     streets to the School of Art. Underfoot was a layer of greasy mud. In the little shops a
     bleared gas-light made an orange patch in the all-pervading greyness. At the fruiterers' the
     mounds of golden oranges, crimson apples, and scarlet tomatoes flamed with startling assurance
     against the blurred, brownish-grey of the houses, the pavement, the very atmosphere. She was
     curiously alive, now, to effects of colour, to ‘values’; everywhere the girl saw a possible
     picture. If she had passed, Mary made up her mind she would telegraph to Vincent. It would be
     an extravagance, but it would make him so happy. Mary pictured her lover reading that charming
     message from over the seas, as he sat in an Indian verandah in a white flannel suit, with a
     hazy background of punkahs and date palms.
Afterwards, when she thought of that day, she remembered that the hall of the art school was
     full of students, all talking at once. At the sight of the girl's expectant face someone called
     out goodnaturedly, ‘I say, you're in, Miss Erle. I'm sure I saw your name on the list. It's in
     the office, pinned up over the mantel-piece.’
Mary slid into the little room without a word.
      Yes, there was the list of successful probationers, written
     in Mr. Sanderson's careful hand on a slip of notepaper, and pinned up with a brass drawing pin
     over the mantelpiece. Her eye ran hastily along the list—‘Simpkins, Dorothy Muriel; Smith, Mary
     Gwendo]en; Walsh, Joseph Frederick; Billington, George Francis; Thomson, Pamela Evelyn; Beadle,
     Reginald Forsyth.’ That was all. She read it again to make sure, repeating to herself,
     mechanically, the Dorothys, Pamelas, and Gwendolens of the back-shop. No, there was no possible
     mistake. The name of Mary Erle was not there. And so it was all over... Never, she felt, should
     she have the courage to spend another six months labouring and stippling over another Laocoon.
     The girl slipped into a chair in a corner. Her disappointment had affected her physically, her
     feet were icy cold; she felt, without being hungry, as if she had nothing inside her, while the
     voices of people talking round sounded strange and far away.
But presently she roused herself and went through the big room to collect some things she had
     left. Only Mr. Perry Jackson met her behind the olive-green curtain :—Mr. Jackson, who,
     although the workmen were now out of his studio, was curiously often to be seen at the
     school.

He glanced at Mary and instantly read the disappointment in her face. Though young, he was,
     after all, a Londoner, and had the Cockney's intuitive knowledge of the world. He even went so
     far as to congratulate Miss Erle in having failed to attain the desired standard of academical
     excellence. He had, as he admitted with pleasing candour, only got his own drawing admitted, in
     the years gone by, ‘by the skin of its teeth.’ As for himself, he had mainly attended the
     classes (and this was said with something very like a wink) to make friends with the Royal
     Academicians. ‘They're all right when you know 'em, but you've got to know 'em first,’ quoted
     the rising artist. ‘There's old Jack Madder, who always does Wardour Street pictures; he's not
     half a bad old chap, and thinks no end of me. He's on the Hanging Committee next year. I go and
     ask his advice. I'm going to do a big thing for next year's Academy, and I'll eat my hat if it
     isn't on the line!’
‘I hope so, I'm sure,’ replied Mary, smiling. ‘When are you going to begin?’
‘Oh, at once. I've got an idea that's bound to fetch the public.’ ‘Indeed?’ replied Mary,
     amused at his naïve optimism.
‘I shall call it “The Time of Roses.” What
      do you think of that? Neat, eh? Nothing but girls, and
     nothing but roses. Lord, you can't give the public enough of either of them. It likes 'em,
     because they both “go off” so soon,’ added Mr. Jackson, charmed with his own perspicacity.
     ‘It'll be an eight-footer, if it's an inch, and if it isn't on the line next May——’
‘I dare say it will be an immense success,’ said Mary quietly, as she thought of bygone
     Private Views, and of the canvases which had become ‘the picture of the year.’
‘Now, for the Grosvenor,’ continued Mr. Jackson—‘after my last Academy picture they're spry
     enough with their invitations to exhibit there—I shall do a girl in a graveyard. Bless you,
     people are “death” on cemeteries. Black dress—limp—black hat, hangin' on her arm—black circles
     round the eyes. And there you are, don't you know.’
Mary laughed. There was not much doubt about the fact that Mr. Perry Jackson was destined to
     get on. He had an astonishing facility in painting; in the summer time he worked at vast
     canvases, out of doors, in the country, painting with large square brushes, in the approved
     modern manner.
‘Oh! I say, Miss Erle,’ said Perry, detaining the girl with a look as she stood putting her
      painting things together. There was something of despair in
     the way in which Mary was folding up her easel, and arranging her chalks and paint-brushes in
     the long tin box, and with his quick sympathy the young man wished to assuage her sickening
     disappointment.
‘Just look here,’ he continued, pulling from a cardboard portfolio an Indian-ink drawing of a
     beautiful young woman in a ball-dress reading a love-letter. ‘Old “Stick-in-the-mud,” he says
     he'd like this drawing for Illustrations, only he must have a short story or
     some verses to go with it. Now, you're so clever, and literary, and read so many books, can't
     you knock me off something to print with it?’
Mary, who had never heard of this primitive method of producing imaginative literature,
     stared in blank astonishment at Mr. Perry Jackson. Her eye caught his knobby hands, his stubbly
     hair, his knowing, anaemic, town-bred face, and then the picture of the exquisite woman robed
     in tulle, which he held in his hand.
‘Oh, yes. Why not?’ she found herself saying eagerly. ‘I will try, if you like. I think I
     could do quite a short story. And I can only —fail,’ she added, a little bitterly, as her mind
     ran back over the months she had spent in that odious room, herding with hulking boys, who
      smelt of stale tobacco, with young ladies who tossed their
     heads archly, and whispered anecdotes of ‘fellows’ whom they met in pastry-cooks' shops, or in
     the sculpture galleries of the British Museum.
‘That's right. Knew you could,’ rejoined Perry, repacking the drawing. ‘It'll be time enough
     if I have it in a week. I'm doing a story for Illutstrations now. Blessed,’ he
     added, with a comic twinkle, pushing back his shock head of hair, ‘if I didn't make an ass of
     myself yesterday. Last week old “Stick-in-the-Mud,” he asked me if I'd do some pictures for a
     story. “Oh!” I said, “I 'm game,” I said; “who's it by?” And he says, “By Somervail.” Well, I
     never heard of him—did you, Miss Erle?’
‘I know the name,’ said Mary.
‘Well, presently comes the MSS., and I read it through, and it was pretty tough work, I can
     tell you, what with not being type-written, and I not feeling quite fit that day, havin' taken
     the chair at our smoking concert the night before. However, a few days later comes a stiff kind
     of a letter from this Somervail, saying I must call at once, that evening, at his house, out
     Notting Hill way. So off I go in my carriage and pair (the red-and-gold one, don't you know),
     and presently I find the house. Well, the servant girl, she showed me up a passage covered all
     over with
      autotypes, framed alike in white. Crikey' thought I, here's
     “High Art.” There's nothing good enough for this chap but Rossetti, and Burne-Jones, and Watts.
     And in the drawing-room it was just the same——’
‘But didn't you know then whom it was?’ asked Mary, smiling.
‘No, blessed if I did!’ rejoined Mr. Jackson. ‘And so this Mr. Somervail comes in. “Oh, good
     evening,” says he, without any more ceremony than that. “Have you brought the rough sketches
     for my story?” “No,” I said, “I haven't,” I said, just imitating his off-hand manner, “because
     you wouldn't have understood 'em if I had.”’
‘But didn't you know,’ said Mary, ‘that Mr. Somervail is the art critic of two or three
     London papers?’
‘Nary a bit. Well, he laughed—a sort of thin, superior laugh it was—but he didn't say
     anything; and so I got out all right. But I felt a precious fool when I heard who he was.’
‘Let us hope,’ said Mary, who remembered the great art critic at dinner-parties, exhibiting
     his culture, with a modest air, ‘let us hope Mr. Somervail isn't vindictive.’
Perry looked uneasy.
‘I say,’ he suggested, genially, ‘why shouldn't you turn art critic, Miss Erle, and slate us
     all
      round? Old Somervail, he's made a good thing out of it!’
At that instant a tumult of voices behind the curtain made further conversation impossible. A
     girl's shrill scream was suddenly audible, and then, the next second, the heavy crash of a
     falling plaster cast rent the momentary silence. Shouts, exclamations, and inextinguishable
     laughter, mingled with the sound of scurrying feet, followed. An untoward gaiety was evidently
     illumining the usual routine of the school. As Mary, gathering up her things, passed through
     into the large studio, a boy's raucous voice raised the joyous, but somewhat incongruous
     refrain :— 
      ‘The pore girl didn't know, yer know,
The pore girl didn't know’—
      a quotation which may or may not have had reference to the now triumphant probationer,
     Miss Simpkins, who, with heightened colour and agitated mien, was bending over the many
     fragments of the shattered Laocoon, which lay strewn about the floor.
The rest of the day, it would seem, was to be devoted to celebrating the admittance of
     Messrs. Walsh, Billington, and Beadle to the Royal Academy Schools, for, scared at Miss
     Simpkins' misadventure, the girls incontinently fled. A
      drawing—a laboriously stippled drawing—was triumphantly
     wrenched from an overturned board, and torn in many pieces; the easels were as unceremoniously
     hurled against the wall. Some bottles of beer made a mysterious appearance, and, from some
     one's bag, two pairs of boxing-gloves were surreptitiously produced. The moment was justly held
     to be a supreme one, for, dancing on the shattered fragments of the fallen Laocoon, a
     truculent, if disappointed, young gentleman was heard shouting to the three successful students
     that, ‘successful or not,’ he would fight them all in turn.
It may have been the bottled ale, or simply British perseverance, which emboldened the
     aggressor, for, as he threw off his coat and slipped on the gloves, he was heard fulminating
     the hazy, if withal glorious, challenge—
‘I don't care a rap for your blooming Academy. Come on, you fellows. I'll show you who's the
     best man!’
</div></body></text></TEI>