<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daughters of Danaus : VWWP edition </title><author>Caird, Mona (1854-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II.
ONCE more the old stronghold of Dunaghee, inured for centuries to the changes of
       the elements, received the day's greeting. The hues of dawn tinged the broad hill pastures,
       or “airds,” as they were called, round about the Tower of the Winds. No one was abroad yet in
       the silent lands, except perhaps a shepherd, tending his flock. The little farmstead of Craw
       Gill, that lay at a distance of about a couple of miles down the valley, on the side of a
       ravine, was apparently dead asleep. Cruachmore, the nearest upland farm, could scarcely be
       seen from the stronghold. The old tower had been added to, perhaps two hundred years ago; a
       rectangular block projecting from the corner of the original building, and then a second
       erection at right angles to the first, so as to form three sides of an irregular courtyard.
       This arrangement afforded some shelter from the winds which seldom ceased to blow in these
       high regions. The spot had borne the same reputation for centuries, as the name of the old
       tower implied.
The Tower of the Winds stood desolately, in the midst of a wide-eyed agricultural country,
       and was approached only by a sort of farm track that ran up hill and down dale, in a most
       erratic course, to the distant main road.
The country was not mountainous, though it lay in a northern district of Scotland; it was
       bleak and solitary, with vast bare fields of grass or corn; and below in the valley, a river
       that rushed sweeping over its rough bed, silent where it ran deep, but chattering busily in
       the shallows. Here was verdure to one's heart's content; the whole country being a
        singular mixture of bleakness on the heights, and woodland
       richness in the valleys; bitterly cold in the winter months, when the light deserted the
       uplands ridiculously early in the afternoon, leaving long mysterious hours that held the
       great silent stretches of field and hillside in shadow: a circumstance, which had, perhaps,
       not been without its influence in the forming of Hadria's character. She, more than the
       others, seemed to have absorbed the spirit of the northern twilights. It was her custom to
       wander alone over the broad spaces of the hills, watching the sun set behind them, the
       homeward flight of the birds, the approach of darkness and the rising of the stars. Every
       instinct that was born in her with her Celtic blood—which lurked still in the family to the
       confounding of its fortunes—was fostered by the mystery and wildness of her surroundings.
Dawn and sunset had peculiar attractions for her.
Although the Preposterous Society had not separated until unusually late on the previous
       night, the President was up and abroad on this exquisite morning, summoned by some “message
       of range and of sweep—” to the flushing stretches of pasture and the windy hillside.
In spite of the view that Hadria had expounded in her capacity of lecturer, she had an
       inner sense that somehow, after all, the will can perform astonishing feats in
       Fate's despite. Her intellect, rather than her heart, had opposed the philosophy of Emerson.
       Her sentiment recoiled from admitting the possibility of such tragedy as her expressed belief
       implied. This morning, the wonder and the grandeur of the dawn supplied arguments to faith.
       If the best in human nature were always to be hunted down and extinguished, if the efforts to
       rise in the scale of being, to bring gifts instead of merely absorbing benefits, were only by
       a rare combination of chances to escape the doom of annihilation, where was one to turn to
       for hope, or for a motive for effort? How could one reconcile the marvellous beauty of the
       universe, the miracles of colour, form, and, above all, of music, with such a chaotic
        moral condition, and such unlovely laws in favour of
       dulness, cowardice, callousness, cruelty? One aspired to be an upholder and not a destroyer,
       but if it were a useless pain and a bootless venture—?
Hadria tried to find some proof of the happier philosophy that would satisfy her intellect,
       but it refused to be comforted. Yet as she wandered in the rosy light over the awakening
       fields, her heart sang within her. The world was exquisite, life was a rapture!
She could take existence in her hands and form and fashion it at her will, obviously,
       easily; her strength yearned for the task.
Yet all the time, the importunate intellect kept insisting that feeling was deceptive, that
       health and youth and the freshness of the morning spoke in her, and not reason or experience.
       Feeling was left untouched nevertheless. It was impossible to stifle the voices that
       prophesied golden things. Life was all before her she was full of vigour and longing and good
       will; the world stretched forth as a fair territory, with magical pathways leading up to
       dizzy mountain tops. With visions such as these, the members of the Preposterous Society had
       fired their imaginations, and gained impetus for their various efforts and their various
       ambitions.
Hadria had been among the most hopeful of the party, and had pointed to the loftier
       visions, and the more impersonal aims. Circumstance must give way, compromise was wrong; we
       had but a short time in this world, and mere details and prejudices must not be allowed to
       interfere with one's right to live to the utmost of one's scope. But it was easier to state a
       law than to obey it; easier to inspire others with faith than to hold fast to it oneself.
The time for taking matters in one's own hands had scarcely come. A girl was so helpless,
       so tied by custom. One could engage, so far, only in guerilla warfare with the enemy, who
       lurked everywhere in ambush, ready to harass the wayfarers with incessant petty attack. But
       life must have
        something more to offer than this—life with its myriad
       interests, dramas, mysteries, arts, poetries, delights!
By the river, where it had worn for itself a narrow ravine, with steep rocky sides or
       “clints,” as they were called, several short tunnels or passages had been cut in places where
       the rock projected as far as the bank of the river, which was followed in its windings by a
       narrow footway, leading to the farmstead of Craw Gill.
In one part, a series of such tunnels, with intervals of open pathway, occurred in
       picturesque fashion, causing a singular effect of light and shade.
As Hadria stood admiring the glow of the now fully-risen sun, upon the wall of rock that
       rose beyond the opening of the tunnel which she had just passed through, she heard footsteps
       advancing along the riverside path, and guessed that Algitha and Ernest had come to fetch
       her, or to join in any absurd project that she might have in view. Although Algitha was
       two-and-twenty, and Hadria only a year younger, they were still guilty at times of wild
       escapades, with the connivance of their brothers. Walks or rides at sunrise were ordinary
       occurrences in the family, and in summer, bathing in the river was a favourite amusement.
“I thought I recognised your footsteps,” said Hadria, as the two figures appeared at the
       mouth of the tunnel, the low rays of the sun lighting them up, for a moment, as they turned
       the sharp bend of the narrow path, before entering the shadow.
A quantity of brown dead leaves were strewn upon the floor of the rock-passage, blown in by
       the wind from the pathway at each end, or perhaps through the opening in the middle of the
       tunnel that looked out upon the rushing river.
A willow-tree had found footing in the crevice of the rock just outside, and its branches,
       thinly decked with pale yellow leaves, dipped into the water just in front of the opening.
       When the wind blew off the river it would sweep the leaves of the willow into the tunnel.
“Let's make a bonfire,” suggested Ernest.

They collected the withered harvest of the winds upon the cavern floor, in a big brown
       heap, and then Ernest struck a match and set light to it. Algitha, in a large black cloak,
       stood over it with a hazel stick—like a wand—stirring and heaping on the fuel, as the mass
       began to smoulder and to send forth a thick white smoke that gradually filled the cavern,
       curling up into the rocky roof and swirling round and out by the square-cut mouth, to be
       caught there by the slight wind and illumined by the sun, which poured down upon the soft
       coils of the smoke, in so strange a fashion, as to call forth a cry of wonder from the
       onlookers. Standing in the interval of open pathway between the two rock-passages, and
       looking back at the fire-lit cavern, with its black shadows and flickering flame-colours,
       Hadria was bewildered by what appeared to her a veritable magic vision, beautiful beyond
       anything that she had ever met in dream. She stood still to watch, with a real momentary
       doubt as to whether she were awake.
The figures, stooping over the burning heap, moved occasionally across the darkness,
       looking like a witch and her familiar spirit, who were conjuring, by uncanny arts, a vision
       of life, on the strange, white, clean-cut patch of smoke that was defined by the sunlit
       entrance to the tunnel. The witch stirred, and her familiar added fuel, while behind them the
       smoke, rising and curdling, formed the mysterious background of light: opaque, and yet in a
       state of incessant movement, as of some white raging fire, thinner and more deadly than any
       ordinary earthly element, that seemed to sicken and flicker in the blast of a furnace, and
       then rushed upwards, and coiled and rolled across the tunnel's mouth. Presently, as a puff of
       wind swept away part of the smoke, a miraculous tinge of rosy colour appeared, changing, as
       one caught it, into gold, and presently to a milky blue, then liquid green, and a thousand
       intermediate tints corresponding to the altering density of the smoke—and then! Hadria caught
       her breath—the blue and the red and the gold melted and moved and formed, under the
       incantation, into a marvellous
        vision of distant lands, purple mountains, fair white
       cities, and wide kingdoms, so many, so great, that the imaginltion staggered at the vastness
       revealed, and offered, as it seemed, to him who could grasp and perceive it. Among those blue
       deeps and faint innumerable mountaintops, caught through a soft mist that continually moved
       and lifted, thinned and thickened, with changing tints, all the secrets, all the hopes, all
       the powers and splendours, of life lay hidden; and the beauty of the vision was as the
       essence of poetry and of music—of all that is lovely in the world of art, and in the world of
       the emotions. The question that had been debated so hotly and so often, as to the relation of
       the good and the beautiful, art and ethics, seemed to be answered by this bewildering
       revelation of sunlit smoke, playing across the face of a purple-tinted rock, and a few feet
       of grass-edged pathway.
“Come and see what visions you have conjured up, O witch!” cried Hadria.
Algitha gave a startled exclamation, as the smoke thinned and revealed that bewildering
       glimpse of distant lands, half seen, as through the atmosphere of a dream. An exquisite city,
       with slender towers and temples, flashed, for a moment, through the mist curtain.
“If life is like that,” she said at length, drawing a long breath, “nothing on this earth
       ought to persuade us to forgo it; no one has the right to hold one back from its
       possession.”
“No one,” said Hadria; “but everyone will try!”
“Let them try,” returned Algitha defiantly.
</div></body></text></TEI>