<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of a Modern Woman : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Dixon, Ella Hepworth (1857-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III
A YOUNG GIRL
LOOKING back, across the vague, misty years, the egotism, the ferocious egotism, of
     the young girl appears well-nigh incredible. At eighteen, she, with her fluffy hair and her
     white shoulders, is the most important thing in her little world. There is the day she first
     discovers she has a throat with fine lines; the secret delight with which she hears an artist
     tell her that the movements of her body are graceful. Does black, or blue, or white become her
     best? It is never too late, and she is never too tired, when she comes back from a ball, to
     light all the candles again in her bedroom and examine herself critically, anxiously, in the
     glass. There is a little pink spot of excitement on each cheek; her hair is ruffled. She looks
     pretty, she has been happy to-night. Some one—no matter who—has told her she looks
     charming.
There is the desire of the young girl to coquet, to play with, to torture, when she first
      learns the all-powerful influence which she possesses by the
     primitive fact of her sex. With all the arrogance which belongs to personal purity, she stands
     on her little pedestal and looks down on mankind with a somewhat condescending smile. She
     is—and she feels it instinctively—a thing apart, a kind of forced plant, a product of
     civilisation. At present the ball-room, with its artificial atmosphere, its fleeting devotions,
     its graceful mockery of real life, is the scene of her little triumphs. The eyes of all
     men—young and old alike—follow the girl approvingly, wistfully, as she ascends the staircase,
     her full heart beating against her slim satin bodice, the clear, peachlike cheeks pink with
     excitement, her swimming eyes raised invitingly to some favourite partner, or dropped as she
     passes a man she wishes to avoid. At the door her slender white arms and shoulders disappear in
     a circle of black coats; the programme is scrawled all over; she notes exultantly that one or
     two men are scowling at each other, and that she has no dance to give some one who has joined
     the group too late. It is the woman's first taste of power.
There is, too, the joie de vivre, the delight of the young
     animal at play, the imperious will-to-live of a being in perfect health. The girl must dance
     till her feet ache horribly, the room swings
      round, and the pink dawn comes creeping in behind the drawn
     blinds; but still she must go on till that music stops, the swaying, voluptuous heartrending
     music which draws her feet round and round. The violins, with their navrant tones, the human, dolorous strains of the cornets, the brilliant, metallic,
     artificial sounds of the piano, all act powerfully on the young girl's nervous system. Then
     come the stifling crowded supper-room, with its indigestible food and sweet champagne; the
     young men who move nearer and look at her with strange eyes, after they have eaten and drunk.
     It is all new and intoxicating, and a little frightening; but it is life, or the nearest
     approach to it that a young girl, gently nurtured and carefully looked after, can possibly
     know.
Admiration, at this period, is the very breath of her nostrils. No matter from whom, no
     matter when or where. A smile, seen like a flash, on a face in a passing hansom; the ill-bred
     pertinacity of a raised lorgnette at a theatre; the dubious gaze of men about town, leaning
     against ball-room doors—nothing offends her. It is simply incense burnt at the feet of her
     youth.
But at last, out of the vague crowd of black coats and wistful eyes, the first lover emerges.
     It is a little difficult to recall his face, after all
      these years. Looking back dispassionately, he seems to have
     been very like all the others, only that he made her suffer, while the others, perhaps,
     suffered a little for her sake. There were the horrible half-hours of torture when she waited,
     in some crowded party, for his sleek head and his somewhat foolish smile to appear in the
     door-way; the blank, empty days when there was no letter; the shamefully sweet, the incredible
     surrender to the first tentative embrace, a surrender which tortured her night and day, and
     then the joy, the supreme joy, of knowing, for certain, that he cared.
It is all a little remote, now, but the beautiful secret was hugged like a very treasure. He
     was young, he was poor, there were difficulties of every sort to contend with, and finally
     there was a parting, one warm, windy night in November. It was a Sunday, about seven o'clock,
     and through the window, which was ajar in the drawing-room where they stood, came the sound of
     a tolling bell. It was only a neighbouring church summoning pious folk to evening service, but
     it sounded like a knell. It was a well-nigh hopeless affair, and all that they could do was to
     promise to write to each other. For some weeks the girl watched, in the column of the shipping
     intelligence, the eastward progress of a Peninsular and Oriental
      steamer on its way to Australia, and after that, on the
     mornings when the mail came in, she would stand with her heart in her mouth, and her hand on
     the knob of the dining-room door, afraid to go in and find that no foreign envelope lay beside
     her plate. For some months, to be sure, the letters nearly always lay there, but gradually they
     got rarer and rarer, and one day she told herself finally that she need not expect any more.
     Torture is not made more bearable by being slowly applied. During the months in which those
     letters from Australia grew rarer, the girl understood for the first time the helplessness, the
     intolerable burden which society has laid on her sex. All things must be endured with a polite
     smile. Had she been a boy, she was aware that she might have made an effort to break the
     maddening silence; have stifled her sorrow with dissipation, with travel or hard work. As it
     was, the trivial round of civilised feminine existence made her, in those days, almost an
     automaton. One looks back, with wonder, at the courage of the girl. To find a smile with which
     to face her father at the dinner table; to take a sisterly interest in Jim's exploits at
     school; to show due surprise each time her brother announced the arrival of a new batch of
     rabbits; and a partisan's joy in the licking which Smith minor had administered to
      Jones major—these were the immediate duties which lay before
     her.
Not feeling strong just now, the girl gave up going to balls; they reminded her too much of
     that episode which she wished to forget; and now the prospect that opened out before her was a
     vista of years full of scientific soirées where one walked
     down long sparsely-peopled rooms and looked through microscopes at things which wriggled and
     squirmed. Sometimes the girl felt strangely like one of those much-observed bacilli; the
     daughter of a scientist, she knew well enough that her little troubles had about as much
     importance as theirs in relation to the vast universe. Yet there she was, fixed down under her
     little glass case, while the world kept a coldly observant eye upon her. Ah, the torture of the
     young—the young who are always unhappy, and whose little lives are continually coming to a full
     stop, with chapters that cease bluntly, brutally, without reason and without explanation.
That she was thrown aside, dropped overboard, as it were, in the terrific battle for
     existence mattered nothing to the young girl. Having no self-pity, she never questioned the
     justice of the blow that had been dealt her. Afterwards, in the years to come, she might wonder
     why she should have been made to
      suffer so? But not then. One's first sorrow is a very
     precious thing. In those far-off days, she would gladly have sacrificed everything—even life
     itself—for the young man who forgot to write, and whose face, with its rather foolish smile, it
     is so difficult to recall exactly as it was.
About this time, when she began to work at the Central London School of Art, father and
     daughter became great friends. On the days when he went to lecture at the London University,
     she would either walk with him, or go to fetch him on those afternoons when he was coming
     straight home to tea instead of making his way to the Athenæum Club. With her chin in the air,
     looking straight before her, she stepped along, in the half-dark, with a royal scorn for the
     well-dressed loafers who find their pleasure in accosting ladies in the street. She was
     twenty-one, and a woman now; it behoved her to be able to take care of herself. And after all,
     they were perhaps more easily disposed of than some of the men who took her in to dinner, men
     who had tired eyes and a dubious smile, and who were fond of starting doubtful topics with a
     side-long, tentative glance.
She works now regularly with her father, acting as his amanuensis when his eyes are tired, or
     verifying facts in the library. Jimmie,
      the little brother, has grown into a boy with charming,
     insinuating manners, who is curiously un-British in his demonstrativeness. His sister, he says,
     is the most charming of girls. He announces that he is always going to live with her. Nothing
     shall separate them. His whole life, he declares, with his arms round her neck, is to be
     devoted to his dearest Mary.
How well she remembered the last time she and her father had gone out together. She could
     recollect driving in a hansom, and their talk on the way to the Foreign Office. His last book
     but one had but lately appeared, and was now being scratched and bespluttered assiduously by
     clerical pens, while it was received with rapture by the large class which like their advanced
     thinking done for them, and turned out in fat print with ample margins once in every third
     year. All the way up the crowded staircase there is a great display of teeth, of tiaras, of
     stars and orders, of shining bald heads. The wife of the Foreign Secretary is delighted to see
     the professor, though no one in that eminently aristocratic gathering ‘insists’ on anything,
     and most people are content to exchange two fingers, two words, and two smiles, one at greeting
     and one at passing on. His Excellency the German Ambassador detains the father and daughter,
     for he has just heard
      that the Emperor intends to bestow on the English professor
     the Order of the Crown, for his distinguished services to the progress of modern thought. The
     two move on, and are caught up in other small circles, where they hear agreeable commonplaces,
     in an atmosphere where everything is taken for granted, and in which smooth phrases and smooth
     faces abound, faces which have inherited, for hundreds of years, the art of expressing nothing
     in a polite way. It is all suave and artificial and decorous. No epigrams make themselves
     conspicuous in the well-bred chatter, and one great lady, exhibiting a superfluity of bare
     flesh, raises a tortoise-shell lorgnette when some one—who can it be?—is heard to laugh
     outright. A famous guardsman has several charming things to say, and the girl finds her chatter
     received with flattering attention by the handsome man with the Garter, who is at once a
     Viceroy and the most suave of diplomats. Surely, when one looks back, the girl's eyes are
     bright again that night; her blond hair is full of electricity; she has regained, though with a
     curious little composed manner, something of the roundness, the joyousness, of nineteen. Life
     is a compromise, and must not be taken too seriously. It is absurd to be much in
     earnest, and it bores people. So much the girl has learned.

For the next two or three days, the two hardly left the study, except for a short walk after
     dinner, for the professor's book absorbed him. Not feeling himself, he was anxious—terribly
     anxious—to get it done. After this they would go abroad, and get a long holiday. He wanted to
     go to Zermatt. At the Riffel Alp he would get the air and exercise he craved. No, he was not
     quite himself; he felt over-strained, nervous, he had a continual headache. It was, perhaps, he
     said, a touch of bile.
But one evening, just before dinner, the book was actually done. Bending over the girl at the
     desk, he kissed her crisp hair, and wrote at the bottom of the page, in his own cramped hand,
     these words—‘The End.’
And so it was, indeed.
The next morning, when the servant went up to call him, the professor had been dead some
     hours. The doctors spoke of a clot of blood in the brain, of over-work, and over-strain.
And in the tall, darkened house in Harley Street, the child who had played, the girl who had
     danced, died too.
</div></body></text></TEI>