<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of At The Relton Arms, by Evelyn
      Sharp.</title><author>Sharp, Evelyn (1869-1955)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1895</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I.
It was towards the end of a crowded reception in the musician's studio. Most of the people
     who had come from a sense of social obligation, and they were chiefly the mothers of his
     fashionable pupils, had left when the musician began to play his own compositions; and those
     who remained behind, and occupied the position of the Greek chorus with regard to his remarks,
     were his own chosen disciples, who were of course privileged to stay much longer than ordinary
     acquaintances. The musician, perhaps, had no effectual means of suggesting their departure; but
     neither was their homage, being very womanly and obvious, unpleasing to him; and when the
     well-dressed Philistines had driven away in their carriages, he abandoned the attitude of the
     debonair host and took up that of the prophet instead, which at once gave a serious turn to the
     conversation. He then propounded his own theories, or somebody else's, at great length, and the
     chorus assented with a gentle murmur of approbation whenever there was a pause. Occasionally
     one of the elect would ask for some music, and the musician would single out a pupil whom he
     considered qualified to interpret what he had composed; and in the applause which invariably
     followed, the performer would be entirely eclipsed by the greater importance of what she had
     performed.
"Isn't it a beautiful thing? Such depth," said Mrs. Reginald Routh, moving away from the
     piano where she had just been singing the musician's last song. It was an uncomfortable habit
     she had of always anticipating what the other people would have said if she had only given them
     time to speak; and she had acquired it from living many years with an unmusical though wealthy
     husband, who only acknowledged his wife's musical talents by sending large checks annually to
     the musician. On this occasion she caught the eye of some one who had just arrived, and
     repeated her remark emphatically; for the new-comer was a stranger who had unscrupulously
     interrupted the last verse of her song, and was now absorbed in prolonging the existence of a
     modicum of bitter tea, one sugar-plum, and a preserved cherry.
"Is it?" she answered hastily, seeing she was expected to say something. "I suppose it is
     quite good, of course. Who is it by? I suppose you can't say, though, without looking; and I
     haven't really the least desire to know. Talking of music," she continued blandly, chasing the
     sugar-plum round the saucer, "I have really had a treat this afternoon at St. James's Hall. Of
     course you have often heard Sapolienski? Don't ask me how to pronounce him; I think another of
     the horrors added to modern composers is the length of their names. But I'm ashamed to say I
     have never heard him before; I have been abroad, you see, and I am not a bit musical either. I
     enjoyed it much more than I expected though, and you should have seen the ovation he received
     at the end, ladies crowding on to the platform and throwing their rings at him! Oh, no, I am
     clearly not musical. But still, as he is the greatest musician of the day...."
Here Mrs. Reginald Routh found her opportunity, and used it.
"Oh, indeed? I have never heard of a player of that name, but really there are so many
     third-rate 'eskis' now that we cannot be expected to know them all. I dislike all kinds of
     sentimental effusion, and society lions, especially when they are musical ones, are singularly
     unpleasing to me. There can be no flattery where true genius exists, and if we were to reserve
     our praise for real hidden talent," she paused as the musician came within hearing and repeated
     her last words in a louder tone, "real hidden talent, music would at last find her
     rightful place of honor among us. Do you not think so, Mr. Digby?"
Mrs. Reginald maintained a superb air of possession over music by making it always of the
     feminine gender, just as she did over the musician by calling him by his first name.
Mr. Digby Raleigh, thus intercepted in his passage across the room, turned on his heel and
     ran his fingers through his hair as he launched out on his favorite theme with enthusiasm. For
     besides being an interesting musician with a studio in the West End, he had views on
     metaphysics and Socialism as well, and although his warm discussions of these and other modern
     subjects conveyed little but confused notions to the minds of his feminine hearers, yet his
     enthusiasm only lent him a more potent charm in their eyes.
"Not yet, Mrs. Routh, no, no, not yet," he exclaimed earnestly, "we are not ready, not fit
     for it yet. Socialism has to come first; the people must be taught the meaning of life and
     humanity before they can be made ready for music. Music is the end and aim of every intelligent
     Socialist. The people must suffer first, as we have all had to suffer, we who do
     understand and are waiting for the light which cannot shine because of the materialists who do
     not even feel the need of it. Life is a problem, but we at least are happiest who see that it
     is so, and seek for the solution with our—with our heart's blood."
The end was not quite so eloquent as the beginning of his speech, but the musician had also
     caught the eye of the latest comer as she stirred the grounds of her tea mechanically and
     looked across the room at him, and he became suddenly conscious that there was somebody in the
     room who was actually inclined to laugh at him. So he stumbled slightly over his last words,
     and blushed a little at his own emotion; but the other ladies were glancing at one another with
     much sympathy as if to show that they thoroughly understood all he meant and felt, and they
     evidently expected some more to follow. So he ran his fingers through his hair again, and
     looked at Mrs. Reginald Routh, and tried to forget the gray-eyed girl in the warmth of his
     cause.
"It is not Parliamentary reform, it is not any revolution, or series of revolutions, that
     will bring Socialism. It is we ourselves who must give it birth after much pain and sorrow,
     even as a mother—" here the exclusive nature of the audience struck him, and he paused
     abruptly, until he remembered that he was a prophet, and might use any questionable metaphor he
     pleased without impropriety—"even as a mother brings forth the child who is to become her joy
     and her comfort. It is the spirit of altruism that has to be diffused among us, and when we
     have once realized that the 'will to live' as Schopenhauer puts it, is the one to be
     controlled, and that the finest of all things is to die,—that is, of course, to live,—to live
     for the good of the Commonwealth, then shall we be prepared for the enjoyment of perfect art,
     and then shall the musician,—that is, of course, the art of the musician,—be allowed
     to exist without such sordid considerations as bread and butter and a roof. I use art in its
     highest, its only real sense, as meaning music only; such imitative branches as literature and
     painting will not then be practised. I—I beg your pardon?"
"Please don't stop," urged the gray-eyed girl, who had painted certain hot sunsets and purple
     mists during her travels on the Continent, and had shown in her face what she thought of the
     musician's last words, "I would not interrupt for the world. I don't know anything about
     Socialism, or any of the other things you mention except painting, which is evidently doomed.
     So pray go on, I find it most entertaining."
And a laugh, in which derision was plainly discernible, rang out to bear testimony to her
     words. She evidently did not realize the serious nature of the assemblage in which she found
     herself, and Mrs. Reginald acquired a distinct antipathy for her when she leaned back in her
     chair carelessly, and proceeded to argue with Digby as though he were any ordinary young man,
     with no ideas, and no studio, and no deep and hidden tragedy in his life which could be alluded
     to darkly whenever the topic of conversation required it. And no one in the room could forgive
     her when the musician threw himself on the chair at her side, and condescended to parry her
     objections as though he thoroughly enjoyed the attack she was daring to make upon his favorite
     principles.
"Do you not see that the language of painting is limited?" he cried. "It has told us all it
     had to tell; it is not adapted to modern needs and modern craving, though the impressionists
     have made a fine attempt, a noble attempt, to make it express more than it can. Do you not see
     that while music is purely spiritual, purely intellectual, painting is a mere imitation of the
     common objects of nature?"
"Man and woman being among the common objects?" murmured the girl. But he did not heed her
     tiresomely obvious remark, and plunged onwards.
"Is not art finer, ten times finer than nature? You cannot see below the surface, you
     painters who copy nature, poor ignorant nature, who is only on the threshold of knowledge
     herself. You say you can paint a tree; but when it is done, what is it? A tree!"
"No, it is not only the tree," objected the other, "it is the picture in the artist's mind
     that the tree makes. When you and I look at a tree we see two different things,—apparently; and
     as I live in the country most of the year, I am thankful I am not a musician. Voilà tout!"
"But even then? You can put into your picture none of the workings of the human mind, none of
     the aspirations of the human soul. When you have a great happiness or a great sorrow, does it
     help you to paint your pictures? No, no, your painting is apart from your existence, your mind
     has no place there. In the future we shall have but one art, and that art will be music!"
"Oh, Mr. Raleigh!" laughed the girl, "you are making a world for one kind of people. What
     will happen to the poor luckless ones like myself who are not musical? I suppose there will
     have to be some in your world?"
"Je n'en vois pas la nécessité," said the musician, relaxing into a laugh too; but Mrs.
     Routh, who had never read Voltaire, thought it was quite time to interfere when she could not
     even understand what they were saying, and she dropped her parasol. Digby stooped to pick it
     up, and she asked him promptly to play something.
The spell was broken, and the chorus round the room echoed the request. The musician smiled
     in a forced manner, and said he would play the thirty-seven variations of Beethoven.
"Oh, no, something of your own," begged the chorus.
"Yes, please, Mr. Raleigh, something full of the workings of the human mind and the
     aspirations of the human soul," said the girl, merrily; and as the musician sat down and began
     to play, she again shocked everybody by walking round the room and examining the
     photographs.
"How exquisite, how emotional!" cried the easily moved Mrs. Reginald when he had
     finished.
"Is he not bound to get on?" said the other upholders of altruism. But the musician did not
     seem to hear them, for he crossed over to the girl by the bookshelves.
"Now tell me," she said, hardly lowering her voice, "is it possible to compose anything that
     would express the aspirations of Mrs. Reginald Routh's soul? That is she, is it not, the one in
     the black silk who glares at me and is so maternal to you? Oh, I shall never understand the
     language of music; I wonder if you find the language of painting as difficult, and if that is
     why you have acquired such an unflattering opinion of it?"
"May it not be because I have as yet seen none of your sketches?" he said gallantly; but she
     shrugged her shoulders and turned away.
"What stacks of photographs you have. Cleverly arranged too, I see: pupils in evening dress
     from twenty to twenty-five on the piano; pupils with long hair and pinafores on the mantelshelf
     with the pipe-racks; mammas in velvet and fur behind the fern-pots. Ah, the workings of the
     musical mind are most subtle. Good-bye; I suppose I shall see you down at the Manor on
     Saturday?"
"I hope to run down for the week end; I have not seen my people for months. And perhaps I may
     have an opportunity of converting you yet! Is your carriage here?"
"Who is she?" asked some one, when the musician had followed her into the hall.
"Don't ask me, dear," said Mrs. Reginald, with her habitual smile, "I am quite unacquainted
     with the person."
"Poor Mr. Raleigh, I quite felt for him," said another; "but how chivalrous he is! No one
     would have suspected how much her impertinence was torturing his sensitive nature."
"I should not call her impertinent myself," said Mrs. Reginald, charitably, "I think it is
     merely want of breeding. Provincial, I should say. Some friend of the family perhaps; I have
     heard—that is to say, Mr. Digby has often talked to me of his home in the country. Strange that
     so many of our greatest men should have come up from the provinces. Take—take Händel, for
     instance, or even Charlotte Brontë."
"What a pretty girl, Mr. Raleigh; who is she?" asked the first speaker, when the musician
     returned, with rather a conscious look on his face.
"Ah, yes, charming, isn't she? She is Lady Joan Relton, the Relton Court family, you know;
     came into the title unexpectedly through the death of a great-uncle. Not much wealth, I
     believe; no doubt, all the money has been squandered by her worthless and immoral ancestors,"
     he added, remembering his prophet's mantle in time to justify his momentary interest in the
     aristocracy. "Will you give us another song, Mrs. Routh?"
And, the room having been cleared, as it were, of the heretical element, the atmosphere of
     music once more settled down solidly on that studio in the West End.
</div></body></text></TEI>