<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of Bessie Costrell : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1895</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">

SCENE V
SO the husband and wife were left together in the cottage room. The door had no
     sooner closed on Saunders and his companions than Isaac was seized with that strange sense of
     walking amid things unreal upon a wavering earth which is apt to beset the man who has any
     portion of the dreamer's temperament, under any sudden rush of circumstance. He drew his hand
     across his brow, bewildered. The fire leapt and chattered in the grate; the newly-washed
     tea-things on the table shone under the lamp; the cat lay curled, as usual, on the chair where
     he sat after supper to read his Christian World; yet all things were not the
     same. What had changed?
Then across poor John's rifled box he saw his wife sitting rigid on the chair where he had
     left her.

He came and sat down at the corner of the table, close to her, his chin on his hand.
“'Ow did yer spend it?” he said, startled, as the words came out, by his own voice, so
     grinding and ugly was the note of it.
Her miserable eyes travelled over his face, seeking, as it were, for some promise, however
     faint, of future help and succour, however distant.
Apparently she saw none, for her own look flamed to fresh defiance.
“I didn't spend it. Saunders wor lyin'.”
“'Ow did yer get them half-crowns?”
“I got 'em at Bedford. Mr. Grimstone give 'em me.”
Isaac looked at her hard, his shame burning into his heart. This was how she had got her
     money for the gin. Of course, she had lied to him the night before, in her account of her fall,
     and of that mark on her forehead, which still showed, a red disfigurement, under the hair she
     had drawn across it. The sight of it, of her, began to excite in him a quick
      loathing. He was at bottom a man of violent passions, and in
     the presence of evil-doing so flagrant, so cruel—of a household ruin so complete—his religion
     failed him.
“When was it as yer opened that box fust?” he asked her again, scorning her denials.
She burst into a rage of tears, lifting her apron to her eyes, and flinging names at him that
     he scarcely heard.
There was a little cold tea in a cup close to him that Bessie had forgotten. He stretched out
     his hand, and took a mouthful, moistening his dry lips and throat.
“Yer'll go to prison for this,” he said, jerking it out as he put the cup down.
He saw her shiver. Her nerve was failing her. The convulsive sobs continued, but she ceased
     to abuse him. He wondered when he should be able to get it out of her. He himself could no more
     have wept than iron and fire weep.
“Are yer goin' to tell me when yer took that
      money, and 'ow yer spent it? 'Cos, if yer don't, I shall go
     to Watson.”
Even in her abasement it struck her as shameful, unnatural, that he, her husband, should say
     this. Her remorse returned upon her heart, like a tide driven back. She answered him not a
     word.
He put his silver watch on the table.
“I'll give yer two minutes,” he said.
There was silence in the cottage except for the choking, hysterical sounds she could not
     master. Then he took up his hat again, and went out into the snow, which was by now falling
     fast.
She remained helpless and sobbing, unconscious of the passage of time, one hand playing
     incessantly with a child's comforter that lay beside her on the table, the other wiping away
     the crowding tears. But her mind worked feverishly all the time, and gradually she fought
     herself free of this weeping, which clutched her against her will.
Isaac was away for an hour. When he came back, he closed the door carefully, and, walking to the
      table, threw down his hat upon it. His face under its ruddy
     brown had suffered some radical disintegrating change.
“They've traced yer,” he said hoarsely; “they've got it up to twenty-six pound, an' more.
     Most on it 'ere in Clinton—some on it, Muster Miles o' Frampton 'ull swear to. Watson 'ull go
     over to Frampton, for the warrant—to-morrer.”
The news shook her from head to foot. She stared at him wildly—speechless.
“But that's not 'arf,” he went on—“not near 'arf. Do yer 'ear? What did yer do with the rest?
     I'll not answer for keepin' my 'ands off yer if yer won't tell.”
In his trance of rage and agony, he was incapable of pity. He had small need to threaten her
     with blows—every word stabbed.
But her turn had come to strike back. She raised her head; she measured her news against his;
     and she did it with a kind of exultation.
“Then I will tell yer—an' I 'ope it 'ull do yer
      good. I took thirty-one pound o' Bolderfield's
     money then—but it warn't me took the rest. Some one else tuk it, an' I stood by an' saw 'im.
     When I tried to stop 'im—look 'ere.”
She raised her hand, nodding, and pointing to the wound on her brow.
Isaac leant heavily on the table. A horrible suspicion swept through him. Had she wronged him
     in a yet blacker way? He bent over her, breathing fast—ready to strike.
“Who was it?”
She laughed. “Well, it wor Timothy, then—yur precious—beautiful
     son—Timothy!”
He fell back.
“Yo're lyin',” he cried; “yer want to throw it off on some one. How cud Timothy 'ave 'ad
     anythin' to do with John's money? Timothy's not been near the place this three months.”
“Not till lasst night,” she said, mocking him. “I'll grant yer—not till lasst night. But it
      do 'appen, as lasst night Timothy took forty-one pound
      o' John Borroful's money out o' that box, an' got off—clean.
     I'm sorry if yer don't like it—but I can't 'elp that; yo' listen 'ere.”
And lifting a quivering finger she told her tale at last, all the beginning of it confused
     and almost unintelligible, but the scene with Timothy vivid, swift, convincing—a direct
     impression from the ugly immediate fact.
He listened, his face lying on his arms. It was true, all true. She might have taken more and
     Timothy less; no doubt she was making it out as bad as she could for Timothy. But it lay
     between them—his wife and his son—it lay between them.
“An' I 'eard yer coming,” she ended; “an' I thought I'd tell yer—an' I wor
     frightened about the 'arf-crowns—people 'ad been talkin' so at Dawson's—an' I didn't see no way
     out—an'—an'—”
She ceased, her hand plucking again at the comforter, her throat working.
He, too, thought of the loving words he had said
      to her, and the memory of them only made his misery the more
     fierce.
“An' there ain't no way out,” he said violently, raising his head. “Yer'll be took before the
     magistrates next week, an' the assizes 'ull be in February, an' yer'll get six months—if yer
     don't get more.”
She got up from her chair as though physically goaded by the words.
“I'll not go to jail,” she said under her breath. “I'll not—”
A sound of scorn broke from Isaac.
“Yo' should ha' thought o' that,” he said. “Yo' should ha' thought o' that. An' what you've
     been sayin' about Timothy don't make it a 'aporth the better—not for yo'! Yo' led
      'im into it too—if it 'adn't been for yo', 'ee'd never ha' seen the cursed stuff.
     Yo've dragged 'im down worse nor 'ee were—an' yerself—an' the childer—an' me. An' the drink,
     an' the lyin'!—it turns a man's stomach to think on it. An' I've been livin' with yer—these
     twelve years. I wish to the Lord I'd never seen yer—as
      the children 'ad never been born! They'll be known all their
     life now—as 'avin' 'ad sich a woman for their mother!”
A demon of passion possessed him more and more. He looked at her with murderous eyes, his
     hand on the table working.
For his world, too, lay in ruins about him. Through many hard-working and virtuous years he
     had counted among the righteous men of the village—the men whom the Almighty must needs reckon
     to the good whenever the score of Clinton Magna had to be made up. And this pre-eminence had
     come to be part of the habitual furniture of life and thought. To be suddenly stripped of it—to
     be, not only disgraced by his wife, to be thrust down himself among the low and sinful
     herd—this thought made another man of him; made him wicked, as it were, perforce. For who that
     heard the story would ever believe that he was not the partner of her crime? Had he not eaten
     and drunk of it; were not he and his children now clothed by it?

Bessie did not answer him nor look at him. At any other moment she would have been afraid of
     him; now she feared nothing but the image in her own mind—herself led along the village street,
     enclosed in that hateful building, cut off from all pleasure, all free moving and willing—alone
     and despised—her children taken from her.
Suddenly she walked into the back kitchen and opened the door leading to the garden.
Outside everything lay swathed in white, and a snowstorm was drifting over the deep cup of
     land which held the village. A dull, melancholy moonlight seemed to be somewhere behind the
     snow curtain, for the muffled shapes of the houses below and the long sweep of the hill were
     visible through the dark, and the objects in the little garden itself were almost distinct.
     There, in the centre, rose the round stone edging of the well, the copious well, sunk deep into
     the chalk, for which Bessie's neighbours envied her, whence her good nature let them draw
     freely at any time of drought. On either side
      of it the gnarled stems of old fruit-trees and the bare
     sticks of winter kail made black scratches and blots upon the white.
Bessie looked out, leaning against the doorway, and heedless of the wind that drove upon her.
     Down below there was a light in Watson's cottage, and a few lights from the main street beyond
     pierced the darkness. The Spotted Deer must be at that moment full of people, all talking of
     her and Isaac. Her eye came hastily back to the snow-shrouded well and dwelt upon it.
“Shut that door!” Isaac commanded from inside. She obeyed, and came back into the kitchen.
     There she moved restlessly about a minute or two, followed by his frowning look—the look, not
     of a husband, but of an enemy. Then a sudden animal yearning for rest and warmth seized her.
     She opened the door by the hearth abruptly and went up, longing simply to lie down and cover
     herself from the cold.
But, after all, she turned aside to the children, and sat there for some time at the foot of
     the little boys'
      bed. The children, especially Arthur, had been restless for
     long, kept awake and trembling by the strange sounds outside their door and the loud voices
     downstairs; but, with the deep silence that had suddenly fallen on the house after Isaac had
     gone away to seek his interview with Watson, sleep had come to them, and even Arthur, on whose
     thin cheeks the smears left by crying were still visible, was quite unconscious of his mother.
     She looked at them from time to time, by the light of a bit of a candle she had placed on a box
     beside her; but she did not kiss them, and her eyes had no tears. From time to time she looked
     quickly round her, as though startled by a sound, a breathing.
Presently, shivering with cold, she went into her own room. There, mechanically, she took off
     her outer dress, as though to go to bed; but when she had done so her hands fell by her side;
     she stood motionless till, suddenly wrapping an old shawl round her, she took up her candle and
     went downstairs again.

As she pushed open the door at the foot of the stairs, she saw Isaac, where she had left him,
     sitting on his chair, bent forward, his hands dropping between his knees, his gaze fixed on a
     bit of dying fire in the grate.
“Isaac!”
He looked up with the unwillingness of one who hates the sound he hears, and saw her standing
     on the lowest step. Her black hair had fallen upon her shoulders, her quick breath shook the
     shawl she held about her, and the light in her hand showed the anguished brightness of the
     eyes.
“Isaac, are yer comin' up?”
The question maddened him. He turned to look at her more fixedly.
“Comin' up? Noa, I'm not comin' up—so now know. Take yerself off, an' be quick.”
She trembled.
“Are yer goin' to sleep down 'ere, Isaac?”
“Aye, or wherever I likes: it's no concern o' yourn. I'm no 'usband o' yourn from this day forth.
      Take yerself off, I say!—I'll 'ave no thief for
      my wife!”
But instead of going she stepped down into the kitchen. His words had broken her down; she
     was crying again.
“Isaac, I'd ha' put it back,” she said imploring. “I wor goin' in to Bedford to see Mr.
     Grimstone—'ee'd ha' managed it for me. I'd a worked extra—I could ha' done it—if it 'adn't been
     for Timothy. If you'll 'elp—an' you'd oughter, for yer are my 'usband, whativer
     yer may say—we could pay John back—some day. Yo' can go to 'im, an' to Watson, an' say as we'll
     pay it back—yo' could, Isaac. I can take ter the plattin' again, an' I can go an'
     work for Mrs. Drew—she asked me again lasst week. Mary Anne 'ull see to the childer. Yo' go to
     John, Isaac, to-morrer—an'—an'—to Watson. All they wants is the money back. Yer couldn't—yer
     couldn't—see me took to prison, Isaac.”
She gasped for breath, wiping the mist from her eyes with the edge of her shawl.

But all that she said only maddened the man's harsh and pessimist nature the more. The
     futility of her proposals, of her daring to think, after his fiat and the law's had gone forth,
     that there was any way out of what she had done, for her or for him, drove him to frenzy. And
     his wretched son was far away; so he must vent the frenzy on her. The melancholia, which
     religion had more or less restrained and comforted during a troubled lifetime, became on this
     tragic night a wild-beast impulse that must have its prey.
He rose suddenly and came towards her, his eyes glaring, and a burst of invective on his
     white lips. Then he made a rush for a heavy stick that leant against the wall.
She fled from him, reached her bedroom in safety, and bolted the door. She heard him give a
     groan on the stairs, throw away the stick, and descend again.
Then for nearly two hours there was absolute stillness once more in this miserable house. Bessie
      had sunk, half fainting, on a chair by the bed, and lay
     there, her head lying against the pillow.
But in a very short time the blessed numbness was gone, and consciousness became once more a
     torture, the medium of terrors not to be borne. Isaac hated her—she would be taken from her
     children—she felt Watson's grip upon her arm—she saw the jeering faces at the village
     doors.
At times a wave of sheer bewilderment swept cross her. How had it come about that she was
     sitting there like this? Only two days before she had been everybody's friend. Life had been
     perpetually gay and exciting. She had had qualms indeed, moments of a quick anguish, before the
     scene in the Spotted Deer. But there had been always some thought to protect her from herself.
     John was not coming back for a long, long time. She would replace the money—of course she
     would! And she would not take any more—or only a very little. Meanwhile the hours floated by,
     dressed in a colour and variety they had never yet possessed for her—
      charged with all the delights of wealth, as such a human
     being under such conditions is able to conceive them.
Her nature, indeed, had never gauged its own capacities for pleasure till within the last few
     months. Excitement, amusement, society—she had grown to them; they had evoked in her a richer
     and fuller life, expanded and quickened all the currents of her blood. As she sat shivering in
     the darkness and solitude, she thought with a sick longing of the hours in the public-house—the
     lights, the talk, the warmth within and without. The drink-thirst was upon her at this moment.
     It had driven her down to the village that afternoon at the moment of John's arrival. But she
     had no money. She had not dared to unlock the cupboard again, and she could only wander up and
     down the bit of dark road beyond the Spotted Deer, suffering and craving.
Well, it was all done—all done!
She had come up without her candle, and the only light in the room was a cold glimmer from
     the snow
      outside. But she must find a light, for she must write a
     letter. By much groping she found some matches, and then lit one after another while she
     searched in her untidy drawers for an ink-bottle and a pen she knew must be there.
She found them, and with infinite difficulty—holding match after match in her left hand—she
     scrawled a few blotted lines on a torn piece of paper. She was a poor scholar, and the toil was
     great. When it was done, she propped the paper up against the looking-glass.
Then she felt for her dress, and deliberately put it on again, in the dark, though her hands
     were so numb with cold that she could scarcely hook the fastenings. Her teeth chattered as she
     threw her old shawl round her.
Stooping down, she took off her boots, and pushing the bolt of her own door back as
     noiselessly as possible, she crept down the stairs. As she neared the lower door, the sound of
     two or three loud breathings caught her ear.

Her heart contracted with an awful sense of loneliness. Her husband slept—her children
     slept—while she—
Then the wave of a strange, a just passion mounted within her. She stepped into the kitchen,
     and walking up to her husband's chair, she stood still a moment looking at him. The lamp was
     dying away, but she could still see him plainly. She held herself steadily erect; a frown was
     on her brow, a flame in her eyes.
“Well, good-bye, Isaac,” she said, in a low but firm voice.
Then she walked to the back door and opened it, taking no heed of noise; the latch fell
     heavily, the hinges creaked.
“Isaac!” she cried, her tones loud and ringing, “Isaac!”
There was a sudden sound in the kitchen. She slipped through the door, and ran along the
     snow-covered garden.
Isaac, roused by her call from the deep trance of
      exhaustion which only a few minutes before had fallen upon
     his misery, stood up, felt the blast rushing in through the open door at the back, and ran
     blindly.
The door had swung to again. He clutched it open; in the dim weird light, he saw a dark
     figure stoop over the well; he heard something flung aside, which fell upon the snow with a
     thud; then the figure sprang upon the coping of the well.
He ran with all his speed, his face beaten by the wind and sleet. But he was too late. A
     sharp cry pierced the night. As he reached the well, and hung over it, he heard, or thought he
     heard, a groan, a beating of the water—then no more.
Isaac's shouts for help attracted the notice of a neighbour who was sitting up with her
     daughter and a new-born child. She roused her son-in-law and his boy, and through them a score
     of others, deep night though it was.
Watson was among the first of those who gathered
      round the well. He and others lowered Isaac with ropes into
     its icy depths, and drew him up again, while the snow beat upon them all—the straining men—the
     two dripping shapes emerging from the earth. A murmur of horror greeted the first sight of that
     marred face on Isaac's arm, as the lanterns fell upon it. For there was a gash above the eye,
     caused by a projection in the hard chalk side of the well, which of itself spoke death.
Isaac carried her in, and laid her down before the still glowing hearth. A shudder ran
     through him as he knelt, bending over her. The new wound had effaced all the traces of
     Timothy's blow. How long was it since she had stood there before him pointing to it?
The features were already rigid. No one felt the smallest hope. Yet with that futile
     tenderness all can show to the dead, everything was tried. Mary Anne Waller came—white and
     speechless—and her deft gentle hands did whatever the village doctor told her. And there were
     many other women, too,
      who did their best. Some of them, had Bessie dared to live,
     would have helped with all their might to fill her cup of punishment to the brim. Now that she
     had thrown herself on death as her only friend, they were dissolved in pity.
Everything failed. Bessie had meant to die, and she had not missed her aim. There came a
     moment when the doctor, laying his ear for the last time to her cold breast, raised himself to
     bid the useless effort cease.
“Send them all away,” he said to the little widow, “and you stay.” Watson helped to clear the
     room, then he and Isaac carried the dead woman upstairs. An old man followed them, a bent and
     broken being, who dragged himself up the steps with his stick. Watson out of compassion came
     back to help him.
“John—yer'd better go home, an' to yer bed—yer can't do no good.”
“I'll wait for Mary Anne,” said John, in a shaking whisper—“I'll wait for Mary Anne.”
And he stood at the doorway leaning on his stick;
      his weak and reddened eyes fixed on his cousin, his mouth
     open feebly.
But Mary Anne, weeping, beckoned to another woman who had come up with the little procession,
     and they began their last offices.
“Let us go,” said the doctor kindly, his hand on Isaac's shoulder, “till they have done.”
At that moment Watson, throwing a last professional glance round the room, perceived the
     piece of torn paper propped against the glass. Ah! there was the letter. There was always a
     letter.
He walked forward, glanced at it, and handed it to Isaac. Isaac drew his hand across his brow
     in bewilderment, then seemed to recognize the handwriting, and thrust it into his pocket
     without a word. Watson touched his arm. “Don't you destroy it,” he said in warning; “it'll be
     asked for at the inquest.”
The men descended. Watson and the doctor departed. John and Isaac were left alone in the
     kitchen. Isaac hung over the fire, which had been
      piled up in the hope of restoring warmth to the drowned
     woman. Suddenly he took out the letter and, bending his head to the blaze, began to read
     it.
“Isaac, yer a cruel husband to me, an' there's no way fer me but the way I'm goin'. I didn't
     mean no 'arm, not at first, but there, wot's the good of talkin'? I can't bear the way as you
     speaks to me an' looks at me, an' I'll never go to prison—no, never. It's orful—fer the
     children ull 'ave no mother, an' I don't know however Arthur ull manage. But yer woodent shew
     me no mercy, an' I can't think of anythin' different. I did love yer an' the childer, but the
     drink got holt of me. Yer mus' see as Arthur is rapped up, an' Edie's eyes ull 'ave to be seen
     to now an' agen. I'm sorry, but there's nothin' else. I wud like yer to kiss me onst, when they
     bring me in, and jes say, Bessie, I forgive yer. It won't do yer no 'arm, an' p'raps I may 'ear
     it without your knowin'. So good-bye, Isaac, from yur lovin' wife, Bessie....”
As he read it, the man's fixed pallor and iron calm
      gave way. He leant againist the mantelpiece, shaken at last
     with the sobs of a human and a helpless remorse.
John, from his seat on the settle a few yards away, looked at Isaac miserably. His lips
     opened now and then as though to speak, then closed again. His brain could form no distinct
     image. He was encompassed by a general sense of desolation, springing from the loss of his
     money, which was pierced every now and then by a strange sense of guilt. It seemed to have
     something to do with Bessie, this last, though what he could not have told.
So they sat, till Mary Anne's voice called “Isaac” from the top of the stairs.
Isaac stood up, drew one deep breath, controlled himself, and went, John following.
Mary Anne held the bedroom door open for them, and the two men entered, treading softly.
The women stood on either hand crying. They had clothed the dead in white and crossed her
     hands upon her breast. A linen covering had been passed,
      nun-like, round the head and chin. The wound was hidden, and
     the face lay framed in an oval of pure white, which gave it a strange severity.
Isaac bent over her. Was this Bessie—Bessie, the human, faulty, chattering
     creature—whom he, her natural master, had been free to scold or caress at will? At bottom he
     had always been conscious in regard to her of a silent but immeasurable superiority, whether as
     mere man to mere woman, or as the Christian to the sinner.
Now—he dared scarcely touch her. As she lay in this new-found dignity, the proud peace of her
     look intimidated, accused him—would always accuse him till he too rested as she rested now,
     clad for the end. Yet she had bade him kiss her—and he obeyed her—groaning within himself,
     incapable altogether, out of sheer abasement, of saying those words she had asked of him.
Then he sat down beside her, motionless. John tried once or twice to speak to him, but Isaac
     shook his head impatiently. At last the mere presence
      of Bolderfield in the room seemed to anger him. He threw the
     old man such dark and restless looks that Mary Anne perceived them, and, with instinctive
     understanding, persuaded John to go.
She, however, must needs go with him, and she went. The other woman stayed. Every now and
     then she looked furtively at Isaac.
“If some one don't look arter 'im,” she said to herself, “'ee'll go as his father and his
     brothers went afore him. 'Ee's got the look on it awready. Wheniver it's light I'll go fetch
     Muster Drew.”
With the first rays of the morning Bolderfield got up from the bed in Mary Anne's cottage,
     where she had placed him a couple of hours before, imploring him to lie still and rest himself.
     He slipped on his coat, the only garment he had taken off, and taking his stick he crept down
     to the cottage door. Mary Anne, who had gone out to fetch some bread, had left it ajar. He
     opened it and stood on the threshold looking out.
The storm of the night was over, and already a
      milder breeze was beginning to melt the newly-fallen snow.
     The sun was striking cheerfully from the hill behind him upon the glistening surfaces of the
     distant fields; the old labourer felt a hint of spring in the air. It brought with it a hundred
     vague associations and filled him with a boundless despair. What would become of him
     now—penniless and old and feeble? The horror of Bessie's death no longer stood between him and
     his own pain, and would soon even cease to protect her from his hatred.
Mary Anne came back along the lane, carrying a jug and a loaf. Her little face was all
     blanched and drawn with weariness; yet when she saw him her look kindled. She ran up to
     him.
“What did yer come down for, John? I'd ha' taken yer yer breakfast in yer bed.”
He looked at her, then at the food. His eyes filled with tears.
“I can't pay yer for it,” he said, pointing with his stick; “I can't pay yer for it.”

Mary Anne led him in, scolding and coaxing him with her gentle trembling voice. She made him
     sit down while she blew up the fire; she fed and tended him. When she had forced him to eat
     something, she came behind him and laid her hand on his shoulder.
“John,” she said, clearing her throat, “John, yer shan't want while I'm livin'. I promised
     Eliza I wouldn't forget yer, and I won't. I can work yet—there's plenty o' people want me to
     work for 'em—an' maybe, when yer get over this, you'll work a bit too now and again. We'll hold
     together, John—anyways. While I live and keep my 'elth yer shan't want. An' yer'll forgive
     Bessie”—she broke into sudden sobbing. “Oh! I'll never 'ear a crule word about Bessie in my
     'ouse, never!”
John put his arms on the table and hid his face upon them. He could not speak of forgiveness,
     nor could he thank her for her promise. His chief feeling was an intense wish to sleep; but as
     Mary Anne dried her tears and began to go about her
      household work, the sound of her step, the sense of her
     loving presence near him, began for the first time to relax the aching grip upon his heart. He
     had always been weak and dependent, in spite of his thrift and his money. He would be far more
     weak and dependent now and henceforward. But again, he had found a woman's tenderness to lean
     upon, and as she ministered to him—this humble shrinking creature he had once so cordially
     despised—the first drop of balm fell upon his sore.
Meanwhile, in another cottage a few yards away, Mr. Drew was wrestling with Isaac. In his own
     opinion, he met with small success. The man who had refused his wife mercy, shrank with a kind
     of horror from talking of the Divine mercy. Isaac Costrell's was a strange and groping soul.
     But those misjudged him who called him a hypocrite.
Yet in truth, during the years that followed, whenever he was not under the influence of
     recurrent attacks of melancholia, Isaac did again
      derive much comfort from the aspirations and self-abasements
     of religion. No human life would be possible if there were not forces in and round man
     perpetually tending to repair the wounds and breaches that he himself makes. Misery provokes
     pity; despair throws itself on a Divine tenderness. And for those who have the “grace” of
     faith, in the broken and imperfect action of these healing powers upon this various world—in
     the love of the merciful for the unhappy, in the tremulous yet undying hope that pierces even
     sin and remorse with the vision of some ultimate salvation from the self that breeds them—in
     these powers there speaks the only voice which can make us patient under the tragedies of human
     fate, whether these tragedies be “the falls of princes” or such meaner, narrower pains as
     brought poor Bessie Costrell to her end.
</div></body></text></TEI>