<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Woman Who Didn't : VWWP edition </title><author>Cross, Victoria (1868-1952)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1895</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">

CHAPTER III
THE next six months, spent partly in Paris partly in London, were six months lost,
     thrown away in dissipation that failed even in being amusing, and in which I wasted as much
     money and strength as one could well do in the time.
Of course I made excuses for myself. No man, except sometimes in retrospection, and sometimes
     under the influence of a great moral shock, will ever look his conduct in the face.
If he admits it is bad, he immediately marshals an illimitable number of excuses to explain
     and justify the evil he is committing, until he has conclusively proved that he is in reality
     but the passive and suffering martyr to the surrounding circumstances.

And my excuses seemed to me to be legion. I needed distraction. It was positively necessary
     to me to forget, at any rate to conquer, the dishonourable passion for another's wife.
Anything that I could do was better than to encourage my present feelings, to continue to
     think of her as I was thinking; and without distraction, without diversion, it was impossible
     to drown the remembrance of her as it was obviously my duty to do.
As to the passion itself, I was greatly to be excused.
I had been badly treated, unfairly used. Of course, if I had known the truth from the first,
     the passion would never have been allowed to grow into being, etc., etc.
Then, too, I realised so keenly that I had done my duty in the matter by accepting my
     dismissal, that I felt I could allow myself a little license now, for in the male moral code we
     make a little virtue go a long way.

Besides, there was no doubt that there was but one method by which I could efface Eurydice's
     image from my mind, blunt the edge of remembrance and steel myself to indifference to her if it
     should chance that we met again.
And now that the six months had dwindled down to their last few days, I sat alone in the
     dining-room as the March afternoon closed in, with hosts and legions of uncomfortable thoughts
     advancing upon me, silently, in whole armies of serried battalions.
They came in squadrons, the first cohorts supplied by the just past month, and continually
     supplemented by detachments of recollections from each preceding month, backwards to the very
     night I had left her on board.
When I had sat down in the chair I had attempted to roll up a cigarette, but the violent
     trembling of my shaky fingers had left it a simple impossibility, and this sight of my
      weakness had been the signal for the commencement of the
     march of that terrible army upon me.
I looked round the room weighted down with depression. I hated the solitude but yet felt too
     ill to go out of it. I leant farther back in the chair, and my eyes travelled mechanically
     round and round the room in the growing dusk.
It had every conceivable comfort and bore signs of, I might say, wealth. Yes, I had means,
     money, and almost every other gift to make life acceptable, and yet from six months' leave and
     idleness I had been unable to purchase more than at the most two or three hours of
     pleasure.
For pleasure, unfortunately, does not sell herself at a fixed price, and enjoyment exists not
     in that which we enjoy, but in our capacity for enjoying, just as not the food we eat, but only
     that which we digest, nourishes us.

I got up after a time, crossed the room, my shadow falling huge and distorted on the red and
     gilt paper in the firelight, pushed aside the velvet curtains hanging across the door into the
     bedroom and entered the room.
I was moved by an impulse of curiosity to see whether I looked as ill as I felt, whether the
     relentless army that was invading and wounding my brain left visible traces of its ravages.
I walked up to the glass and from its dusky surface in the gathering gloom, my own face
     looked back at me. I scrutinised it attentively with a cynical smile, pallid, lined and seamed
     about the eyes, the lips livid, and all the vitality gone out of it.
Not much consoled, I strolled back again to the dining-room hearth, my resolution to make
     some break in this sort of existence ratified by that glance in the glass.
I looked idly along the mantelpiece, and
      amongst the letters lying there my eye caught a still
     unanswered invitation from the old colonel of my former regiment to stay with him.
I remembered he had a big place just out of Dover.
‘The very thing,’ I thought, and I sat down and wrote an acceptance of his offer for a three
     weeks' stay.
‘It will make a break here at least,’ I thought. ‘Dickinson is such an awful fellow for going
     the pace, and I am tired of keeping up with him.’
The three weeks went by, and at their end, with a sense of relief, lined, as it were, with
     boredom, I was coming back to town.
As the train slid into the station, I drew back idly the curtain that had fallen across the
     window-panes and looked down the platform.
The electric light streamed from above on some scattered, moving figures, and a warmer
      blaze from the bookstall fell on a compact group nearer my
     end of the train.
The knot loosened just as my carriage approached it, and one figure detached itself and
     walked on down towards the refreshment-room.
It was Eurydice.
I knew it directly, though my gaze had not caught her face.
But that gait was hers and hers alone, the same that had arrested my eyes as she walked the
     length of the slippery, sloping deck; the same, the perfect balance of the figure; the same,
     that erectness of the head.
The very toilette was as distinctly hers—extremely quiet as to colour and extremely smart as
     to cut; and how familiar the fall of that skirt, short enough to let me see the incomparably
     tiny feet walking down the lighted platform.
My heart rose suddenly, leapt with the same
      violent pulse as when I had seen her the first morning on
     board.
Keen pleasure ran through my tired brain and languid nerves, and I recoginised I had been
     chasing it for the last six months in vain.
I gripped my bag with one hand, unfastened the door with the other, and jumped from the
     still-gliding train.
She was walking slowly before me, and a few steps of mine brought me up to her just as she
     passed beneath the central light.
‘Eurydice!’
It was great cheek on my part to use her Christian name, but it was accidental, and not
     intentional, cheek.
It never passed into my brain nor came to my lips to say Mrs. Williamson, and after all I
     don't know that it mattered.
She turned suddenly, and we were face to face beneath the white, searching light.

That face!
The light played over it and showed it to me in all its own familiar charm.
The delicacy of the pallor, the brilliance of the eyes, and the long lines of the eyebrows; I
     noted and recognised them all with a pained and eager delight; and under the rolled-back velvet
     hat-brim one small, dark curl lay on her forehead beneath her transparent veil.
Our right hands were in each other's, our eyes locked together, and we said nothing.
Time, circumstance, position, resolutions, decisions, for those first few seconds were
     not.
We were the one woman and the one man in the world for each other, and we had met again after
     absence.
‘Is this your luggage, sir?’
The porter wheeled his truck close up beside us.
I drew her to one side out of its way by her small, gloved hand, and I knew in those few
      seconds that it had the same old magnetism, the same curious
     electric power over my own nerves and frame as when it had touched mine first.
‘Yes; that's mine,’ I said, hastily. ‘Look after it a minute, will you?’
‘Sorry, sir, it's against the regerlations. I can't stay by it, sir.’
Damn! I thought. ‘Well, put it in the cloak-room, then. You can do that, I suppose?’
The porter nodded and turned the truck round.
I still held my companion's dear little hand in mine. I looked down on her with a smile.
‘What a fortunate chance to meet you here!’ I said, conventionality coming to my aid and
     throwing a suffocating cloak over all my feelings, and giving them their expression only in
     this one stereotyped phrase.
And almost any other woman would have
      answered me in the same language of convention.
Eurydice, however, withdrew her hand from mine and said merely, ‘Fortunate! What's the use of
     it?’
Her tone was half hopeless, half impatient, and a still paler shade came across her face.
The words brought back upon my recollection all that had been forgotten for that first
     instant.
It was she, as usual, with her peculiar decision and clear mental vision who saw the
     situation as it really was, not as it appeared to be.
For me the meeting, at least in these first moments, was a simple pleasure; for her, whose
     mind gripped only realities, and whose eyes it was impossible to blind with illusions, the
     meeting was simply a vexation, useless, as she said, and therefore worthless.
She turned from me, and I thought she was
      positively going to leave me without another word.
‘Where are you going now?’ I said hurriedly.
She looked at me, with the familiar mocking laughter on her brilliant face, which was her
     mask for everything.
I had seen it drawn down over pain, weariness, and despair. She met the shocks and the tedium
     of life, and she would meet the fear and horror of death with that same careless smile.
‘To the refreshment-room,’ she said lightly, and walked on; and I walked beside her.
‘And there is no use ...’ I said mechanically, ‘Nothing is changed?’
‘Nothing,’ she answered in a grave, inflexible voice, looking straight before her up the
     platform.
A few steps more, and we were at the refreshment-room doors.
At the entrance stood a group of loose
      women talking, and a vile expression reached us as we came
     up.
Eurydice passed through them indifferently with an ‘allow me,’ and without a shade upon her
     face. It was I that felt revolt for her as her skirt brushed theirs.
We found the room quite full. It was not long before the departure of the Dover express, and
     a crowd of thirsty passengers had closed in round the counter.
We pushed our way gradually through them to one end, and Eurydice leant her back against the
     wall and laughed at my efforts to find her a chair.
‘It doesn't matter a bit,’ she said. ‘And there's really no space to sit down. Get me the
     coffee; and what are you going to have for yourself?’
‘Coffee, I think, too,’ I said, and ordered for us both over the heads of a couple of
     Germans, and then turned to look at her again at my ease.

In the crush and the heat, with the careless gabble of voices round us, the clatter of
     glasses and scent of drink from the bar, the blaze of light from above and the tobacco smoke in
     the air, that calm, delicate face was singularly striking.
She noticed me scanning it eagerly, and her eyes softened in a smile as they rested on
     mine.
‘Like the scratch suppers on board, isn't it?’ she said as we waited patiently for the
     appearance of our coffee.
‘Yes,’ I answered without heeding her words, absorbed in noting the tired shades beneath her
     eyes.
‘What have you been doing all these six months?’
‘Living at Wimbledon taking care of Mrs. Williamson. I am a model daughter-in-law, you
     know.’
‘And wife!’ I murmured, and a line of scarlet
      glowed suddenly in her cheeks and then died as suddenly.
‘And what have you been doing?’ she said, fixing her eyes upon me.
I coloured suddenly. I felt the hot blood mount in a scalding stream to my very eyes as I
     muttered ‘Nothing,’ and I turned from her to the counter and looked anxiously for the cups of
     coffee.
The memory of those six months came back upon me so horribly. They glared in such contrast to
     her own.
For six months she had been treading the clean narrow path of duty, temptations passed,
     difficulties overcome, and I for those same months had been wandering further into the mire of
     personal satisfaction, all temptations embraced, all difficulties avoided.
I could see as in a mirror held up to me what her days had been, pure and clear, and filled
     with a wearying, unsatisfying virtue,
      dragging after each other in intolerable tedium, which she
     had had the strength to endure and the will to live through, and mine seemed lost, as I looked
     back, in a mist of mere degradation.
‘My dear fellow, I can see what you have been doing,’ she said in an undertone with a
     suppressed laugh, and as I caught the mockery on the pale face and the derision in her eyes I
     would have given more than I can say to be able to deny her thoughts.
‘I never thought I should meet you again,’ I muttered lamely.
‘So it didn't matter.’
‘No; it is very extraordinary that two people, both living in or near town and both going
     about a good deal, should ever meet! I admit that! Oh, here 's the coffee.’
She straightened her figure and turned to the counter and drew the two steaming cups towards
     her. I watched her, and the knowledge
      ledge came to me suddenly that I loved her now, as when we
     had parted.
Dimly, in a vague, hurried way, I realised now that the past six months had done nothing to
     deaden the passion, nothing to alter or weaken that; it was my will to resist it that they had
     weakened.
Like a man roused from his sleep, who feels hurriedly for his weapons of defence to find them
     gone, I tried to recall all those feelings that I remembered had moved me when I parted from
     her, but they were nowhere.
I had no time for thought, for she kept asking me whether I liked three or four lumps of
     sugar in my coffee, but I felt a confused sense of apprehension and surprise that I could not
     define to myself.
‘Oh, three please, no more, and no milk ... Where are you staying now, then, in town?’
Her face was hidden by the coffee cup,
      but I saw her eyebrows contract above the edge.
‘What does it matter where I am staying?’ she said as she set the cup down.
‘Mayn't I come and see you?’ I said, and I looked straight into her eyes and wondered vaguely
     that my conscience did not reproach me, but it did not.
A cold surprise came all over her face. She elevated her eyebrows.
‘What do you mean? Have you forgotten all that was said on board, settled and decided and
     arranged?’
‘I don't know,’ I answered, looking down into the coffee and stirring it, and that was
     strictly the truth.
I remembered we had talked on board and made resolutions and decisions, and I had suffered,
     and she had perhaps cried, but somehow I seemed to have forgotten all that had prompted it, and
     why we had done it. Now as
      I looked at her, there seemed to have been no necessity. In
     fact the necessities seemed to be all the other way.
‘I know I have not had an hour's pleasure since I last saw you.’
She laughed slightingly.
‘I should be inclined to doubt that, but even if it were true, we're not here for pleasure,
     you know: we're always told that.’
The passengers round us had emptied themselves onto the platform, and the room now was nearly
     empty.
On a bench at our left side sat one man with an objectionable person drinking brandy and
     water, and three men leant across the bar chaffing the gilt-haired barmaid. A marble table at
     the far end was vacant and secluded.
‘Let us transfer ourselves,’ I said. ‘You must be tired of standing.’
I carried the coffee to the table, and then drew a chair to it: she came up slowly and sat
     down.

‘But why may I not come to see you, just once or twice?’ I persisted.
She balanced her spoon idly on the edge of the cup, looked at me, and laughed.
‘When one stands on the top of a hill, and one is particularly anxious not to find oneself at
     the bottom, does one take the first few steps down the declivity? It is very stupid if one
     does; then one has to go on against one's will or turn and go back, and the little bit of hill
     behind one seems very steep. We are both on the summit now, let us stop there.’
‘I don't know so much about that,’ I muttered. ‘I have been going downhill steadily all these
     months, and shall go on, I suppose.
‘ Well, in any case you must go alone.’
The tone was very cold, and, looking at her, I saw the old severity come into her eyes and
     settle on her face.
There was a long silence. She gazed past
      me absently towards the gilt-haired creature leaning
     confidentially towards the three male heads, this side of the counter.
I looked at her face and studied the stamp of hopeless virtue on it.
‘Just as friends,’ I murmured at last, following up my own thoughts.
She brought her eyes back to mine, and they flashed with cynical mockery.
‘Friendship is an illusion. Do please let us look life in the face.’
‘Nobody ever does,’ I said, limply.
‘I have always tried to. One does deceive and cheat oneself at times, but I always try not to
     voluntarily.’
‘Still, let me come,’ I answered, hammering away at the point I wanted to gain with the dull
     persistency of the male, and sliding away from the involved metaphysical arguments she loved. I
     knew they were dangerous ground where one often gets led into unconsciously
      admitting the theoretical infamy of some practical step one
     is urging.
It was all very well for Eurydice, she could always find her way about amongst the sinuous
     windings of her talk, but I sometimes found myself left behind, hopelessly entangled.
‘No.’
‘At least tell me where you are.’
‘But what is the good?’
‘Because,’ I said, flushing hotly and looking straight into the mocking eyes, ‘it will show
     that you trust me. You know if you tell me not to come, I shall not come. We don't fool with
     each other. A command from you and a promise from me is a command and is a promise. Tell me
     your address, and say “Come” or “Don't come,” and I shall obey, but I object to being treated
     as if you were a coquette, or I could not be trusted.’
‘Oh, certainly, I trust you,’ she said quickly. ‘I am staying in rooms in Ebury
      Street,’ and
      she added the number. ‘But my express command to you is not
     to come, nor to try and see me in any way.’
‘Very good,’ I said sullenly, and there was a strained silence.
She rose after a few minutes, and I started to my feet.
‘Are you going?’ I said.
‘Yes; I only came in here to order a book at the stall,’ she answered. ‘Will you see me into
     a hansom?’ she added smiling, and we walked out together on to and down the platform to the
     station yard. I put her into the hansom and gave the address to the cabman. I closed the doors
     together across her knees, and then leant forward upon the panels and fixed my eyes on her
     face. I gazed at it in the blue sheet of light that fell on us from the station lamps, through
     the murky, rain-filled air, and shone in the hansom doors, over which her face looked out.

It seemed as if I could never transfer my eyes: hers had a strange expression in them: they
     were on mine, and dilated.
I was startled by their gaze.
Something of tenderness looked out of them, half-veiled in their usual sorrow.
The horse moved forward: she stretched out one small light-gloved hand: there was a sudden
     impulsive leaning forward of her figure, a flash of her white cheek in the light.
‘Come,’ she said.
The whip fell, the horse plunged forward, there was a splash of muddy puddles, a rattle of
     the wheels, and the cab bowled away through the glistening, rain-swept station yard.
I stood there on the kerb motionless, with that one word stinging my brain like a bullet
     embedded there.
Had she really said it? It seemed incredible. Had I imagined it? No; it sounded in my ears
     still, her voice.

‘Come.’
So she had given way, yielded. Was it possible? After the scornful hardness of all her words
     to me to-night. After the inflexible resistance at our last parting? Yes, but after six months.
     What was it? How was it? What influence had worked this change in us? How was it that our
     strength had slipped from us? She was as weak as I.
And quick as a flash of light passes before the eyes, the thought struck my brain, I did not
     condemn her for her weakness, did not even despise it. I was indifferent. And I knew six months
     back I should have condemned her. I had loved her then for her strength, been stung to an
     enthusiasm for her virtue, and now I recognised that both were failing, and realised that their
     failure neither pained nor shocked me.
I stood there an indefinite time, with my brain in a whirl of surprised confusion, shot
      through and through with pleasure, and then turned
     half-mechanically back into the station to have a drink and think it all over.
I got my drink, and then stood turning the empty tumbler round and round upon the counter,
     and staring absently at it while I tried to wrestle out the cause of this change of phase.
My own side of the problem was fairly easy. I saw now my six months' dissipation had failed
     to destroy or even weaken in the slightest my love for her.
And, granting this were so, the real effect that it had had, that of blunting my moral
     susceptibilities and obscuring my judgment was comprehensible enough, but why then in her
     should six months, spent in an entirely different, in fact, directly opposite way, have
     produced exactly the same result?
Could it be, I asked myself, that both Virtue and Vice are essentially tiring in their nature?
      Could it be that the human being is not fitted to sustain an
     extended course of either one or the other?
In a natural state, he would alternate one with the other, and in this mixed existence his
     moral character perhaps most fully develops and expands itself.
Was it possible that an enforced protracted course of virtue is really as enfeebling, as
     enervating to the finer moral constitution as a course of vice?
Perhaps there is something attenuating to the mental fibres in long continued virtue: the
     soul, the heart, the moral muscles become cramped by it: they are deprived of all that movement
     and exercise natural to them, in the fervours of repentance, passionate remorse and agonised
     regret consequent upon error, and they degenerate as the body does, of which all its muscles
     are not brought properly into play.
Could it be that Eurydice had degenerated
      during six months of immaculate virtue, as I had during six
     months of virtue's opposite? Had she grown insensibly as tired of virtue as I of vice?
Paradoxical as it might seem, our meeting with each other promised a radical change to each
     of us.
To me, sunk for six months in coarser forms of pleasure, my love for this woman soared up
     before my mental vision as something brilliantly pure, even holy and virtuous by contrast: a
     change almost from vice to virtue.
To her, wearied of the absolute, colourless purity of her life, her love for me seemed
     something terribly, fearfully guilty, a transition from virtue to vice.
Was this change that which had captivated her?
The next moment I hated myself for thinking in this way of her. No, I told myself, ten
     thousand times no. There was some other motive, but what?

At last I broke up my reflections in sheer despair, finished hurriedly a fourth whisky and
     soda, and came out on the platform. I collected my luggage from the cloak-room, had it put on a
     hansom, and drove off to my rooms.
When I came into the dining-room I found Dickinson there, extended in a long chair, smoking
     and reading the Globe.
‘Hullo, old pally, got back?’ he said, looking round his paper, as I walked in and flung my
     bundle of rugs on the sofa.
‘Got back, yes, and who on earth do you think I met at Victoria?’
‘Haven't a notion,’ returned Dickinson, whose thoughts ran constantly on unpaid bills. ‘Your
     tailor?’
‘No.’
‘Your money-lender?’
‘No.’
‘Some Johnny you owe money to?’
‘No.’

‘Oh well, imagination won't stretch further—give it up.’
‘That girl I was so spoony on on board ship, Mrs. Williamson.’
‘Aha!’ said Dickinson, sitting up and looking interested. ‘Speak?’
‘Of course!’ I said, flushing and coming up to lean against the mantelpiece. ‘I was not
     likely to see her and let the occasion slip!’
‘But I thought you had such a tragic good-bye on board, a sort of eternal adieu business,
     eh?’
‘Yes, I know; but I always did think I'd been in a beastly hurry about it,’ I said
     meditatively, looking down at the rug.
‘So that little arrangement has been knocked on the head now, I suppose?’ said Dickinson,
     derisively. ‘Where's she staying? in town?’
‘Yes.’
‘Alone?’
‘Yes.’
‘Are you going to see her?’

‘Yes.’
‘Did she ask you?’
‘Yes.’
Dickinson laughed. ‘I say, that's pretty thick, isn't it?’
‘I don't know what you imply,’ I said, annoyed. ‘I shall call, of course, like any other
     ordinary acquaintance.’
Dickinson folded up his paper and tossed it aside without replying, and I said after a
     minute, following up the thread of my own thoughts. ‘That's a thoroughly good woman, Reggie:
     one of the few women that are.’
‘And you're going to alter all that, I see, it's so old-fashioned. Bring her up to date,
     reform her!’
‘On the contrary, she'll reform me,’ I said curtly. ‘I'm sure I need reformation.’
Dickinson looked as if he would have liked to contradict me, but his conscience would not
     allow him to.

‘Have a peg, or anything?’ he said after a moment.
‘No, thanks; I had a series at the station.’
‘After the interview, I suppose! Well, what sport did you have in the country?’
‘Oh the usual thing,’ I said, sitting down, and we talked and smoked until past midnight.
Sitting up late and passing an absolutely sleepless night did not prevent my having energy
     enough to call upon Eurydice early the following afternoon: and I strolled about the empty
     drawing-room I was shown into with a sort of delight at the new atmosphere I was in.
There seemed a restful peace, a tranquil virtue in the very air, in the white light coming
     through the long lace curtains, in the straight-stemmed palms on the different tables, in the
     slim, narrow-seated chairs and pale hard satin couch.

There was no scent in the air, not even of flowers: an unopened Times lay on
     the table, and some books filled a case against the wall. I walked over to these and examined
     them. Mostly Latin authors of the irreproachable order, Martial and his school being missing;
     Greek seemed represented by Sophocles and only one innocent volume of seductive and
     reprehensible Plato. The rest were French philosophical books of the purest kind, and English
     poetry.
Yes; in this room everything seemed to speak of reposeful innocence, calm clearness of mind
     and life, and to me, accustomed to bachelor haunts, rooms dusky with smoke and furnished in
     decadent tints, with curious pictures behind odd curtains, and peculiar looking books lying on
     the tables, with luxurious ottomans and long lounging chairs, its cool simplicity made a sudden
     and delightful change.

I walked about, feeling all the ardour of first reform waking in me, and beginning to toy
     with the new idea of virtue as delightedly as a child to play a new game.
After a minute or two Eurydice came in, and the white morning light fell full on her face as
     she came up to me. It looked tired, with the unutterable tiredness of life lived without love
     and without joy, a mental tiredness that no physical fatigue can equal.
‘You have come very soon,’ she said, a smile seeming to light up the pallor of her face as
     sunlight falling upon snow.
‘Of course,’ I said gravely, and we both stood silent, looking at each other: a second
     perhaps or two: then Eurydice sat down in a wicker chair by the window and I dropped into one
     opposite her.
‘I suppose you thought it very extraordinary, my asking you to come, last night, after all I
     said; but when you told me about yourself and
      the life you had been living, I felt half responsible for it
     ...’ she paused and turned her tired-looking gaze through the window.
I waited, unwilling to interrupt her, listening, absorbed in listening for the curious and
     beautiful voice to continue.
‘I felt,’ she went on with a sort of effort, ‘that if, as you said, seeing me and knowing
     that you were coming to me would help you to live differently, it would be the most selfish,
     cruel thing I could do to refuse. That was my reason for saying come. I have your honour to
     trust to that it will be of some good to you, some benefit; if not, as I said at first, I think
     we had better not see each other.’
She was still looking away from me, and there was no flush on her face and no
     self-consciousness: it was as if she spoke on some grave and impersonal matter.
But I could not suddenly become so sublimely impersonal, and I glanced over the
      reposeful figure in front of me with a half-derisive
     smile.
‘There is,’ I said, with a sort of mocking assent, ‘a sentence in a celebrated work—“Flee
     from temptation.”’
Eurydice turned her head instantly, and the disdain in the light-filled eyes reminded me of
     the flash from them that had nearly scorched me upon board ship.
‘Yes,’ she answered, ‘and there is another sentence in that same celebrated work: “Resist the
     devil and he shall flee.” That is the motto I have always taken. Stand your ground, whatever
     the cost. Temptations are at every point. To flee from one is to rush into another. Besides,
     supposing that you have fled successfully hitherto before evil, and then you are called upon
     suddenly to meet one from which you cannot flee, and from which there is no escape, how can you
     resist, then, if you have no practice and no training? Whereas each
      one conquered gives you strength to meet the next. I would
     say, “Never flee.” Embrace every temptation. Take it into your arms, against your very breast,
     and kill it there. Strangle it, and then throw it away from you, and continue your own path in
     life unmoved.’
She sat up facing me. The pallor and dense fatigue had fallen like a mask from her face. The
     power and force of intellect seemed set upon her brow, looking out of her eyes, playing like
     sudden light all over the transfigured countenance.
Opposite me, in this hum-drum little drawing-room, against the white curtains, looked back at
     me a face gleaming with rapt enthusiasm, as a martyr's and saint's may have looked up from the
     stake to heaven, or across the flare of the kindling faggots.
I sat and looked, and couldn't help thinking, if in this case I were the temptation, I shouldn't
      object to being taken into her arms, even to be strangled
     and thrown away afterwards!
‘What can your life be worth,’ she added, ‘spent in running away from temptations?’
‘How would it be to yield to them all?’ I said, with a smile.
She stared at me for a moment in silence, and slowly a look of horror gathered in her
     expanding eyes.
‘Evelyn! What has come over you? Since we parted I can't understand...’
She got up and pushed her chair back with with one slight white hand.
It seemed as if that hand had grown whiter, more transparent, than when I had seen it
     last.
I got up, too, and walked nervously up and down the room.
How I admired the woman now, as always! How all my moral being went out in devotional worship
     to the moral beauty of hers!

‘I don't know,’ I said shortly. ‘I think I have come to see that there's no use in doing
     one's duty, no use in clinging to theories and ideas. You admit that there is nothing before
     and after life; well, I can find deuced little in it. Oughtn't we to make the most of that
     little? Sin! What is sin? Is anything a sin that makes this existence more tolerable?’
I stopped short in front of her. I felt my face whitening with excitement and a mist rising
     before my eyes. I had not meant to say anything of the sort when I came.
I was surprised dimly myself at the emotion growing in my brain.
She looked back at me, white, too, with the passion of impersonal argument that touches
     closely one's personal life and conduct.
‘No sin can render existence more tolerable,’ she exclaimed. ‘It lays a still heavier burden
     upon life. In the scales of sin moments of joy
      are weighed against months and years of misery!’
We stood looking at each other, everything, ourselves included, forgotten in the heat and
     crush of our thoughts, just as in the old word battles on board, and in the second's pause that
     followed her last sentence the door was opened and the servant entered with a tray of tea
     things, which she methodically began to arrange on a side table.
We both laughed and subsided into our chairs. The prosaic detail of every-day life obtruding
     itself at that moment dissipated the passionate enthusiasm of our argument, and when the
     servant left, Eurydice crossed the room to make the tea, with some light, commonplace remark,
     as if unwilling to re-open the discussion.
We talked on, mere conventional trivialities making up our conversation, and after perhaps
     half an hour I rose to go.
Eurydice, as she shook hands with me, looked
      straight into my eyes with the clear, penetrating light of
     the soul gleaming in her own.
‘Then tell me,’ she said quietly and without preface, ‘will it be any benefit to you to come
     here occasionally? Will it help you?’
‘Yes,’ I said meekly. ‘It will be like going to church.’
Eurydice smiled the faintest shadow of a smile.
‘I have your promise, while you come,’ she added seriously, ‘while you are my friend, that
     you will try to lead the best life possible to you? This is the condition of your coming here,
     and I have your word of honour you will keep it?’
‘Yes,’ I said merely, but I think she was satisfied.
There was a momentary pause, and then I said gravely, ‘Your example is not quite thrown away,
     I know your own life is a martyrdom.’

‘No,’ she said quietly, and a divine contentment seemed to descend upon the pale face and a
     fresh strength and resolution play round the cold lips. ‘No; say rather an infinite peace.’
</div></body></text></TEI>