<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Lilith: A Romance</title><author>MacDonald, George (1824-1905).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1895</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
chapter xi
THE EVIL WOOD
I FELL fast asleep, and when I woke the sun was rising. I went to the top again, and looked
     back: the hollow I had crossed in the moonlight lay without sign of life. Could it be that the
     calm expanse before me swarmed with creatures of devouring greed?
I turned and looked over the land through which my way must lie. It seemed a wide desert,
     with a patch of a different colour in the distance that might be a forest. Sign of presence,
     human or animal, was none—smoke nor dust nor shadow of cultivation. Not a cloud floated in the
     clear heaven; no thinnest haze curtained any segment of its circling rim.
I descended, and set out for the imaginable forest: something alive might be there; on this
     side of it could not well be anything!
When I reached the plain, I found it, as far as my sight could go, of rock, here flat and
     channeled, there humped and pinnacled—evidently the wide bed of a vanished river, scored by
     innumerable water-runs, without a trace of moisture in them. Some of the channels bore a dry
     moss, and some of the rocks a few lichens almost as hard as themselves. The air, once "filled
     with pleasant noise of waters," was silent as death. It took me the whole day to reach the
     patch,—which I found indeed a forest—but not a rudiment of brook or runnel had I crossed! Yet
     through the glowing noon I seemed haunted by an aural mirage, hearing so plainly the voice of
     many waters that I could hardly believe the opposing testimony of my eyes.
The sun was approaching the horizon when I left the river-bed, and entered the forest. Sunk
     below the tree-tops, and sending his rays between their pillar-like boles, he revealed a world
     of blessed shadows waiting to receive me. I had expected a pine-wood, but here were trees of
     many sorts, some with strong resemblances to trees I knew, others with marvellous differences
     from any I had ever seen. I threw myself beneath the boughs of what seemed a eucalyptus in
     blossom: its flowers had a hard calyx much resembling a skull, the top of which rose like a lid
     to let the froth-like bloom-brain overfoam its cup. From beneath the shadow of its
     falchion-leaves my eyes went wandering into deep after deep of the forest.
Soon, however, its doors and windows began to close, shutting up aisle and corridor and
     roomier glade. The night was about me, and instant and sharp the cold. Again what a night I
     found it! How shall I make my reader share with me its wild ghostiness?
The tree under which I lay rose high before it branched, but the boughs of it bent so low
     that they seemed ready to shut me in as I leaned against the smooth stem, and let my eyes
     wander through the brief twilight of the vanishing forest. Presently, to my listless roving
     gaze, the varied outlines of the clumpy foliage began to assume or imitate—say rather
      suggest other shapes than their own. A light wind began to blow; it set the
     boughs of a neighbour tree rocking, and all their branches aswing, every twig and every leaf
     blending its individual motion with the sway of its branch and the rock of its bough. Among its
     leafy shapes was a pack of wolves that struggled to break from a wizard's leash: greyhounds
     would not have strained so savagely! I watched them with an interest that grew as the wind
     gathered force, and their motions life.
Another mass of foliage, larger and more compact, presented my fancy with a group of horses'
     heads and forequarters projecting caparisoned from their stalls. Their necks kept moving up and
     down, with an impatience that augmented as the growing wind broke their vertical rhythm with a
     wilder swaying from side to side. What heads they were! how gaunt, how strange!—several of them
     bare skulls—one with the skin tight on its bones! One had lost the under jaw and hung low,
     looking unutterably weary—but now and then hove high as if to ease the bit. Above them, at the
     end of a branch, floated erect the form of a woman, waving her arms in imperious gesture. The
     definiteness of these and other leaf masses first surprised and then discomposed me: what if
     they should overpower my brain with seeming reality? But the twilight became darkness; the wind
     ceased; every shape was shut up in the night; I fell asleep.
It was still dark when I began to be aware of a far-off, confused, rushing noise, mingled
     with faint cries. It grew and grew until a tumult as of gathering multitudes filled the wood.
     On all sides at once the sounds drew nearer; the spot where I lay seemed the centre of a
     commotion that extended throughout the forest. I scarce moved hand or foot lest I should betray
     my presence to hostile things.
The moon at length approached the forest, and came slowly into it: with her first gleam the
     noises increased to a deafening uproar, and I began to see dim shapes about me. As she ascended
     and grew brighter, the noises became yet louder, and the shapes clearer. A furious battle was
     raging around me. Wild cries and roars of rage, shock of onset, struggle prolonged, all mingled
     with words articulate, surged in my ears. Curses and credos, snarls and sneers, laughter and
     mockery, sacred names and howls of hate, came huddling in chaotic interpenetration. Skeletons
     and phantoms fought in maddest confusion. Swords swept through the phantoms: they only
     shivered. Maces crashed on the skeletons, shattering them hideously: not one fell or ceased to
     fight, so long as a single joint held two bones together. Bones of men and horses lay scattered
     and heaped; grinding and crunching them under foot fought the skeletons. Everywhere charged the
     bone-gaunt white steeds; everywhere on foot or on wind-blown misty battle-horses, raged and
     ravened and raved the indestructible spectres; weapons and hoofs clashed and crushed; while
     skeleton jaws and phantom-throats swelled the deafening tumult with the war-cry of every
     opinion, bad or good, that had bred strife, injustice, cruelty in any world. The holiest words
     went with the most hating blow. Lie-distorted truths flew hurtling in the wind of javelins and
     bones. Every moment some one would turn against his comrades, and fight more wildly than
     before, The Truth! The Truth! still his cry. One I noted who wheeled ever in a
     circle, and smote on all sides. Wearied out, a pair would sit for a minute side by side, then
     rise and renew the fierce combat. None stooped to comfort the fallen, or stepped wide to spare
     him.
The moon shone till the sun rose, and all the night long I had glimpses of a woman moving at
     her will above the strife-tormented multitude, now on this front now on that, one outstretched
     arm urging the fight, the other pressed against her side. "Ye are men: slay one another!" she
     shouted. I saw her dead eyes and her dark spot, and recalled what I had seen the night
     before.
Such was the battle of the dead, which I saw and heard as I lay under the tree.
Just before sunrise, a breeze went through the forest, and a voice cried, "Let the dead bury
     their dead!" At the word the contending thousands dropped noiseless, and when the sun looked
     in, he saw never a bone, but here and there a withered branch.
I rose and resumed my journey, through as quiet a wood as ever grew out of the quiet earth.
     For the wind of the morning had ceased when the sun appeared, and the trees were silent. Not a
     bird sang, not a squirrel, mouse, or weasel showed itself, not a belated moth flew athwart my
     path. But as I went I kept watch over myself, nor dared let my eyes rest on any forest-shape.
     All the time I seemed to hear faint sounds of mattock and spade and hurtling bones: any moment
     my eyes might open on things I would not see! Daylight prudence muttered that perhaps, to
     appear, ten thousand phantoms awaited only my consenting fancy.
In the middle of the afternoon I came out of the wood—to find before me a second net of dry
     water-courses. I thought at first that I had wandered from my attempted line, and reversed my
     direction; but I soon saw it was not so, and concluded presently that I had come to another
     branch of the same river-bed. I began at once to cross it, and was in the bottom of a wide
     channel when the sun set.
I sat down to await the moon, and growing sleepy, stretched myself on the moss. The moment my
     head was down, I heard the sounds of rushing streams—all sorts of sweet watery noises. The
     veiled melody of the molten music sang me into a dreamless sleep, and when I woke the sun was
     already up, and the wrinkled country widely visible. Covered with shadows it lay striped and
     mottled like the skin of some wild animal. As the sun rose the shadows diminished, and it
     seemed as if the rocks were re-absorbing the darkness that had oozed out of them during the
     night.
Hitherto I had loved my Arab mare and my books more, I fear, than live man or woman; now at
     length my soul was athirst for a human presence, and I longed even after those inhabitants of
     this alien world whom the raven had so vaguely described as nearest my sort. With heavy yet
     hoping heart, and mind haunted by a doubt whether I was going in any direction at all, I kept
     wearily travelling "north-west and by south."
 
</div></body></text></TEI>