<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">

CHAPTER VI
SO we three were left alone. To form one of that trinity was not an honour, very
      certainly, which I coveted. But there was no way to avoid it; so, inwardly protesting, and
      feeling, I confess, ignominiously nervous, I remained.
Leversedge came on along the side of the table, and dropped into the chair which I, in the
      moment of the catastrophe, had vacated. The girl did not look at him; she continued in the
      same rigid attitude, her arms still flung out across the table amid the wreck of the supper;
      her fingers doubling and undoubling convulsively—the only sign she gave of her agitation. And
      Leversedge laid his hand on her bare arm just below the elbow. It was rather ghastly to think
      how her muscles working like that, right under his fingers, must have affected him. For a
      little space he sat silent, trying to force back a rising tide of very vital emotion—while, I
      remember, the coffee from an overturned cup dripped slowly, slowly from the farther edge of
      the table on to the gravel below. At last he said—

“My sweet, this is bad—very bad. This is the one thing I have implored mightn't happen; that
      I have prayed against—by day when I was free, by night when I was cursed. I have fought
      against the terror of its happening as one fights for life itself. I could not think it could
      be allowed to be—I trusted God—whatever God is—to be more just than that.”
His voice broke. Again he was silent, trying to recover himself.
“As for that brute Gerrard,” he went on presently, “I believe, as I told him, that he lied.
      But you—you—you,” cried Leversedge,—“you couldn't lie.”
He bent his head and kissed the hollow of the girl's arm again and again.
All this was indescribably painful; and I most genuinely detest what is painful—at close
      quarters. I wanted to go away, I wanted desperately to go away. But the Carissima raised her
      eyes to mine. Her pretty face was still set and fierce; but, as far as I could judge in the
      dim light, it was fierce with alarm now, rather than with resolve. Her eyes entreated me,
      commanded me not to desert her. I obeyed.
“See,” Leversedge said, “I have no words in which to tell you of my shame, of my
      self-loathing in having brought this horror on you. I have been hideously, damnably selfish in
      tying up
       your life to mine, with the possibility of that happening
      which has happened. But—but—oh! I am a scoundrel to have let it come to this pass—you see,
      we've gone too far to turn back—you see, we belong to each other now.”
Leversedge paused, a perfect agony of prayer, of love in his expression. It became almost
      unbearable. If she would only give some sign! But she continued absolutely impassive, save for
      the doubling and undoubling of her fingers as they rested on the table.
“You see—it's a vile thing to remind you of like this—but we are married. We can't cancel
      that except by death. And don't, don't want me to die,” he cried,—“not yet, not just yet. I
      have cared so long, dreamed so long, waited so long for this—for our marriage—for what
      to-morrow brings. Oh! my sweet, my sweet, try to put it out of your mind, try to forget what
      you saw. You may never see it again, it may never come back. Only be merciful, and try, just
      try. Give me a week, a month, just a little while, in which to be happy. And the torment will
      cease, the cloud will pass. I know it will. It must. I will compel it to—it must. And,
      listen—I will love you as never yet woman was loved; for you will have done for me more than
      any woman ever yet did for any man.”
Leversedge's head sank down upon his hand on
       the girl's arm, and I saw that his whole frame was shaken
      with great sobs.
“Forgive me,” he said, just audibly. “Forgive me,—try to forget.”
Then for a minute, I confess, I lost my head and called out loud to her—
“Speak to him! Say something, anything. God in heaven! what are you made of? Speak to him, I
      say.”
The girl straightened herself up, with a long shuddering sigh—a ghostly image of desperation
      against the dark multitudinous background of magnolia leaves.
“You—you of all people in the world, Antony Hammond!” she said very bitterly.
And Leversedge repeated his prayer, just audibly again.
“Forgive me—and for a little while, try, only try.”
“I have tried,” she answered at last.
“You have been to me as an angel.”
“I have tried,” she repeated, addressing me, not Leversedge. “You can bear witness to
      that—who better?”
She dragged her arm away from under his hand.
“And I have failed, failed miserably and contemptibly. Just in the very moment of success I
      break down—”
She rose to her feet, speaking violently, passionately
       ately, pelting me with words, as she might have with
      stones.
“No, I don't care what I admit. I have been mad to convince you, to prove to you that I was
      what I desire to be and am not. I thought I was sufficiently strong to carry it through long
      enough, at all events, to disprove your suspicions, to master you. I didn't care what came
      later. I should have won that which I wanted. But I am not sufficiently strong. You triumph,
      after all. You were right in your estimate of me. I am cheap, flimsy, insincere—an actress. My
      learning is mere cram, my talents mere imitation. I am a sham—colourless, characterless, a
      mere reflection of other people's thoughts, fashions, affectations. Yes, you are right, you
      have been right all along. I am a fraud. But I hoped against hope. I thought if I played at
      being something else long enough, I might deceive even myself, and really become that which I
      simulated. And, remember, I gave you the chance to help me, not once, not twice. But you were
      relentless; you forced me back on myself; you dragged aside the veil with which I tried to
      conceal my nothingness. I gave you the chance to help, and you were too lazy, too selfish, too
      fine, to trouble to take it. Then I turned to someone else. Ah! I am grateful to you—in very
      truth we have all cause to be grateful to you.”
Leversedge was standing up too. He looked
       utterly amazed and bewildered. More than once he had tried
      to stay the torrent of her speech, unsuccessfully; but, to my immense relief, I perceived that
      he was far too much absorbed in his own side of the drama to comprehend the purport of the
      girl's words. He supposed—poor dear Leversedge—it was the terror of the diabolic dog which had
      thus unhinged her mind; and he, of course, was responsible for that also!
“Charlotte, my poor child, my poor darling,” he implored, “don't go on like this, pray
      don't. You'll break my heart. I don't know what to do for you.”
He held out his arms to her, tried to take hold of her, to draw her to him; but she backed
      away, violently, round the corner of the table. A trailing spray of roses caught the folds of
      her dress and dragged them sideways.
“No,” she cried, “I will not come. It is useless to ask me. Don't you understand, I break
      with you? Ah! how thick-witted you are! Don't you understand, what you offer me isn't enough,
      since—since—you yourself go with it?”
Leversedge stared at her, for a minute, across the table, and still the coffee from the
      overturned cup dripped slowly, very slowly, upon the gravel. Then languor and tenderness alike
      passed away from him. He drew himself up, and it struck me what a big man—notwithstanding his
      spare make—Leversedge was.

“Isn't it a trifle late to think of that?” he asked her very quietly.
There was a silence, while a dog yelped and whimpered again, close to us, down among the
      roses below the balustrade.
“I do not love you,” the girl said.
Leversedge looked at her and laughed harshly, and for an instant the devil of desire leapt
      into his eyes.
“That is rather unfortunate,” he replied, “for I love you—very much.”
I turned away. Really they must settle the matter themselves. The presence of a third person
      had ceased to be admissible. But the girl called to me imperiously to remain.
“Stay,” she cried, “stay—you're a poor enough creature, Mr. Hammond, but you shall stay. I
      demand that you do so. I refuse to be left alone here, unprotected, with this madman.”
Leversedge staggered—then steadied himself, resting his hands on the table.
“But—you—you saw it yourself,” he said, with a sort of indignation.
Then Charlotte née Perry, that unheroic daughter of
      unheroic parents, played her last card. It was a very foul card, unfortunately.
“I saw nothing, just now. Listen, attend to that which I tell you, I saw nothing but what I
      should see this moment, if I turned my head—nothing but the glow-worms in the grass.”

“But—but—” Leversedge murmured wildly.
“It was a plan,” she went on, “a plot to rid myself of you—do you not understand?—to get rid
      of you.”
She made a strange downward and outward movement of her hands, as though stripping away some
      garment, some covering.
“Wake up,” she cried, “Constantine Leversedge; see things as they are, clearly, at last,
      though too late; for I am utterly weary of this long comedy. You have worshipped a delusion.
      Know me at last as I am. Mr. Hammond will be delighted to draw out the points of the lesson.
      Learn of what I am capable. I lied to you—do you hear me?—I lied.”
Then she slipped round the end of the table—while the rose spray, catching her dress, rent
      the muslin and tore at the silk of it with a sort of lingering shriek; and a small whitish
      dog, a mangy, half-starved, quivering little wretch, his tail between his legs, and a dirty
      tag of rope round his neck, crawled out from between the pillars of the balustrade, and ran,
      limping and yapping, behind her, across the terrace, as she fled up the marble steps into the
      vast hotel.
</div></body></text></TEI>