<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
CHAPTER I
IT was not, I must admit, without a certain movement of relief I learned, on
      inquiry, from the head waiter—who graciously condescended himself to serve my breakfast on the
      verandah outside the salle à manger—next morning, that
      Leversedge had left for Geneva by the first train.
As I have remarked already, I adore drama. It is among the best of the several good things
      of life; but it is, I must add, among the good things of which it is quite possible to have
      enough. And I had really had about enough of it on the previous evening. I hailed a pause. I
      did more. I took an early boat to Evian, and refreshed my soul by a Platonic luncheon—in a
      delightfully cool atmosphere both physical and sentimental—in company with the friend who does
      not enter into this history, and whom,
       therefore, I have already expressed a desire to leave out
      of it. Coming back, since the afternoon was very charming, instead of crossing directly to
      Ouchy, I took the boat to the head of the lake. The chestnut woods above St. Gingolph held the
      sunshine in an enchanting manner, I remember. I wished to think about these woods, about the
      humours of my fellow-passengers, about the gossip of the fair friend from whom I had just
      parted; but, unfortunately, I found it impossible wholly to banish memories of, and
      speculations concerning, the Perry-Leversedge situation from my mind. The occasions upon which
      one witnesses strong emotion in real life are rare, and that which one does witness on such
      rare occasions is haunting. It was borne in upon me how very much more effective and
      penetrating strong emotion is off, than on, the stage; how nature, notwithstanding her obvious
      crudities, strikes home, as art, I deeply regret to allow it, never can.
Last night Leversedge had been fine. Charlotte Perry had been fine—with a difference. Even
      Gerrard had played a telling part, in his own objectionable way. And there I paused. For my
      own action appeared to me wholly insipid. I had occupied the inglorious position of the
      “buffer state.” Only once had I taken the initiative, and then with what disastrous results!
       I could not, moreover, acquit myself of a certain
      pusillanimity in leaving Miss Perry, though she did, I own, appear perfectly equal to managing
      her own affairs. No, I was not proud of myself. And then little incidents began to recur to me
      which were somewhat incomprehensible. In that matter of putting out the lights, now, was it a
      plant?—had there been any collusion between Percy Gerrard and Miss Perry?
I was busy with this difficult and not very pleasing problem when, on trans-shipping at
      Villeneuve, Mr. Perry himself hailed my advent upon the upper deck of the lake-boat.
“Well met!” he cried. “As ever the truly welcome friend.”
There was, if I may put it so, an air of high-class-bank-holiday about Mr. Perry. It is an
      air calculated to render a hearty reception by the possessor of it peculiarly gratifying to
      one, specially when the said reception happens to take place in public. The occupants of the
      benches under the awning—the lean and active Americans; the large and affectionate Germans;
      the English clergy in mufti, surrounded by their harems; even those very superior persons, the
      schoolmasters in knickerbockers, bearing the impressive effect of universal proprietorship
      which covers them immediately upon crossing the channel, and remains so engagingly by them
      until they
       regain their native shore,—even these turned to gaze at Mr.
      Perry and my all too greatly honoured self. Mr. Perry had a courier bag slung across his
      shoulders; under one arm he carried a bulky white umbrella. He had field-glasses in his hand.
      To-day, alas! he wore a new hat. It was high, made of soft grey felt, and had a deep cleft, an
      absolute ravine, down the middle of the crown. Of all European countries known to me,
      Switzerland undoubtedly produces the most unholy headgear, both male and female. Mr. Perry's
      hat was of local manufacture. It was surrounded, moreover, by a black and white pugaree that
      had seen service, the stringy ends of it streaming afar upon the breeze as the little man
      perambulated the deck.
Mr. Perry was full of conversation.
“I am here with my daughter,” he told me. “She is unstrung, Mr. Hammond,—slightly unstrung.
      Perfect health, really perfect, I assure you; but a delicate, a highly nervous organisation.
      And marriage is a serious step; it is, I think I may even say, an arduous undertaking—for some
      of us, I am sure, very arduous. To leave home and kindred, to quit the dear old family
      roof”—(at Château Perry, one wondered, did they habitually
      camp out, catlike, among the chimney-pots?),—“must of necessity cause a pang,—aye, more than
      one—quite a number
       of pangs in fact, to any highly sensitive heart.”
I expressed my regret for Miss Perry's indisposition, and added a hope it was but of a
      passing, character.
“I trust so,” he replied. “But I cannot disguise from myself that my daughter appears
      depressed. These delicate young creatures are so full of feeling— 
Fair English girl, whose mantling cheek
Forbids the words her lips would speak.
 Yes, yes—so I invited her to come out with me. And Mamma approved the plan, I am
      happy to state,—entirely approved it. The aspect of outward nature upon this truly glorious
      summer afternoon would, I felt convinced, prove an antidote to gloomy thoughts. And hence you
      find us here, Mr. Hammond,—hence you find us; and very happy indeed we are to be found, I can
      assure you.”
While making these pleasing remarks, Mr. Perry pursued his course along the deck towards the
      stern of the boat. The wooded precipices behind Chillon fled away upon our left. Before us
      stretched out the immense, blue perspective of the Rhone Valley. Vast shadows lay across it,
      soft and misty; while here and there the flanks of the great hills, a row of balsam poplars on the
       flat, or the windows of a châlet caught the mellow
      brightness of the western sun. Everybody knows the view very well; still it remains
      delicious—delicious even though Perry père, in the tones of
      one returning thanks for the bridesmaids at a suburban wedding-breakfast, prattles at one's
      side.
“I am myself aware,” he continued, “how when harassed by the calls of business and by those
      anxieties which the fluctuations of the money market necessarily produce in the breast even of
      the most sanguine and the most solvent,—I am aware how a few hours, spent in one of the
      sequestered country spots, of which our dear sea-girt land supplies so many charming examples,
      will restore a measure of energy to the jaded nervous system, and promote a healthy, hopeful
      outlook upon our present form of existence. For though,” cried Mr. Perry, drawing himself up
      in a bold and reckless manner, and slipping his disengaged hand in between the buttons of his
      insufficiently brushed waistcoat,—“though through circumstances I occupy the position of a
      peaceful citizen, I am by nature a roamer. These snowy summits seem to call me—”
Here he waved his field-glasses dramatically towards the circle of mountains closing in the
      head of the valley.
“I envy the agile chamois leaping from rock
       to rock with dilated nostril. I long to inhale the
      invigorating atmosphere of those amazing altitudes. And the ocean, again,” added Mr. Perry;
      “the sound of it is, as I may say, positively in my blood. Often in my boyhood— 
Dear bygone time when youth's enchanted hand
Smoothed the light curl, caressed the candid brow—”

Here he smiled with a kind of a noble coyness.—“Often in my boyhood, when pacing the arid
      London pavement, have I paused and picked up a whelk dropped from the barrow of the itinerant
      coster; and, holding the home of the humble mollusc to my ear, have found solace and sweet
      suggestion of liberty in the murmur of the shell. Poetry, my dear Mr. Hammond, believe me, in
      the end we must all come back to that,—and a very wholesome thing it is to come back to, I'm
      sure, very wholesome.”
We turned, and I perceived the daughter of my eloquent companion in the open space at the
      far end of the deck, beyond the shadow of the awning. She was seated upon a low camp-stool, at
      a distance from all the other passengers, a study in brown-holland, under a large black and
      yellow parasol. Nobody was in attendance. Miss Perry for once was alone.
“Mamma, now, is different,” resumed Mr. Perry. “Travel for her has few attractions. A home-loving
       nature, the fireside, the bright flower border, the
      prolific vegetable garden,—these content the heart of Mamma, as does the round of her domestic
      duties.—‘A wet sheet and a flowing sail’—fine old song that, Mr. Hammond, and full of the true
      British nautical spirit—exercise no fascination over her. And so we left her at the hotel this
      afternoon; we did not bring her with us. Indeed,” he added, lowering his voice, “I may tell
      you, in confidence, Mr. Hammond,—you, are a man of the world, which is equivalent to saying
      that you know something of the feminine nature,—I was not altogether sorry to part my two
      ladies for a little while to-day, not altogether sorry to part them. A passing cloud, no
      more,—I am sure quite passing,—crossed the face, as I may say, of our family happiness. Just a
      momentary lack of unanimity of sentiment between the child and her maternal parent. Mamma had
      heard rumours—the confused indiscretion of an officious chambermaid—the sex will gossip, as
      you know—of something that happened last night.”
Mr. Perry looked sharply at me.
“Last night?—Indeed?” I said.
“A—in short—a scene—” repeated Mr. Perry.
“A scene?” I inquired.
“You were there, I believe, Mr. Hammond.”
“Certainly, I was there all the time. Your
       daughter played to us as—well, as I really think only your
      daughter can play.”
The boat slowed up at the debarcadère of Territet-Chillon,
      just below the extensive constructions of the Grand Hôtel des
       Alpes. Mr. Perry held on to the starboard railings and scrutinised the on-coming
      passengers. Among them chanced to be the retired Deputy Surgeon-General of the Madras Army,
      his face showing leaden under his white solar topee. Mr. Perry leaned out over the starboard
      railing and signalled to him with his umbrella. Then he addressed me again.
“You relieve me of anxiety,” he said,—“greatly relieve me. Mrs. Perry is slightly wanting in
      diplomacy at times; and she has, perhaps, views of the duties of a chaperon belonging to less
      advanced and cultivated social conditions than those in which it is the habit of our daughter
      to move. She questioned Charlotte.”
Again Mr. Perry looked very sharply at me.
“A mistake,” he added, “and one which I myself should have been incapable of
      committing—though not perhaps an unnatural one in an anxious mother. And—ah! here is our good
      friend the doctor. Botanising I see, as usual. No naughty poppies, I trust, annoying your eye
      in those delightful Alpine solitudes—ah! ha—eh, no naughty poppies?”
</div></body></text></TEI>