<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">

CHAPTER III
T0 most of us foggy islanders 90° in the shade takes the gilt off the ginger-bread
      even in so delectable a matter as a luncheon to meet a resplendent tail. Perry père et mère were distinctly demoralised in aspect, and even the
      Carissima was not quite up to her usual level.
Miss Perry looked warm, which was a pity, for it was not her rôle to look warm. It was her rôle to remind you
      of sunrise rather than sunset, to be virginal, flower-like, I might say dewy. She was tall;
      and our grandmothers, I think, would have described her appearance as elegant, the more so
      that her shoulders sloped and that her features were somewhat indefinite. For truly, in her
      the paternal rat and the maternal clock-moon had mixed themselves to the point of uncertainty,
      the roundness of the one putting a perpetual check upon the sharpness of the other, and
       vice versâ—two affirmatives going to make a negative, if
      one may reverse the rule laid down in our English grammar. Her colouring, on the other hand, was
       quite definite. It was red and brown. I have heard it called
      Italian, or gipsy-like. A budding poet once asserted, in dedicatory verse, that her complexion
      reminded him of split pomegranates. But then, poets pay odd compliments—specially young ones.
      Miss Perry's hair was brown, and abundant. Her eyes were also brown, and the whites of them
      very white. They were extremely pretty eyes; not large and placed flatly in her head, but
      dewy, almost always dewy, and full of appeal.
In short, she was unquestionably an uncommonly attractive young lady, particularly at a
      little distance. She needed to be focussed—but nearly every pretty woman, like every good
      picture, needs that! And she dressed well, though her clothes needed focussing too. At close
      quarters they had an unhappy knack of looking new without looking quite fresh. On the day in
      case, I remember, she wore a brown linen suit with a wealth of primrose silk vest to it. Both
      were smart, but slightly tired—perhaps from long sojourn in her boxes. The yellow roses in her
      large, black-lace hat were tired also. But I own to a sense of shame in having noticed these
      defects. I felt it was unhandsome of me, since she advanced upon her lover with a really
      captivating air of appeal and anxiety.
A pathetic note had intruded itself into my
       friendship for Constantine Leversedge during the last
      half-hour. If any pleasure was going, he had a prescriptive right to it. He was owed
      compensation. Solitude à deux is, of course, the very seat
      of bliss in matters of the affections; I therefore did my possible to procure him a tête-à-tête with the fair Charlotte by concentrating the attention
      of her parents upon myself. I succeeded. Mrs. Perry, dear good woman, had subsided on to the
      settee in the centre of the hall, too extenuated by the heat to be otherwise than perfectly
      docile. Mr. Perry was active, I might almost say rampageous; he was thirsting to communicate
      impressions, triumphs. In the capacity of an audience I was therefore acceptable to him.
“Well, well, good afternoon to you, Mr. Hammond,” he cried. “You see, we have returned. Not
      all the darts of the sun-god—torrid sunshine to-day, I'm sure, really torrid—could detain us
      any longer. Even in the gayest scenes, the most intellectually stimulating society, the heart
      of the true woman”—Mr. Perry nodded playfully over his shoulder in the direction of Miss
      Charlotte and Leversedge—“draws her back to ‘the kindred points of heaven and home.’ Hotel and
      heaven and home, as I may say in this case; which is accurate in fact, and pleasing to the ear
      as alliteration, eh, Mr. Hammond? Yes, thank you,
       we have had a charming party, really a delightful
      party,—haven't we, Mamma?”
This to Mrs. Perry, flushed as a moon in the early stages of an eclipse, vainly courting
      coolness by untying her bonnet strings and spreading out her fingers upon her knees, as she
      sat upon the settee.
“Delightful,” he continued, without waiting for an answer; “and most gratifying to us as—as
      the authors of her days, as I may say—wasn't it, Mamma?—to witness the high estimation in
      which our dear Charlotte is held by really superior persons. Nothing new, of course,”—Mr.
      Perry said this with a smile which came as near being haughty as the fashion of a rat
      permitted;—“but testimony to an old truth, if that truth be pleasing, is always welcome. And
      she sustained her part in the conversation victoriously. I do not exaggerate when I employ the
      word victorious. Really there are moments when my daughter's knowledge of all subjects that
      come under discussion almost staggers me. It is encyclopædic, I'm sure,—positively
      encyclopædic. I listen and admire and— 
Still the wonder grows
How one small head can carry all she knows.”

(For under excitement it was Mr. Perry's habit thus to gather in the British poets by some
      more or less hybrid quotation. I have heard with
       trembling, that he has been known to recite whole poems of a
      patriotic character—“The Charge of the Light Brigade,” for instance, or “God bless the Prince
      of Wales”—during the lapses of active interest—these are not infrequent, I understand—at local
      meetings of the Primrose League.)
“Mamma, I am sure, will endorse my statement,” he added. “My daughter in congenial society,
      among her intellectual equals, is surprising, really surprising.”
“Oh yes,” Mrs. Perry said, thus appealed to—“of course everybody was very clever. Mrs.
      Mertyns' friends always are. And it seemed to me Charlotte talked as cleverly as any of them;
      at least I understood quite as little of what she meant. And it always shows people are saying
      what is clever when you can't make out what they mean; don't you think so, Mr. Hammond?”
“Unquestionably, my dear lady,” I replied. “An infallible test!”
Mr. Perry glanced at me sharply, and then again addressed that unconscious satirist his
      wife.
“You would like to have the lift, my love, and go up to our apartment and rest.—Here,
       ascenseur, ascenseur!”
“I think I will sit still a little first,” Mrs. Perry replied, throwing back her bonnet
      strings. “Heat is very confusing. Don't you find it so, Mr. Hammond? It quite upsets me. Once
      or twice
       at luncheon I turned so faint and giddy I wondered if I
      could remain at table, which was very awkward for me.”—Mrs. Perry sighed.—“It seems to me
      clever people, like Charlotte's friends, are so strong,” she said. “They often look delicate,
      and yet somehow they always seem ready to go anywhere, and do anything, and talk. They never
      seem overcome with the heat, or the cold either, for that matter. I'm sure it must be very
      nice to feel like—”
“Habit,” broke in Mr. Perry,—“habit—there is a vast amount in that. I declare I hesitate to
      limit the power of habit. But I wish you had been with us, Mr. Hammond. You would have
      appreciated the conversation, and no doubt increased its charms—no doubt increased them. One
      brief passage of arms between my daughter and Mr. Percy Gerrard, upon the place of the
      imagination in modern realistic fiction, was brilliant, positively brilliant. 
And so the wordy battle grew, swelling almost to dissonance;
Then broke in laughter, and, with courteous phrase,
Sunk back to sweet agreement—this the end.
 And Mertyns told some very good stories towards the conclusion of lunch. One of the
      late Earl of Beaconsfield, which was new to me. A first-rate story—not more so than some of my
      own, but still first-rate. Just remind me, after dinner,
       my dear, and I'll tell it to Mr. Hammond. It will amuse
      him.”
“Yes, but it seems a pity you couldn't have heard Mr. Mertyns tell it himself; for it seemed
      to me everybody would have been so glad to see you, Mr. Hammond,” Mrs. Perry said. “They all
      seemed so surprised to hear you were at this hotel with us. Mrs. St. John said she wondered
      what on earth you could be doing here, and that she wished so much you would come and tell
      her.”
“Mrs. St. John is a delightful woman, and if she is very good perhaps I will tell her,” I
      replied.
Perplexity obscured Mrs. Perry's countenance as a passing cloud, then she beamed out
      harvest-moon-wise at me.
“Oh,” she said, “I see. Now you're being clever.”
“Heaven forbid!” I cried. “I am guilty of much, but, believe me, of that never.”
“My dear, I really think we may as well be moving.”—This from Mr. Perry, not without a hint
      of asperity.—“Ascenseur! Where is that lazy lad? Asleep, I
      suppose, as usual.—Yes, most kind inquiries after you, I'm sure, Mr. Hammond. The ladies
      begged you would call upon them. In fact, I suspected,”—he here became very arch,—“I may have
      been wrong, but I suspected it was thought you were a little remiss in not having done so
      already. Come, ascenseur, ascenseur, I tell you; don't you
      hear?”

And, receiving no response, he chased away in and out of all probable and improbable doors
      voraciously seeking the lift-boy.
“Mr. Hammond, a legend obtains that you are a lawyer. I hope that it is true, for I stand in
      great need of an advocate. Constantine is obdurate, he is grasping. Plead my cause with him,
      pray.”
Miss Perry was at my elbow, Leversedge's long, lean, white and grey figure a couple of paces
      from her to the left. He was watching her, adoring her; and the terror had not yet quite
      passed out of his face. This was dramatic.
Meanwhile Miss Perry's bright and dewy eyes were, I will not say raised to mine, for truth
      compels me to own our eyes were pretty nearly on a level. I trust I shall not be considered
      indiscreet if I mention that her lips had a trick of tremulously collecting themselves into
      what may be described as the sketch of a conceivable kiss before and after speaking. Her voice
      was of a gentle, toneless quality; while her speech, glib in fact yet apparently full of
      modest hesitation, caressed one's ear with a delicate hint of deference. For Charlotte Perry
      had the excellent gift of a deprecatory manner, such as flatters the natural vanity of the
      masculine heart. You felt she reckoned it a matter of gratitude so fine a creature as your
      manly self allowed her to look on you and live. Ah! if
       women knew! Perhaps some of them do, though—worse luck!
Anyhow, at that moment, Leversedge's matrimonial intentions appeared to me as little
      misplaced as such foolish intentions often can be. For even at close quarters Miss Perry was
      very distinctly engaging. It must be remembered I had just suffered a heavy dose of her
      parents, and from them she came a sensible relief. Poor young lady! I asked myself of what
      crimes she could possibly have been guilty in a former state of existence to deserve such
      parents?
“You see this bunch of roses,” she continued; “it is very lovely, isn't it? The scheme of
      colour is perfect—you feel colour, don't you, Mr. Hammond? These gradations are delicious,
      from white through those faint flesh tones, rose-saffron, and rose to this heart of passionate
      crimson. Do not let Constantine coerce me into marring its perfection. Plead for it. You are a
      poet. Save it, for is it not a poem?”
“Is it?” Leversedge said. “Well, then, give me a verse to stick in my buttonhole.”
“Ah!” Miss Perry murmured, drawing back.
She shut her eyes for an instant and shook her head, putting up one hand with a very pretty
      gesture of repudiation.
“A verse! but the context, Constantine; don't you perceive you would annihilate the
      context?”

“Annihilate the what?” Leversedge asked, in bewilderment. “I only want one of your
      roses.”
Charlotte Perry looked piteously at me.
“I cannot comprehend a willingness to mar what is perfect in order to gratify personal
      desire,” she said. “It is distressing. Is it not almost immoral?”
“According to many high authorities all desire, alas! is immoral, my dear young lady,” I
      replied. “Therefore your wish to preserve your charming nosegay intact may be—I do not assert
      that it is, I only suggest that it may be—every bit as culpable as Leversedge's very natural
      wish to convert a portion of it into a favour for his unregenerate buttonhole.”
“Do you really mean that? I should have thought harmony was always dearer than discord,
      preservation than destruction. To me that scheme of colour represents the birth and
      growth”—Miss Perry's voice sank away, became almost inaudible in refinements of
      hesitation—“and the eventual, the splendid consummation of some great romance. I told
      Mr. Gerrard so when he gave me the flowers—”
“Oh! Percy Gerrard gave you the flowers?” I cried.
The girl did not speak, she only gazed at me, while her lips tremulously formed themselves
      into that peculiar sketch of a kiss. I don't know how she did it, but undoubtedly she made me
      feel I
       had behaved grossly, that I had been amazingly crude and
      coarse. Then she turned languidly to Leversedge.
“Do you still want them, Constantine? You may have them all now,” she said.
“Oh, my dear, you're never going to give away your sweet bookay!” Mrs. Perry protested from
      her post on the settee.
And Leversedge stood holding the flowers, bewildered, looking as nearly awkward, indeed, as
      I had ever seen him look. I am not usually either impulsive or irritable, but I could not
      quite contain myself.
“Ah, you were right, pre-eminently right,” I remarked to Mrs. Perry. “Your daughter is among
      the very clever persons. She says things of which it is wholly difficult to arrive at the
      meaning.”
“Ascenseur—I have him at last. Run him to earth,” cried
      Mr. Perry, emerging from a side door, in what may be described as a jovial, sporting, fine old
      English mood. “Ah ha! run him to earth at last. Now, my ladies, to horse, to horse, boot and
      saddle, up and away!—eh, Mamma?—up and away!”
Leversedge followed the family party, and leaned his long arms on the gilded gates of the
      lift.
“Mayn't I come up with you, Charlotte?” he asked. “I've hardly seen you all day.”
Miss Perry's expression was still that of one
       who has been pained, mistaken, really very much pained.
“I am so tired,” she answered gently. “And yet I must practise. I—I am distressed,
      Constantine, but I think perhaps—I must practise, you see—I had better be alone.”
The sleepy boy was working the steel rope, and with a click the painted cage began to move
      up on its greased steel pillar.
“I won't be in the way. I'll sit quite still. I swear I won't try to make you talk,”
      Leversedge pleaded.
But Charlotte Perry sank upon the narrow red velvet seat beside her mother, shaking her
      head.
“Not just now, dear Constantine—please not just now,” she plaintively said.
Leversedge sauntered back across the hall thoughtfully, dropped the discarded roses on a
      little round table, rubbing his hands together as though he wished to get the feeling of their
      stems out of his fingers.
“I think I want exercise, perhaps,” he said to me.—Leversedge had a very well-bred instinct
      of always trying to carry things off.—“One leads an abominably lazy life here, you know. I
      think I'll go out for a good stretch. By the way, Hammond, I suppose I ought to know, but I've
      been so little at home lately, you see—who's this fellow Percy Gerrard, who you're all talking
      about?”

“A scavenger of genius,” I replied.
“A what?”
“The editor of an extremely successful weekly paper of the social variety. In his youth he
      produced a witty and improper novel, which everybody said it was impossible to read, and
      everybody promptly read. It affected to be autobiographical. Now he has ceased to be
      immoral—at all events in print—having laid to heart the golden maxim that public confession of
      the sins of others is, on the whole, an even more paying speculation than public confession of
      sins of your own. I am afraid he has also ceased to be witty. That is a matter for
      regret.”
Leversedge looked hard at me.
“Sounds a bit of a skunk, I think,” he said. “But very likely I'm wrong. I see I don't catch
      on to a whole heap of subjects you are all talking about. I have stayed out of England too
      long, and your ideas at home have run clean away from me. You are all speaking a language I
      don't know half the time.”
He stared absently at the stool, still lying wrong way up on the marble floor, and then
      kicked it aside with a sudden savageness.
“Why the dickens didn't I come home six years ago for good?” he said. “I was worth a tidy
      lot even then. I was younger, everyone was younger—one was more in touch. And then, perhaps, too,
       I should never have seen that ungodly brute of a—Oh, well, I
      beg your pardon, Hammond. I must have bored you enough and to spare with my own affairs
      already. Meet you at dinner? All right—I'm going for my walk.”
</div></body></text></TEI>