<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">

CHAPTER IV
AS though the day had not already been long I enough, we broke out into extensive
      festivity at the Grand Hôtel that evening. We had indulged
      in small dances before, when the gold and crimson chairs and sofas fled back against the walls
      of the salon, while the band brayed lustily upon the
      verandah. But to-night—whether by request of Perry père, I
      know not—proceedings were upon a grander scale. The neighbouring hotels and pensions had sent
      us their contingent of English and American youth, English and American maturity; while even
      the native population had subscribed precious specimens, with those petticoats
      disproportionately short in the one sex and ties disproportionately narrow in the other, those
      necks quite unnecessarily large and uncovered in both, which are so characteristic of the
      descendants of William Tell, and of the conquerors of Morat and Grandson. In honour of these
      guests the hotel was lighted from end to end; there were even rumours of supper to be obtained
      in the salle

à-manger. The rooms were really crowded. We were nothing,
      indeed, if not gay that evening.
On our return from Geneva, I had dined with Leversedge and the Perry family in the
      restaurant. Dined? rather say feasted! And Perry père had
      been horribly profuse in anecdote; but I capped his vilest quotations, I applauded his stalest
      stories. For the Carissima was gentle, natural, wholly captivating; while Leversedge held
      himself gallantly, and had a light in his eyes good to see. And these things produced in me an
      amiability little short of divine. I so very seldom am overtaken with charitable activities in
      respect of my fellow-men, I so seldom do anything—in the least burdensome to myself—to promote
      their welfare, that I was really quite overcome by my own successful altruism. If, thanks to
      me—for had I not, overruling the distaste of the one, and scruples of the other, pushed these
      two into each other's arms, thus finally and irrevocably?—if, I say, the half marriage went so
      merrily, might not the whole marriage go to perfection? For the time I enjoyed all the proud
      pleasures of the preacher, the evangelist, the director. I comprehended the fascinations of
      the sacerdotal position. I had “played with souls” for their good, temporal and eternal; and
      had won them, though the odds against such winning were extremely heavy. I had saved
      Leversedge's reason, probably his life
       into the bargain. I had converted the Carissima. And, for
      the time, I own it, my conceit of myself was colossal—rampantly, gloriously blatant.
It was in this spirit of profound self-congratulation that I beheld Leversedge and his bride
      pass out into the dusky brightness of the garden, and that I conducted Mrs. Perry to a gilded
      chair in the salon, whence she could witness the humours of
      the dance; while Mr. Perry, full of dinner, hilarity, and parental pride, instituted himself
      Leader of the Revels, encouraging the musicians, and inducing the wildest confusion by
      introducing young ladies, of whose names and nationalities he was quite uncertain, to
      gentlemen, whom he did not in the very least know.
Then the sweet influences of accomplished duty pervaded me—a large, digestive calm, subtly
      mingled with the blissful serenity of one upon whose undertakings the gods have smiled, so
      that he finds himself both a better and abler man than he had ever imagined himself to be. I
      retired into the hall, to a secluded corner behind one of the groups of pillars supporting the
      first-floor gallery. There I sat and smoked, and thought—as I invariably do think when I am
      feeling very good—of the white rectory house away in slumberous Midlandshire, of the old
      ecclesiastical historian (his living interest in things long dead, his deadly indifference
      regarding things still living), and of the
       woman I ought to have married, the only woman, as I firmly
      believe (when I am feeling very good), that I ever really loved, the woman I never make the
      slightest effort to see—sweet Lydia Castern.—And meanwhile I watched the passing crowd, and,
      since the double doors of the salon, facing me, stood wide
      open, caught passing glimpses of the dancers, my senses pleasantly dulled by the sound of many
      footsteps, many voices, the rustle of women's garments, across all which, advantageously
      tempered by distance, came the strains of the band.
Surely I might take my ease. Was not everything going to admiration? Out there, under the
      stars, amid the magic of the fair September night, was not Constantine Leversedge making love,
      his soul delivered from the grotesque and ghastly dream of the diabolic dog? And was not
      Charlotte, née Perry, listening, her soul delivered from
      dreams hardly less grotesque and ghastly—from false standards of taste, of fashion, from false
      refinements, false intellectualities, from a silly pursuit of decadent eccentricities? Was she
      not beginning to comprehend what an exquisite, yet very simple solution—notwithstanding the
      prurient purities of contemporary feminine novelists and reformers—true-love offers to the
      much-vexed question of the sexes? Beginning to comprehend how deep-rooted and terrible, yet
      how exceedingly
       pretty a pastime, is the love of an honest man—and many men
      are honest, after all, you know—for an honest woman?
My soul expanded under these charming meditations. For was I not the deus ex machina, was not this good work mainly of my making? Had I yielded to the
      Carissima's thoughtless coquetries, and involved myself in any intimate relation to her, how
      different the result! It was the cut of her shoes that saved me? Perish the thought!—it was my
      own high-mindedness, my own self-forgetting appreciation of the justice of the situation. Had
      I counselled Leversedge weakly to withdraw, instead of bravely to remain, again how different
      the result! I beheld the vision of two wasted lives. The Carissima, moreover, let loose upon
      society, possibly to entangle me—yes, me, after all, in the end. Instead of which, here I sat,
      replete with the perfect peace of conscious impeccability. Verily, how delightful are the
      leisures of the righteous, how inspiring the repose of him who seeks the advantage of others
      rather than advantage of his own! Five minutes more, and I might have added a hundred and
      fifty-first to the hundred and fifty Psalms of King David, with a difference—a difference
      possibly somewhat in the direction of M. Tartufe. But I was saved from any such disaster by
      the sound of a low grunt.
As I have already stated, I am—I thankfully
       affirm—acquainted with but one human being who testifies to
      the fact of his presence in this primitive manner. It is a little introductory habit of Mr.
      Percy Gerrard; and he often employs it as a preface to observations the reverse of
      agreeable—so I fancy, but then I own to a prejudice against Percy Gerrard.
On the present occasion he had “stolen upon me softly”; and his manner struck me as less
      intolerably superior than usual. He really seemed to wish to make himself agreeable.
“'Evening, Hammond,” he murmured affably, as he dropped into a neighbouring chair. “Dancing?
      How superfluous! You are very right to remain out here. The modern bourgeois ballroom—and this, I imagine, is pre-eminently bourgeois—is a revolting spectacle. Few sights, indeed, can be more repulsive than
      a herd of both sexes, underbred and perspiring, clasping each other's waists, and revolving,
      with prolonged and boisterous fatuity, in time to some wholly imbecile tune such as offends my
      ear at the present moment.”
Nevertheless, Gerrard pushed his chair farther to the left, with the evident desire to gain
      a clearer view of the festivities going forward in the salon. But a good many persons stood about the doorway, and it was only at
      intervals that one obtained full sight of the dancers.
“An exhibition of untamed animality!” he murmured
       mured in tones of disgust. “I hold it proof of the
      skin-deep quality of our vaunted civilisation that performances of this description are
      countenanced, nay, encouraged—it is humiliating to think of—by really very decently educated
      people.”
“From the Perfectly Ordered State, then, dancing is excluded?” I inquired.
For I was still at peace with all mankind, and even Gerrard's unlovely humours failed to
      ruffle me. I even played up to him, indulged him. In the columns of The Present
       Day he had lately been sketching Arcadias and Utopias according to his graceful
      fancy. He was not slow to observe the allusion, and turned to me with a gleam of gratified
      vanity in his dull eyes.
“Ah! you read those little things of mine!” he said. “They had merit—I knew it.”
“Of course you knew it. It is the most abject of exploded fictions that a man can write a
      masterpiece without knowing it.”
He directed his slow glance upon the crowd round the door of the salon again.
“Yes; I agree with you. I knew those articles had merit, and the best critics confirmed my
      judgment. I have been asked to reprint them.”
“Do so,” I said. “The world will be the gainer.”
Gerrard gathered himself up in his chair—planting his small square feet on the top rung of it
       —into a sort of spiderlike blob. What an immensely
      displeasing creature he was!
“Yes, I think I shall reprint them,” he said. “That is the worst of journalism—really
      beautiful things are too often lost, forgotten along with the day that gave them birth. But,
      since you are interested in my visions, in the Perfectly Ordered State, which, as I devoutly
      trust, is equivalent to saying, in the Coming Civilisation, woman will resume her natural
      position, that from which the moral and intellectual barbarism of the last few centuries has
      ousted her with such deplorable results. In the Coming Civilisation there will be a very
      hard-and-fast line drawn between the public and the private life. For we have ceased most
      lamentably to appreciate the decencies of the high wall, the heavy curtain, the locked door.
      The Democratic Spirit, rightly understood, is disgustingly immodest. It has done its best to
      murder secrecy and concealment, which are necessary elements in all really exquisite
      living.”
The crowd opened to give passage to the American prima-donna, her well-preserved mother, and her stout poodle; and, for the moment,
      the glistening floor of the ballroom and its racing couples were disclosed to observation.
“And so I take it,” Gerrard continued, “in the Perfect State, woman will again dance with
      all the grace of richly developed suggestion—behind
       closed doors—for the delectation of man, who will sit still
      and just watch her, lending her the emotional support of a profoundly sympathetic admiration,
      not the brutally material one of an encircling arm.”
“The coming civilisation has a little Oriental turn to it then?” I remarked.
“How should it be otherwise?” he replied. “In many matters the Oriental has always continued
      true to the light that was in him. His mind has remained unconfused by those weak notions of
      abstract justice, which war against the life of sense and of society.”
Gerrard drew his hand over his moist, uncomfortably smooth hair. I may add that it partially
      concealed his ears. Why does one instinctively distrust a man whose ears are partially
      concealed by his hair?
“The pendulum has swung far enough now, in all conscience, in the western ‘Hail Columbia!’
      direction; with unalloyed gladness I hail indications of the return, the eastern beat.—And
      that reminds me—talking of dancing, of course you know that most exquisite place, Palewell
      Friars? I was down there at Whitsuntide this year. They like to have me. You remember the view
      from the cedar drawing-room? That delightful Italian garden and the river flowing just below
      it, the lime avenues, and the broken ground in the deer-park
       studded with the old Spanish chestnuts, composes as
      entirely a lovely home scene as—”
He stopped. Again the crowd had broken up about the door, disclosing a view of the
      ballroom.
“A civil marriage is perfectly valid, perfectly sound in law?” Gerrard asked, with curious
      abruptness, his voice cracking up queerly at the end of the sentence.
“Unquestionably,” I said.
“Precisely—of course,” he spread himself in his chair.—“I know most of our fine English
      country houses, from the inside, I am happy to say. But Palewell always strikes me as unique,
      nothing jars, nothing obtrudes itself. Its charm is a solicitation, not a demand; while there
      is the inimitable flavour of an intensely aristocratic atmosphere pervading the whole scene,
      the whole life.”
“Which exactly suits you?” I suggested. Gerrard turned his head, and I perceived a
      singularly insolent gleam in his eyes.
“It does,” he replied; “you are perfectly right, it certainly does. I draw breath there with
      the emotion of perfect and natural well-being, with which, as I conceive, the Blest draw
      breath in the translucent air of Paradise—I am at home.”
He paused and sighed.
“We all have intimations, at times, of that which is utterly in harmony with the best of our
      own being—a delicious satisfaction of both the religious
       and artistic instincts. I had attended mass one morning in
      that little gem of a chapel; and later, in the richly toned and shadowed cedar drawing-room,
      while the sunlight yet caressed the grey stone mullions of that range of vast windows, Lady
      Clare danced to us.—You know her? Petite but svelte, sherry-coloured eyes and hair, with a dark pencilling of
      eyelash and eyebrow. A skin like cream—yet that illustration hardly gratifies me. It is a
      little disgustingly suggestive of the cow, and the farm-girl, and a rude first-hand relation
      to nature.”
Gerrard lounged sideways in his chair, and flattened down his hair again.
“Think, therefore, I beseech you, only of cream in some delectable golden jug of Renaissance
      workmanship, about the delicately turned body of which fauns and naïads toy amorously, in a
      wonder of subtly interlacing lines. Yes, I think that fairly renders the immediate sentiment
      of her appearance. It was all very beautiful. The magnificent room, the high-bred woman, her
      bare neck and arms braving the sunlight, on which those historic rubies—you know them?—glowed
      and shone as she passed from the voluptuous monotony of the Nautch to the frank gaminerie of the Café
      Chantant.”
“Innocent alike of the intention of either?” I remarked.
“I really can't tell,” he said, with an effort at candour. “But I hope so; of course I hope
      so, for
       it would go far to carry out my cherished theory of
      woman.—And there were contrasts in the setting of the scene which, emotionally speaking, were
      wonderfully helpful. The other women present wore shirts and sailor hats, the men were in
      breeches and dirty shooting-boots. Pour comble de bonheur
      little Freddy Hellard lighted cigarettes, and no one chid him. Ah, I shall long remember that
      morning, it was big with—”
Gerrard rose to his feet, peering in the direction of the ballroom. Again the crowd had
      opened, drifting to right and left, while Leversedge and the Carissima were revealed standing
      in the doorway. Evidently they had been valsing. The girl's abundant hair was slightly
      disordered; she carried the train of her soft peach-bloom coloured muslin dress over her arm.
      Leversedge faced her. He was laughing a little, fanning her, talking to her. Things went well,
      then? Verily, they went most exceedingly well. I thanked the gods. I approved my own conduct
      in this business afresh. Yet I almost regretted to see these lovers in the commonplace
      hurley-burley of a ball. I could not find it in my heart to think it the very best taste in
      the world that they should thus appear so conspicuously in public. Moreover, I wished
      earnestly to believe them in that state of mind in which solitude, and the repetition of
      certain sweet nothings, are so adorably full of high illumination,
       high delight. That they should tolerate the close contact
      of their fellow-creatures, that they should have any desire for activity, disappointed me. Or,
      might I trust this pointed to the light-heartedness that comes of complete happiness, the
      exuberant gaiety which is born of fulness of content? There is a stage of mental as well as
      physical well-being which, in all living things, expresses itself in playfulness,
      skittishness, a disposition, as you may say frankly, to jump about. Could it be—but oh, dear
      me, for that were indeed a notable conversion!—that Charlotte, née Perry, had reached the stage of innocent rapture in which all young and
      wholesome creatures develop this disposition to jump about? Yet the peace of the—to
      themselves, unexpectedly—virtuous being still upon me, I was disposed to press a point in the
      direction of cheerfulness; to endure all things, in the shape of that most unsavoury animal,
      Gerrard; to hope all things for the salvation of Leversedge's mind; to believe all things,
      concerning its purification from fashionable frivolities, of the Carissima's spirit. And as to
      a questionableness of taste in thus appearing in public, well, after all, what is Taste? The
      hedge from behind which the feeble shoot at the strong; the refuge of the unproductive; the
      cloak under which the unsuccessful try to cover the blackness of their envy; the spangles with
      which talent tries so to dazzle the eyes of the
       commonplace multitude, that it shall fail to see the stars
      of true genius shining on quietly very far above its head. My metaphors might be confused, but
      my determination of conviction was great. Constantine and Charlotte were right to dance, it
      meant everything most promising that they should dance. Taste?—who in the moment of honest
      gladness, or honest misery, ever stops to think about taste?
Thus did I reason with myself, while Gerrard paused beside me, curiously spiderlike. I quite
      thought he intended advancing upon the couple in the doorway. But the crowd, to my relief,
      speedily closed up again, and he sank back into his chair with a grunt.
“Poor girl,” he murmured, “I have a regard for her. It is painful. She was worthy of a
      better fate than the embraces of that —. But let us turn to something pleasanter, Hammond. I
      felt very thankful during that scene at Palewell; for I recognised that my prayers had been
      answered, and that I had not misread the signs of the times. I recognised that the reaction
      has set in, in very truth; that the degrading fiction of the equality of the sexes is already
      exploded; that education, doing its worst, has still failed to do any abiding injury, since
      the fin de siècle woman, true in instinct, though false in
      idea, mistakes the badge of her servitude for the brevet of her emancipation,
       and, to prove the completeness of her liberty, dances, like
      any slave-girl of the harem, for the entertainment of her hereditary masters. A cynic might
      sneer at this, as a last and crowning example of the illogic of the feminine mind. I cannot
      sneer. To me the matter is solemnly glad from the bigness of its promise. ‘Woman never
      civilises,’—thank God for that.”
I loathed Gerrard. But what was the good of relieving my feelings by being rude to him, and
      telling him so? I had a growing conviction that he was here for a set purpose, that he
      harboured designs of some sort against the peace of mind of Leversedge and the Carissima. If I
      was rude to him, he would go away and carry out his purpose—perhaps—all the sooner. Let them
      dance—let them dance; meanwhile I would, greatly enduring, continue the conversation.
“How about the suffrage, then,” I asked, as one greedy of information, “to which, as a good
      Conservative, your organ—that is the technical term, I believe—your organ, has devoted so many
      eloquent pages?”
“Assuredly, Hammond, you are not taken in by that little blague?” he said, turning his head slowly and looking at me. “We need it for the
      protection of our own property, of course, menaced as it is by the rapacity of the masses. Not
      one woman in a million is public-spirited—the vast
       majority have a savage rage for their own little
      possessions. We give it as the rope, the enough of rope, which will enable these dear foolish
      female creatures very effectually to hang themselves. Don't you see?”
“Most emphatically I do see,” I said.
Something in my tone, I suppose, conveyed to my hearer that I had had about enough. Ah! how
      stupid is it ever to lose one's temper, even in a good cause! Gerrard grunted, again rose to
      his feet. He stood, smoothing down his hair, and looking intently at the open door of the
      ballroom.
“By the way,” he said, “you know, I suppose, whether this story of Mrs. Mertyns' is true
      about that lunatic Leversedge's money?”
“What story?” I asked.
“Oh! that there is really a great deal of it, and that he has left it unconditionally to his
      wife?”
I got up too, and pushed my chair aside to let the apostolic-looking Russian poet and his
      daughters pass. They stopped a moment; we talked. I hoped Gerrard would go. But he remained at
      my elbow.
“You signed the will, I understand,” he said. “Of course you know all about it.”
“Upon my word,” I replied, “I do not see—if you will excuse my saying so—that whatever
       I do know or don't know is any particular concern of
      yours.”
Percy Gerrard is not constitutionally brave. I was delighted to note that he backed away
      from me a little, that he was distinctly uncomfortable and embarrassed.
“Oh! of course I don't want details,” he said hastily. “Pray, don't misunderstand my motives
      in asking. I have, as I told you just now, a regard for the poor girl. She is clever; in good
      hands something might be made of her. I am aware, just as you are aware, and everybody else is
      aware, that the man she is marrying is insane. And I own, I should be glad to know that when
      her husband retires into the enforced seclusion which is already, in my humble opinion, so
      desirable for the comfort and safety of other people, she, poor thing, will at least be
      decently provided for.”
“Make your charitable mind easy,” I replied. “Mrs. Leversedge will be by no means
      destitute.”
“So I understood. It is a relief to have you confirm the report.”
Gerrard gazed meditatively at me. He had regained all his habitual insolence of
      demeanour.
“Thanks, Hammond,” he said. “You are really very obliging. That is all I wanted to
      know.”
And he pushed his way through the crowd into the brilliantly-lighted salon.
</div></body></text></TEI>