<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">

CHAPTER VII
SO Charlottle Perry never cried,—never, from a child, had been given to the
      weakness of weeping. Among the many enlightening pieces of information I had recently
      received, this struck me as one of the most interesting. I found myself repeating it over and
      over as I loitered down the garden. Perplexing young person! And the copious tears of
      yesterday, what then did they indicate? A breaking down of stoicism; the heart of the woman
      fairly touched at last; or merely a pose more elaborate, more realistically developed, than
      all former poses?
In the days of my youth and my vanity, I thought I knew a great deal about human nature; I
      fancied myself an adept in the reading of character. But as I grow older I grow less and less
      confident of my own astuteness. My slowness in “catching on” indeed appears to me positively
      abysmal. The comprehension—in the true sense of that word—of even the most fatuous of one's
      fellow-mortals demands, not only a patience almost superhuman, but a lifetime of observation.
      One thing among all the
       perplexities, however,was quite certain, namely, that I had
      not got to the end of Charlotte Perry yet.
Meanwhile, I own, I kept a look-out for the scarlet silk blouse. Not only did I need a
      change from the Perry atmosphere to a less depressing climate and wider horizon, but I owed
      the owner of that brilliant garment one, to put it vulgarly. “Discipline must be maintained,”
      as observed the immortal Sergeant Bagnet. She had been malicious. She must pay for her
      malice—somehow—were it only indirectly by acting as an antidote to the insularity of good Mrs.
      Perry. But the offender had become invisible. I searched for her, but I searched vainly. She
      and her dyspeptic cavalier had disappeared. Finally, hearing a sound of voices from the place
      of gnats, I turned my footsteps thither.
Alas! under the sharp-edged shadow of the plane-trees only two English nurses and their
      charges were visible.—A small boy and girl,—two wildly active blue and white little beings,
      apparently in imminent risk of immersion, jumping from gunwale to gunwale of the pack of
      rowing-boats that were drawn up half out of the water on the paved slope at the near end of
      the little harbour. And a lusty infant of tender age, armed with a wooden spade, and suffering
      permanent eclipse, as to its face, from the vast proportions of a flapping white linen hat,
      who made staggering rushes in
       unexpected directions; indulging, meanwhile, in that
      wordless and wholly unrelated description of vocalisation, which should delight the heart of
      the evolutionary philologist, since it points so distinctly to the conclusion that the
      utterances of the primæval savage are heard over again in the earliest notes of the
      contemporary Christian child.
It was uncommonly warm under the plane-trees. Owing to the turn of the coast-line the whole
      of the little bay was sheltered from the breeze; so that the gay-coloured flags of the
      rowing-boats, among which the stars and stripes predominated, hung limp and flaccid from the
      white stern-posts. The length of the stone pier lay in a blaze of sunshine. And at the extreme
      end of it, raised high above the quay by a flight of steep steps, stood, not the accentuated
      black and red figure of my coveted young Russian, but Leversedge,—tall, gaunt, curiously
      unsubstantial looking, in a pale brown shooting-coat and white trousers.
His back was towards me, his hands in his pockets, his shoulders rounded, as he gazed down
      into the blue water ridged with slow, smooth undulations from the wash of the lately passed
      steamer. He was absolutely still—a modern St. Simeon Stylites upon his lonely pillar—victim,
      even as this last was, allowing for the difference of outlook brought about by the lapse of
      fifteen centuries, of the strange torments of a fixed idea.

I walked nearly the length of the pier before hailing him (the stones, I remember, struck
      quite hot even through the soles of my boots), and when, in response to my greeting, he turned
      round, it was in the slow, dazed manner of a man half asleep.
“My dear fellow,” I said, “the effect of you up there is finely statuesque, and most
      appropriately so. I have been holding converse with Mrs. Perry—who, by the same token, is as
      dear and kind a soul as ever stepped—and I find you are very much the hero of the hour. But I
      have had no speech of you for two days. Descend, therefore, oh great man, from your pedestal,
      and account for yourself. Tell me how you are.”
Thus admonished, Leversedge stepped down to the level of the quay.
“She told you about it all, and they're pleased?” he said. “That's a good thing, anyhow. I'm
      immensely glad.”
As he spoke, I took a steady look at Leversedge, and that which I saw, upon my word, I
      should not be sorry to forget. His eyes were sunk in his head, and circled by a bluish-black
      stain. His face was very thin and positively grey in colour, causing his close brown beard to
      seem unnaturally dark and bright. And this had a ghastly effect somehow, as though the man's
      hair alone was alive, the rest of him, though he moved and spoke, already dead.
       His appearance was so startling that I could not help
      commenting on it.
“You're not well,” I said.
Leversedge raised his eyebrows, and smiled at me in his curiously patient way.
“I'm sure I don't know. On the whole I imagine not,” he replied. “But really I begin to
      forget. Was I ever well? Is anybody ever well? Isn't it all a matter of degrees, after all?
      Some cheerful old johnny once declared the beginning of living was, rightly understood, merely
      the beginning of dying, didn't he? And as you get older the process of dissolution merely gets
      more way on, I suppose. The pace quickens when you're nearing the post.”
“But, my dear friend, at your age one by no means necessarily nears the post. There are ways
      and means. Something can and must be done to prevent it.”
“Make me warm, then,” said Leversedge. “I am so dismally and infernally cold. I don't
      believe I am more cowardly than most men, but the cold frightens me. I am always seeing a
      picture, I once came across somewhere, of men and women frozen into a great sea of ice. I
      fancy it was an illustration of Dante,—mean, spiteful sort of thing it always struck me, to
      stick all the people who annoyed you into the wrong place like that, in a poem, for themselves
      and everybody else to read.
       I came down here,” he added, “to try to bake the shivers
      out of me. But it's no good. This European sun of yours is a miserably one-horse concern. It
      gives out about as much heat as a square foot of looking-glass.”
I was greatly concerned for Leversedge.—“Is it the old story?” I asked.
He nodded.
“I've been spending a happy night with my faithful dog,” he said. “Nine hours of
      uninterrupted enjoyment.”
And then, as by mutual consent, we looked very hard at each other; while the lusty infant
      under the plane-trees, filled by the sense of its own well-being, upraised its voice in still
      louder shoutings, and the empty boats bumped against one another, with soft gurglings and
      suckings of water, as the little boy and girl skirmished about them playing some game of wild
      adventure.
“No, Hammond, I am not mad. Appearances are frightfully against me; but, before God, I don't
      believe I am mad,” Leversedge said solemnly. “What it all is, and why it all is, I don't know.
      I have gone back through everything, as far as I can remember, and my record,—it isn't
      perfectly clean; whose is, after all, you know?—but it is not worse than most men's. So I
      can't make out that I have done anything to bring this upon myself. I suppose it's folly ever
      to try to go behind the fact.
       What is, is; and there's the beginning and end of it. And,
      as I told you, in that dead camp I saw the Thing-too-Much. Still, one would always like to
      know why. It occurs to one Somebody must be accountable, and one would be obliged if They'd
      kindly explain,—that's all.”
Leversedge's dead face smiled pathetically upon me.
“But They don't explain,” he added. “I don't want to be blasphemous, but it occurs to one
      sometimes that perhaps They're not so very much to blame,—perhaps They can't explain.”
“Ah! there you touch bottom,” I said. “You can get no lower. You have reached the land of
      Outer Darkness, where reigns the Everlasting Despair. Come out of that. It, anyhow, is
      absolutely no good. Put it away from you. If it had been proved up to the hilt,—which,
      remember, it never yet has been, or, as far as I can see, ever can be,—still it would be the
      part of the wise man to deny it, to ignore it, to refuse utterly to think of it.”
“Since when have you turned preacher, Hammond?” Leversedge asked. Then he added almost
      immediately,—“I beg your pardon. I am an ass. One may be in a pretty bad way, but it is
      superfluous to be uncivil.”
“Perpetrate incivilities of the most aggravated character, and I will endure them like a
      lamb, like a sucking-dove, like that unpardonably-irritating
       creature, ‘patient Grizel’ herself, only, don't lose
      heart.”
There was a silence. Leversedge's eyes rested on the children playing in the sunshine in the
      gaily painted boats.
“That must be awfully jolly,” he said presently. “One would be glad to go back. And yet one
      would merely have to do it all over again, which would be—”
He shivered.
“I drove it away four or five times last night,” he added. “But it only went round and
      curled itself into my back. That was the finish. I was so absurdly tired,—that little bit of
      business with the Consul yesterday regularly knocked me up—I don't know what I am coming
      to,—but I hadn't the energy to get up and move about, so I lay still and let it lie. And it
      chilled me clean through.”
Not my worst enemy has ever accused me of an intemperate passion for physical exercise; but
      there are times when one must do violence even to one's highest virtues.
“Come and drink,” I said, “and then come and walk. Even a salamander might find some of the
      vineyard paths on the hillside agreeably sultry. You may get warm there in time—heaven knows,
      I shall get so soon enough. We can but try.”
Under the plane-trees the lusty infant, backing
       away from its own spadeful of pebbles, came into violent
      collision with my companion's long legs. Involuntarily it assumed a sitting position with, to
      itself, unexpected rapidity and force. Leversedge stooped down and picked up the baby, which,
      by no means disconcerted by its sudden elevation, continued to send forth prehistoric cries of
      unalloyed cheerfulness.
“You're a nice, promising little chap,” Leversedge remarked.
Whereat the baby ceased its calling, contemplated him from under its flapping sun-hat with
      owl-like solemnity, decided in his favour, and pouted out a round moist mouth for a kiss. I
      own to a movement of accentuated embarrassment in the face of such frank infantile advances.
      Not so Leversedge. He planted a very square kiss on the pouting lips.
“Dear little chap, kind little chap,” he murmured.
The nurse advanced flurried and apologetic.
“Master So-and-so,” for this creature, a span long, already apparently possessed both a name
      and rank of its own—“never minded where he was going.”
“Oh! well, he went most uncommonly right this time, anyhow,” Leversedge answered, as he gave
      the child carefully back into her arms.
He walked on at rather a breathless pace.
“Hammond,” he said presently, “you know
       we're to be married to-morrow. That is, half-married—before
      the Consul at Geneva. I'm almost ashamed to ask you; it will be a long way there and back, and
      I am afraid you'll be awfully bored, but, look here, I should be tremendously grateful to you
      if you'd come.”
“Of course,” I replied, “I will come.”
“That's very good of you,” he said. “I know Charlotte will be immensely pleased at your
      coming. She told me she'd spoken to you about it. She had a little talk with you
      yesterday.”
“So she did, so she had,” I answered. And, good gracious, about how many surprisingly other
      matters had she not spoken in the course of that same little talk? Amazing Charlotte Perry,
      who from her childhood, as her mother reported, had “never cried”! In spirit I yearned over
      Leversedge. How, in the name of fortune, would it all turn out?
We went for our walk. The paths between the vineyard walls were basting. I have reason to
      believe that I lost many pounds during that walk. And Leversedge talked of South Africa; of
      elephants, ostriches, and diamond fields; of Imperial Federation; of the very nasty habits of
      the noble savage. He was really amusing upon the latter subject. Of all practical jokers the
      savage, upon his showing, is the most professional, the most advanced. During the whole time
      he mentioned
       (putting, as I fancied, a pretty strong force upon himself)
      neither his approaching marriage nor his diabolic dog.
To luncheon, Perry père—who, it may be noted in passing,
      had, by the exercise of some diplomacy, secured to himself the seat at the head of the long
       table-d'hôte—did not return; and Leversedge, in obedience
      of a gentle command on the part of the Carissima, occupied his place. The spaces between the
      windows of the great, cool dining-room, and the inside wall of it, were freely incrusted with
      plaques of looking-glass. From my station halfway down the room—I invariably indulge myself
      with a separate table when staying in hotels—I could see Leversedge's bright dark head and
      beard and somewhat deathly profile reflected back and forth, apparently endlessly, to right
      and left; on one side of him the charming face and brilliant colouring of his fiancée, on the other the worthy clock-moon countenance of his
      future mother-in-law.
Miss Perry talked softly to him; her manner was delicious, most engaging, winning, and
      modest; and he listened to her, watched her, with a sort of rapture. He also, I believe, drank
      a whole bottle of champagne; but, so far as I could discover, he ate nothing, and I knew he
      was still cold, cold as a corpse.
</div></body></text></TEI>