<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">

CHAPTER III
THE joyless little ceremony was over, and Leversedge had got his wife as far as
      civil law could give her to him. His will was signed and witnessed by Mertyns and myself. Then
      we turned from business to the courting of pleasure. We ate a smart luncheon at a smart hotel,
      towards the end of which entertainment Mr. Perry was with difficulty restrained from making a
      speech. Finally we went for a walk. At this point Mrs. Mertyns' courage ran out; she departed,
      with many protestations of sorrow, to seek for some distinguished Genevan littérateur whom she suddenly felt an overwhelming necessity to call
      upon. She went away in a cab, with a white awning to it like the tester of a four-post bed.
      She left us Septimus.
Perry père et mère clung to each other through that
      dreadful walk, clung to the Carissima, clung to the rest of us. Escape was impossible. Like
      Wordsworth's cloud, “we moved together, if we moved at all.” It was hot and dusty, and the
       horror of being “out for the day” was most sensibly upon
      us.
Returning from the farther shore of the Rhone by the broad Pont des
       Bergues,—to the middle of which Rousseau's Island is moored by a little iron
      suspension bridge,—good Mrs. Perry made a sudden diversion. There was yet a weary hour before
      our train started. She begged plaintively to be taken on to the island. Not that she was
      filled by the spirit of pilgrimage, by memories of the delightful pages of the
       Confessions, or the disintegrating ones of the Social Contract.
      She saw trees, and green benches whereon she might rest a while, and seek relief from the
      fatigues and trampings of this very peripatetic day.
Leversedge took care of her, found her a cool spot, sat by her saying, I am sure, an
      infinity of nice kind things. Mr. Perry and Mr. Mertyns drifted into a ponderous conversation
      on the affairs of the nation at home and abroad. While I found myself standing under the
      narrow shimmering shade of the great poplars with the fair Charlotte,—the sapphire waters of
      the Rhone rushing down between the white piers of the bridges at the pace of a galloping
      horse; the façades of the solid square houses, fronting the quay and its rows of round-headed
      plane trees, lying in strong sunshine and blue shadow; the city piled up behind to the stern
      mass of the Romanesque cathedral, the two
       squat towers of which showed hard and dark against the pale
      lilac limestone terraces of the Grand Salève.
The girl's pretty eyes had been reproachful whenever they chanced to meet mine during that
      deadly day. They were reproachful still. I perceived that the atmosphere was electric, I
      feared we were on the verge of an explanation, and I cordially detest explanations. So I
      talked, I did more, I chattered. I gave my companion a really rather witty description of a
      sentimental journey I had once made—in company with the friend who shall be nameless-from
      Geneva, via Aix les Bains, to Annecy, for the purpose of
      visiting Les Charmettes—sacred to the memory of that most
      charming victim of every conceivable false philosophy, Madame de Warens.
Suddenly the girl stopped me.
“You go too far,” she said, “for I cannot believe you are utterly heartless, and so you must
      be aware, in a measure, of all I am feeling.—Oh! I know you are talking well—you usually do
      that. But, just now, that you should be agreeable is of very slight moment to me.”
She raised her hand and pointed to the dark high-shouldered cathedral.
“You remember they burnt people up there, once upon a time,” she said. “Well, I feel towards
      your talk much as those people must have felt
       towards the grasshoppers—listen to them now—singing gaily
      in the sunshine while the flames leapt up that—”
“No, no, no, pardon me,” I cried. “It is you who go very much too far. For goodness' sake
      don't souse us thus suddenly in a sea of tragedy right up to the neck. Forgive my remarking
      that your illustration is a wild exaggeration, altogether beyond the facts of the case.”
“You know what I have done, you know why I have done it, and you make agreeable
      conversation. You have no word of recognition, of admission. Does not your sense of justice
      compel you to own my sincerity at last?”
“Oh, quarrel with me as much as you like,” I said. “That is healthy enough. But don't lose
      sight of the proportion of things, and indulge in distorted comparisons. It is unworthy of
      your intelligence to do so, to go thus madly beyond the facts of the case.”
The girl clasped her hands and moved a couple of steps aside, with one of those swift
      movements which would look so excellently upon the stage.
“But can anything really go beyond the facts of the case?” she asked in tones of sharp, thin
      distress.
Upon my word, I was very much provoked with the Carissima, provoked to the point of being
       greatly minded to tell her, once and for all, that she was
      a goose.
“Yes, most emphatically many things can,” I answered. “Does a man's love carry so little
      weight with you that you dare speak as though to be the sole and supreme object of it was a
      dire misfortune? Moreover, Leversedge comes to you with his hands by no means empty. He does
      not merely offer you the trivial matter of his whole heart, but the exceedingly substantial
      matter of his whole fortune.”
The girl's colour had faded. She regarded me with some amazement. She had often surprised
      me; now I proposed to have my turn.
“You cannot suppose money matters to me?” she faltered.
“Indeed,” I returned, “I can very readily suppose it. Money matters vitally to every one of
      us who is in his, or her, sober senses. Miseries come whether one is rich or whether one is
      poor; but, I own, I never encountered any form of misery yet which money could not do a good
      deal to alleviate. But that is not the main point; the main point is your very limited
      appreciation of the affection of the man you are marrying.”
“Are you aware that you are simply scolding me?” my companion inquired sweetly.
“Yes, I am perfectly well aware of it, my dear young lady,” I replied genially. “And unless you
       actually run away from me, or call for help, I am fully
      prepared to continue the process. I am not nearly through with the business yet; and it is all
      for your good—all, believe me. See now, you have done me the honour to be very confidential
      with me. You have confided to me dreams of an ideal affection.”
The colour rushed into the fair Charlotte's face again. She closed her charming eyes, and
      raised her hand as though to ward off a blow. But the vision of Leversedge was upon me;
      Leversedge in that basting railway carriage, and the broken passion of his utterance. I would
      not relent.
“Bear with me while I point out to you that those dreams are but pale and ghostly fictions,
      beside the real, the very full-blooded, romance of Leversedge's affection. All that you have
      vaguely imagined yourself feeling regarding some possible, conceivable, but non-existent
      being, he positively and actually feels regarding you. Don't you understand, you are the last
      word of poetry, of art, of religion—even—to him. And is that nothing? Is it a slight matter to
      be to a man the incarnation, the ultimate expression, of all enchantments, all delights—that
      in you he finds the realisation of his highest aspirations—finds it there or nowhere?”
I paused, somewhat out of breath from my own—most unusual—flight of eloquence. I am not
       often thus loudly didactic. To be so is to be crude, and I
      shudder at crudity. Even now I dared not pause long, lest a quite opposite side of the case
      should present itself to me, and I should begin to fear not only that my enthusiasm was
      slightly ridiculous, but that I might, after all, be presenting my hearer with a garbled
      edition. Garbled or not, it appeared to work upon her. She stood silent; and her pretty face,
      set in the aureole of her wide-brimmed, rose-garlanded hat, wore a questioning expression
      somewhat—so I flattered myself—new to it. And this encouraged me. I held a brief for
      Leversedge—well, then, I would strike while the iron was hot, I would go on, I would plead his
      cause yet further.
“My dear young lady, you have been bewitched by much talk, by much reading, by all manner of
      ingenious hair-splittings regarding the emotions, regarding the relation of men and women. Do
      come back out of all that, all those misleading generalisations and fanciful interpretations,
      and deal with the matter in hand. You have just married a man who adores you, to whom
      you—briefly—represent rapture; well, lend yourself a little to the situation. It is not a
      contemptible one. For, to how many women do you suppose it happens, in their whole lifetime,
      ever to represent that to any member of our sex?”

The Carissima's lips quivered. She looked very young just then; and, queerly enough, I saw
      in her a strong likeness to her mother—to a clock-moon of long ago, paradisaic rather than
      suburban. I had an angelic moment, wherein my spirit yearned in purest and most praiseworthy
      pity and hope over Charlotte Perry. A little more and I could have prayed—to “whatever gods
      there be”—for the salvation of her.
“Constantine should tell me all this himself,” she said.
“Wait,” I replied, the angelic humour strong in me. “He will do more than tell you—only give
      him time. Remember, Leversedge is one of those who live ballads, not one of those who merely
      sit at home and write them. Only don't frighten him by narrow criticism, and quarrel with him
      because he does not conform altogether to fashionable standards. Give him room. Then he will
      not disappoint you. He has rather magnificent stuff in him. And he is yours to make or to
      break. Make him—believe me, he's worth it—make him, and for you, also, life shall be
      sweet.”
The girl came close to me.—“And that hideous hallucination?” she whispered.
“Will vanish into the nothingness out of which it came,” I answered.
The narrow shadow of the poplars had shifted, so that Charlotte, pink-sleeved and rose-crowned,
       stood in the full gaiety of the sunshine, above the rushing
      blue river.
“If I make him, will you believe in me, at last?” she asked.
“Down to the ground. I will hail you as the dearest and most sacred thing on earth,—a clever
      and beautiful woman who is not above giving happiness, who is not ashamed of being something
      of an angel into the bargain—”
Ah! Lydia Castern, why does the remembrance of you invariably return upon me in moments of
      exaltation such as these, when—for a little while—I harbour the notion that the practice of
      certain old-fashioned virtues, so patiently and faithfully practised by you, may, after all,
      be the surest way of pleasantness and directest path of peace?
But here the voice of Perry père, raised in playful
      admonition, put a stop to further conversation.
“Come, come,” he cried, “'tis time to move, though I regret to quit this interesting spot—to
      the student of literature, I'm sure, most interesting. Not that the writings of the
      ‘self-torturing sophist’ have ever greatly appealed to me. No, no, as an Englishman, as a
      husband and father, I say—and must always say—give me something manly, give me something
      sound, give me, in short, sentiments which, without the most fugitive movement of apology, I
      can permit to lie open upon my wife's drawing-room table.”

Leversedge had sauntered up to us. He stood near Charlotte.
“Tired?” I heard him ask her quietly.
“I own it,” continued Mr. Perry, with lofty humility, “for 'tis, no doubt, a reflection on
      my culture; yet I own that the genius of the French, as a nation, is foreign to me. A want of
      grit, Mr. Hammond, a lack of the substantial. Too many kickshaws, eh? just a trifle too many
      kickshaws and sauces.”
The girl hesitated a moment, then she looked very charmingly at Leversedge.
“Yes,” she said, “I am rather tired. To tell the truth, I dread the noise and dust of the
      train.”
She glanced at me, her eyes swam in possible tears, her lips sketched a possible and
      all-seductive kiss. Then she turned swiftly to Leversedge again.
“Shall we desert the others?” she asked him. “Shall we leave them to encounter the miseries
      of the railway without us? Will you go back with me—alone—by boat?”
Leversedge's head went up with a sudden jerk. His breath caught in his throat. I fancy he
      did not see anything very distinctly for a second or two, though there was an immense gladness
      in his face. It was rather moving; and I addressed myself to Perry père, in haste, regarding the flimsy,
       the gilt-gingerbread character of the literature of the
      French nation—the lack of humour of Molière, general cheapness of M. de Voltaire, and, to come
      down to our own day, the deplorable want of style in such men as Flaubert and Gautier. I took
      my examples, perhaps, slightly at random. Meanwhile I heard Leversedge laugh a little—almost
      as a child laughs.
“ Will I?” he said. “Do you really mean it?—Will I—will I not?”
Mrs. Perry talked to me all the way to the station, along the flaming Rue du Mont Blanc.
“I suppose there's no objection to their going off alone together like that, Mr. Hammond,”
      she said. “Mr. Perry made no objection, and, of course, we all know Joseph is very tenacious
      of appearances. But it does seem to me strange, only half married as they are. But then
      everything does seem strange to-day somehow; and, you see, it is so very warm, and I get such
      giddy turns. Dear me, I'm sure up at the Consul's, when all those papers were signing, the
      room turned right round with me, and I thought I should have fallen, which made me dreadfully
      nervous, because, of course, it would have been most mortifying for Charlotte and Mr. Perry.
      But, you see, I can't help feeling a little upset somehow, with all the marrying twice over.
      I'm sure none of my relations were ever married like that, nor any of Mr.
       Perry's either. And I really don't feel I know who
      Charlotte is for the rest of to-day. I've been worrying about whether she is Mrs. Leversedge
      yet, or only our daughter, just as usual; and I can't make out anyhow. I've been thinking if
      anything was to happen before to-morrow—which I'm sure I hope it won't—to make her name appear
      in the papers, whatever would they call her? I don't know. And it makes me quite nervous. It
      seems almost a scandalous thing not to be sure about your own daughter's name, now doesn't it,
      Mr. Hammond.”
</div></body></text></TEI>