<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="25">

CHAPTER VI
“APRÈS,” cried Mr. Perry, addressing his daughter in
      rallying tones,—“après le bal! Surely you young people stand
      in need of a little light refreshment? A plan, a plan, I have a charming plan—eh, Mamma? Let's
      offer our friends here an al fresco entertainment, before we
      part at the close of this auspicious day, to meet again to-morrow morning. Ah yes, meet at the
      church door at half-past ten o'clock. I look for many friendly faces to be gathered at the
      church door, I'm sure, quite a number of friendly faces.—But now to supper.”
In speaking, Mr. Perry waved us towards a table, by one of the large magnolias, at the
      farther side of the terrace. The rough zinc top of the table, I remember, caught the light, as
      did the white balustrade parallel to which it stood, over which pink climbing roses, set in
      the flower-border below, had thrown long trails of leaf and blossom. Beyond lay a quarter of
      an acre of lawn sloping away into a darkness of trees, bordering the lake shore.

The Carissima passed us without speaking. She went quickly across the wide gravel terrace,
      and dropped into a chair at the head of the table. It appeared to me the young lady's whole
      manner and bearing was curiously concentrated; it held no hint of hesitancy now, or of
      deprecating mildness. She swept by, indeed, with a certain violence; and, as I followed with
      Mrs. Perry, the effect of her struck me as really impressive—her head and bare throat, her
      slim figure to the waist, in its pale draperies, standing out in profile, clean cut, from the
      multitudinous background of glossy magnolia leaves. And, thereupon, a suspicion overtook me,
      that, even now, for good or evil, I had not come to the end of Charlotte née Perry. I took my place at the little table in a spirit of
      expectation; a rather weariful sense upon me—really this day was an unconscionably long
      one!—that, in respect of drama, there might even now be a considerable amount ahead.
As for the rest of the party—Mr. Perry had skirmished off in search of supper; Percy Gerrard
      still lingered, wrapped in august abstraction, under the verandah; while Leversedge, passing
      round, perched himself on the balustrade near his bride—his back towards the dimness of the
      garden, his face towards the illuminated façade of the great
      hotel. He bent down and spoke in a low voice to the girl.

Mrs. Perry sat next me, and proceeded to engage my attention by artless discourse. She was
      gorgeously attired this evening in a rich silk gown of sanguine hue. Moreover, I distinctly
      recall her cap. It was of the usual respectable upper-housemaid order, so much affected by
      elderly ladies of our modest nation; but, as sign of full dress, curious little golden acorns
      depended from the lower lace frill of it, as wind-bells from the roofs of a pagoda. They
      waggled as she moved her head, and the affect was amusing, somehow.
“I'm sure this is all very pleasant,” she said, looking round with evident satisfaction.
      “And no doubt it's very right and proper of Dr. Moorcock to be so busy about the bad habits of
      those poor blacks. But hearing him talk seems to make you very anxious, you know. Of course I
      was always brought up to believe those in authority—governors and generals and Members of
      Parliament, and all those sort of gentlemen, did know best, so that one wasn't called upon to
      trouble. And then, of course, when somebody like Dr. Moorcock comes and explains to you
      they're always making dreadful mistakes, why, you can't help being very upset and uneasy, you
      know—you really don't feel as if anything was safe anywhere.”
“My dear child,” I heard Leversedge saying,
       very gently, “if you'd only tell me what's gone wrong—half
      an hour ago everything seemed as right as—”
“And then it's so beautiful sitting out of doors like this,” Mrs. Perry continued, folding
      her hands contentedly over the centre of her person. “Of course that was all very different,
      quite in a small private sort of way, you know; but still it does remind me of the first year
      Mr. Perry and I were married. We had a house at Brixton—semi-detached, and a nice bow-window
      to the sitting-room,—I know Aunt Trumbull gave me red rep curtains for it and they never would
      quite meet, there was a mistake about half a breadth, somewhere—it was a disappointment, but I
      tried never to let them be drawn when she came in, for fear it should mortify her,—well, and
      there was a garden at the back. It had walls all round, and, of course, it wasn't very much;
      but there was a black-plum tree in one corner, and when Joseph used to come back from the
      office early, we would take our chairs out there and sit.”
Then Leversedge's voice reached me again.
“Oh,” he was saying, “if you would like the plans altered any way, there's nothing
      easier.”
He plucked off the head of a rose absently, and pulled the petals apart.
“The world's before us where to choose, after all, you see. We'll go where you like, and stay
       where you like. Whatever you like, I like—down to the
      ground, I like it.”
“It was very close that summer,” Mrs. Perry went on; “and—perhaps it's not quite a thing to
      mention before a gentleman, but, you see, you do seem to be such an old friend now, Mr.
      Hammond—I felt the heat very much just then, not being quite strong—”
What the girl had answered him I do not know, but I saw Leversedge turn away rather hastily.
      Then something must have arrested his attention, for he paused, leaning sideways over the
      balustrade, one arm outstretched towards the trailing roses, looking out over the great lawn.
      He was very still for a moment; and a dog howled again, down in the direction of the
      harbour.
“Poor thing, the doctor hasn't caught it, then,” Mrs. Perry put in parenthetically.
Leversedge pulled off another rose with rather laboured indifference, and, facing round,
      threw back his head with a jerk. The content had died out of his face. His brow was
      distracted, and the hunted look had come once again into his eyes. He bent very tenderly over
      Charlotte.
“Whatever you please and wherever you please, my sweet,” he said softly,—“if only you will
      be pleased. Surely you know, you know, I just live for that?”
“You see, it was just a few months before dear Lottie's birth,” continued my excellent companion
       panion. “We weren't very well off at that time, Mr.
      Hammond, and I made all my own baby-linen. It's very pretty work baby-linen, I always have
      thought that. And I used to sew as long as it was light, and then sometimes Mr. Perry would
      play to me. I am afraid the people next door objected rather, which seemed to me very
      illiberal, for I am sure I always found it sweetly pretty—Joseph used to practise quite a
      number of nice tunes, at that time, upon the flute.”
Meanwhile Leversedge went on speaking, pleading, as it appeared to me; but he spoke very
      low, I did not hear what he said.
“You know, Mr. Perry doesn't quite care to hear me refer to that time; he gets rather
      excited when I do, and says it's not fair upon Charlotte to recall our early married life. And
      perhaps it isn't. Of course, it all was very obscure. But I never knew how obscure it was
      then; and, you see, I was very happy somehow—”
Mrs. Perry sighed.
“I know it's all much better now, and that Charlotte and Mr. Perry move in society much more
      suitable to them both; but a woman's thoughts will go back to the time she was very happy,
      even if she sees afterwards that it was all a mistake and that she oughtn't to have been so,
      you know, Mr. Hammond.”
Here the Carissima made a sudden movement—
       threw up her hands, clasped them before her face. She
      stayed so a minute, showing like a cameo against the screen of foliage.
“Wait,—pray, pray, wait,” she said. “Presently, when my parents are gone—not now—I can't
      explain before them. Indeed, I hardly know my own thought yet. Wait—I implore you, wait.”
“The last thing I wish is to distress you, God knows,” Leversedge said slowly and sadly.
Hearing which, the remnants of my lately recovered cheerfulness began to vanish, smokelike,
      in deepening disquiet. For I recognised that I had gloried without sufficient cause, that this
      conversion remained distinctly incomplete.
Leversedge stared away across the lawn again, and as I watched him his figure gradually
      stiffened and straightened. He, too, was watching anxiously, unwillingly, yet with a sort of
      fascination something—something which I did not see. I suppose I really was very tired, for
      his attitude affected me strangely. The feeling returned upon me which had oppressed me
      earlier in the evening, as I worked my way out of the crowded hall, namely, that there was an
      abnormal, a malign element in my surroundings. It was absurd, of course, yet increasingly the
      Spirit of Fear—fear of I know not quite what—whether a perception of something supernatural,
      or merely a heightened perception of the ever-present possibility of tragedy in mortal
      existence, seemed to
       haunt the whispering trees and dusky garden, to diffuse
      itself through the blue-purple abyss of the lake and mountains, and the clear, impassive,
      starlit night.
Just then arrived to us Mr. Perry, followed by a waiter carrying a tray, shoulder high. If
      there was any abnormal influence abroad, it had not affected Perry père as yet, save in the way of an astonishing and altogether disproportionate
      hilarity.
“Ah ha!” he cried, “I bring you varied cates— 
Each to his taste, enough alike for all.
 Coffee and ices for the slighter appetites; champagne for the more solid, accompanied
      by a lobster mayonnaise. Mamma was ever partial to a salad composed of that somewhat
      deleterious crustacean —weren't you, Mamma?—Ici, put the
      things on the table, don't you see, comme ça, garçon. Et maintenant
       ôtez le plateau, and you can go, allez,—vous
       comprenez.”
This to the waiter.
Whether attracted by the sight of food, or impelled by some more subtle form of desire, I
      know not, but here Percy Gerrard descended the steps and joined us. He drew up at the corner
      of the table, between Charlotte and myself; and the girl looked up at him with a strange
      expression, half dependence, half disgust—as it seemed to me. As once before, I suspected
      collusion between these
       two persons, and I didn't in the least like it. At all
      events, it was a satisfaction to note that, along with dependence, Charlotte Perry's extremely
      pretty and mobile face did express disgust.
“Lobster?—no, thank you. Champagne?—yes,” he said, in response to an invitation on the part
      of Mr. Perry,—“that is, if it is dry; I take for granted it's dry.”
Gerrard's voice was not under complete control; it came hard and sudden. He emptied his
      glass, and then, setting it down, rested his hand on the table, bending forward over the
      girl.
“Have you remarked the glow-worms to-night?” he asked her. “Out there, upon the grass, they
      are really very wonderful.”
He raised his hand and pointed down over the lawn. And that hand must have been disagreeably
      damp; for it left, dark on the grey zinc table-top, a distinct impression of a flat palm, four
      squat fingers and a thumb to match.
“Fairylike?—yes, I'm sure, positively fairylike,” broke in Perry père enthusiastically. “Titania and her frisky train are all abroad this evening.
      I have called my wife's attention to their merry manœuvres already—haven't I, Mamma?”
Leversedge, at the mention of the glow-worms, glanced sharply at the speaker. Then he seemed
      to gather himself together, with a certain determination, and sat, his head bent, his back to the
       garden and his face to the light, laying hold, very hard—so
      I fancied—of the edge of the stone balustrade on either side of him.
Gerrard went on speaking, his voice cracking up and down queerly.
“You see them? There must be some peculiar atmospheric conditions to account for the extreme
      brilliancy of those delicate jewels.”
He paused, apparently trying to steady his unruly voice. The dance was over; the bandsmen
      were putting up their instruments. The concierge turned out
      the clusters of electric lights one by one, leaving but a gas-jet here and there, in
      compliment to the few guests who still loitered in the grounds. The lady of the red silk
      blouse passed us with her attendants, as usual deep in excited talk. The fresh-faced subaltern
      and his trim partner lingered, bidding each other a protracted farewell at the foot of the
      steps.
“Ah! how extraordinary!” cried Gerrard suddenly. “Look—look at those in the centre of the
      lawn, two discs of lambent living green. Singular! They move together rapidly, and towards
      us.”
The Carissima pushed her chair violently back making the stiff leaves of the magnolia
      shatter together behind her.
“No, no, not that way!” she cried,—“not that way! I dare not. It is too wicked. I
      cannot.”
Leversedge had taken one glance over his
       shoulder into the dimness. Then he wrenched himself round,
      wrenched himself on to his feet. And once again I could have sworn his hair bristled, while
      his lips stood away from his teeth.
“You lie,” he said, “and you know it. You lie,—so help me God.”
A silence followed; even Perry père, for once, amazed out
      of all articulate expression. And a dog yelped and howled, quite near us this time, on the
      left. While one of the bandsmen, a tow-headed young German, mocked it, howling an echo;
      whereupon all his companions laughed rather boisterously, as they moved away into the
      darkness, round the corner of the huge house.
When Gerrard answered, his voice rose into a positive scream.
“You are insolent, Mr. Leversedge, and your language is gross; but let that pass. I appeal
      to Miss Perry—to your wife. Ask her what she saw just now.”
The girl stood up between the two men—Leversedge on her right, Gerrard on her left. But she
      looked at neither of them. She looked full at me—for a most disintegrating, delectable,
      detestable minute. Her expression was of supreme appeal. Her lips gathered, quivered, with
      that delicious sketch of a kiss. I knew—don't write me down an unpardonably fatuous ass—I knew
      she was mine, to have if I would. I had only to speak
       five words to claim her, and she would come, regardless of
      all obstacles, joyfully, nay, triumphantly. And, dear me, was she not seductive just then,
      radiant with an amazing mingling of demand and of innocence? She asked me silently, yet with
      dominating force, she knew not what—for Charlotte Perry's passion was (pray, let us never
      forget that), as is the passion of so many modern young women, rightly considered, a matter of
      the head, of the imagination only, and not really one bit of the heart. And I answered her,
      whether as a man of honour, whether merely as a selfish craven, I shall never know. To the end
      of my foolish days, here on this foolish earth, the problem will haunt me, will remain
      unsolved by me. Did I behave as a perfect gentleman, or merely as a very thorough-paced
      poltroon? I cannot tell. Anyhow, silently, I did answer. Whereupon the girl threw herself down
      in her chair, and flung her arms out across the table, scattering the ice-plates and
      coffee-cups to right and left, making a swamp of Perry père's poor little supper.
“Oh dear!” moaned Mrs. Perry,—“oh dear! whatever is the matter? Everything seems to have
      turned off so very dreadful all of a sudden. And,I'm sure I can't tell what it's all about—can
      you, Mr. Hammond?”
“About death and damnation!” I exclaimed under my breath.

Leversedge bent forward across the corner of the table.
“Charlotte,” he said hoarsely, yet authoritatively, “tell me, did you see anything? What did
      you see?”
There was a breathless pause; and a dog whimpered close to us, quite close, down among the
      rose bushes, just below the balustrade. Then the Carissima raised her head, and her face was
      sharp, astute, terrible.
“Yes,” she said, “I did see something.”
She looked at Gerrard, she looked at me again, she turned straight to Leversedge.
“I did see something. I saw it.”
Percy Gerrard slapped his hands together and moved back a couple of steps from the table,
      making an ugly noise in his throat, between a cough and a grunt; while good Mrs. Perry broke
      into an hysterical sobbing.
“Oh dear me! I don't understand,—won't anybody tell me?—I don't understand,” she said.
And Leversedge remained quite still, his back to the wide dusky garden; his face and figure
      seeming to grow thinner, more corpse-like, as the concierge,
      passing the length of the terrace, extinguished another and yet another of the lights. When at
      last he spoke, he was fine, he was admirable—he had, indeed, risen to something of majesty.
      For he was master of himself,
       perfectly self-restrained, and calm—with the bitter
      self-restraint, the cruel calm, of one whose feet are set in the Valley of Tribulation,
      journeying through which a man's spirit is too deeply laden for him to strive or cry, but who
      moves forward, with the stoicism which, in strong and simple natures, utter desolation
      is—thank heaven—almost sure to give.
“This is not the end,” he said,—“not quite the end,—and with the end the rest of you have
      nothing to do. Go, you cur,” he added, addressing Gerrard. “Just how much I owe you I don't
      yet know, but be very sure I'll do my best to pay you all I do owe.”
He came round the table and stood by Mrs. Perry's chair.
“Go away too, my dear good woman,” he said very gently. “You have always been very kind to
      me; but I am beyond the point now where kindness like yours is of much avail.”
“I am at a loss,” broke in Perry père suddenly; “I
      protest, I am altogether at a loss—I am at sea, positively at sea. The wordy scene, the
      untasted refreshments—really, Constantine—”
“There, there, there,” answered Leversedge. “You shall know the result all in good time, and
      that must be enough for you.”
“But my daughter,” protested Mr. Perry.
Charlotte had sat rigid, her arms still out-
       stretched upon the table, her face hard and set. Now she
      turned, almost contemptuously, upon her father.
“Go, Papa,” she said. “I do not want you; you can't help me, and you may make me ridiculous.
      I can play my own game. And,” she added,—“and—you needn't be afraid. There will be a
      witness—Mr. Hammond shall stay.”
Percy Gerrard, whose courage was never of the militant order, had fled hurriedly up the
      marble stairway into the hotel. And now Perry père et mère
      followed him quite meekly—she weeping in a broken-spirited manner piteous to hear.
“I don't understand,” she said, “and I was just growing so fond of Constantine, too. He
      seemed to recall our dear little boy to me so—though as he died quite an infant and
      Constantine's a grown man, I'm sure I don't know why.”
And for once in his life Mr. Perry was too cowed to scold her; he merely gave her his arm,
      and led her humbly away.
</div></body></text></TEI>