<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">

CHAPTER V
I OBEYED his summons, and leaned beside Leversedge upon the stone balustrade of the
      balcony.
To-night the garden was very sufficiently illuminated. Earlier in the evening the local
      orchestra had discoursed music of a questionable sweetness upon the verandah; and the whole of
      our company, reinforced by a contingent from the town, still lingered in the balmy night air,
      taking little drinks around the tables upon the terrace, or strolling about the paths and
      shadowy alleys. A gang of children, clothed in white garments, chased each other, with cries,
      across the broad lawns and in and out of the shrubberies. Far out on the lake, someone was
      singing to a thrumming banjo accompaniment.
This was the first time I had seen Leversedge, save in the presence of witnesses, for
      several days. I had fancied, probably quite erroneously, that I detected a slight
      unwillingness on the part of the fair Charlotte to leave us together. I was the more glad,
      therefore, to note a very distinct improvement
       provement in my companion's looks and bearing. He seemed
      less harassed, steadier, more solid; he bore himself as a man contented and at ease. I even
      thought that just now I perceived a smile at the back of his eyes, so to speak, indicating
      that the late incident—though he so gallantly came to the rescue—had appealed to his sense of
      humour.
“It's a glorious night, isn't it?” he said.
Leversedge's shoulders shook slightly.
“I really am awfully fond of Mrs. Perry, though,” he added. “And that fellow Gerrard
      actually came in at the right moment for once in his life.”
“Are you revising your first opinion?” I asked; for I was rather curious as to the relation
      of the two men. “Are you growing to relish the society of our celebrated Percy?”
“Oh, I think him more or less of a skunk, which is exactly what I always have thought him,”
      Leversedge answered in tones of cheerful contempt. “And we see a lot more of him than I
      personally in the least care to see; but when a man's clear that he has the game in his own
      hands, he is an ass if he worries about trifles. I can put up with Mr. Percy Gerrard well
      enough for the next week or two. And if he fools about too much after we are married, I'll
      just let him know his place by kicking him.” Leversedge quietly chuckled.—“I walked downstairs behind
       him the other day, and I've an idea nature specially
      constructed him with a view to a kicking.”
Clearly Leversedge was in excellent spirits.
“The course of true love runs smooth, then?” I remarked. “The marriage takes place?”
Leversedge stood up and stretched himself, opening his chest and bringing his clenched fists
      up to the level of his shoulders.
“Yes, the marriage takes place—takes place—takes place,” he said, smiling.
Then he leaned his elbows on the top of the balustrade again, and for a minute or two we
      were silent. The man was evidently happy, and when a man is happy I hold he may very safely be
      left to his own thoughts. For, next to slapping an infant to make it cease crying, or beating
      a cripple with his own crutches to make him hurry, I know no more brutal stupidity than
      awakening the happy from their dream of bliss by talking to them. Happiness is not so common
      that one cares to risk interfering with it. Let them speak first. After a time Leversedge did
      speak.
“You were perfectly right, Hammond,” he said, “and I was a miserably faithless idiot of a
      creature. Of course the right way was to trust her. I'm immensely grateful to you. You've been
      a wonderfully good friend to us both. She told me you had had a little talk with her the other
      day, and, I
       think, if possible, she's been sweeter to me than ever since
      then.”
Leversedge turned his face to me. It was radiant.
“Dear God,” he said very softly, “it's the loveliest thing on earth to be certain at last
      that the woman you love really loves you.”
“And of that you are certain?” I asked.
“Yes, haven't I had proof? She has been tried in the fire and shown what she is made of—pure
      gold. I've left off cursing the dog, Hammond—for three whole days I've forgotten to curse him.
      Ah! there's Charlotte playing again. She does play divinely, doesn't she? Let's come to the
      window and listen.”
And it really was worth while to listen; for if not exactly divine, Miss Perry's playing was
      remarkably good. Her technique was admirable—so admirable, that you could afford to forget all
      about it, and give yourself to the emotional element crying through and superseding the
      mechanical one.
Gerrard had subsided into an arm-chair close to the grand piano. He was not a large man, yet
      he had the iniquitous habit of slightly overflowing every chair in which he sat. To-night he
      overflowed more than usual, changing his position frequently, shading his eyes with a music
      score, glancing about him restlessly, grunting, then
       shading them again. As Miss Perry concluded the nocturne she
      had been playing, he rose with a sloth-like slowness to his small square feet; and, as the
      girl, turning her head, looked at him, said—
“No, my craving for music is not yet satisfied, far from it. But before I ask you to steep
      my jaded senses once more in this purifying ocean of sound, I must implore that the room may
      be darkened somewhat. You have done your best to mitigate the glaring abominations of colour
      and form in this terrible hotel salon, I am sure, Miss
      Perry; but yet much, much of necessity remains which causes anguish to a cultivated eye. And
      the garish light of these candles and lamps brings all unlovely details into fullest
      relief.”
“Really I didn't think the room half bad,” Leversedge said in an aside.
“May we not have some of them extinguished, Miss Perry?—thus letting the stars, there,
      through the open window, the fragrance of the garden borne upon the night wind, and the
      perilous rapture of Chopin—think of the Majorcan episode, that exquisite exile à deux, the eternal sough of the breeze in the pine trees, and
      George Sand (the woman of the sphinx-like and unfathomable eyes) sitting by drinking in the
      insatiable passion of the master's music,—let these, I say, even here, amid the bare
      commonplaces of a modern hotel, for one beneficent hour have it all their own way.”

“Ah! I love the half light too,” the girl answered. “It is sympathetic. Partially to conceal
      is to suggest, isn't it? And to suggest is often really to reveal the deeper, the everlasting
      meaning, don't you think so?”
She got up.
“Yes—yes—let us extinguish them,” she said, with a sort of fervour. Then checking herself
      suddenly, she added,—“Ah! I forgot.”
Charlotte Perry paused; she appeared to hesitate. Then she came swiftly across the room,
      straight to Leversedge—her head thrown back, her hands slightly extended as though in
      entreaty, and that conceivable kiss deliciously sketched upon her lips.
“But if you in the least mind, Constantine?” she said, just audibly, and waited.
He had been a little disturbed by Gerrard's strictures upon the sitting-room, but
      Leversedge's moment of ecstasy was not wholly past yet. His face was still radiant.
“My dearest child, do whatever you like,” he said, taking her extended hands for an instant.
      “Thanks to you, I am growing royally indifferent to the dark.”
Charlotte Perry lingered, gazing in a really enchanting manner questioningly at her lover.
      Suddenly her chin quivered, and her bright eyes were suffused by tears. This was wonderfully
      pretty—too pretty for Leversedge.

“Go and play, go and play,” he said huskily. “Go, or I shall make a fool of myself. Go—I'll
      put out your candles and things—put out the sun itself in heaven, I believe if you asked me
      to.”
The girl turned, gave me one glance in passing—stabbing me as with a dewy dagger—and moved
      swiftly back to the piano; while Leversedge followed her, quenching light and sowing darkness
      in his path with an almost savage ardour; and Gerrard spread himself over the surface of his
      arm-chair again, with a grunt.
“Thanks, thanks, that is better. You are really very amiable, Mr. Leversedge,” he murmured,
      in tones of lofty patronage. “Nothing now, I trust, will mar the sentiment—a sentiment at once
      so chaste and so voluptuous—of these god-given nocturnes.”
</div></body></text></TEI>