<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Lying Prophets: A Novel</title><author>Phillpotts, Eden (1862-1960)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1897</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER FOUR
A THOUSAND POUNDS
A glad heart shortens the longest road, and Joan, whose return journey from the holy well
      was for the most part downhill, soon found herself back again in Penzance. The fire of
      devotion still actuated her movements, and she walked fearlessly, doubting nothing, to the
      post-office. There would be a letter to-day; she knew it; she felt it in her consciousness, as
      a certainty. And when she asked for it and mentioned her name, she put her hand out and waited
      until the sleepy-eyed clerk rummaged through a little pile of letters standing together and
      tied with a separate string. She watched him slowly untie them and scan the addresses,
      grumbling as he did so. Then he came to the last of all and read out:
"'Miss Joan Tregenza, Post-Office, Penzance. To be left until called for.'"
"Mine, mine, sir! I knawed 'e'd have it! I knawed as the kind, good—"
Then she stopped and grew red, while the clerk looked at her curiously and then yawned.
      "What's a draggle-tailed chit like her got to do with such a thing?" he wondered, and then
      spoke to Joan:
"Here you are; and you must sign this paper—it's a registered letter."
Joan, her hand shaking with excitement, printed her name where he directed, thanked the man
      with a smile that softened him, and then hastened away.
The girl was faint with hunger and happiness before she reached home. She did not dare to
      open the letter just then, but took it from her pocket a dozen times before she reached Newlyn
      and feasted her eyes on her own name, very beautifully and legibly printed. He had written it!
      His precious hand had held the pen and formed each letter.
Deep, wordless thanks welled up in Joan's heart, for God was not very far away, after all.
      He had heard her prayer already, and answered it within an hour. No doubt it was easy for Him
      to grant such a little prayer. It could be nothing much to God that one small creature should
      enjoy such happiness; but what seemed wonderful was that He should have any time to listen at
      all, that He should have been able to turn from the mighty business of the great awakening
      world and give a thought to her.
"Sure 'twas the lil lark as the good Lard heard, an' my asking as went up-long wi' en," said
      Joan to herself.
She found her father at home and the family just about to take breakfast. Gray Michael had
      returned somewhat unexpectedly, with a fine catch, and did not intend sailing again before the
      evening tide. A somewhat ominous silence greeted the girl, a silence which her father was the
      first to break.
"Ayte your food, my lass, an' then come in the garden 'long with me," he said. "I do want a
      word with 'e, an' things must be said which I've put off the sayin' of tu long. So be quick's
      you can."
But this sauce did not spoil the girl's enjoyment of her porridge and treacle. She ate
      heartily, and her happy humor seemed catching, at least so far as Tom was concerned. A bright
      color warmed Joan's cheek; the cloud that had dimmed her eyes was there no longer; and more
      than once Mr. Tregenza looked at his wife inquiringly, for the tale she had been telling of
      Joan's recent moods and disorder was at variance with her present spirits and appetite. After
      breakfast she went to her room while her father waited; and then it was that Joan snatched a
      moment to open John Barron's letter. There would be no time to read it then, she knew: that
      delicious task must take many hours of loving labor; but she wanted to count the pages and see
      "Mister Jan's" name at the end. She knew that crosses meant kisses, too. There might be
      crosses somewhere. So she opened the envelope in a fever of joyous excitement, being careful,
      however, not to tear a letter of the superscription. And from it there came a fat, folded pile
      of tissue paper. Joan knew it was money, and flung it on her bed and fumbled with sinking
      heart for something better. But there was nothing else—only ten pieces of tissue-paper. She
      remembered seeing her father with similar pieces; and her mother saying there was nothing like
      Bank of England notes. But they had been crumpled and dirty, these were snowy white. Each had
      a hundred pounds marked upon it; and Joan was aware that ten times a hundred is a thousand.
      But a thousand pounds possessed no more real meaning for her than a million of money does for
      the average man. She could not estimate its significance in the least or gauge its
      possibilities. Only she knew that she would far rather have had a few words from "Mister Jan"
      than all the money in the world.
Mr. Tregenza's voice below broke in upon the girl's disappointment, and, hastily hiding the
      money under some linen in a little chest of drawers, where the picture of Joe's ship was also
      concealed, she hurried to join her father. But the empty envelope, with her name printed on
      it, she put into her pocket that it might be near her.
Joan did not for an instant gather what meaning lay under this great gift of money, and to
      her the absence of a letter was no more than a passing sorrow. She read nothing between the
      lines of this silence; she only saw that he had not forgotten, and only thought that he
      perhaps imagined such vast sums of money would give her pleasure and make the waiting easier.
      What were banknotes to Joan? What was life to her away from him? She sighed, and fell back
      upon the thought of his wisdom and knowledge. He must be in the right to delay, because he was
      always in the right. A letter would presently come to explain why he had sent the money and to
      treat of his return. The girl felt that she had much to thank God for, after all. He had sent
      her the letter; He had answered her prayer in His own way. It ill became her, she thought, to
      question more deeply. She must wait and be patient, however hard the waiting.
So thinking, she joined her father. Tom was away up the village, Mrs. Tregenza found plenty
      to occupy her mind and body indoors; Joan and Mr. Tregenza had the garden to themselves. He
      was silent until they reached the wicket, then, going through it, he led the way slowly up a
      hill which wound above the neighboring stone quarry; and as he walked he addressed Joan. She,
      weary enough already, prayed that her parent intended going no further than the summit of the
      hill; but when he spoke she forgot physical fatigue, for his manner was short and stern.
"Theer's things bein' hid 'twixt you an' me, darter, an' 'tis time you spoke up. Every
      parent's got some responsibility in the matter of his cheel's sawl, an', if theer's aught to
      knaw, 'tis I must hear it. 'The faither waketh for the darter when no man knaweth,' sez the
      Preacher, an' he never wrote nothin' truer. I've waked for you, Joan. 'Keep a sure watch over
      a shameless darter,' sez the Preacher agin; but God forbid you'm that. Awnly you'm allus
      wool-gatherin', an' roamin', an' wastin' time. An' time wance squandered do never come agin. I
      hear tell this has been gwaine forrard since Joe went to sea. What's the matter with 'e? Say
      it out plain an' straight an' now this minute."
Joan had particularly prayed by the Madron altar that the Everlasting would keep her from
      lying. She remembered the fact as her father put his question; and she also recollected that
      John Barron had told her to say nothing about their union until he returned to her. So she
      lied again, and that the more readily because Gray Michael's manner of asking his question put
      a reasonable answer into her head.
"I s'pose as it might be I'm wisht 'cause o' Joe Noy, faither."
"Then look 'e to it an' let it cease. Joe's in the hand o' the Lard same as we be. He's got
      to work out his salvation in fear an' tremblin' same as us. Some do the Lard's work ashore,
      some afloat, some—sich as me—do it by land an' sea both. You doan't work Joe no good trapsing
      'bout inland, here, theer, an' everywheers; an' you do yourself harm, 'cause it makes 'e
      oneasy an' restless. Mendin' holes an' washin' clothes an' prayin' to the Lard to 'a' mercy on
      your sinful sawl's what you got to do. Also learnin' to cook 'gainst the time you'm a wife an'
      the mother o' childern, if God so wills. But this ban't no right way o' life for any wan,
      gentle or simple, so mend it. A gad-about, lazy female's hell-meat in any station. Theer's
      enough of 'em as 'tis, wi'in the edge o' Carnwall tu. What was you doin' this marnin'? Mother
      sez 'er heard you stirrin' 'fore the birds."
"I went out a long walk to think, faither."
"What 'e want to think 'bout? Your plaace is to du, not to think. God'll think for 'e if 'e
      ax; an' the sooner you mind that an' call 'pon the A'mighty the better; 'cause the Devil's
      ready an' willin' to think for 'e tu. Read the Book more an' look about 'e less. Man's eyes,
      an' likewise maid's, is best 'pon the ground most time. Theer's no evil writ theer. The brain
      of man an' woman imagineth ill nearly allus, for why? 'Cause they looks about an' sees it.
      Evil comes in through the eyes of 'em; evil's pasted large 'pon every dead wall in Newlyn.
      Read the Book—'tis all summed up in that. You've gotten a power o' your mother in 'e yet. Not
      but you've bin a good darter thus far, save for back-slidin' in the past; but I saved your
      sawl then, thanks be to the voice o' God in me, an' I saved your mother's sawl, though theer
      was tidy wraslin' for her; an' I'll save yourn yet if you'll do your paart."
Here Gray Michael paused and turned homeward, while Joan congratulated herself upon the fact
      that a conversation which promised to be difficult had ended so speedily and without
      misfortune. Then her father asked her another question.
"An' what's this I hear tell 'bout you bein' poorly? You do look so well as ever I knawed
      'e, but mother sez you'm that cranky with vittles as you never was afore, an' wrong inside
      likewise."
"Ban't nothin', faither. 'Tis awver an' done. I ate tu much or some sich thing an' I be
      bonny well agin now."
"Doan't be thinkin' then. 'Tis all brain-sickness, I'll lay. I doan't want no doctor's
      traade in my 'ouse if us can keep it outside. The Lard's my doctor. Keep your sawl clean, an'
      the Lard'll watch your body. 'E's said as much. 'E knaws we'm poor trashy worms an' even a
      breath o' foul air'll take our lives onless 'E be by to filter it. Faith's the awnly medicine
      worth usin'."
Joan remembered her morning bath and felt comforted by this last reflection. Had she not
      already found the magic result? For a moment she thought of telling her father what she had
      done, but she changed her mind. Such faith as that would have brought nothing but wrath upon
      her.
While Mr. Tregenza improved the hour and uttered various precepts for his daughter's help
      and guidance, Thomasin was occupied at home with grave thoughts respecting Joan. She more than
      suspected the truth from signs of indisposition full of meaning to a mother; but while duly
      mentioning the girl's illness, Mrs. Tregenza did not dare to breathe the color of her own
      explanation. She prayed to God in all honesty to prove her wrong, but her lynx eyes waited to
      read the truth she feared. If things were really so with Joan, then they could not be hid from
      her eyes much longer; and in the event of her suspicions proving correct, Mrs. Tregenza told
      herself, as a right Luke Gospeler, she must proclaim her horrid discovery and let the
      perdition of her husband's daughter be generally made manifest. She knew so many were called,
      so few chosen. No girl had ever been more surely called than Joan: her father's trumpet tongue
      had thundered the ways of righteousness into her ears from her birth; but, after all, it began
      to look as though she was not chosen. The circumstance, of course, if proved, would rob her of
      every Luke Gospeler's regard. No weak pandering with sentiment and sin was permitted in that
      fold. And Mrs. Tregenza had little pity herself for unfortunate or mistaken women. Let a girl
      lose her character and Thomasin usually refused to hear any plea of mercy from any source.
      Only once did she find extenuating circumstances: in a case where a ruined farmer's daughter
      brought an action for breach of promise and won it, with heavy damages. But money acted in a
      peculiar way with this woman. It put her conscience and her judgment out of focus, softened
      the outlines of events, furnished excuses for unusual practices, gilded with a bright lining
      even the blackest cloud of wrongdoing. Where Mrs. Tregenza could see money she could see
      light. Money made her charitable, broad-minded, even tolerant. She knew she loved it, and was
      careful to keep the fact out of Gray Michael's sight as far as possible. She held the purse,
      and he felt that it was in good hands, but cautioned her from time to time against the awful
      danger of letting a lust for this world's wealth come between the soul and God.
And now a course long indicated in Thomasin's mind was being by her pursued. Having
      convinced herself that under the present circumstances any step to found or dispel her fears
      concerning Joan would be just and proper, she took the exceptional one of searching the girl's
      little room while her stepdaughter was out with Michael. Even as Mr. Tregenza turned to go
      homeward again, his wife stood in the midst of Joan's small sanctuary, and cast keen,
      inquiring eyes about her. She rarely visited the apartment, and had not been in it for six
      months. Now she came to set doubt at rest if possible, or confirm it. Her own secret opinion
      was that Joan had come to serious trouble with her superiors. In that case letters, presents
      or tokens had probably passed into her hands; and, if such existed, in this room they would
      be.
"God send as I'm makin' a mistake an' shaan't find nothin' 'tall," said Mrs. Tregenza to
      herself. And then she began her scrutiny. 
</div></body></text></TEI>