<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Lying Prophets: A Novel</title><author>Phillpotts, Eden (1862-1960)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1897</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="34">
CHAPTER SIX
THE FLOOD
In the coomb beneath Drift, flashing as though red-hot from a theater of Cimmerian
      blackness, certain figures, flame-lighted, flickered hurriedly this way and that about a dark
      and monstrous pile which rose in their midst. From the adjacent hill, superstitious watchers
      might have supposed that they beheld some demoniac throng newly burst oat of the bowels of
      earth and to be presently re-engulfed; but seen nearer, the toiling creatures, fighting with
      all their hearts and souls to save a haystack from flood, had merely excited human interest
      and commiseration. Farmer Chirgwin and his men were girt as to the legs in old-fashioned
      hay-bands; some held torches while others toiled with ropes to anchor the giant rick against
      the gathering waters. There was no immediate fear, for the pile still stood a clear foot above
      the stream on a gentle undulation distant nearly two yards from the present boundary of the
      swollen river. But, on the landward side, another danger threatened, because in that quarter
      the meadow sank in a slight hollow which had now changed to a lake fed by a brisk rivulet from
      the main river. The great rick thus stood almost insulated, and much further uprising of the
      flood would place it in a position not to be approached by man without danger. Above the
      stack, distant about five-and-twenty yards, stood a couple of stout pollarded willows, and by
      these Uncle Chirgwin had decided to moor his hay, trusting that they might hold the great mass
      of it secure even though the threatened flood swept away its foundations. Nine figures worked
      amain, and to them approached a tenth, appearing from the darkness, skirting the lake and
      splashing through the streamlet which fed it. Mary Chirgwin it was who now arrived—a grotesque
      figure with her gown and petticoats fastened high and wearing on her legs a pair of her
      uncle's leather gaiters. Mary had been up to the farm for more rope, but the clothesline was
      all that she could find, and this she now returned with. Already three ropes had been passed
      round the rick and made fast to the willows, but none among them was of great stoutness, nor
      had they been tied at an elevation best calculated to resist a possible strain. Amos Bartlett
      took the line from Mary and set to work with many assistants; while the farmer himself, waving
      a torch and stumping hither and thither, now directed Bartlett, now encouraged two men who
      worked with all their might at the cutting of a trench from the lake in order that this
      dangerous body of water might be drained back to the main stream. The flame-light danced in
      many a flash and splash over the smooth surface of the face of the inland pond. Indeed it
      reflected like a glass at present, for no wind fretted it, neither did a drop of rain fall.
      Intense, watchful silence held that hour. The squash of men's feet in the mud, the soft swirl
      of the water, the cry of voices alone disturbed the night.
"God be praised! I do think 'tis 'bating," cried the farmer presently. He ran every few
      minutes to the water and examined a stake hammered into it a foot from the edge. It seemed, as
      far as might be judged by such fitful light and rough measurement, that the river had sunk an
      inch or two, but it was running in undulations, and what its muddy mass had lost in volume was
      gained in speed. The water chattered and hissed; and Amos Bartlett, who next made a survey,
      declared that the flood had by no means waned, but rather risen. Then, the last ropes being
      disposed to the best advantage, all joined the laborers who were digging. Twenty minutes
      later, however, and before the trench was more than three parts finished, there came a
      tremendous change. Turning hastily to the river, Bartlett uttered a shout of alarm and called
      for light. He had approached the telltale stake, and suddenly, before he reached it, found his
      feet in the water. The river was rising with fierce rapidity at last, and five minutes later
      began to lick at the edge of the hay-rick, and churn along with a strange hidden force and
      devil in it. The pace increased with the volume, and told of some prodigious outburst on the
      moor. The uncanny silence of the swelling water as it slipped downward was a curious feature
      of it in this phase. Chirgwin and his men huddled together at the side of the rick; then
      Bartlett held up his hand and spoke.
"Hark 'e all! 'Tis comin' now, by God!"
They kept silence and listened with straining ears and frightened eyes, fire-rimmed by the
      flickering torchlight. A sound came from afar—a sound not unmelodious but singular beyond
      power of language to express—a whisper of sinister significance to him who knew its meaning,
      of sheer mystery to all others. A murmur filled the air, a murmur of undefined noises still
      far distant. They might have been human, they might have arisen from the flight and terror of
      beasts, from the movement of vast bodies, from the reverberations of remote music; Earth or
      Heaven might have bred them, or the upper chambers of the air midway between. They spoke of
      terrific energies, of outpourings of force, of elemental chaos come again, of a crown of
      unimagined horror set upon the night.
All listened fearfully while the solemn cadences crept on their ears, fascinated them like a
      siren song, wakened wild dread of tribulations and terrors unknown till now. It was indeed a
      sound but seldom heard and wholly unfamiliar to those beside the stack save one.
"'Tis the callin' o' the cleeves," said Uncle Chirgwin.
"Nay, man, 'tis a live, ragin' storm comed off the sea an' tearin' ower the airth like a
      legion out o' hell! 'Tis the floodgates o' God opened you'm hearin'! Ay, an' the four winds at
      each other's throats, an' a outburst o' all the springs 'pon the hills! 'Tis death and ruin
      for the whole country-side as be yelling up-long now. An' 'tis comin' faster'n thot."
As Bartlett spoke, the voice of the tempest grew rapidly nearer, all mystery faded out of it
      and its murmuring changed to a hoarse rattle. Thunder growled a bass to the shriek of coming
      winds and a flash of distant lightning bridged the head of the coomb with a crooked snake of
      fire.
"Us'd best to get 'pon high land out o' this," shouted Bartlett. "All as men can do us have
      done. The hay's in the hand o' Providence, but I wouldn't be perched on top o' that stack not
      for diamonds all the same."
A cry cut him short. Mary had turned and found the way to higher ground already cut off. The
      lake was rising under their eyes, and that in spite of the fact that the waters had already
      reached the trench cut for them, and now tumbled in a torrent back to the parent stream.
      Escape in this direction was clearly impossible. It only remained to wade through the head of
      the lake, and that without a moment's delay. Mary herself, holding a torch, went first through
      water above her knees and the men hastily followed, Uncle Chirgwin coming last and being
      nearly carried off his short legs as he turned to view the rick. Once through the water, all
      were in safety, for the meadow sloped steeply upward. An increasing play of lightning made the
      torches useless, and they were dropped, while the party pressed close beneath an overhanging
      hedge which ran along the upper boundary of the meadow. From this vantage-ground they beheld a
      spectacle unexampled in the memory of any among them.
Screaming like some incarnate and mad manifestation of all the elements massed in one, the
      hurricane launched itself upon that valley. As a wall the wind heralded the water, while
      forked lightnings, flaming above both, tore the black darkness into jagged rags and lighted a
      chaos of yellow foaming torrent which battled with livid front straight down the heart of the
      coomb. The swollen river was lost in the torrent of it; and the hiss of the rain was drowned
      by its sound.
So Nature's full, hollowed hand ran over lightning-lighted to the organ music of the
      thunder; but for these horror-stricken watchers the majestic phenomena sweeping before them
      held no splendor and prompted no admiration. They only saw ruin tearing at the roots of the
      land; they only imagined drowned beasts floating before them belly upward, scattered hay
      hurried to the sea, wasted crops, a million tons of precious soil torn off the fields,
      orchards desolated, bridges and roads destroyed. For them misery stared out of the lightning
      and starvation rode upon the flood. The roar of water answering the thunder above it was to
      their ears Earth groaning against the rod, and right well they knew that the pale torrent was
      drowning those summer labors which represented money and food for the on-coming of the long
      winter months. They stared, silent and dumb, under the ram; they knew that the kernel of near
      a year's toil was riding away upon the livid torrent; that the higher meadows, held absolutely
      safe, were half under water now; that the flood tumbling under the blue fire most surely held
      sheep and cattle in its depths; that tons of upland hay swam upon it; that, like enough, dead
      men also turned and twisted there in a last mad journey to the sea.
A passing belief that their labors might save the stack sprung up in the breast of one
      alone. Uncle Chirgwin trusted Providence and his hempen ropes and clothesline; but it was a
      childish hope, and, gazing open-mouthed upon that swelling, hurtling cataract of roaring
      water, none shared it. An almost continuous mist of livid light crossed and recrossed,
      festooned and cut by its own crinkled sources, revealed the progress of the flood, and,
      heedless of themselves, Uncle Chirgwin and his men watched the fate of the stack, now rising
      very pale of hue above the water, seen through shining curtains of rain. First the torrent
      tumbled and rose about it, and then a sudden tremor and turning of the mass told that the rick
      floated. As it twisted the weak ropes, receiving the strain in turn, snapped one after
      another; then the great stack moved solemnly forward, stuck fast, moved again, lost its center
      of gravity and foundered like a ship. Under the lightning they saw it heave upward upon one
      side, plunge forward against the torrent which had swept its base from beneath it, and vanish.
      The farmer heaved a bitter groan.
"Dear God, that sich things can be in a Christian land," he cried. "All gone, this year, an'
      last, an' the aftermath; an' Lard He knaws what be doin' in the valley bottom. I wish the
      light may strike me dead wheer I stand, for I be a blot afore Him, else I'd never be made to
      suffer like this here. Awnly if any man among 'e will up an' tell me what I've done I'll thank
      en."
"'Tis the land as have sinned, not you," said Mary. "This reaches more'n us o' Drift. Come
      your ways an' get out o' these clothes, else you'll catch your death. Come to the house, all
      of 'e," she cried to the rest. "Theer ban't no more for us to do till marnin' light."
"If ever it do come," groaned the man Bartlett. "So like's not the end o' the world be here;
      an' I'd be fust to hollo it, awnly theer's more water than fire here when all's said, an' the
      airth's to be burned, not drowned."
"Let a come when a will now," gasped an aged man as the drenched party moved slowly away
      upward to the farm; "our ears be tuned to the trump o' God, for nort—no, not the screech o'
      horns blawed by all the angels in heaven—could sound awfuler than the tantarra o' this gert
      tempest. I, Gaffer Polglaze, be the auldest piece up Drift, but I never heard tell o' no sich
      noise, let alone havin' my awn ears flattened wi' it."
They climbed the steep lane to the farm, and the wind began to drown the more distant roar
      of the water. Rain fell more heavily than before, and the full heart of the storm crashed and
      flamed over their heads as Drift was reached.
Dawn trembled out upon a tremendous chapter of disasters, still fresh in the memory of many
      who witnessed it. A gray, sullen morning, with sky-glimpses of blue, hastily shown and
      greedily hidden, broke over Western Cornwall and uncovered the handiwork of a flood more
      savage in its fury and far-reaching in its effects than man's memory could parallel—a flood
      which already shrunk fast backward from its own havoc. To describe a single one of those
      valleys through which small rivers usually ran to the sea is to describe them all. Thus the
      torrent which raved down the coomb beneath Drift, and carried Uncle Chirgwin's massive hayrick
      with it like a child's toy-boat, had also uprooted acres of gooseberry bushes and raspberry
      canes, torn apple trees from the ground, laid waste extensive tracts of ripe produce and
      carried ripening roots by thousands into the sea. Beneath the orchards, as the flood subsided,
      there appeared great tracts of nakedness where banks of stone had been torn out of the land
      and scattered upon it; dead beasts stuck jammed in the low forks of trees; swine, sheep and
      calves appeared, cast up in fantastic places, strangled by the water; sandy wastes, stripped
      of every living leaf and blade, ran like banks where no banks formerly existed, and here and
      there from their midst stuck out naked boughs of upturned trees, fragments of man's
      contrivances, or the legs of dead beasts. Looking up the coomb, desolation was writ large and
      the utmost margins of the flood clearly recorded on branch and bough, where rubbish which had
      floated to the fringe of the flood was caught and hung aloft. Below, as the waters gained
      volume and force, Buryas Bridge, an ancient structure of three arches beneath which the
      trout-stream peacefully babbled under ordinary conditions, was swept headlong away and the
      houses hard by flooded; while the greatest desolation had fallen on those orchards lying
      lowest in the valley. Indeed the nearer the flood approached Newlyn the more tremendous had
      been the ravage wrought by it. The orchards of Talcarne valley were ruined as though artillery
      had swept them, and of the lesser crops scarce any at all remained. Then, bursting down
      Street-an-nowan, as that lane is called, the waters running high where their courses narrowed,
      swamped sundry cottages and leaped like a wolf on the low-lying portion of Newlyn. Here it
      burst through the alleys and narrow passages, drowned the basements of many tenements,
      isolated cottages, stores and granaries, threatened nearly a hundred lives startled from sleep
      by its sudden assault. Then, under the raging weather and in that babel of angry waters, brave
      deeds were done by the fisher folk, who chanced to be ashore. Grave personal risks were
      hazarded by many a man in that turbid flood, and not a few women and children were rescued
      with utmost danger to their saviors' lives. Yet the petty rivalry of split and riven creeds
      actuated not a few even at that time of peril, and while life was allowed sacred and no man
      turned a deaf ear to the cry of woman or child, with property the case was altered and sects
      lifted not a finger each to help the other in the saving of furniture and effects.
Newlyn furnished but one theater of a desolation which covered wide regions. At Penzance,
      the Laregan River flooded all the lowlands as it swept with prodigious cataracts to the sea;
      mighty lakes stretched between Penzance and Gulval; the brooklets of Ponsandine and Coombe,
      swollen to torrents, bore crushing destruction upon the valleys through which they fell. Bleu
      Bridge with its ancient inscribed "long stone" was swept into the bed of the Ponsandine, and
      here, as in other low-lying lands, many tons of hay were torn from their foundations and set
      adrift. At Churchtown the rainfall precipitated off the slopes of Castle-an-dinas begot vast
      torrents which, upon their roaring way, tore the very heart out of steep and stony lanes,
      flooded farmyards, plowed up miles of hillside, leaped the wall of the cemetery below and
      spread twining yellow fingers among the graves.
Three hundred tons of rain fell to the acre in the immediate tract of that terrific storm,
      and the world of misery, loss and suffering poured forth on the humble dwellers of the land
      only came to be estimated in its bitter magnitude during the course of the winter which
      followed.
Ashore it was not immediately known whether any loss of human life had added crowning horror
      to the catastrophe, but evil news came quickly off the sea. Mourning fell upon Mousehole for
      the crews of two among its fisher fleet who were lost that night upon the way toward Plymouth
      waters to join the herring fishery; and Newlyn heard the wail of a robbed mother.
At Drift the farmhouse was found to hold a mystery soon after the day had broken. Joan
      Tregenza, whose condition rendered it impossible for her to actively assist at the struggle in
      the coomb, did not retire early on the previous night, as her family supposed, and Mary,
      entering her room at breakfast-time, found it empty. There was no sign of the girl and no
      indication of anything which could explain her absence.
</div></body></text></TEI>