<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Lying Prophets: A Novel</title><author>Phillpotts, Eden (1862-1960)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1897</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="43">
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
STARLIGHT AND FROST
Born of the sunshine, on a morning in late December, gray ephemerae danced and dipped and
      fashioned vanishing patterns against the green of the great laurel at the corner of Drift
      farmyard. The mildness of the day had wakened them into brief life, but even as they twinkled
      their wings of gauze death was abroad. A sky of unusual clearness crowned the Cornish
      moorland, and Uncle Chirgwin, standing at his kitchen door, already foretold frost, though the
      morning was still young.
"The air's like milk just now, sure 'nough, an' 'twill bide so till noon; then, when the sun
      begins to slope, the cold will graw an' graw to frost. An' no harm done, thank God."
He spoke to his niece, who was in the room behind him; and as he did so a circumstance of
      very unusual nature happened. Two persons reached the front door of the farm simultaneously,
      and a maid, answering the double knock, returned a moment later with two communications, both
      for Mary Chirgwin.
"Postman, he brot this here, miss, an' a bwoy from Mouzle brot t'other."
The first letter came from London, the second, directed in a similar hand, reached Mary from
      the adjacent fishing hamlet. She knew the big writing well enough, but showed no emotion
      before the maid. In fact her self command was remarkable, for she put both letters into her
      pocket and made some show of continuing her labors for another five minutes before departing
      to her room that she might read the news from Joe Noy.
He, it may be said, had reached Penzance by the same train which conveyed his various
      missives, all posted too late for the mail upon the previous night. Thus he reached the white
      cottage on the cliff in time to see Mrs. Tregenza and bid her destroy unread the letter she
      would presently receive; and, on returning to his parents, himself took from the
      letter-carrier his own communications to them and burned both immediately. He had also
      dispatched a boy to Drift that Mary might be warned as to the letter she would receive by the
      morning post, but the lad, though ample time was given him to reach Drift before the postman,
      loitered by the way. Thus the letters had arrived simultaneously, and it was quite an open
      question which the receiver of them would open first.
Chance decided: Mary's hand, thrust haphazard into her pocket, came forth with Hoy's epistle
      recently dispatched from Mousehole; and that she read, the accident saving her at least some
      moments of bitter suffering.
"Dear Mary," wrote Noy, "you will get this by hand afore the coming in of the penny post.
      When that comes in, there will be another letter for you from me, sent off from London. It is
      all wrong, so burn it, and don't you read it on no account. Burn it to ashes, for theer's a
      many reasons why you should. I be coming up-long to see you arter dinner, and if you can walk
      out in the air with me for a bit I'll thank you so to do. Your friend, J. Noy. Burn the letter
      to dust 'fore anything else. Don't let it bide a minute and doan't tell none you had it."
Curiosity was no part of Mary Chirgwin's nature. Now she merely thanked Heaven which had led
      to the right letter and so enabled her unconsciously to obey Joe's urgent command. Then she
      returned to the kitchen, placed his earlier communication in the heart of the fire and watched
      while it blackened, curled, blazed, and finally shuddered down into a red-hot ash. She
      determined to see him and walk with him, as he asked, if he returned with clean hands. While
      the letter which she had read neither proved nor disproved such a supposition, the woman yet
      felt a secret and sure conviction in her heart that Noy was coming back innocent at least of
      any desperate action. That he was in Cornwall again and a free man appeared to her proof
      sufficient that he had not committed violence.
Mary allowed her anxiety to interfere with no duty. By three o'clock she was ready to set
      out, and, looking from her bedroom window as she tied on her hat, she saw Joe Noy approaching
      up the hill. A minute later she was at the door, and stood there waiting with her eyes upon
      him as he came up the path. Then she looked down, and to the man it seemed as though she was
      gazing at his right hand which held a stick.
"'Tis as it was, Mary Chirgwin—my hands be white," he said. "You needn't fear, though I
      promised if you ever seed 'em agin as they'd be red. 'Tedn' so. I was robbed of my hope, Mary.
      The Lard took Joan fust; then he took my revenge from me. His will be done. The man died
      four-an'-twenty hours 'fore I found en—just four-an'-twenty lil hours—that was all."
"Thank the Almighty God for it, Joe, as I shall till the day of my death. Never was no
      prayer answered so surely as mine for you." 
"Why, maybe I'll graw to thank God tu when 'tis farther to look back 'pon. I caan't feel
      'tis so yet. I caan't feel as he'm truly dead. An' yet 'twas no lie, for I seed en, an' stood
      'longside of en."
"God's Hand be everywheer in it. Think if I'd read poor Joan's letter an' tawld 'e wheer the
      man's plaace of livin' was!"
"Iss, then I'd have slain en. 'Tis such lil things do mark out our paths. A gert pichsher o'
      Joan he drawed—all done out so large as life; an' I found it, an' it 'peared as if the dead
      was riz up again an' staring at me. If 'tis all the saame to you, Mary, us'll go an' look 'pon
      her graave now, for I abbun seen it yet."
They walked in silence for some hundred yards along the lanes to Sancreed. Then Noy spoke
      again. 
"How be uncle?"
"Betwix' an' between. The trouble an' loss o' Joan aged en cruel, an' the floods has brot
      things to a close pass. 'Twas the harder for en 'cause all looked so more'n common healthy an'
      promisin' right up to the rain. But he's got the faith as moves mountains; he do knaw that
      sorrer ban't sent for nort."
"An' you? I wonder I'm bowldacious 'nough to look 'e in the faace, but sorrer's not forgot
      me neither."
"'Tis a thing what awver-passes none. I've forgived 'e, Joe Noy, many a long month past, an'
      I've prayed to God to lead 'e through this strait, an' He have."
"'Tis main hard to knaw what road's the right wan, Mary."
"Iss fay, an' it is; an' harder yet to follow 'pon it when found."
"I judged as God was leadin' me against this here evil-doer to destroy en."
"'Twas the devil misleadin' 'e an' takin' 'e along on his awn dance, till God saw, an' sent
      death." 
"Thanks to your prayin', I'll lay."
"Thanks to the mightiness of His mercy, Joe. 'Twas the God us worships, you mind, not Him of
      the Luke Gosp'lers nor any other 'tall. Theer's awnly wan real, livin' God; an' you left Him
      for a sham."
"An' I'm punished for't. Wheer should I turn now? I've thrawed awver your manner o' worship
      an' I'm sick o' the Gosp'lers, for 'twas theer God as led me to this an' brot all my trouble
      'pon me. He caan't be no God worth namin', else how should He a treated that poor limb,
      Michael Tregenza, same as He has. That man had sweated for his God day an' night for fifty
      years. An' see his reward."
"Come back, come back to the auld road again, Joe, an' leave the ways o' God to God. The
      butivul, braave thing 'bout our road be that wance lost 'tedn' allus lost. You may get
      night-foundered by the way, yet wi' the comin' o' light, theer's allus a chance to make up
      lost ground agin an' keep gwaine on."
"A body must b'lieve in somethin', else he'm a rudderless vessel seemin'ly, but wi' sich a
      flood of 'pinions 'bout the airth, how's wan sailorman to knaw what be safe anchorage and what
      ban't?"
Mary argued with him in strenuous fashion and increased her vehemence as he showed signs of
      yielding. She knew well enough that religion was as necessary to him in some shape as to
      herself.
Already a pageant of winter sunset began to unfold fantastic sheaves of splendor, and over
      the horizon line of the western moors the air was wondrously clear. It faded to intense white
      light where the uplands cut it, while, above, the background of the sky was a pure beryl
      gradually burning aloft into orange. Here waves of fire beat over golden shores and red clouds
      extended as an army in regular column upon column. At the zenith, billows of scarlet leaped in
      feathery foam against a purple continent and the flaming tide extended from reef to reef among
      a thousand aerial bays and estuaries of alternating gloom and glow until shrouded and dimmed
      in an orange tawny haze of infinite distance. In the immediate foreground of this majestic
      display, like a handful of rose-leaves fallen out of heaven, small clouds floated directly
      downward, withering to blackness as they neared the earth and lost the dying fires. Beneath
      the splendor of the sky the land likewise flamed, the winding roadways glimmered, and many
      pools and ditches reflected back the circumambient glory of the air.
In a few more minutes, Mary and Joe reached Sancreed churchyard and soon stood beside the
      grave of Joan Tregenza.
"The grass won't close proper till the spring come," said Mary; "then the turf will grow an'
      make it vitty; an' uncle's gwaine to set up a good slate stone wi' the name an' date an' some
      verses. I planted them primroses 'long the top myself. If wan abbun gone an' blossomed
      tu!"
She stooped to pick a primrose and an opening bud; but Joe stopped her.
"Doan't 'e pluck 'em. Never take no flowers off of a graave. They'm all the dead have
      got."
"But they'll die, Joe. Theer's frost bitin' in the air already. They'll be withered come
      marnin'."
"No matter for that," he said; "let 'em bide wheer they be."
The man was silent a while as he looked at the mound. Then he spoke again.
"Tell me about her. Talk 'bout her doin's an' sayin's. Did she forgive that man afore she
      died or dedn' she?"
"Iss, I reckon so."
Mary mentioned those things best calculated in her opinion to lighten the other's sorrow. He
      nodded from time to time as she spoke, and walked up and down with his hands behind, him. When
      she stopped, he asked her to tell him further facts. Then the light waned under the sycamore
      trees and only a red fire still touched their topmost boughs.
"We'll go now," Noy said. "An' she died believin' just the same as what you do—eh,
      Mary?"
"Uncle's sure of it—positive sartain 'twas so."
"An' you?"
"I pray that he was right. Iss fay, I've grawed to b'lieve truly our Joan was saved, spite
      of all. I never 'sactly understood her thots, nor she mine; but she'm in heaven now I do
      think."
"If bitterness an' sorrer counts she should be. An' you may take it from me she is. An' I'll
      come back, tu, if I may hope for awnly the lowest plaace. I'll come back an' walk along to
      church wance agin wi' you, wance 'fore I goes back to sea. Will 'e let me do that, Mary
      Chirgwin?"
"I thank God to hear you say so. You'm welcome to come along wi' me next Sunday if you mind
      to." 
"An' now us'll go up the Carn an' look out 'pon the land and see the sun sink."
They left the churchyard together, climbed the neighboring eminence and stood silently at
      the top, their faces to the West.
A great pervasive calm and stillness in the air heralded frost. The sky had grown strangely
      clear, and only the rack and ruin of the recent imposing display now huddled into the arms of
      night on the eastern horizon. The sun, quickly dropping, loomed mighty and fiery red.
      Presently it touched the horizon, and its progress, unappreciated in the sky, became
      accentuated by the rim of the world. A semi-circle of fire, a narrowing segment, a splash,
      throbbing like a flame—then it had vanished, and light waned until there trembled out the
      radiance of a brief after-glow. Already the voices of the frost began to break the earth's
      silence. In the darkness of woods it was busy casing the damp mosses in ice, binding the
      dripping outlets of hidden water, whispering with infinitely delicate sound as it flung forth
      its needles, the mother of ice, and suffered them to spread like tiny sudden fingers on the
      face of freezing water. From the horizon the brightness of the zodiacal light streamed
      mysteriously upward into the depth of heaven, dimming the stars. But the brightness of them
      grew in splendor and brilliancy as increasing cold gripped the world; and while the stealthy
      feet of the frost raced and tinkled like a fairy tune, the starlight flashed upon its magic
      silver, powdered its fabrics with light and pointed its crystal triumphs with fire. Thus
      starlight and frost fell upon the forest and the Cornish moor, beneath the long avenues of
      silence, and over all the unutterable blackness of granite and dead heather. The earth slept
      and dreamed dreams, as the chain of the cold tightened; all the earth dreamed fair dreams, in
      night and nakedness; dreams such as forest trees and lone elms, meadows and hills, moors and
      valleys, great heaths and the waste, secret habitations of Nature, one and all do dream: of
      the passing of another winter and the on-coming of another spring.
THE END.
</div></body></text></TEI>