<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Lying Prophets: A Novel</title><author>Phillpotts, Eden (1862-1960)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1897</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="28">
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
A BARGAIN FOR MRS. TREGENZA
To the superficial eye dead hopes leave ugly traces; viewed more inquiringly the cryptic
      significance of them appears; and that is often beautiful. Joan's soul looked out of her blue
      eyes now. Seen thoughtfully her beauty was refined and exalted to an exquisite perfection; but
      the unintelligent observer had simply pronounced her pale and thin. The event which first
      promised to destroy the new-spun gossamers of a religious faith and break them even on the day
      of their creation, in reality acted otherwise. For Joan, Joe's letter was like a window
      opening upon a hopeless dawn; and her helplessness before this spectacle of the future threw
      the girl upon religion—not as a sure rock in the storm of her life, but as a straw to the hand
      of the drowning. The world had nothing else left in it for her. She, to whom sunshine and
      happiness were the breath of life, she who had envied butterflies their joyous being, now
      stood before a future all uphill and gray, lonely and loveless. As yet but the dawn of
      affection for the unborn child lightened her mind. Thought upon that subject went hand in hand
      with fear of pain. And now, in her dark hours, Joan happily did not turn to feed upon her own
      heart, but fled from it. For distraction she read the four Gospels feverishly day by day, and
      she prayed long to the Lord of them by night.
Mary helped her in an earnest, cheerless fashion, and before her cousin's solicitude, Joan's
      eyes opened to another thought: the old friendship between Mary and Joe Noy. It had wakened
      once, on her first arrival at Drift, then slept again till now. She was troubled to see the
      other woman's indifference, and she formed plans to bring these two together again. The act of
      getting away from herself and thinking for others brought some comfort to her heart and seemed
      to rise indirectly out of her reading.
The Christianity of Drift was old-fashioned, and reflected the Founder. No distractions rose
      between Joan and the story. She took it at first hand, escaping thus from those petty follies
      and fooleries which blight and fog the real issues today. She sucked her new faith pure. A
      noble rule of conduct lay before her; she dimly discerned something of its force; and
      unselfishness appeared in her, proving that she had read aright. As for the dogma, she opened
      her arms to that very readily because it was beautiful and promised so much. Faith's votaries
      never turn critical eyes upon the foundations of her gorgeous fabric; their sight is fixed
      aloft on the rainbow towers and pinnacles, upon the golden fanes. And yet this man-born
      structure of theology, with aisles and pillars fretting and crumbling under the hand of
      reason, needs such eternal propping, restoring and repairing, that priestly tinkers, masons,
      hod-carriers are solely occupied with it. They grapple and fight for the poor shadows of dogma
      by which they live, and, so engaged, the spirit and substance of religion is by them
      altogether lost. None of the Christian churches will ever be overcrowded with men who possess
      brain-power worthy the name. Mediocrity and ignorance may starve, but talent and any new
      nostrum to strangle reason and keep the rot from the fabric will always open their
      coffers.
Joan truly found the dogma more grateful and comforting than anything else within her
      experience, and the apparition of a flesh and blood God, who had saved her with His own life's
      blood before she was born, appeared too beautiful and sufficing to be less than true. Her
      eyes, shut so long, seemed opening at last. With errors that really signify nothing, she drew
      to herself great truths that matter much and are vital to all elevated conduct. She thought of
      other people and looked at them as one wakened from sleep. And, similarly, she looked at
      Nature. Even her vanished lover had not taught her all. There were truths below the formulae
      of his worship; there were secrets deeper than his intellectual plummet had ever sounded.
      Without understanding it, Joan yet knew that a change had come to pass in material things.
      Sunshine on the deep sea hid more matters for wonder than John Barron had taught or known.
      Once only as yet had she caught a glimpse of Nature's beating heart; and that was upon the
      occasion of her visit to St. Madron's chapel. She was lifted up then for a magic hour; but the
      lurid end of that day looked clearer afterward than ever the dewy dawn of it. Nature had
      smiled mutely and dumbly at her sufferings for long months since then. But now added knowledge
      certainly grew, and from a matrix mightier than the love of Nature or of man, was Joan's new
      life born. It embraced a new sight, new senses, ambitions, fears and hopes.
Joan went to church at every opportunity. Faith seemed so easy, and soon so necessary.
      Secret prayer became a real thing to be approached with joy. To own to sins was as
      satisfactory as casting down a heavy burden at a journey's end; to confess them to God was to
      know that they were forgiven. There were not many clouds in her religious sky. As Mary's
      religion was bounded by her own capabilities and set forth against a background of gloom,
      which never absolutely vanished save in moments of rare exaltation, so Joan's newfound faith
      took upon itself an aspect of sunshine. Her clouds were made beautiful by the new light; they
      did not darken it. Mary's gray Cornish mind kept sentiment out of sight. She lived with clear
      eyes always focusing reality as it appeared to her. Heaven was indeed a pleasanter eternal
      fact than hell; yet the place of torment existed on Bible authority; and it was idle to
      suppose it existed for nothing. Grasping eternity as a truth, she occupied herself in
      strenuous preparation; which preparation took the form of good works and personal self-denial.
      Joan belonged to an order of emotional creatures widely different. She loved the beautiful for
      its own sake, kept her face to the sun when it shone, shivered and shut up like a scarlet
      pimpernel if bad weather was abroad. And now a chastened sunshine, daily growing stronger,
      shot through the present clouds, painted beauty on their fringes, and lighted the darkness of
      their recesses so that even the secrets of suffering were fitfully revealed. Joan grasped at
      new thoughts, the outcome of her new road.
Nature presently seemed of a nobler face, and certain immemorial achievements of man also
      flashed out in the side-light of the new convictions; as objects, themselves inconsiderable,
      will suddenly develop unsuspected splendors from change of standpoint in the beholder. The
      magic of that Christianity, which Joan now received directly from her Bible, wrought and
      embroidered a new significance into many things. And it worked upon none as upon the old
      crosses, some perfect still, some ruined as to arm or shaft, some quite worn out and gnawed by
      time from their original semblance. These dotted her native land. Them she had always loved,
      but now they appeared marvelously transfigured, and the soul hid in their granite beamed
      through it. Supposing the true menhirs to be but ruined crosses also, Joan shed on them no
      scantier affection than upon the less venerable Brito-Celtic records of Christianity. Bid so
      to do, and prompted also by her inclination, the girl was wont to take walks of some length
      for her health's sake; and these had an object now. As her dead mother's legends came back to
      her memory and knit Nature to her new Saviour, so the weather-beaten stones brought Him
      likewise nearer, marked the goal of precious daily pilgrimages, and filled a sad young life
      with friends.
Returning from a visit to Tremathick cross, where it stands upon a little mound on the St.
      Just road, Joan heard a thin and well-known voice before she saw the speaker. It was Mrs.
      Tregenza, who had walked over to drink tea and satisfy herself on sundry points respecting her
      stepdaughter.
"Oh, my Guy Faux, Polly!" she said upon arriving, "I'm in a reg'lar take to be here, though
      I knaws Michael's t'other side the islands an' won't fetch home 'fore marnin'. I've comed
      'cause I couldn't keep from it no more. How's her doin', poor tibby lamb, wi' all them piles
      o' money tu. Not that money did ought to make a differ'nce, but it do, an' that's the truth,
      an' it edn' no good makin' as though it doan't. What a world, to be sure! An' that letter from
      Noy? I knaw you was fond of en likewise in your time. The sadness of it! Just think o' that
      mariner comin' home 'pon top o' this mishap."
Mary winced and answered coldly that the world was full of mishaps and of sadness.
"The man must face sorrer same as what us all have got to, Mrs. Tregenza. Some gets more,
      some gets less, as the sparks fly up'ard. Joe Noy's got religion tu."
Mary spoke the last words with some bitterness, which she noted too late and set against
      herself for a sin.
"Oh, my dear sawl," said Mrs. Tregenza, looking round nervously, as though she feared the
      shadow of her husband might be listening. "Luke Gosp'ling's a mighty uncomfortable business,
      though I lay Tregenza'd most kill me if he heard the word. 'Tedn' stomachable to all, an' I
      doubts whether 'twill be a chain strong enough to hold Joe Noy, when he comes back to find
      this coil. 'Tis a kicklish business an' I wish 'twas awver. Joe's a fiery feller when he
      reckons he's wronged; an' there ban't no balm to this hurt in Gosp'ling, take it as you will.
      I tell you, in your ear awnly, that Luke Gosp'lers graw ferocious like along o' the wickedness
      o' the airth. Take Michael, as walks wi' the Lard, same as Moses done; an' the more he do, the
      ferociouser he do get. Religion! He stinks o' religion worse than ever Newlyn stinks o' feesh;
      he goes in fear o' God to his marrow; an' yet 'tis uncomfortable, now an' then, to live wi'
      such a righteous member. Theer's a sourness along of it. Luke Gosp'ling doan't soften the
      heart of en."
"It should," said Mary.
"An's so it should, but he says the world's no plaace for softness. He'm a terror to the
      evildoer; an' he'm a terror to the righteous-doer; an' to hisself no less, I reckon; an' to
      God A'mighty tu, so like's not. The friends of en be as feared of en as his foes be. An'
      that's awful wisht, 'cause he goes an' comes purty nigh alone. The Gosp'lers be like fry
      flyin' this way an' that 'fore a school o' mackerl when Michael's among 'em. Even minister, he
      do shrivel a inch or two 'longside o' Michael. I've seen en wras'lin' wi' the Word same as
      Jacob wras'led wi' the angel. An' yet, why? Theer's a man chosen for glory this five-an'-forty
      years, an' he knaws it so well as I do, or any wan."
"He knaws nothin' o' the sort. The best abbun no right to say it," declared Mary. 
Then Mrs. Tregenza fired up, for she resented any criticism on this subject other than her
      own.
"An' why not, Polly Chirgwin? Who's a right to doubt it? Not you, I reckon, Ban't your
      plaace to judge a man as walks wi' God, like Moses done. If Michael edn' saved, then theer's
      no sawl saved 'pon land or sea. You talk—a young maiden! His sawl was bleedin' an' his hands
      raw a batterin' the gate o' heaven 'fore you was born, Polly—ay, an' he'd got the bettermost
      o' the devil wance for all 'fore you was conceived in the womb; you mind that."
"Us caan't get the bettermost o' the devil wance for all," said Mary, changing the issue,
      "no—not no more'n us can wash our skin clean wance for all. But you an' me thinks differ'nt
      an' allus shall, Mrs. Tregenza."
"Iss, though I s'pose 'tis the same devil as takes backslidin' church or chapel folks. Let
      that bide now. Wheer's Joan to? I've got to thank 'e kindly for lookin' arter Tom t'other
      Sunday night. Tis things like that makes religion uncomfortable. But you gived the bwoy some
      tidy belly-timber in the small hours o' day, an' he comed home dog-tired, but none the worse.
      An' thank 'e for they apples an' cream an' eggs, which I'm sorry they had sich poor speed. A
      butivul basket as hurt me to the heart to paart with. But I wasn't asked. No offense, I hope,
      'bout it? Maybe uncle forgot 'twas the Lard's day?"
"He'm the last ever to do that."
Joan entered at this point in the conversation and betrayed some slight emotion as her
      stepmother kissed her. It was nearly five months since they had met, and Mary now departed,
      leaving them to discuss Joan's physical condition.
"I be doin' clever," said Joan, "never felt righter in body."
Mrs. Tregenza poured forth good advice, and after a lengthy conversation came to a secret
      ambition and broached it with caution.
"I called to mind some baaby's things—shoes, clouts, frocks an' sich-like as I've got snug
      in lavender to home. They was all flam-new for Tom, an' I judged I'd have further use for 'em,
      but never did. Theer they be, even to a furry-cloth, as none doan't ever use nowadays, though
      my mother did, and thot well on't. So I did tu. 'Tis just a bit o' crimson red tailor's cloth
      to cover the soft plaace 'pon a lil baaby's head 'fore the bones of en graw together. An' I
      reckon 'tis better to have it then not. I seem you'd do wise to take the whole kit; an' you'm
      that well-to-do that 'twouldn' be worth thinkin' 'bout. 'Twould be cheaper'n a shop; an'
      theer's everything a royal duke's cheel could want; an' a butivul robe wi' lacework cut 'pon
      it, an' lil bits o' ribbon to tie in the armholes Sundays. They'm vitty clothes."
Joan's eyes softened to a misty dreaminess before this aspect of the time to come. She had
      thought so little about the baby and all matters pertaining thereto, that every day now
      brought with it mental novelty and a fresh view of that experience stored for her in the
      future.
"Iss, I do mind they things when Tom was in 'em. What be the value in money?"
Mrs. Tregenza answered shyly and almost respectfully.
"Well, 'tis so difficult to say, not bein' a reg'lar seller o' things. They cost wi'out the
      robe, as was a gift from Mrs. Blight, more'n five pound."
"Take ten pound, then. I'll tell uncle."
Thomasin's red tongue-tip crept along her lips and her bright eyes blinked, but conscience
      was too strong.
"No, no—a sight too much—too much by half. I'll let 'e have the lot for a fi'-pun' note. An'
      I'd like it to be a new wan, if 'tis the same to you."
Joan agreed to this, and ten minutes afterward Uncle Chirgwin was opening his cash-box and
      handing Thomasin the snowy, crackling fragment she desired.
"'Tis the fust bit o' money ever I kept unbeknawnst to Michael," she said, "an', 'pon me
      life, Chirgwin, I be a'most 'feared on't."
"You'll soon get awver that," declared Uncle Thomas. "I'll send the trap home with 'e, an'
      you can look out the frippery; an' you might send a nice split bake back-along with it, if
      you've got the likes of sich a thing gwaine beggin' to be ate."
Presently Mrs. Tregenza drove away and Joan went to her room to think. Magic effects had
      risen from the spectacle of the well-remembered face, from the sound of the sharp, high voice.
      A new sensation grew out of them for Joan. Home rose like a vision, with the sighing of the
      sea, the crying of the gulls, the musical rattle of blocks in the bay, the clink, clink of
      picks in the quarry, the occasional thunder of a blast. Many odors were with her: the smell of
      tar and twine and stores, the scent of drying fish. She saw the low cliffs all gemmed at this
      season with moon-flowers—the great white convolvulus which twinkled there. A red and purple
      fuchsia in the garden, had blossomed also. She could see the bees climbing into its drooping
      bells. She remembered their music, as it murmured drowsily from dead and gone summers, and
      sounded sweeter than the song of the bees at Drift. She heard the tinkle of a stream outside
      the cottage, where it ran under the hedge through a shute and emptied itself into a great
      half-barrel; and then, turning her thoughts to the house, her own attic, with the view of St.
      Michael's Mount and the bay, rose in thought, with every detail distinct, even to the glass
      scent-bottle on the mantel-piece, and the colored print of John Wesley being rescued in his
      childhood from a burning house. These and kindred memories made a live picture to Joan's eyes.
      For the first time since she had left her home the girl found in her heart a desire to return
      to it. She awoke next morning with the old recollections increased and multiplied; and the
      sensation bred from continued contemplation was the sensation of a loss.
</div></body></text></TEI>