<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Domitia by Sabine Baring-Gould</title><author>Baring-Gould, Sabine (1834-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1898</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">

CHAPTER IX.GLYCERIA.
 Domitia returned to her apartments, quivering like an aspen in a light air; but no sooner
      was she there, than she summoned Eboracus, and said to him:— 
 “Be speedy. Follow Paris, and protect him. There is evil planned against him. Fly—lest you
      be too late.” 
 The slave departed at once. 
 Domitia paced the room, in an agony of mind, now shivering with cold, then with face
      burning. But it was not the humiliations to which she had been subjected that so affected
      her,—it was fear of what she suspected was meditated against the actor, and through him
      against Glyceria. 
 A cold sweat broke out on her brow, and icy tears formed on her long eyelashes. It seemed
      to her that for her to show favor to any one, was to bring destruction on that person. And
      hatred towards the Emperor became in her heart more intense and bitter. 
 She could think of nothing else but the danger that menaced Paris. She went out on the
      terrace, and the wind blowing over her moist brow chilled her; she drew her mantle more
      closely around her, and re-entered the palace. Already night was falling, for the days were
      becoming short. 
 Her heart cried out for something to which to cling,
      for some one to whom to appeal against the overwhelming evil and tyranny that
      prevailed. 
 Was there no power in earth above the Cæsar? There was none. No power in heaven? She could
      not tell; all there was dark and doubtful. There was a Nemesis—but slow of step, and only
      overtaking the evil-doer when too late to prevent the misery he wrought, sometimes so lagging
      as not to catch him at all, and so blind as often to strike the innocent in place of the
      guilty. No cry of the sufferer could reach this torpid Nemesis and rouse her to quicker
      action. She was a deity bungling, deaf and blind. 
 Again she tramped up and down the room. She could endure to have no one with her. She sent
      all her servants away. 
 But the air within was stifling. She could not breathe, the ceiling came down on her head,
      and again she went forth. 
 Now she could hear voices below in the Sacred Way. She could see lights, coming from
      several quarters, and drawing together to one point where they formed a cluster, and from this
      point rose a wail—the wail of the dead. 
 She wiped her brow. She was sick at heart, and again went within, and found Eboracus there,
      cast down and silent. 
 “Speak,” she said hoarsely. 
 “It was too late. He had been stabbed in the back, whilst leaving the palace, and a pupil
      was assassinated at the same time, because somewhat resembling him.” 
 Domitia stood cold as marble. She covered her mouth for a moment with her right hand, and
      then in a hard voice said:— 

 “Inform Euphrosyne. I cannot.” 
 Then she turned away, went to her bed-chamber, and was seen of none again that night.
      Several of her female slaves sought admission to undress her, but were somewhat roughly
      dismissed. 
 In that long night, Domitia felt as one drowning in a dark sea. She stretched out her hands
      to lay hold of something—to stay her up, and found nothing. She had nothing to look forward
      to, no shore to which she might attain by swimming, nothing to care for, nothing to cling to.
      There was no light above, only the unsympathetic stars that looked down on the evil there was,
      the wrong that was done, and cared not. The pulsation of their light was not quickened by
      sense of injustice, they did not veil their rays so as to hide from them the horrors committed
      on earth. There was no light below, save the reflection of the same passionless eyes of
      heaven. 
 She felt as though she were still capable of the sense of pain, but not of being sensible
      to pleasure. 
 The faculty of being happy was gone from her forever, and life presented to her a prospect
      of nothing better than gray tracts of monotonous existence, seamed with earthquake chasms of
      suffering. 
 Next day she rose white and self-restrained, she summoned to her Euphrosyne, but did not
      look at her tear-reddened eyes. 
 “Euphrosyne,” said she, “I bid you go, and take with you Eboracus, I place you both wholly
      at the disposal of your sister—and bid her spare no cost, but give to him who has been, a
      splendid funeral at my expense. Here is money. And—” she paused a moment to obtain mastery
      over herself, as her emotion
      threatened to get the upper hand—“and, Euphrosyne, tell Glyceria that I shall go
      to see her later. Not for a few days, not till the first agony of her grief is over; but go I
      will—for go I must—and I pray the Gods I may not be a cause of fresh evil. O, Euphrosyne, does
      she curse me?” 
 “Glyceria curses none, dear mistress, least of all you. Do not doubt, she will welcome you
      when you do her the honor of a visit.” 
 “If she were to curse me, I feel as if I should be glad—glad, too, if the curse fell heavy
      on my head—but you know—she knows—I meant to do well, to be kind—to—but go your way—I can
      speak no more. Tell Glyceria not to curse me—no—I could not bear that—not a curse from her.” 
 Euphrosyne saw by her mistress’s manner, by her contradictory words, how deeply she was
      moved, how great was her suffering. She stooped, took up the hem of her garment, and kissed
      the purple fringe. Then sobbing, withdrew. 
 That day tidings came to Domitia to render her pain more acute. 
 The kindly, sympathetic people in the insula of Castor and Pollux, in
      poetic, picturesque fashion had come with baskets of violets and late roses, and had strewn
      with the flowers the spot stained with the blood of Paris. 
 This was reported to the Emperor, and he sent his guards down the street to disperse the
      people, and in doing this, they employed their swords, wounding several and killing two or
      three, of whom one was a child. 
 Three days later, Domitia ordered her litter and at
      tendants that she might go to the Insula in the Suburra. 
 She had said nothing of her intentions, or probably Domitian would have heard of them—she
      was surrounded by spies who reported in his ear whatever she did—and he would have forbidden
      the visit. 
 Only when the Forum had been crossed, did she instruct the bearers as to the object of her
      excursion. 
 On entering the block of lodgings and ascending the stairs Domitia was received with
      respect but with some restraint. The people did not press about her with enthusiasm as before;
      they knew that it was through her that evil had overtaken them, and they dreaded her visit as
      inauspicious. 
 Yet there was no look of resentment in any face, only timorous glances, and reverential
      bows, and salutations with the hand to the lips. The poor folk knew full well that it was
      through no ill-will on her part that Paris and his pupil, and some of their own party had
      fallen. 
 It was already bruited about that Julia daughter of Titus was honored in the palace, and
      advanced above Domitia, the Empress. Some said that Domitian would repudiate his wife, that he
      might marry his niece, and that he waited only till the months of mourning for her husband
      were passed, so as not to produce a scandal. Others said that he would not repudiate Domitia,
      but treat her as Nero had treated Octavia, trump up false charges against her and then put her
      to death. 
 Already Domitia was regarded as unlucky, and on the matter of luck attaching to or
      deserting certain persons, the Roman populace were vastly superstitious. 

 And now, although these poor creatures loved the beautiful woman of imperial rank who
      deigned to come among them, and care for one of their most broken and bruised members, yet
      they feared for themselves, lest her presence should again draw disaster upon them. 
 Domitia was conscious rather than observant of this as she passed along the gallery to the
      apartment of Glyceria. 
 At the door to the poor woman’s lodgings she knocked, and in response to a call, opened and
      entered. She waved her attendants to remain without and suffer none to enter. 
 Then she approached the bed of the sick woman, hastily, and threw herself on her knees
      beside it. 
 “Glyceria,” she said, “can you forgive me?” 
 The crippled woman took the hands of Domitia and covered them with kisses, whilst her tears
      flowed over them. 
 This was more than the Empress could bear. She disengaged her hands, threw her arms about
      the widow, and burst into convulsive weeping. 
 “Nay, nay!” said Glyceria, “do not give way. It was not thy doing.” 
 “But you fear me,” sobbed Domitia, “they do so—they without. Not one touched, not one
      kissed me. They think me of evil omen.” 
 “There is nothing unlucky. Everything falls out as God wills; and whatever comes, if we bow
      under His hand, He will give sweetness and grace.” 
 “You say this! You who have lost everything!” 
 “Oh, no! lady,” then the cripple touched the cornelian fish. “This remains.” 
 “It is a charm that has brought no luck.” 

 “It is no charm. It is a symbol—and to you dark. To me full of light and joy in believing.” 
 “I cannot understand.” 
 “No—that I know full well. But to one who does, there is comfort in every sorrow, a rainbow
      in every cloud, roses to every thorn.” 
 “Glyceria,” said Domitia, and she reared herself upon her knees, and took hold of both the
      poor woman’s hands; so that the two, with tear-stained cheeks, looked each other full in the
      face. “My Glyceria! wilt thou grant me one favor?” 
 “I will give thee, lady, anything that thou canst ask. I should be ungrateful to deny thee
      ought.” 
 “It is a great matter, a sharp wrench I ask of thee,” said the daughter of Corbulo. 
 “I will do all that I can,” replied the widow. 
 “Then come with me to the palace. Here you have none to care for you, none to earn a
      livelihood for you,—I want you there.” 
 Glyceria hesitated. 
 “Do you fear?” 
 “I fear nothing for myself.” 
 “Nor I,” said Domitia. “Oh, Glyceria, I am the most miserable woman on earth. I thought I
      could not be more unhappy than I was—then come—I will not speak of it,—thy loss—caused
      unwillingly by me, because I came here—and that has broken my heart. I have done the cruellest
      hurt to the one I loved best. I am most miserable—most miserable.” She covered her face, sank
      on the bed and wept. 
 The widow of the player endeavored to soothe her with soft words and caresses. 
 Then again Domitia spoke. “I have no one, I have
      nothing to look to, I am as one dead, and the only life in me is hate, that bites
      and writhes as a serpent.” 
 “And that thou must lay hold of and strangle as did Hercules.” 
 “I cannot, and I will not.” 
 “That will bring thee only greater suffering.” 
 “I cannot suffer more.” 
 “It is against the will of God.” 
 “But how know we His will?” 
 “It has been revealed.” 
 Again Domitia threw her arms about the sick woman, she pressed her wet cheek to her
      tear-moistened face, and said:— 
 “Come with me, and tell me all thou knowest—and about the Fish. Come with me, and give me a
      little happiness, that I may think of thee, comfort thee, read to thee, talk with thee—I care
      for no other woman. And Euphrosyne, thy sister, she is with me, and I will keep thee as the
      apple of mine eye.” 
 “Oh, lady! this is too great!” 
 “What? anon thou wouldst deny me naught, and now refusest me this.” 
 “In God’s name so be it,” said Glyceria. “But when?” 
 “Now. I will have no delay, see—” she went to the door and spoke with her slaves. “They
      shall bear thee in my litter, at once. Euphrosyne shall tarry here and collect thy little
      trifles, and the good Eboracus, he shall bear them to thy new home. O Glyceria! For once I see
      a sunbeam.” 
 Never could the dwellers in the Insula have dreamt of beholding that which this day they
      saw. The actor’s crippled widow lifted by imperial slaves and
      placed in the litter of the Empress, the Augusta, to whom divine honors had been
      accorded. And, further, they saw the cripple borne away, down the lane of the Suburra in which
      was their block of lodgings, and the Empress walked by the side, holding the hand of the
      patient who lay within. 
 They did not shout, they uttered no sound indicative of approval, no applause. They held
      their breaths, they laid their hands on their mouths, they looked each other in the eyes—and
      wondered what this marvel might portend. A waft of a new life had entered into the evil world,
      whence it came, they knew not, what it would effect, that also they could not conceive—whom it
      would touch, how transform, all was hid from their eyes. 
</div></body></text></TEI>