<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Domitia by Sabine Baring-Gould</title><author>Baring-Gould, Sabine (1834-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1898</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">

CHAPTER XVIII.A REFUGEE.
 “A priest of Jupiter here!” exclaimed Duilia. “When his temple is on fire! Bid him be
      off—but stay. Who let him in?” 
 “Lady, the Chaldæan introduced him.” 
 “He had no right to do so. Let him entertain him. I desire to see the end. Run. The roof is
      on fire—the eagles will be down—or melt away.” 
 “Lady! the Magian commissioned me to assure you that he bears an important communication.” 
 “Say I am engaged.” 
 A minute later, the Chaldæan himself arrived on the housetop and addressed the mistress. 
 “I cannot attend to your abracadabra,” said she, in reply to his request to be heard. “Look
      there. The Capitol is in flames, the temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus blazes. I know what he
      wants—he has come begging. They all beg. I have no money. I am interested in the fire, the
      Revolution, and all that sort of thing.” 
 “Lady Longa,” said Elymas, “There are moments that are turning points in every life. A
      great chance offers. Take it, or put it away forever.” 
 “You worry me past endurance. What is it? Look! the flames are licking Jupiter in his
      chariot.” 

 “If you will step aside I will speak. Not here.” 
 Duilia with an impatient toss of her head and shrug of her shoulders, gathered up her
      garment with one hand, stepped to a distant part of the roof, and said, sulkily— 
 “Well, what is this about?” 
 “You know that the Præfect of Rome who supped at your house the other day is besieged in
      the Capitol.” 
 “Well—this is no news.” 
 “And that for security, lest they should be put to death by Vitellius or the soldiery, he
      took his children and his nephew there with him.” 
 “So I have been told. That does not concern me. Why did he not take also his fat wife? she
      would have fed the flames.” 
 “My lady—the Capitol cannot hold out another half hour, and then all within will be
      butchered.” 
 “Can I help that? They all do it. This sort of thing happens in revolutions invariably. I
      cannot alter the course of the world.” 
 “But, madam, the son of Vespasian, Flavius Domitianus has escaped through the Tabularium,
      by a little door into the Forum.” 
 “He might have escaped by turning a somersault over the walls for aught I care.” 
 “His life is in extreme jeopardy. If discovered he will be assassinated, most assuredly.” 
 “Well, that is the way these things go.” 
 “I have brought him hither—disguised as a priest.” 
 “What!” 
 The lady became rigid, eyes, mouth and nostrils. 
 “What!” 
 “He escaped disguised as a priest of Jupiter. As
      such, with veiled head he has passed unmolested, even through the ranks of the
      soldiery and people, inclined to tear him to pieces, for they are all on the side of the
      reigning prince.” 
 “Domitian here! What a fool you are, Elymas. I’ll have you tossed off the roof, in
      punishment. By Hercules! you compromise me. If it be suspected that he is here, I shall have
      the house ransacked, and all my valuables plundered, and the Gods alone know what may become
      of me.” 
 “That is true, lady, and you must run the risk.” 
 “I will not,” said Duilia, stamping angrily on the concrete of the roof. “Is it not enough
      to have the house turned upside down with this detestable Saturnalia! Age of Gold indeed! Age
      of tomfoolery and upside-downedness. If my poor dear man had but done what he ought, there
      would have been none of these commotions, and I—well—I—I would have put down the Saturnalia.” 
 “Madam, this is all beside the mark. Domitian, the son of Flavius Vespasian, whom the world
      has saluted Emperor, and sworn to, is under your roof as a suppliant.” 
 “How unfortunate!” 
 “How fortunate!” 
 “I cannot see that.” 
 “Then, madam, the clouds of night must have got into your brain. Do you not see that you
      are running a very slight risk. None suspect that he is in concealment here, as I smuggled him
      into the house.” 
 “There are my slaves.” 
 “They regard him as a priest escaping from the fire and the siege,” said the soothsayer. He continued—
      “Before morning the Illyrian legions will have arrived in Rome. Do you suppose
      the German bodyguard can stand against them? What other troops has Vitellius to fall back on?
      None—he is deserted. His cause is fatally smitten. By to-morrow evening he will be dead, cast
      down the Gemonian stair. Vespasian will be proclaimed in the Forum. Your risk will be at an
      end, and you will have obtained the lasting gratitude of the Imperial father, who will do
      anything you desire, to show his thankfulness to you for having saved the life of his son.” 
 “There is something in that,” said Duilia. 
 “And suppose now that Domitian is here, that you bid your slaves eject him, and he falls
      into the hands of Vitellius, how will you be regarded by the Flavian family? Do you not
      suppose that you will be the first to suffer the resentment of the Augustus?” 
 “There is a good deal in that,” said Duilia, to which the Magus said,— 
 “I have no fear of betrayal from any in the house save Senecio, that owl-like philosopher.
      He is not like the slaves, he may suspect, and trip me up.” 
 “My good Elymas,” interrupted Duilia, “do not concern yourself about him. He is not a man
      to chew nutshells when he can munch kernels.” 
 “Domitian is in my apartment, will you see him, lady?” 
 “By all means. I have a notion. Go, fetch Domitia, bring her down there to me.” 
 Then Longa descended to that portion of the mansion where were situated the rooms given up
      to the soothsayer; they were on one side of a small court, and the philosopher occupied
      chambers on the other side.
      Across the water tank in the midst many an altercation had taken place. 
 Senecio was not there now. He was probably out taking a philosophic view of the internecine
      strife, and moralizing over the burning of the Capitol. 
 With a benignant smile and a tear in her eye, Duilia almost ran to Domitian, her two hands
      extended. She had just looked round the court to make sure she was unobserved and that there
      was no one within earshot. 
 “I am so grateful to the Gods,” she said, with a tremor in her voice, “that they should
      allow me the honor and happiness of offering you an asylum. Blood is thicker than water.
      Though I perish for my advocacy of your dear father—I cannot help it. Cousins must be
      cousinly. It is with us a family peculiarity—we hang together like a swarm of bees.” 
 The young man cautiously removed his white veil or head-covering, and exposed his face,
      that was somewhat pale. He had a shy modest appearance, a delicate complexion that flushed and
      paled at the changes of emotion in his heart. His eyes were a watery gray, large, but he
      screwed the eyelids together, as though near-sighted. He was fairly well built, but had
      spindle legs, no calves, and his toes as if cut short. 
 In manner he was awkward, without ease in his address; owing to the low associates with
      whom he had consorted, having been kept short of money, and to his lack of acquaintance with
      the courtesies of the cultured classes. 
 “I thank you. My life is in danger. I came hither, as my uncle supped here the other day,
      and I knew something about kinship. I had nowhere else whither to go. I would have been hunted
      out and murdered
      had I gone to my uncle—my mother’s brother. They would have sought me there first
      of all.” 
 “You shall stay here till all danger is past. I should esteem myself the vilest of women
      were I to refuse you my protection at such a time as this. Senecio, my philosopher, is out,
      gadding about—of course. You shall occupy his room, and I shall give strict orders that he be
      not admitted. I will not have philosophers careering in and out of my house, at all hours, as
      pleases them. This is not a rabbit warren, as the Gods love me! But here comes my daughter to
      unite with me in assurance of welcome and protection.” 
 Domitia had entered, in obedience to the command transmitted by the sorcerer. 
 There was but one oil lamp on a table in the chamber, and consequently at first she did not
      discern who was there addressed by her mother. But Duilia stepped aside and allowed the light
      to flash over the face of Domitian. 
 The moment the girl saw it, she started back and put her hands to her bosom. 
 “My dear child,” said Longa Duilia, “you will thank the Lares and Penates, that our cousin
      has taken refuge with us. The Capitol is in flames, the Imperial guards are storming the
      walls, there is, I fear, no hope for our dear good friend Flavius Sabinus. Poor man, how he
      enjoyed himself at supper here the other day! We may hope for the best, but not expect
      impossibilities. Revolutions and all these sorts of things have their natural exits, the
      sword, the Tullianum and the Gemonian steps—horrible, but inevitable. Domitian has fled to us,
      disguised as a priest of Jupiter. O my dear, what a nice thing it is that there is so much
      religion
      left among the common people that they respected his cloth. Well, here he is, and
      we must do what we can for him.” 
 “Cast him out,” said Domitia hoarsely. 
 “What, my love?” 
 “Cast him out—the beast, the crowned beast, the new Nero. The fifth that was and the eighth
      that will be.” 
 Duilia raised her eyebrows. 
 “My dear, I don’t in the least understand enigmas. I was never clever at them, though my
      parts are not generally accounted bad.” 
 “Mother, I pray you, I beseech you as you desire my happiness, do not harbor him under your
      roof. Cast him forth. What ho! Slaves!” 
 Domitian started and caught the girl by the shoulders. 
 “You would betray me?” 
 “I would have you thrust forth into the street.” 
 “To be murdered—torn to pieces by the blood-thirsty mob?” 
 “It is to save myself.” 
 “Thyself! I do thee no harm.” 
 “Do not attend to her. It is childish, maidenly timidity,” said Duilia, frowning at Domitia
      and shaking her finger at her. “She knows that, to screen you, we run great risks ourselves.
      We may be denounced—we may.—As the Gods love me! There is no saying what we may be called on
      to suffer. But I say, perish all the family rather than offend against hospitality.” 
 “Mother,” said Domitia. Her face was white as ashes. “Send him forth. If he were not a
      coward, a mean coward, he would not come here, to the house of two women, and shelter himself
      behind their
      skirts. Titus Flavius Domitianus, dost thou call thyself a man?” 
 He looked furtively at the girl, and muttered something that was unintelligible. 
 “If thou art a man, go forth, run us not into danger. If thou tarry here—I esteem thee as
      the basest of men.” 
 “I praise the Gods!” said Longa Duilia, in towering wrath, “she does not command in this
      house. That do I; and when I say welcome, there you stay, and she shall not gainsay me.” 
 “Mother—to welcome him, is to exile, to destroy me.” 
 “This is rank folly.” 
 “Mother, eject him!” 
 “I will not. I prithee, Domitian, when your dear father is proclaimed in Rome,—forget this
      girl’s folly, and remember only that I sheltered thee.” 
 “I will remember. I am not one to forget.” 
 “There is no escape,” sighed Domitia. “Whom the Gods will destroy—they pursue
      remorselessly. Well, be it so.—Stay then, coward! I am undone.” 


</div></body></text></TEI>