<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Domitia by Sabine Baring-Gould</title><author>Baring-Gould, Sabine (1834-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1898</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">

CHAPTER XXI.THE VIRGIN’S WREATH.
 “My dear,” said Longa Duilia to her daughter, “with wit such as you have, that might be
      drawn through a needle’s eye, it is positively necessary to have you married as quickly as
      possible. I can no longer bear the responsibility of one so full of waywardness and humors as
      yourself.” 
 “That, mother, is as Lamia chooses. You know that I can marry only him.” 
 “And I do not ask you to take another. I will get it settled forthwith. I’ll see his father
      by adoption and have the settlements looked to. You are a good match. I presume you are aware
      of that, and this explains certain poutings and bad temper. Well—reserve them for Lamia, and
      don’t vex me. I wash my hands of you, when that you are married. A camel carries his own hump,
      but a man his wife’s humors.” 
 Domitia was sufficiently acquainted with her mother’s elasticity of spirit and fertility of
      invention to be satisfied that she had a motive for pressing on her marriage, and what that
      motive was seemed obvious. But it was one that distressed her greatly. 
 “My dearest mother,” she said timidly, “I hope—I mean, since you are so good as not to urge
      me further to break my engagement with Lamia, that you have not set your mind—I mean your
      heart——” 

 “My excellent child,” answered Longa Duilia cutting her daughter short, “make no scruple of
      blurting out what is on your tongue. You allude to Domitian. Well! If you had common sense,
      you would know that to get on in life, one must fit one’s heart with the legs of a
      grasshopper, so as to be able to skip from an inconvenient, into any suitable position. When a
      dish of ortolans is set on table, none but a fool will dismiss it untasted to be devoured by
      the servants in the kitchen!” 
 “But, mother, he is quite young.” 
 “By the favor of the Gods, Domitia, youths always fall in love with women somewhat older
      than themselves. The Gods ordered it for their good. If they, I mean the young men—would only
      follow their—I mean the Gods’—direction, there would be fewer unhappy marriages. For my part,
      I can’t see anything attractive in half-baked girls.” 
 But the thoughts of her own future, and approaching happiness took up the whole of
      Domitia’s brain, and left no space for consideration of her mother’s schemes, and their
      chances of success. 
 The young prince was away. It was, as had been feared, too late for him to reap laurels in
      Germany, the revolt had been quelled by Cerealis, but as there was a ferment working in Gaul,
      it was deemed advisable that Domitian should go thither and overcome the dissatisfied instead
      of crossing the Alps. He had accordingly changed his route, and had appeared in Lyons. 
 The marriage between Domitia and Lamia could not take place so speedily as Duilia desired.
      She was wishful to have it over before the return to Rome of Domitian, so that she might be
      left a freer hand, and
      her daughter put out of the way who, she thought, exercised a peculiar
      fascination over the young prince; but she was unable to decide in her own mind whether what
      drew his eyes towards Domitia was dislike or love; possibly it was a commingling of resentment
      at her treatment of him, and admiration for her loveliness. 
 But hindrances arose. Lamia was absent on his estates in Sicily, where there had been
      disturbances among the slaves, and till matters were settled there, he could not return. 
 Then came the month of May in which no marriages might be performed owing to the hauntings
      of the Lemures, or ghosts of bad men, and such as had not received burial.
      These, seen in the forms of walking skeletons or bugbears, rioted in that sweetest month of
      the whole year. Then they obtained opportunities among the incautious to slip into their
      bodies, and possess them with madness, or to take up their abodes in dwelling-houses and
      disturb the living occupants by phantom appearances and mysterious sounds. 
 On three days in the month of May special means were adopted to propitiate or scare away
      these spectres. On the 9th, 11th, and 13th, at midnight, the master of a house, or, in the
      event of his death or absence, his widow or wife, walked barefoot before the door to a flowing
      fountain, where the hands were thrice washed, and then the propitiator of the ghosts returned
      home, and threw black beans over the shoulder, saying: “These I give to you, and with these
      beans I ransom myself and mine.” 
 It was supposed that the ghost scrambled for the beans, and so enabled the owner of the
      house to reach
      the door before them. There stood the servants beating brazen vessels, pots and
      pans, shouting, “Out with you! Out with you, ye ghosts!” 
 At the beginning of June was the cleansing of the Temple of Vesta, and till that was
      completed, on the 15th, marriages were forbidden. 
 Consequently the wedding could not take place much before midsummer, and to this Longa
      Duilia had to submit. 
 Domitia was content and happy. She had not been so happy since her father’s death. Indeed
      till now she had not been able to shake off the pain she had felt at his loss. For to her,
      that father was the model of noble manhood, high-minded, full of integrity, strong yet gentle.
      She had often marvelled at the manner in which he had dealt with her mother, whom she indeed
      loved but who somewhat rasped her. With his wife he had ever been firm yet forbearing. He
      allowed her to form her little schemes, but always managed to thwart them when foolish or
      mischievous, without her perceiving who had put a spoke in the wheel. 
 Lucius Ælius Lamia she looked upon as formed in her father’s school, upon his model. He was
      modest, honorable, true; a good man to whom she could give her whole heart with full assurance
      that he would treasure the gift, and that she could trust him to be as true to her as she
      would be true to him. 
 Since her father’s death, Domitia had felt more than previously the incompatibility of her
      mind with that of her mother. They had no thoughts, no wishes, no feelings in common. Domitia
      was a dreamer, speculative, ever with eager mind seeking the things beyond what was known,
      whereas Duilia had not a thought, a
      care that were not material. The lady Duilia cared not a rush about philosophy or
      the theory of emanations. It was to her a matter of complete indifference whether the
      established paganism was true or false. For she had no apprehension of the importance of
      Truth. And she had no wish that could not be gratified by money or the acquisition of
      position. 
 Now also the haunting horror of those waking dreams that she had seen in the Temple of Isis
      passed from the heart of the young girl, like the vapors that roll away and disclose the blue
      heavens and the glorious sun. She had been drifting purposeless; now she saw that she was
      about to enter on a condition of life in which she would have an object, and would find
      complete happiness in the pursuit of that object,—in the fulfilment of her duties as housewife
      to a loved husband, in whom she would find strength, sympathy and love. 
 And now also, for the first time since the death of Corbulo, she sang as she went about the
      house, or worked at her bridal dress. 
 Lamia, on his return from Sicily was surprised to note the change in her appearance. She
      had been as a beautiful flower bowed by rain and pinched with cold, and now, as in renewed
      sunshine, she bloomed with expanded petals. Light danced in her blue eyes, and a delicate rose
      suffused her smooth cheeks. She had stepped back into the childhood out of which she had
      passed on that terrible day at Cenchræa. 
 And as he looked at her, her eyes sparkling with love and tears of joy, he thought he had
      never seen one sweeter and to whom he could so wholly devote himself as to his dear Domitia. 

 Then arrived the eve of the marriage. 
 The young girl was in the garden, stooping, picking the flowers of which her virginal crown
      was to be woven, and singing as she plucked. 
 Then she came with her lap full of herbs and blossoms to her mother, who said:— 
 “That is right. None may gather the flowers but the bride. By the way, have you heard?
      Domitian is back from Gaul. I was rejoiced at the news, and have despatched an invitation to
      him to attend the wedding.” 
 “Oh, mother! it is a bad omen.” 
 At the mention of the name, the vision of the red face, seen at Gabii between her own and
      that of Lamia, started up before her, and she let drop the lap of flowers, and they fell at
      her feet. 
 “By the Gods! what a silly thing thou art! Quick, gather up the herbs and then go fetch thy
      dolls and toys of childhood, they must all this evening be offered on the altar of the
      household gods.” 
 “I have them not, mother.” 
 “Not your dolls!” 
 “Not one.” 
 “But what have you done with them? I know they were all brought from Antioch.” 
 “Mother, they have been given away.” 
 “Given away! to whom?” 
 “To Glyceria, the sister of Euphrosyne.” 
 “But what can have induced you to do this?” 
 “She is paralyzed, and served by little children in the story of the
       Insula where she lives. I considered that it would amuse her to dress the
      dolls afresh, and perhaps mend broken limbs, and after that she will
      distribute them among the little willing children that help her in her
      infirmity.” 
 “As the Gods love me!” exclaimed Duilia, “Whoever heard before of such madness. Hellebore
      would not cure it. Verily the more you labor at a hole the greater the hollow. You are a fool,
      and your folly grows daily greater. You must present your toys of childhood to the
       Lares, they expect it—it is the custom, it is right.” 
 “But I have none left.” 
 “Mother Ops! what is to be done? Run, Eboracus,—run and buy me half a dozen dolls—dressed
      if possible. Domitia, you are determined to bring ill-luck on yourself. There is nothing else
      to be done but for you to spend an hour in playing with the dolls, and then you can present
      them at the altar, and the Gods will be none the wiser. Between me and you and the pillars of
      the peristyle, they are bigger fools than us mortals, and easier gulled.” 
 Domitia stooped to collect the fallen flowers. 
 “What is that?” asked her mother—“Oh! right enough, natrix, that drives away ghosts and nightmare. And that of course is in the
      virginal wreath, myosotis (Forget-me-not) it dries tears. An Egyptian slave
      I had—he fell ill, so I exposed him on the isle between the two Bridges—he told me that if one
      ate the root in the month of Thoth—that is August, one escaped sore eyes for a twelvemonth.
      That is right also, the scarlet anemone, it betokens the flame of love—and that evergreen its
      continuance. The centaury—that is the herb of union, it will close a wound so as
      not to show even a scar—and in marriage, no better symbol than that. What have
      you here? The lysimachia, that gives harmony and agreement of mind. They
      say that a plant of it fastened to the pole of a chariot will make the wildest and most
      impatient horses pull together. And the herb of the Twelve Gods! quite right, always remember
      the gods, they come in useful. The vervain—of course, it will give you all you will. But, ye
      Gods of Olympus! What have you done to pluck cypress! My dear Domitia, are you mad? Thyme,
      mint, if you will—but cypress! the tree of the infernal gods, and—as the Gods love me! let me
      look at your hands! They are red—what have you plucked—plucked till your hands are dyed—the
       androsœmum! Oh! Domitia! ill-fated child—look, look at your hands, the
      juice has stained them, they are dipped in blood.” 


</div></body></text></TEI>