<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Domitia by Sabine Baring-Gould</title><author>Baring-Gould, Sabine (1834-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1898</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="25">

CHAPTER XXV.BY A RAZOR.
 Two days passed, and Domitia remained undisturbed. No tidings reached her from Rome, but to
      her great relief the Cæsar Domitian did not appear. That a meeting with him must take place,
      she was aware, but in what manner he would address her, that she could not guess; whether he
      would take occasion to exhibit ignoble revenge for her treatment of him on the night when he
      sought refuge in her house, or whether he would approach her as a lover. This the sequel could
      alone disclose. The second alternative was what she mainly dreaded. 
 On the third day, hearing a bustle in the hall, and conjecturing that some one had arrived,
      and that the critical moment had come, Domitia waited in her chamber with beating heart, and
      long-drawn sighs. When the curtains were sharply withdrawn, to her surprise and delight her
      mother entered, radiant in her best toilette, her face, as far as could be judged through the
      paint, wreathed with smiles. 
 “Well!” said she.—“But first a seat. You sly fox! who would have thought it? But there—I am
      content. I have sent out no invitations to a little supper, there is now no occasion for it,
      and one does not care to spend—without an expectation of it leading to results. To look at
      your face no one would have supposed that
      depth in you—and to play us all such a trick, poor Lamia and me. It would really
      make a widow of a week old laugh. Don’t smother me, my dear, and above all, don’t cry—that is
      to say, if you cry do not let your tears fall on my cheek, you know I am—well—well—it might
      spoil my complexion.” 
 “Mother,” gasped the unhappy girl—“O, how can you speak to me in this manner. You know, you
      must know, I have been carried away against my will. O mother, Lucius does not suppose that——” 
 “My dear child, it does not concern me in the least, whether the kitten carried off the
      rat, or the rat the kitten. Here you are in the rat’s hole, and all you have to look to is to
      eat your rat and not let the rat eat you.” 
 “Oh, mother! mother! take me home with you.” 
 “Domitia, do not be a baby. Of course you cannot return. You have bidden farewell to the
      household Gods, and renounced the paternal threshold.” 
 “Mother—I have embraced the gate-posts of the Lamiæ.” 
 “But the Gods of that family have been unable or unwilling to retain you, they have
      resigned you to—I cannot say, in conscience, nobler hands, for the Flavian family—well, we
      know what we know,—but to more powerful hands, that will not let you go. Besides, my dear, I
      have no wish to have you home again. When a bird has flown, it has said farewell to the nest,
      to its cracked eggshells and worms, and must find another.” 
 “Do not be cruel!” 
 “I am not cruel—but what has happened must be accepted, that is the true philosophy of
      life, better than all that nonsense declaimed by philosophers.” 

 “Mother! I will not stay here.” 
 “Domitia, here you must stay till somebody comes to take you away. Why! as the Gods love
      me! I expect yet to hear you proclaimed Augusta, and to have to offer incense and to pour a
      libation on your altar. Think—what an honor to have your wax head among the ancestors, as a
      divinity to be worshipped—but no—I am wrong there, you would be in the
       lararium, or set up in the vestibule, a deified ancestress or member of
      the family is exalted from the atrium to the temple. I really will go out of my way and have a
      little supper to honor the occasion. I see it all—we shall before long have a college of
      Flavian priests, and all the whole bundle of mouldy old usurers, and tax-collectors, and their
      frowsy womankind will be gods, with temples and a cult, and you, my dear! It makes my mouth
      water.” 
 “But, mother, why am I carried away?” 
 “Why! O you jocose little creature, why? because some person I know of has taken a
      fancy to your monkey ways and baby face.” 
 “I belong to Lamia. I have been married to him.” 
 “Oh! that is easily settled. I thank the Immortals, divorce is easily obtained in Rome—with
      money, influence in Rome—to the end of time, my dear.” 
 “I do not desire to be divorced—I will not be divorced. I love Lucius and he loves me.” 
 “You are a child—just away from your dolls, and know nothing of life.” 
 “But, mother, there are laws. I will throw myself on the protection of the Senate.” 
 Longa Duilia laughed aloud. “Silly fool! laws bind the subjects and the weak, not princes
      and the strong.
      Make your mind up to accept what has happened. It is the work of destiny.” 
 “It is an infamous crime.” 
 “My child, do not use such words, what might be crime among common folk is pleasantry among
      princes. They all do it. It is their right. It is of no avail your attempting resistance.
      Domitian has taken a fancy to you—he is young, good-looking, Cæsar, all sorts of honors have
      been heaped on him, and he has but to put out a rake and comb together all the good in the
      world. And”—she drew nearer to her daughter,—“he may be Emperor some day. Titus has but one
      lumpy, ugly girl—no son.” 
 “I care not. I hate him! let me go back to Lamia!” 
 “That is impossible.” 
 “Not if I will!” 
 “You cannot. You would be stayed by the servants here.” 
 “But you—cannot you help me? O mother, if you have any love for me! For the sake of my
      dear, dear father!” 
 “Even if I would, I could not. Why, there is not a court in Rome, not the Senate even can
      afford you protection and release. The Flavians are up now.” 
 “I will appeal to Vespasian, to the Emperor!” 
 “He is in Egypt.” 
 The girl panted and beat her head with her hands. 
 “Lamia! he shall release me.” 
 “He needs some one to release him.” 
 “How so?” 
 “He insulted Domitian in the Senate House—all because of you, and is under arrest. For less
      matters, than what he has done, lives have been lost.” 

 “He will never—no, never!” she could not finish her sentence, her heart was boiling over,
      and she burst into a paroxysm of sobs. 
 “The Gods! the Gods help me!” she cried. 
 “My dear Domitia, you might as well call on the walls to assist you. The Gods! They are
      just as bad as mortals. You may cry, but they will look between their fingers, accept your
      prayers and offerings and laugh at you as a fool. Why, as the Gods love me! Does not the
      family derive from Lamius, and was not he the child of Hercules and Omphale? It was very
      naughty and shocking, and all that sort of thing—but they all do it, and are not in the least
      disposed to assist you. On the contrary, they will back up the ravisher.” 
 “Then I have no help—save in myself. I will never be his.” 
 “Be advised by me, you foolish child. When you come under a cherry tree you pluck all the
      ripe fruit; and what you cannot eat yourself you give to your friends. Do you not perceive
      that having been fortunate enough to catch the fancy of the young Cæsar, you can use this
      fancy and make large profit out of it? He is already very freely distributing offices to all
      his friends and such as most grossly flatter him. What may not you obtain for me! That is if I
      take a liking for any one and wish to marry him, you must positively obtain the proconsulship
      of Syria or Egypt for him. And as to Lamia, he can be choked off with a prætorship.” 
 The veil was plucked aside, and Domitian entered. 
 Longa Duilia rose; not so Domitia Longina. 
 He stood for a moment looking at the girl. 

 “Saucy still?” he said. 
 “Wrathful at this treatment,” she answered, with her eyes on the ground, and her hands
      clasped. “Because I would have denied to you a suppliant, the hospitality of our house, must
      I, unsoliciting it, be forced to accept yours?” 
 “Domitia, has your mother informed you what I have designed for you?” 
 “I should prefer that you concerned yourself with your prætorial duties.” 
 Domitian bit his lip. He had been invested with the office of prætor of the city, but in
      his overweening conceit deemed it unworthy of him to discharge the duties of the office. 
 “It is my intent, Domitia, to elevate you into the Flavian family.” 
 “O how gracious!” sneered the girl,—“taken up like Trygdeus.” 
 “Domitia!” exclaimed her mother, then at once perceiving that the allusion was lost on the
      uneducated prince, she said:— 
 “Quite so, on the wings of the Bird of Jove.”

 The young man became crimson. He was convinced that there was some bitter sneer in the
      words of Domitia, and he was ashamed at his inability to comprehend the allusion. 
 “What I intend for you,” said he, moving from the doorway to where he could observe her
      face, “what I intend for you is what there is not another woman in Rome who would not give her
      jewels to obtain.” 
 “Then I pray you address yourself to them. Pay
      your debts with their subscriptions, and leave me who am content to be
      disregarded, in the tranquillity I so love—with my husband, Ælius Lamia.” 
 “Lamia!” laughed Domitian. “You are to be divorced from him. Your mother is willing.” 
 “My mother has no more power over me. I am out of the paternal family.” 
 “You will consent yourself.” 
 “Who will make me?” 
 “That will I. It is easy to rend apart——” 
 “Any fool can break, not all can bind.” 
 “Domitia, be advised and do not incense me.” 
 “I care not for myself. I have but one wish. Let me go. Take, if you will, what is my
      property, take that of Lamia, but let us retire together to some little farm and be quiet
      there, drive us, if you will, out of Italy—but do not separate us.” 
 “You talk at random. Follow me.” 
 He led the way, stood in the entrance, holding back the curtain, and Duilia drew her
      daughter from her seat. 
 “Come,—Lamia awaits you,” said Domitian. 
 Then the girl started to her feet. 
 “He is here! You will be generous,—like a prince!” 
 “Come with me.” 
 She now followed with beating heart. Her cheeks were flushed, a sparkle was in her eye, her
      breath came fast through her nostrils, her teeth were set. 
 Without were many lictors lining the way, filling the court. 
 He led into that portion of the villa where were the baths and entered the warm room. There
      Domitia saw at once Lamia, stripped almost to the skin, held
      by soldiers of the prince’s guard, his mouth gagged, and a surgeon standing by
      with a razor. 
 She would have sprung to him and thrown her arms around him, had she not been restrained. 
 “Domitia,” said the young Cæsar; “you will see how that to divorce you is in my power,
      unless you consent to it yourself, and give yourself to me.” 
 Domitia trembled in every limb. She looked with distended eyes at Lamia, who had no power
      to speak, save with his eyes, and they were fixed on her. 
 A large marble bath stood near, and both hot and cold water could be turned on into it. 
 She knew but too well what the threat was. Seneca had so perished under Nero,—by the
      cutting of the veins he had bled to death. 
 Petronius, master of the Revels to the same tyrant, had suffered in the same manner, and as
      his blood flowed he had mocked and hearkened to ribald verses till the power to listen and to
      flaunt his indifference were at an end. 
 And now the second Nero, not yet full blown, but giving earnest of what he would be, was
      threatening Lamia with the same death. It was not a gradual and painless extinction, but a
      death of great suffering, for it led to agonizing cramps, knotting the muscles, and
      contracting the limbs. Domitia knew this—she had heard the dying agonies of Seneca and
      Petronius described,—and she looked with quivering lips and bloodless cheeks on him whom she
      loved best—on the only one in the world she loved, threatened with the same awful death. 
 She would do anything short of taking the Cæsar Domitian as her husband in place of him to
      whom she
      was bound by the most sacred ties,—anything short of that to save the life of
      Lamia. 
 The struggle in her bosom was terrible; her head spun, she tried to speak but could frame
      no words. 
 She sought some guidance in Lamia’s eyes, but her own swam with tears, and she could not
      read what he would advise. 
 “My child,” said her mother, “of course it is all very sad, and that sort of thing—but it
      is and must be so. If a wilful girl will not be brought to reason in any other way—well, it is
      a pity.” 
 Domitian turned to Domitia. 
 “His life is in your power,” said he. “He has insulted me before the Conscript Fathers, and
      is under arrest. I have brought him hither—to die. But I give his life to you on the one
      condition that you allow divorce to be pronounced between you and him, and that in his place
      you accept me.” 
 Domitia turned her face away. 
 “So be it,” said he. “Surgeon, open his veins.” 
 With a slash of the razor across the arm at the fold, an artery was severed, and the black
      blood spurted forth. 
 Uttering a cry of horror, Domitia battled with those who held her, to reach and clasp her
      husband. 
 “Cut the other arm,” commanded the prince, “then cast him into the bath.” 
 “I yield,” gasped Domitia, burying her face in her hands and sinking to her knees. 
 “Then bind up his wound, and let him go!” 
 “Destiny must be fulfilled,” said Elymas who stood behind. “You were born for the purple.” 
</div></body></text></TEI>