<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Hosts of the Lord</title><author>Steel, Flora Annie (1847-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
FALLING STARS
The long durbar tent was packed from end to end with the cane-bottomed seats of the
     mighty; and in each sat its appointed occupant,--patient, grave, silent.
But in the two rows behind the Viceroy's still empty chair of state the Englishmen in
     political dress or uniform who sat in the front, and the Englishwomen in the latest Paris
     fashions who sat behind, were talking and laughing; in a perfectly well-bred way, yet, to the
     majority of those silent spectators, at the expense of decency, since a durbar is,
     like a West Indian ball, not for 'talkee.' There was, however, no disapproval on those
     indifferent dark faces. Such things were part and parcel of that general eccentricity of the
      Huzoors, before which it behoved calmness to remain calm. Yet those same faces would
     have been quick to notice and resent the faintest breach of etiquette in regard to their own
     treatment, or position. Those being correct, the rest was immaterial.
And now, the sudden strains from without of "God Save the Queen" sent those talking, laughing
     rows to their feet silently, with the proud alacrity so noticeable in India when the act is a
     confession of faith, indeed! But the mass beyond followed suit obediently, with a starry shiver
     of diamond-flash, a milky way of pearl-shine; for Eugene Smith's electric light was working
     full power.
Finally, as if wafted on the full chords, came a small man, with that inevitable look of
     coming into church which Englishmen consider dignity; possibly because public worship is,
     really, the only function in which they are not inwardly ashamed of taking part. The great gold
     chair, the great gold footstool, seemed all too large for everything about their occupant, save
     the diamond star, the ribbon on his breast. Yet, in a way, the scene gained by his inadequacy
     when, after a decent pause, a decent silence, he rose, small, insignificant, to give voice to
     Empire--in a strong Scotch accent, it must be admitted, which equalled the Commissioner's Irish
     one, when, its proper exponent, the Secretary, having a cold, he read a translation of the
     Viceroy's speech, and his soft brogue ran riot among the clamorous Persian vowels.
"Ai Mâhârâjâhân, râjâhân, nawâbân wâ sâhibân âlishân."
The diamonds and pearls sat too still for play, so the electric light contented itself with
     the white teeth of Englishwomen as they yawned. But even these failed it when, the speech
     ending, that front row began its file past; the civilians first, the soldiers next. A quick
     file, a formal bow as a rule; but, every now and again, a pause would come in the monotonous
     string of names, for a few words from the Viceroy, and another bow ere the recipient passed on.
     Muriel Smith, who sat behind--the best dressed woman there, as Erda Shepherd had judged
     her--watched her husband's tall gaunt figure approaching, and wondered if that pause would come
     to him. Her heart beat so when it did that she could hear nothing except "graciously pleased,"
     "eminent services," "distinguished order"; but a whisper from her neighbor, "All right! C. S.
     I., not C. I. E.," left her sick and faint with relief. Even so, her eyes instinctively sought
     Vincent Dering's sympathy; but he, to her surprise, was looking at the tall gaunt man whose
     face was a "nunc dimittis" in itself, as he made his way back to his seat, forgetful
     even of his wife.
But he had forgotten her, amid a host of other things, for three whole years: forgotten them
     in a ceaseless effort, an untiring energy. And now that the necessity for this was over, sleep
     and rest were his first thoughts. He took both, apparently, in his chair, while the
     Commissioner, causing this time a fresh flashing of jewels, began on a fresh string of
     titles.
"Sri râja-i-râjân,
     furzund-i-khâs-munsoor-i-zamân-mâhârâj-dhirâj-rasâkh."
And, as they rolled on, the atom of humanity belonging to them--someone in faded brocade,
     with ropes of ill-shaped pearls and uncut stones wound about him, or a jauntier figure fresh
     and glittering from a Calcutta jeweller's shop--would be singled out by its political in
     charge, like a sheep from a flock, and guided dexterously to the exactly proper spot in the
     whole round world wherein obeisance and offering could be made with dignity to itself, and the
     recipient. Then it would be swept on, regardless of an invariable desire to break back, in an
     endless circle to its seat, while fresh titles rolled out, and a fresh owner was hemmed in and
     swept forward. For two whole mortal hours, this, and nothing but this; with, every now and
     again, that pause for a few words, translated now into Irish-Urdu, producing an expression as
     of a cat licking cream, on a face as it was was hustled back, blindly obedient, as sheep are
     with a collie they know and trust.
So, at last, long after everyone, even Dya Ram--who looked terribly disjointed between his
     frock coat, white tie, grey trousers, and the gold mohur which he persisted in holding after
     native custom in his gloved right hand--had passed, the politicals gathered in a knot, like
     church-wardens for the offertory plates, and the distribution of atta and
     pân, that sacrament of servitude and sovereignty, began. It, too, was exactly like an
     offertory; that is, a languid passing round of a plate by an official, and yawns for the rest
     of the congregation.
Finally, with a vigour savouring--like a voluntary--of relief, the band attacked "God Save
     the Queen" once more, the Viceroy retired, the durbarees trooped out, still calm and
     silent, yet satisfied, and the Commissioner, sinking into a vacant seat, said:--
"Thank the Lord! That's over without a hitch. So India's safe for another six months at the
     cost of a trumpery title or two."
"I don't see on what ground," began the Under Secretary, laboriously.
"Then ye don't read your Bible. Didn't Adam, when he was given dominion over the lower
     animals, begin by bestowing names on them? Ah! my dear Mrs. Smith, I didn't know ye were so
     close. A thousand congratulations, my dear lady."
"You don't mean it, sir," she interrupted, laughing. "Do you think I have forgotten the
     consolatory verses you wrote me last year when Eugene didn't get anything? You are a
     fraud."
"Not a bit of it; only an Irishman," put in Father Ninian, with an almost tender smile for
     the keen, whimsical face which had been friend to him, and foe to him, for many a long year.
     "Let us have the verses, Mrs. Smith."
"Say ye don't remember them, there's a kind soul," urged the Commissioner, persuasively.
"But I do:

"I dreamt, and lo, the stars fell from the sky
To blaze upon the breasts of naughty men;
And as I wondered, came this swift reply:--
'Each star is some soul's inmost aim, and when
The angels don't approve, it is returned
To feed the base-born flame by which it burned.
The nice, they keep until--life's struggle striven--
The owners find them at the gates of heaven.'"

"Striven--heaven!" groaned the Commissioner, amid the clapping of hands. "My dear madam, did
     I commit such a crime--I mean rhyme? But the poet's right. Ye can't go wide of the mark,
     annyhow, even in a song, but you're sure to find the fact again in the heart of a friend."
So, with that curiously light-hearted, almost reckless, frivolity of Indian society--a not
     unnatural recoil, perhaps, from the perpetual presence of the greatest social problem the world
     has ever seen, or is likely to see, that is, the mutual assimilation of East and West without
     injury to either--the little company of English men and women, empire makers and breakers,
     drifted out into the sunshine, and so on to the Viceroy's private enclosure, where the band,
     weary of national anthems, was already at work on a selection of street tunes, beginning with
     "Tommy, make room for your uncle."
So the pageant of power passed into a garden-party, and nothing remained to show the
     hand-grip which had made that garden out of a wilderness, to tell of the tireless effort to
     solve the problem, the ceaseless striving to be just, which underlay all the quips and cranks,
     the foibles and follies, of the great camp, save the premature baldness of a few heads, as
     their owners fought desperately at badminton; fought to prevent a child's shuttlecock from
     falling in the wrong court!
A fight which was watched with blank courtesy, as a further exhibition of sheer eccentricity,
     by those of the jewelled and brocaded owners of titles who had the entrée to this Holy
     of Holies.
Roshan Khân, however,--who looked splendid in his uniform,--fought with the best; and won,
     too, though Laila Bonaventura, who played on his side, stood still, taking, it is true, the
     shots which came within reach dexterously enough, but never stirring an inch for one beyond.
     And, as he played, the curious chance which had brought him into her company made his blood run
     fast.
Captain Dering had bidden him join the set; bidden him curtly, almost savagely, as the best
     player available, in answer to a challenge from Muriel Smith to play her, her husband, and the
     Commissioner. And this challenge had come curtly, also, because Captain Dering was standing
     beside Laila Bonaventura, to whom he had been giving a cup of coffee. Not because it gave him
     pleasure, but from sheer determination not to let his mistake in the darkness count for
     anything. Yet, as the girl's hand took the cup from his, he had remembered with a thrill the
     gladness, the content it had brought him. Though he refused to acknowledge the fact, the puzzle
     of this mistake had been his chief thought ever since it occurred, and a smouldering resentment
     regarding his past relationship with one who was still to him the best and dearest of women was
     the result. He felt vaguely that she, as well as he, ought to have known that their sentiment,
     their monopoly, as it were, of friendship, could only mean--what it had meant to him during
     those few moments of blindness which had, paradoxically, opened his eyes. So he had felt
     bitter, and she had known it instinctively. If she had ever faced facts, this alone might have
     opened her eyes also; but she was too good a woman, too helplessly bound by her woman's cult of
     love, to disassociate it from friendship. So, without bringing a doubt even, the jealous desire
     of appropriation which draws a line clear and clean as a sword-cut between the two, had risen
     up in her from the absence of the sympathetic look she had expected from Vincent Dering. So she
     had challenged him, and so it came to pass that Roshan Khân played badminton with Laila
     Bonaventura. She took no notice of him beyond a casual inspection of his uniform; still the
     mere fact of being her equal within the white lines which separated their badminton court from
     the realities of life seemed a fate. When the game was over, his eyes followed her closely, and
     he, himself, at a respectful distance; and as he followed her, his desire to speak to her grew
     as he pondered on his right to do so. After all, as his grandmother had said, she was his
     cousin.
And fate was on his side once more. A well-bred crowding round a table where some photographs
     of the camp were being shown, brought him so near her that she caught sight of his yellow,
     silver-laced uniform behind her, and turned quickly. Turned with a look in her big black eyes
     which dazzled him.
It vanished, however, in a second; yet her words, spoken with a faint resentment, made the
     memory of the look give rise to a swift pulse of angry suspicion.
"I thought you were Captain Dering," she said. "Why do you wear the same uniform? I thought
     natives couldn't be officers."
The assumption, in his present state of mind, made all his fierce temper flash to his face;
     but ere he could choose English words to express it, she laughed, and, after her fashion when
     amused, became confidential. "You are angry at being called a native; but you are one,
     aren't you? Then it is so foolish. You are like my guardian. He can't bear the bazaar people to
     call me 'Begum-sahiba'; but they do sometimes, you know, because I own a lot of their
     houses and lands, and my grandmother was a native princess. I know that, though my guardian
     never speaks about it. He is ashamed, I think--like you are. I'm not. I didn't choose my
     grandmother. Why should one fuss about such things? If they're true, it can't be helped, and if
     they're not, what does it matter? Besides, it must be rather nice to be a real Begum.
     You haven't seen any, of course; they wouldn't let you, would they? That must be horrid. How
     could you like people if you didn't see them? Besides--" she added, with an access of demure,
     pious conviction, "it would be wicked to marry them, you know. You should never marry anyone
     you don't love. Even the Sisters told me that."
Her voice had deepened, broadened; her eyes, occupied with his uniform, not his face, had
     grown soft. Hitherto he had been too much at a loss before her sudden garrulity to interrupt;
     now, that vague suspicion recurred, making him feel inclined to say brutally, "I am your
     cousin; I claim you." The very thought of her outraged face attracted him. But English words
     were inadequate for such emotions, so, as he paused, she went on:--
"As you are here, I suppose you'll be asked to the ball, also. It is to be in my palace, you
     know, because Captain Dering thinks it the best place. He says the gardens will be beautiful
     all lit up--" She smiled as if at some secret mystery, then continued: "Of course, I don't know
     yet; I haven't seen it, but I think it will be lovely. Only I wish my dress was different. I am
     Beatrice--Dante's Beatrice--and I think it stupid. But my guardian chose it because--" she
     smiled again with the same secret amusement--"I don't know, of course, but I expect it is
     because my great-grandmother went as Beatrice to some ball long ago. It is generally that. I
     think he must have been in love with her--isn't it funny?"
"Laila," came Father Ninian's voice from behind, "I have been looking for you everywhere. It
     is time to go."
His usually kind old face was stern. He gave the curtest of recognitions to Roshan Khân, and,
     as he carried his ward off, said sharply, "Who introduced you to that native?"
"No one," she replied, indifferently; "I thought he was Captain Dering; their uniforms--" she
     broke off to add, with more animation, "I do like the gold and silver lace. Though of course
     the jewels, like the rajahs wore, look best."
He interrupted her in Italian, giving a quick gesture of dissent. "Say not so, cara
      mia, they would look ill on--on Englishmen. And listen, child! You should not speak to
     strangers; and I would rather you did not speak to such natives at all. They--cannot
     understand--quite--for they look on women differently from what we do."
Laila's eyes narrowed sullenly. "Very well, guardian," she said resignedly, "only I suppose
     they must know what their women are really like--and--perhaps the native ladies prefer it."
The old man looked at her, startled, but said nothing.
When he had gone to find Akbar Khân and the carriage, Vincent Dering, seeing her alone, came
     up--so, at least, he told himself--out of sheer politeness, to ask if she wanted anything. Yet
     something in her face sent him beyond mere courtesy at once; something almost childishly
     apparent.
"I'm afraid you haven't been enjoying yourself," he said kindly. "Why not? I thought it
     rather pleasant."
"Very pleasant!" she assented wearily. "Only my guardian has been telling me not to do
     things; and I don't know why, but I always want to do them at once--don't you?"
He could not actually deny the fact. "Sometimes. One has to pretend--"
She raised her eyes to his blindingly; he caught a glimpse in them of the lawless approval
     Roshan Khân had seen, yet of something else--a lawless disdain. "Why must one?" she asked. "I
     never mean to, never! If I want to do a thing I'll do it. I don't mean wicked things, of
     course--" she returned here to demure, almost plaintive piety--"I don't want to do them, and
     nothing can be wrong when it seems right to you, and it is real--ever so real, and you give
     yourself to it, every bit of you, without thinking, and--and--ask nothing--nothing at
     all--"
Her vehemence, her passionate assertion, roused a quick response in him. "Would you do that?"
     he asked, his voice vibrating. "Would you--really?"
She smiled slowly. "Of course I don't know," she said, "I haven't tried yet; but I never
     pretend. I don't even pretend to like my dress for the ball. It is so stupid."
He felt annoyed at being led into a burst of emotion, and then baulked. "You will look
     charming, I'm sure," he said in his worst manner. "And if you don't like it, change to
     something jolly after supper. Lots of people do."
"Will Mrs. Smith?" she asked quickly.
He flushed angrily. "I really don't know," he began. Her eyes were on him curiously.
"That's funny," she said. "I thought people--not that it matters," she went on, "for I can't.
     I haven't a dress. Do you know I never have anything I really like--never."
The girl's voice was absolutely touching in its listless, dull confidence, and he could not
     help consolation. "You'll have the ball, I'm sure; you will enjoy it awfully, and--and you
     mustn't forget that you've given me the second waltz, and the first extra after supper."
She did not answer for a moment. "Have I?" she asked. "I didn't know it; but I will. That
     will be nice. And you are coming to decorate to-morrow, aren't you? That will be nice,
     too."
Her tone lingered in his ears long after she had gone. It was with him even when he was
     driving Mrs. Smith home, and, of course, making up their little misunderstanding by the way;
     possibly, because of this making up, since, for the first time, the elaborate
      éclaircissement irked him. It seemed so unnecessary unless the whole affair meant
     something, which was quite out of the question.
For instance, when driving Lance Carlyon back to the Fort afterwards he did not desire an
     explanation of the latter's moodiness. When a chum was evil-dispositioned, you waited calmly
     for him to come round. That was friendship.
"I'm sorry Miss Shepherd couldn't come," said Lance, suddenly, his eyes on that spit of sand,
     with its hovels and logs, below the town. "I wanted her to, awfully, if only because she's
     never seen a durbar; but"--he smiled--"I expect someone else wanted her instead. By
     George! Dering, you don't know how that girl works. Sometimes I feel it's a shame, and
     sometimes I think it's splendid--though of course it don't matter a dash what I think."
And that--Vincent Dering asked himself--was that love?
Laila Bonaventura's voice came back to make him certain of one thing. That would not be her
     version of the old, old story; and the knowledge made him, somehow, more content with his
     world.
Meanwhile another man in yellow and silver lace was being haunted by a girl's voice, which
     had spoken of things which no decent woman of his own race would have mentioned; yet which had
     spoken to him with an equality which no Englishwoman would have allowed herself. And as for
     Englishmen! The recollection of Father Narâyan's face as he carried the girl off made Roshan
     Khân curse under his breath.
But the girl herself had been different. He literally did not know what to think; and the
     desire for someone else's opinion grew so strong that, finally, with a curious mixture of
     reluctance and triumph, he forsook the straight road to the Fort, and turned his horse's head
     towards his grandmother's house. She was at least a woman; she might understand and judge
     better than he.
His first sight of her, however, in unprepared toilette, minus the green satin
     trousers which gave such dignity to her rotund little figure, minus all pretence at
     pomp, dirty, untidy, unkempt both in her surroundings and herself, made him feel what a fool he
     was. The more so when she began by resenting his summary visitation, especially in uniform,
     which, she asserted, made her feel, even at her age, as if she were committing the indiscretion
     of seeing a stranger!
What could a woman like that know? Yet having come, he might as well go through with his
     errand; so he cut short her upbraidings by saying without preamble:
"I have seen my cousin. I spoke to her, and--and she spoke back again."
Mumtâza Mahal looked at him for a moment incredulously, then she cracked all her finger
     joints over his head, or as nearly over it as her height would allow.
"Said I not so?" she asked prophetically. "And when will the wedding be?"
"Wedding!" he echoed petulantly; "there is no talk of wedding. I have but seen her."
"But seen her!" echoed the old lady in her turn. "That came after in my time; but God knows
     how things go nowadays. Then what didst speak about?"
He had to give a Bowdlerized version of what had passed; yet, even so, Mumtâza Mahal looked
     shocked. "A bold hussy; but thou wilt bit and bridle her."
He burst out angrily--for his own recital had shown him the folly of castle-building on so
     slight a foundation--"I am a fool," he said, "and so art thou for all thy years!"
Her little black eyes flashed angrily. "Not I! Did she not say she would like to be a
      Begum? and if that means not--"
"And could I make her one?" he interrupted fiercely. "I--a risaldar on a bare
     pittance--with no prospect of rising. Dost dream me Nawab, fool?"
The old lady's face grew cunning in a second, the instinctive love of intrigue roused by the
     mere suggestion. She leant towards him eagerly. "And wherefore not, Roshan? Are all things
     fixed? Do rulers never change? I live here in a corner, nothing but a poor woman: yet I hear
     more, it seems, than thou dost. I hear of discontent, of desires, of things that call for
     change. But to-day, they spoke of men being killed to make light for these infidels, and
     Gorakh-nâth, jogi, hath sworn a miracle."
He turned on her with a bitter, reckless laugh. "Is that new? Is there not always talk? The
     wise listen not."
A vast importance, a real dignity came to her in an instant. "If the Huzoors had
     listened to such talk in '57."
A thrill ran through him; the thrill of secret curiosity, almost of expectation regarding the
     great Rebellion from which so many things date, which young India always feels in the presence
     of their elders, who passed through it.
"Thou dost know, of course," he said, catching his breath; "thou canst remember."
"Ay!" she replied sternly, "and there was no more talk than there is now. 'Tis not a question
     of words. It is fate. Something happens, and then--then the risaldar may be Nawab--as
     his fathers were."
She had gone too far, and recalled him to himself. "Then let us await the happening," he said
     curtly.
"Wait!" echoed the old lady, reverting to the main point. "Thou canst not wait. Having gone
     so far, the negotiations cannot drop. Thou must send the gift, and see what comes of it."
"A gift!" he repeated. "What gift, and wherefore?"
Mumtâza Mahal looked round as if for approval, tucked a packet of pân into her
     cheek, and chuckled. She was on familiar ground now.
"Leave that to me. I know what girls like. I have them still. Ay! a dress that her
     grandmother wore--good as new, being for a tall woman--and jewels. 'Tis no harm, at least, see
     you; since if they like it not, the gift is returned."
He stood doubtful, half pleased, half shocked at the suggestion. She could certainly send the
     things back, and he had many a time seen English women wearing native jewelry; ay! and
     decorating their rooms with native dresses. And he could write that they were from her cousin
     and servant.
That would be easier than telling.
</div></body></text></TEI>