<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Farringdons, by Ellen
      Thorneycroft Fowler.</title><author>Fowler, Ellen Thorneycroft (1860-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
THE OSIERFIELD

They herded not with soulless swine,
Nor let strange snares their path environ:
Their only pitfall was a mine—
Their pigs were made of iron.

In the middle of Sedgehill, which is in the middle of Mershire, which is in the middle of
     England, there lies a narrow ridge of high table-land, dividing, as by a straight line, the
     collieries and ironworks of the great coal district from the green and pleasant scenery of the
     western Midlands. Along the summit of this ridge runs the High Street of the bleak little town
     of Sedgehill; so that the houses on the east side of this street see nothing through their back
     windows save the huge slag-mounds and blazing furnaces and tall chimneys of the weird and
     terrible, yet withal fascinating, Black Country; while the houses on the west side of the
     street have sunny gardens and fruitful orchards, sloping down toward a fertile land of woods
     and streams and meadows, bounded in the far distance by the Clee Hills and the Wrekin, and in
     the farthest distance of all by the blue Welsh mountains.
In the dark valley lying to the immediate east of Sedgehill stood the Osierfield Works, the
     largest
      ironworks in Mershire in the good old days when Mershire made iron for half the
     world. The owners of these works were the Farringdons, and had been so for several generations.
     So it came to pass that the Farringdons were the royal family of Sedgehill; and the Osierfield
     Works was the circle wherein the inhabitants of that place lived and moved. It was as natural
     for everybody born in Sedgehill eventually to work at the Osierfield, as it was for him
     eventually to grow into a man and to take unto himself a wife.
The home of the Farringdons was called the Willows, and was separated by a carriage-drive of
     half a mile from the town. Its lodge stood in the High Street, on the western side; and the
     drive wandered through a fine old wood, and across an undulating park, till it stopped in front
     of a large square house built of gray stone. It was a handsome house inside, with wonderful oak
     staircases and Adams chimneypieces; and there was an air of great stateliness about it, and of
     very little luxury. For the Farringdons were a hardy race, whose time was taken up by the
     making of iron and the saving of souls; and they regarded sofas and easy-chairs in very much
     the same light as they regarded theatres and strong drink, thereby proving that their spines
     were as strong as their consciences were stern.
Moreover, the Farringdons were of "the people called Methodists"; consequently Methodism was
     the established religion of Sedgehill, possessing there that prestige which is the inalienable
     attribute of all state churches. In the eyes of Sedgehill it was as necessary to salvation to
     pray at the chapel as to work at the Osierfield; and the majority of the inhabitants would as
     soon have thought of worshipping at any other sanctuary as of worshipping at the
      beacon, a pillar which still marks the highest point of the highest table-land in
     England.
At the time when this story begins, the joint ownership of the Osierfield and the Willows was
     vested in the two Miss Farringdons, the daughters and co-heiresses of John Farringdon. John
     Farringdon and his brother William had been partners, and had arranged between themselves that
     William's only child, George, should marry John's eldest daughter, Maria, and so consolidate
     the brothers' fortunes and their interest in the works. But the gods—and George—saw otherwise.
     George was a handsome, weak boy, who objected equally to work and to Methodism; and as his
     father cared for nothing beyond those sources of interest, and had no patience for any one who
     did, the two did not always see eye to eye. Perhaps if Maria had been more unbending, things
     might have turned out differently; but Methodism in its severest aspects was not more severe
     than Maria Farringdon. She was a thorough gentlewoman, and extremely clever; but tenderness was
     not counted among her excellencies. George would have been fond of almost any woman who was
     pretty enough to be loved and not clever enough to be feared; but his cousin Maria was beyond
     even his powers of falling in love, although, to do him justice, these powers were by no means
     limited. The end of it was that George offended his father past forgiveness by running away to
     Australia rather than marry Maria, and there disappeared. Years afterward a rumour reached his
     people that he had married and died out there, leaving a widow and an only son; but this rumour
     had not been verified, as by that time his father and uncle were dead, and his cousins were
     reigning in his stead; and it was hardly to be expected that the proud Miss
      Farringdon would take much trouble concerning the woman whom her weak-kneed kinsman
     had preferred to herself.
William Farringdon left all his property and his share in the works to his niece Maria, as
     some reparation for the insult which his disinherited son had offered to her; John left his
     large fortune between his two daughters, as he never had a son; so Maria and Anne Farringdon
     lived at the Willows, and carried on the Osierfield with the help of Richard Smallwood, who had
     been the general manager of the collieries and ironworks belonging to the firm in their
     father's time, and knew as much about iron (and most other things) as he did. Maria was a good
     woman of business, and she and Richard between them made money as fast as it had been made in
     the days of William and John Farringdon. Anne, on the contrary, was a meek and gentle soul, who
     had no power of governing but a perfect genius for obedience, and who was always engaged on the
     Herculean task of squaring the sternest dogmas with the most indulgent practices.
Even in the early days of this history the Miss Farringdons were what is called "getting on";
     but the Willows was, nevertheless, not without a youthful element in it. Close upon a dozen
     years ago the two sisters had adopted the orphaned child of a second cousin, whose young widow
     had died in giving birth to a posthumous daughter; and now Elisabeth Farringdon was the light
     of the good ladies' eyes, though they would have considered it harmful to her soul to let her
     have an inkling of this fact.
She was not a pretty little girl, which was a source of much sorrow of heart to her; and she
     was a distinctly clever little girl, of which she was utterly
     unconscious, it being an integral part of Miss Farringdon's system of education to
     imbue the young with an overpowering sense of their own inferiority and unworthiness. During
     the first decade of her existence Elisabeth used frequently and earnestly to pray that her hair
     might become golden and her eyes brown; but as on this score the heavens remained as brass, and
     her hair continued dark brown and her eyes blue-gray, she changed her tactics, and confined her
     heroine-worship to ladies of this particular style of colouring; which showed that, even at the
     age of ten, Elisabeth had her full share of adaptability.
One day, when walking with Miss Farringdon to chapel, Elisabeth exclaimed, à propos
     of nothing but her own meditations, "Oh! Cousin Maria, I do wish I was pretty!"
Most people would have been too much afraid of the lady of the Willows to express so
     frivolous a desire in her august hearing; but Elisabeth was never afraid of anybody, and that,
     perhaps, was one of the reasons why her severe kinswoman loved her so well.
"That is a vain wish, my child. Favour is deceitful and beauty is vain; and the Lord looketh
     on the heart and not on the outward appearance."
"But I wasn't thinking of the Lord," replied Elisabeth: "I was thinking of other people; and
     they love you much more if you are pretty than if you aren't."
"That is not so," said Miss Farringdon—and she believed she was speaking the truth; "if you
     serve God and do your duty to your neighbour, you will find plenty of people ready to love you;
     and especially if you carry yourself well and never stoop." Like many another elect lady,
     Cousin Maria regarded beauty of face as a vanity, but beauty of figure as a
      virtue; and to this doctrine Elisabeth owed the fact that her back always sloped in
     the opposite direction to the backs of the majority of people.
But it would have surprised Miss Farringdon to learn how little real effect her strict
     Methodist training had upon Elisabeth; fortunately, however, few elder people ever do learn how
     little effect their training has upon the young committed to their charge; if it were so, life
     would be too hard for the generation that has passed the hill-top. Elisabeth's was one of those
     happy, pantheistic natures that possess the gift of finding God everywhere and in everything.
     She early caught the Methodist habit of self-analysis and introspection, but in her it did not
     develop—as it does in more naturally religious souls—into an almost morbid conscientiousness
     and self-depreciation; she merely found an artistic and intellectual pleasure in taking the
     machinery of her soul to pieces and seeing how it worked.
In those days—and, in fact, in all succeeding ones—Elisabeth lived in a world of imagination.
     There was not a nook in the garden of the Willows which was not peopled by creatures of her
     fancy. At this particular time she was greatly fascinated by the subject of heathen mythology,
     as set forth in Mangnall's Questions, and had devoted herself to the service of Pallas Athene,
     having learned that that goddess was (like herself) not surpassingly beautiful, and was,
     moreover, handicapped by the possession of gray eyes. Miss Farringdon would have been horrified
     had she known that a portion of the wood was set apart by Elisabeth as "Athene's Grove," and
     that the contents of the waste-paper basket were daily begged from the servants by the devotee,
     and offered up, by the aid of real matches, on the shrine of the goddess.
     
"Have you noticed, sister," Miss Anne remarked on one occasion, "how much more thoughtful
     dear Elisabeth is growing?" Miss Anne's life was one long advertisement of other people's
     virtues. "She used to be somewhat careless in letting the fires go out, and so giving the
     servants the trouble to relight them; but now she is always going round the rooms to see if
     more coal is required, without my ever having to remind her."
"It is so, and I rejoice. Carelessness in domestic matters is a grave fault in a young girl,
     and I am pleased that Elisabeth has outgrown her habit of wool-gathering, and of letting the
     fire go out under her very nose without noticing it. It is a source of thanksgiving to me that
     the child is so much more thoughtful and considerate in this matter than she used to be."
Miss Farringdon's thanksgiving, however, would have been less fervent had she known that, for
     the time being, her protégée had assumed the rôle of a Vestal virgin, and that
     Elisabeth's care of the fires that winter was not fulfilment of a duty but part of a game.
     This, however, was Elisabeth's way; she frequently received credit for performing a duty when
     she was really only taking part in a performance; which merely meant that she possessed the
     artist's power of looking at duty through the haze of idealism, and of seeing that, although it
     was good, it might also be made picturesque. Elisabeth was well versed in The Pilgrim's
     Progress and The Fairchild Family. The spiritual vicissitudes of Lucy, Emily, and Henry
     Fairchild were to her a drama of never-failing interest; while each besetment of the Crosbie
     household—which was as carefully preserved for its particular owner as if sin were a species of
     ground game—never
      failed to thrill her with enjoyable disgust. She knew a great portion of the
     Methodist hymn-book by heart, and pondered long over the interesting preface to that work,
     wondering much what "doggerel" and "botches" could be—she inclined to the supposition that the
     former were animals and the latter were diseases; but even her vivid imagination failed to form
     a satisfactory representation of such queer kittle-cattle as "feeble expletives." Every Sunday
     she gloated over the frontispiece of John Wesley, in his gown and bands and white ringlets,
     feeling that, though poor as a picture, it was very superior to the letterpress; the worst
     illustrations being better than the best poetry, as everybody under thirteen must know. But
     Elisabeth's library was not confined to the volumes above mentioned; she regularly perused with
     interest two little periodicals, called respectively Early Days and The Juvenile Offering. The
     former treated of youthful saints at home; and its white paper cover was adorned by the picture
     of a shepherd, comfortably if peculiarly attired in a frock coat and top hat—presumably to
     portray that it was Sunday. The latter magazine devoted itself to histories dealing with
     youthful saints abroad; and its cover was decorated with a representation of young black
     persons apparently engaged in some religious exercise. In this picture the frock coats and top
     hats were conspicuous by their absence.
There were two pictures in the breakfast-room at the Willows which occupied an important
     place in Elisabeth's childish imaginings. The first hung over the mantelpiece, and was called
     The Centenary Meeting. It represented a chapel full of men in suffocating cravats, turning
     their backs upon the platform and looking at the public instead—a more effective if
      less realistic attitude than the ordinary one of sitting the right way about;
     because—as Elisabeth reasoned, and reasoned rightly—if these gentlemen had not happened to be
     behind before when their portraits were taken, nobody would ever have known whose portraits
     they were. It was a source of great family pride to her that her grandfather appeared in this
     galaxy of Methodist worth; but the hero of the piece, in her eyes, was one gentleman who had
     managed to swarm up a pillar and there screw himself "to the sticking-place"; and how he had
     done it Elisabeth never could conceive.
The second picture hung over the door, and was a counterfeit presentment of John Wesley's
     escape from the burning rectory at Epworth. In those days Elisabeth was so small and the
     picture hung so high that she could not see it very distinctly; but it appeared to her that the
     boy Wesley (whom she confused in her own mind with the infant Samuel) was flying out of an
     attic window by means of flowing white wings, while a horse was suspended in mid-air ready to
     carry him straight to heaven.
Every Sunday she accompanied her cousins to East Lane Chapel, at the other end of Sedgehill,
     and here she saw strange visions and dreamed strange dreams. The distinguishing feature of this
     sanctuary was a sort of reredos in oils, in memory of a dead and gone Farringdon, which
     depicted a gigantic urn, surrounded by a forest of cypress, through the shades whereof flitted
     "young-eyed cherubims" with dirty wings and bilious complexions, these last mentioned blemishes
     being, it is but fair to add, the fault of the atmosphere and not of the artist. For years
     Elisabeth firmly believed that this altar-piece was a trustworthy representation of heaven; and
     she felt, therefore,
      a pleasant, proprietary interest in it, as the view of an estate to which she
     would one day succeed.
There was also a stained-glass window in East Lane Chapel, given by the widow of a leading
     official. The baptismal name of the deceased had been Jacob; and the window showed forth
     Jacob's Dream, as a delicate compliment to the departed. Elisabeth delighted in this window, it
     was so realistic. The patriarch lay asleep, with his head on a little white tombstone at the
     foot of a solid oak staircase, which was covered with a red carpet neatly fastened down by
     brass rods; while up and down this staircase strolled fair-haired angels in long white
     nightgowns and purple wings.
Not of course then, but in after years, Elisabeth learned to understand that this window was
     a type and an explanation of the power of early Methodism, the strength whereof lay in its
     marvellous capacity of adapting religion to the needs and use of everyday life, and of bringing
     the infinite into the region of the homely and commonplace. We, with our added culture and our
     maturer artistic perceptions, may smile at a Jacob's Ladder formed according to the domestic
     architecture of the first half of the nineteenth century; but the people to whom the other
     world was so near and so real that they perceived nothing incongruous in an ordinary
     stair-carpet which was being trodden by the feet of angels, had grasped a truth which on one
     side touched the divine, even though on the other it came perilously near to the grotesque. And
     He, Who taught them as by parables, never misunderstood—as did certain of His followers—their
     reverent irreverence; but, understanding it, saw that it was good.
The great day in East Lane Chapel was the Sunday
     School anniversary; and in Elisabeth's childish eyes this was a feast compared with
     which Christmas and Easter sank to the level of black-letter days. On these festivals the
     Sunday School scholars sat all together in those parts of the gallery adjacent to the organ,
     the girls wearing white frocks and blue neckerchiefs, and the boys black suits and blue ties.
     The pews were strewn with white hymn-sheets, which lay all over the chapel like snow in Salmon,
     and which contained special spiritual songs more stirring in their character than the contents
     of the Hymn-book; these hymns the Sunday School children sang by themselves, while the
     congregation sat swaying to and fro to the tune. And Elisabeth's soul was uplifted within her
     as she listened to the children's voices; for she felt that mystical hush which—let us
     hope—comes to us all at some time or other, when we hide our faces in our mantles and feel that
     a Presence is passing by, and is passing by so near to us that we have only to stretch out our
     hands in order to touch it. At sundry times and in divers manners does that wonderful sense of
     a Personal Touch come to men and to women. It may be in a wayside Bethel, it may be in one of
     the fairest fanes of Christendom, or it may be not in any temple made with hands: according to
     the separate natures which God has given to us, so must we choose the separate ways that will
     lead us to Him; and as long as there are different natures there must be various ways. Then let
     each of us take the path at the end whereof we see Him standing, always remembering that
     wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein; and never forgetting that—come whence and
     how they may—whosoever shall touch but the hem of His garment shall be made perfectly whole.
     
</div></body></text></TEI>