<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Visits Of Elizabeth, by Elinor Glyn.</title><author>Glyn, Elinor (1864-1943).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
HAZELDENE COURT
Hazeldene Court,

Tuesday, 9th August.

The Horse Show

Dearest Mamma,—There is a huge party here for the Horse Show, and I daresay I shall enjoy
     myself. We had no sooner got into the station at Paddington than in the distance I caught sight
     of Lord Valmond. I pretended not to see him, and got behind a barrow of trunks, and then
     slipped into the carriage and made Agnès sit by the door. We saw him walking up and down, and,
     just before the train started, he came and got into our carriage. He seemed awfully surprised
     to see me, said he had not an idea he should meet me, and apologised for disturbing me, but he
     said all the other carriages were full. He seemed so uppish and unconcerned that I felt obliged
     to ask him how he enjoyed his dinner with Aunt Maria on Saturday. He said he had enjoyed it
     awfully, and that Aunt Maria was a charming hostess. He asked me if I was going far down the
     line, or only just on the river. I said not very far. I tried to be as stiff as possible and
     not speak, and I did not tell him where I was going, but, do you know, Mamma, there is no
     snubbing him. He said at once that he was going to Hazeldene Court, to stay with his cousins
     the Westaways. I said, "Indeed!" and he said, "Yes, aren't they cousins of yours too?" and when
     I said "Yes," he said he felt sure we were related, and mightn't he call me Elizabeth!!! I just
     told him I thought him the rudest, most detestable man I had ever met; and if he spoke to me
     again at all, I should ask the guard to find me another carriage.

Lord Valmond Presumes

He was awfully surprised, and said he had not meant to be the least rude; he thought it was
     the custom for cousins to call each other by their Christian names, and his name was
     Harry. (Just as if I did not know that, after hearing Mrs. Smith calling him every few
     minutes!) I said in a freezing tone we were not related in any way, and I wished to read the
     paper, upon which he produced every imaginable kind, lots of ladies' papers that he could not
     possibly have wanted for himself. I don't know who he expected to meet. However, I would not
     have any of them, but looked at a Punch I had bought myself. You know that
     uncomfortable feeling one has when some one is staring at one—it makes one obliged to look
     up—so after a while our eyes met over the Punch, and he smiled, and his teeth are so
     white. All he said was, "I was thinking of the Clarkes and Clarks." And in spite of my being
     indignant with him I could not help laughing, when I remembered about them, and then it was
     hard to be very stiff again at once.

The Offending Dimple

Just about this time Agnès went to sleep in the other corner, and the moment Lord Valmond saw
     she was really off, he bent forward and said in such a humble voice, that he was sorry he had
     offended me at Nazeby; he had yielded to a sudden temptation, and he could only ask me to
     forgive him. He had quite mistaken my character he said, he now saw I was a serious person, but
     he had been deceived by the dimple in my left cheek. (Now isn't it provoking, Mamma, to have a
     dimple like that, that gives people the impression they may treat you with want of respect?) I
     said I did not believe a word of it, and, as we were only the merest acquaintances, it did not
     matter whether I forgave him or not, and I hoped he would not mention the subject again. He
     then asked me if I was going to stop at Hazeldene until Saturday. So you see, Mamma, he must
     have known I was going there all along; aren't men odd? You can't trust them one minute not to
     be deceiving you, only I think on the whole I prefer them to women, they can't copy your
     clothes at all events. After that he seemed to think we had quite made everything up, and went
     on talking in the friendliest way, but I would not thaw; he shall not have the chance
     of blaming my dimple again for any of his misconduct! At last I said I hated talking in the
     train, and pretended to go to sleep. But I could not get really off, because every time I
     opened my eyes just to see where we were, I found him looking at me. A huge omnibus was waiting
     for us when we arrived, and several more guests had come by the same train and we all drove to
     the house together. They were having tea on the croquet lawn—Lady Westaway and some other
     people, and the eldest son's wife. You remember what a fuss there was when he married, how Lady
     Westaway had hysterics for three days. Well, she looks as if she could have them again any
     moment.

An Attractive Woman

Mrs. Westaway is awfully pretty. She was lying in a swing chair, showing lots of petticoat
     and ankle. The ankle isn't bad, but the petticoat had common lace on it. She has huge turquoise
     earrings, and very stick-out hair arranged to look untidy with tongs. She smiles all the time,
     and wears lots of different colours. She calls every one by their Christian name, and always
     catches hold of the men's coats, or fixes their buttonholes or ties, or holds their arms and
     whispers: and every one is in love with her, and she has the greatest success. So I can't
     think, Mamma, why you have always told me never to do any of these things, when you want me to
     be a success so much. Her voice is dreadfully shrill, and such an odd pronunciation, but no one
     seems to mind that. I rather like her, she is so jolly but some of the women of the party won't
     speak to her, except to say disagreeable things. Jane Roose is here, she has been here since
     she left Nazeby (Violet is at the sea), and she came up to my room as we were going to dress,
     and I have only just got rid of her. She told me Mrs. Westaway was a "dreadful creature," and
     that no one would know her, if it was not for her mother-in-law receiving her, so they can't
     help it. And she could not understand what the men saw to admire in a low person like that. But
     I can see very well, Mamma, she is as pretty as can be, and probably the men don't notice about
     the lace being common, and all the colours, and those things. I must go down to dinner now, so
     good-bye, dear Mamma.—Your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.
Hazeldene Court,

Thursday, 11th August.

Lady Bobby's Diversions

Dearest Mamma,—I shall be home with you almost as soon as you get this. But I must tell you
     about these last two days. The man I went in to dinner with the first night was so
     nice-looking, only he did not seem as if he could collect his thoughts enough to finish his
     sentences, and it left them sounding so silly sometimes, but I found out before we had begun
     the entrées that it was because Mrs. Westaway was sitting opposite, and he was gazing at her.
     She looked lovely, but not like any one I have seen yet since I stayed out. She had a diamond
     collar and two ropes of pearls (Jane Roose said they were imitation), and her arms quite bare
     and very white, but her skin must come off, because I could see a patch of white on a footman's
     coat where she accidentally touched when helping herself to potatoes. She had a huge tulle bow
     in her hair, and her earrings were as big as shillings. Lady Bobby Pomeroy said afterwards in
     the drawing-room to Jane Roose that she should not take any more of her meals downstairs with
     this "creature;" and she would not have come only that Bobby insisted, as he was showing some
     horses, and it is convenient. And so, do you know, Mamma, Lady Bobby has never come out of her
     room since, except just to go to the Horse Show, which she drove to with Mrs. Mannering in a
     hired fly. I don't call it very polite to the hostess, do you? This afternoon she amused
     herself from her bedroom window by shooting at rabbits just beyond the wire fence of the lawn
     with a rook rifle; she did not hit any rabbits, but she got a gardener in the leg, and the man
     was very angry, and bled a great deal, and had to be taken away, and I think it was very
     careless of her, don't you?

Two is Company

Lord Valmond was on his way to the window seat where Jane Roose and I were sitting the first
     night after dinner, but Mrs. Westaway caught hold of her husband's coat-tails as he passed and
     said quite loud, "Duckie, you must bring Lord Valmond and introduce him to me, we haven't met
     yet, and I want to know all your friends." So Billy Westaway, who is as obedient as a spaniel,
     secured Lord Valmond, and presently we saw them comfortably tucked into a small settee
     together, and there they stayed all the evening. She kept licking her lips as if he was
     something good to eat, and the next morning she fixed a rose in his buttonhole at breakfast and
     called him "Cousin Val," and by lunch time it was plain "Val," and now it is "Harry." I do call
     it bad taste, don't you, Mamma? and she isn't half so pretty in broad daylight, and I don't
     like her at all now. Only I can't help laughing at Lady Westaway's face when "Phyllis" (that is
     Mrs. Westaway's name) says anything especially vulgar; Lady Westaways shudders, and takes a
     huge sniff at her smelling salts. She keeps them always with her in a long gold-topped bottle,
     and she has to use them almost every few minutes when Mrs. Westaway is in the room.
The Horse Show was rather nice; it is held in the park fairly close, and most of us strolled
     there in the morning before lunch to see the judging. Lord Valmond joined us, I was walking
     with Lord George Lane (you remember he was one of the Eleven at Nazeby). I was in a very good
     temper, Mamma, and we had been laughing at everything we said. He is quite a nice idiot, but,
     when Lord Valmond came, of course I talked as stiffly as possibly, and presently Lord George
     told him that he was singularly backward in copybook maxims, and that there was one he ought to
     write out and commit to memory, and it began with "Two's Company," upon which Lord Valmond
     stalked on in a rage.
The seats at the show were very hard boards, and the sun made one awfully drowsy; but about
     half-an-hour before lunch Lord Valmond came up again, and asked me if I should not like to go
     for a turn. I thought I had better, so as not to get cramp. He said he had been afraid he would
     never get the chance of speaking to me, I was always so surrounded. I told him I had only come
     now because of the cramp. I am quite determined, Mamma, not to unbend to him at all. I was not
     once agreeable, or anything but stiff and snubbing, and I am sure he has never been treated
     like that before, but it is awfully hard work keeping it up all the time, and when we got in to
     lunch I was quite tired.

On the Lake

There were numbers of people at the show in the afternoon, and all in their best clothes.
     Lady Grace Fenton was showing two of her hunters, and she kept shouting to the grooms, and I
     did not think it was very attractive behaviour. She takes such strides you would think her
     muslin dress would split. I don't know why it is that so many people in the country are ugly
     and weather-beaten, and all their clothes hanging wrong.
Except the house party here, and a few from other big places, there was not a pretty person
     to be seen. We had a special reserved tent for tea, and Mrs. Westaway seemed to have every man
     in the place round her, and I heard one man come up and say, "Well, Phyllis, this is a joke to
     find you in this respectable hole; how do you like solid matrimony, old girl?" and I do think
     that sounded familiar and rude, don't you, Mamma? but Mrs. Westaway wasn't a bit angry. She
     calls Billy "Duckie," and continually pats and caresses him; he does look such a fool, and I
     should hate to be fingered like that if I were a man, one must feel like a bunch of grapes with
     the bloom being rubbed off. Mrs. Westaway kept Lord Valmond with her all the rest of the time
     at the show, and then took him on the lake while we played croquet.
Lady Bobby went straight to her room and sat by the window, and every now and then shouted
     advice to Lord George who was playing with me. When we had finished, Lady Westaway took me to
     see the conservatories, and there we were joined by old Colonel Blake and Lord Valmond, I don't
     know how he had torn himself away from Mrs. Westaway! Jane Roose says Mrs. Smith would be mad
     if she was here. He asked me why I had walked on ahead so fast on the way back from the Show as
     he wanted me to go on the lake with him instead of Mrs. Westaway. When he had suggested going
     on it he had looked at me, but I would take no notice, and so he was obliged to go with Mrs.
     Westaway when she offered to come, and I was very unkind and disagreeable. I just said if he
     found me so, he need not speak to me at all, I did not care. We looked at one another like two
     wild cats for a moment. I am sure he wanted to slap me, and I should like to have scratched
     him, and then Lady Westaway diverted the conversation by asking me if I thought I should enjoy
     my French visit (how every one knows one's affairs!). I said I hoped I should, and I was
     starting next week. Lord Valmond at once pricked up his ears, and said he would be running over
     to Paris about then, as he was not going to Scotland till September, and he hoped I would let
     him look after me on the way. I said I did not know which day I was going, probably Wednesday,
     so as I am starting on Monday, Mamma, there will be no chance of his coming with me, which
     would annoy you very much I am sure. To-day we have done nothing but loll about and play
     croquet. Lady Bobby and the men and some other women went to the Show again in the morning, but
     I was having a match with Jane Roose, and so we did not bother to go.

Paul and Virginia

This afternoon when Lady Bobby began her rabbit shooting it seemed so dangerous on the
     croquet lawn, especially after she hit the gardener, that we all went on the lake in the
     launch. We landed on the island, and somehow or other Lord Valmond and I got left alone in the
     Belvedere looking at the view. The others went off without us, which made me furious, as I am
     sure he did it on purpose. But when I accused him of it, he said such a thing would never have
     entered his head. He had a nasty smile all the time in the corner of his eye, and did not take
     the least pains about trying to undo the other little boat which we found at last, although I
     kept telling him we should be late for dinner. He said he wished we had not to go back at all,
     that he thought we should be very happy together on this little island like Paul and Virginia.
     I can't tell you, Mamma, what a temper I was in.

The Hardships of a Marquis

I wish I had never met him—or that he had not been rude at Nazeby—it is so difficult
     to behave with dignity when a person has a nice voice and makes you laugh, although you are
     awfully cross with him inside. Then I have to be thinking all the time about my dimple not to
     let it come out, as that is what caused his rudeness, and with one thing and another it upsets
     me so, that my cheeks are always burning when I am with him, and I feel as if I should like to
     box his ears or cry; and I hope after to-morrow I shall never see him again. He rowed so slowly
     when we did get into the boat that I offered to do it, but he would not let me. I would not
     talk to him at all. When we got to the landing I jumped out so that he should not help me, and
     gave my head a crack against the pole in the boat house. I fancied I heard him saying,
     "Darling! have you hurt yourself? What a brute I am to tease you!" but I did not wait for any
     more. I ran to the house as fast as I could, and as he had to tie up the boat, I was just
     getting into the hall when he caught me up. My head hurt dreadfully, and I was so tired and
     cross, and everything, that the tears would come into my eyes. I did not want him to see, but I
     am afraid he did, so before he could speak I rushed on again and got safely to my room. I am
     sure it is very rude to call people "darling" without their leave, isn't it, Mamma?
I went in to dinner with a sporting curate who lives near, and he kept making his bread into
     crumbs on the cloth and then sweeping them up with his knife into a heap, between every course.
     What strange habits people have! After dinner Mrs. Westaway took Lord Valmond and sat in the
     window seat, and when he did get away, and was coming over to me, I said my head was aching
     from the knock I gave it, and came up to bed, and as he has to catch an early train in the
     morning I shan't come down until he has gone. I don't want to see him any more, it is too
     fatiguing quarrelling all the time, and one could not forgive him and be friends I suppose
     after such behaviour as his at Nazeby—could one, Mamma?
Now good-night; I am sleepy.—Your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.

P.S.—I should hate to be a marquis always having to take the hostess in to dinner no
     matter how old and ugly she is, just because a duke isn't present.
</div></body></text></TEI>