<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Hosts of the Lord</title><author>Steel, Flora Annie (1847-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
THE "DEE-PUK-RÂG"
"You are tired to death as it is--why should you fuss any more over a pack--"
"Ssh! sir; don't talk rubbish. I am all right; and Eugene is so anxious everything should be
     a success that I must. Besides I--I like it."
Mrs. Walsall Smith sent the hostess' gathering smile round her long luncheon table, and rose.
     So did Vincent Dering, who had sat at her right hand--a position due to his rank as commandant
     of Eshwara--and, as he did, he drew his chair aside to let the girl on his left pass, with his
     usual somewhat voyant courtesy, though it was only Laila Bonaventura. He had met her
     several times during the past few days, and the effect which her singing had made on him had
     vanished before her general failure to interest him in the least. And to-day she actually wore
     a blue sash! In addition she had filled up the time between her monosyllables in methodically
     crumbling her bread and ranging the results in a pattern, until the inanity of it had got on
     his nerves, and he had felt inclined to beg her to desist.
And yet, as in passing her black eyes looked into his with one curious yet comprehensive
     flash, a memory of the extreme regularity of the curves and lines which had annoyed him, made
     him--quite irrelevantly--wonder hastily if he could have said anything to Muriel which--
He broke off in his own thought impatiently, and gave an apologetic glance after Mrs. Walsall
     Smith's fragile figure. There never was anything, never! Never a word said, never a deed done,
     which all the world--even Eugene Smith himself--might not hear and know. Vincent Dering felt a
     pulse of sheer virtue as he looked down the long table at his host, with the vague irritation
     which the possessors of women often arouse in those who are not their possessors. For Muriel
     Smith's half-playful, half-wistful rejection of sympathy had held that faint hint of dutiful
     martyrdom which seems so purely angelic to selfish man--unless he happens to be the wretch who
     inflicts it!
Curious, he thought; Eugene wasn't much of a gentleman, but he wasn't a bad sort, and he was
     fond of his wife, in a way. Yet he was blind to the fact that Muriel was not fit to go
     trapesing about his blessed old canal works with the pack of padrés and people he had
     got together to do honour to his skill. She would do it, of course, and get through with it,
     too! Here he helped himself to a glass of sherry, and felt incoherently that she was the
     dearest and best woman in the world,--the one woman in the world, so far as he was
     concerned.
As he sat between those two empty chairs where those two women, so absolutely unlike, had
     fenced him in on either side, a faint wonder tinged his virtue in comparing the last three
     years with the time before it.
If anyone had told him, then, that he would write every day to a woman and expect her to
     write to him without a word or a deed--
"Please, Dering-darlin'," said an imperious small voice, "mum wants 'oo, 'tos pup'll go off,
     she says, wis' all a gemplemen, an' she wants 'oo to go off wis' a ladies!"
"All right, little 'un," he laughed gladly, finishing his sherry at a gulp, and, ere catching
     the little mite in his arms, giving himself that smartening pull together which was so
     characteristic of the man.
He looked very handsome, very happy, as he came up, with Gladys shaking her curls at him in
     outrageous flirtation.
"How kind!" said Muriel. "I don't know what I should do without you."
That was all; but it sent him off in absolute content to tackle the stoutest lady in the
     room.
"If you make the move, Mrs. Campbell," he said diplomatically, "everyone will
     follow, and I know Mrs. Smith is anxious we should start, as it will take some time to go
     round."
"Ay! that it will!" assented the good lady in a mournful Scotch accent. "'Deed if it were not
     for Dr. James--" she glanced fearfully at a tall man in a black frock coat--a man whose
     patriarchal beard had once been red and was now the colour of a carpet whisk--who was
     buttonholing Father Ninian; the latter, with his straight slenderness, looking almost youthful
     beside the other's burly bulk.
"I wouldn't go if I didn't want to," put in a sharp-featured lady who belonged to another
     black frock coat--a small one. "You spoil the doctor, Mrs. Campbell. As I tell my
     husband, I yield to him in spiritual matters--the mission, you know, and all that; but when it
     comes to realities--the housekeeping, and what we are to eat, and do, and that sort of
     thing--that is my province."
Mrs. Campbell turned her fat good-natured face on her neighbour's placidly. "Ay, my dear; but
     ye didn't promise to be a wife to Dr. James, an' I did. So, Captain Dering, if you can find my
     niece--"
"Miss Shepherd is quite safe, Mrs. Campbell. Carlyon's looking after her," interrupted
     Vincent, feeling another spasm of sheer virtue. He had seen the two sitting together at lunch,
     apparently interested in each other, and he had noticed how Lance, on entering the
     drawing-room, had made his way straight to those coils of red-bronze hair which had a trick of
     being the most conspicuous point in any group of which they formed part. So Lance would enjoy
     himself simply; he would not have to gain pleasure in complex fashion by dragging about a
      posse of uninteresting old ladies, for the sake of a lady who was neither. Vincent's
     face had a bored look as he began his task by piloting his charge into the verandah, and so on
     into the open.
It was hot work crossing the stretch of sand which lay between the bungalow and the red brick
     abutments of the canal head; but once there, with the broad still basin of the united rivers
     before you, a cool breeze blew pleasantly from that blue barrier of hills with the gold-spiked
     temples of Eshwara enamelled against it, and a soft white mist hiding the feet of the
     far-distant snows; so hiding the "Cradle of the Gods! The floods had gone, however, and so had
     the robe of righteousness. The sandbanks lay bare, of the earth, earthy. The logs, too, were no
     longer dipping and dancing in the currents. Some were piled criss-cross on the spit, awaiting
     ransomers, and a few lay like straight shadows, half in, half out of the receding water.
"A log! not a bit of it!" said someone, stooping for a stone. "Look!"
The missile fell far short of the low streak of sand and shadow, but did its work. The shadow
     disappeared, as a bottle-nosed alligator slipped silently into the stream. Most eyes watched
     it, but Lance Carlyon's turned to Erda Shepherd. He had only met her once, casually, when he
     was out fishing on the spit, since the day when Father Ninian had introduced them, and they had
     seen something else in the river that was also not a log.
"Do you remember," he began impulsively, "the first time we met?"
A shadow slipped into her limpid bronze eyes also. "Certainly," she interrupted coldly. "It
     is not so very long ago--is it?"
She had fenced with his assumption of friendliness more than once already; feeling vexed with
     herself, the while, that she should do so. Since what did it matter? However much she might
     regret--and she had regretted with foolish unseen blushes as she had lain awake at night
     wondering what had possessed her--the almost indecent unveiling of realities in that first five
     minutes, she could not undo it. Besides, she had told herself, he had in all probability
     forgotten it in polo, and partridge-shooting, fishing, and such things.
But he had not, apparently; and he parried her fence with a still more friendly laugh.
"I didn't mean that, of course; but we won't talk of it, if you'd rather not. It isn't a very
     Mark Tapleyish subject, is it, for an afternoon party?"
The blush was to be seen this time. "So I have been thinking myself, Mr. Carlyon, ever since
     last Wednesday," she began, still more coldly, "and I am sorry--"
He interrupted her quite cavalierly. "I didn't mean that, either, and you know I didn't.
     However, we'll leave it alone. So you're not coming to the ball! Do you know, I think it's an
     awful pity; I'm sure you'd dance beautifully."
She felt outraged, in a way, and yet she smiled. He seemed so much younger than she was.
     Younger; but stronger and more vital. That calm assertion, too, that she knew she was playing
     feminine tricks with him, had been manly and dignified to quite a crushing degree. She could
     not help being at once meek and indulgent.
"I don't dance, Mr. Carlyon," she said quietly; adding, as a rider and salve to her
     conscience, "I--I think it wrong."
"I thought you might," he returned, evidently pleased at his own acumen, "but I don't see it
     that way. Of course if--if you go in for those ideas, you know, you can make it
     seem--well--awful low; but I--" he paused before even a possible sounding of his own
     trumpet--"you see I think it's awfully jolly; besides, it's such ripping good exercise, and I
     have to be careful, I tell you, not to put on flesh. I ride thirteen-four, as it is." His face
     grew grave over the confession.
"Is that much?" she said, her eyes caught and held by the splendid figure beside her. "You
     are very tall, surely." There was almost a pride in her tone, certainly a tenderness.
He shook his head. "Not so tall as my people are generally. We Carlyons run to size. My
     uncle, Sir Lancelot's, six-three, and his son is six-four; but he's a bit weedy. So when you're
     only six-one and a half you can't afford to wax fat; you've got to keep the body in subjection.
     That's right, isn't it?" His pride in his Scriptural knowledge made it impossible for her to be
     stern, though she felt she ought to be.
"Quite right, Mr. Carlyon," she assented, hurriedly, "but see! the others have gone on, and I
     don't want to miss--She stumbled, in her haste to end the tête-à-tête, on a loose brick, and
     for an instant was over-near the edge of the abutment.
"Take care!" he said, his hand on hers to give support; a cool, strong hand, with an
     insistence in its clasp which seemed to single her out from the world to stand so, hand fast in
     hand. "You were very nearly over that time," he said, smilingly, as he released her. "Now let's
     come on, or, as you say, we shall be too late for the fair. Smith's going to show off his
     electric light in the tents, you know."
Perhaps it was the slip which had made her dizzy, but she walked beside him feeling as if she
     were in a dream. And, in truth, the scene which grew upon them as they went on had a strange
     unearthliness and unreality. She paused, and gave a little gasp of pleasure and surprise. "It
     seems impossible!" she said. "A week ago, when I was here, it was all sand, sand; and
     now--"
Her eyes met the wide, flower-set walks, the stately white palaces of the Vice-regal camp
     with absolute incredulity. "Did you do all this?" she asked, doubtfully. "Why, you've made a
     new world!" She felt inwardly as if he had, somehow, for her.
"Oh! Vincent did a lot of the decorations, you know. He's that sort. We--my fellows, I mean,
     and Dillon's gaol-birds--dug, and did the dirty work. But it looks all right, doesn't it?"
It did, indeed,--absolutely and entirely all right. So white, so straight, so disciplined;
     even to the very twist on the tent ropes.
"That peg's out of line," said Lance, pausing suddenly. "Here, sergeant!"
A following had gathered in their rear, bringing up the little procession of Englishmen and
     women, with a knot of dark faces, and from it a man in dust-coloured drill stepped, and
     saluted.
"Two inches, or, say, an inch and a half." Erda caught so much in the order given as she
     walked on.
Two inches, or, say, an inch and a half! No more than that wrong in this dream city;
     and over yonder? Her eyes travelled past the snowdrift of the camp, rising against the blue
     background of wide water, to Eshwara, rising against its background of blue hill.
"I thought so; a good inch and a half," said Lance exultantly, coming up with measured
     strides. "It makes a lot of difference though."
She looked at him critically. Older by some months than he, full of strong character, almost
     overfull of strong convictions, she was yet--as women must be until experience of work-a-day
     life teaches them, as it has taught men, the value of subordination--curiously undisciplined,
     curiously lawless. And this striving after uniformity impressed her.
"I suppose you learn that sort of thing in the army," she said, with a new respect.
He laughed. "I should think so; buttons and bootlaces all to pattern. It's an awful bore, but
     it keeps things going. Now, here we are! Now, you can see properly."
They stood in the centre of the camp, in front of the huge durbar tent, that
     wandering throne of an empire fixed and immovable as the stars. In front of them, rising out of
     a wilderness of roses, blossoming where nothing but sand had shown since the primeval sea
     receded from the hills, was the flag of that empire, its folds drooping round the mast. And
     beyond it, past the two brass guns pointing down the long vista, was an avenue of palms,
     bordered by green grass and beds of flowers, and intersected by broad paths leading back to the
     solid white squares of the tents. At the farther end, a quarter of a mile or more from the
     flagstaff, a triumphal arch at the entrance showed, until the palm-leaves cut it short, a
     legend:
"WELCOME TO THE LORD----"
and above it, far at the feet of those distant snows, lay that wreath of white mist hiding
     the "Cradle of the Gods."
Erda's eyes travelled to it, and from it to the other vistas, similar yet smaller, stretching
     to the right and left of her. Then to the orderly rows on rows of tents, looking like solid
     blocks of marble behind her. The whole shut in from the world by a high white wall; still,
     silent, empty, waiting for the Hosts of the Lord. A snow-drift facing that mist-drift on the
     hills. And between them? Eshwara, and all that Eshwara held of evil and of good.
The dreaminess left her eyes, startled at a band of dark figures which at this moment
     appeared rounding the corner of a tent--figures in scanty striped clothing with a broad arrow
     on it; figures with shaven, close-capped heads and leg irons clanking, as their bare feet
     threaded through the flowers. And behind them, half-hidden, as ever, under his mushroom of a
     hat, came George Dillon. He had noticed, as he passed with the others, that the roses were
     flagging a bit under the hot sun, and had gone back to summon a fatigue party of his criminals
     to water them.
"Bring another go, mate," he ordered, as the gang, filing past the flagstaff,
     emptied their earthen pots; "then go back to the road. And be quick. There's no time to lose.
     The Lord-sahib comes to-morrow."
They obeyed with grins; and Dr. Dillon, as he paused beside Lance and Erda, looked after them
     approvingly. "They like this better than picking oakum, and I've had to set some of 'em to do
     that, now the digging's done. I shall be glad when this show's over, and we move on."
"Move! where?" asked Erda.
"Where there is work to be done, Miss Shepherd. Satan finds mischief, you know, especially
     with his own hands." He paused and smiled. "They're a queer lot. Do you know some of them are
     in a blind funk because they think a percentage of them have to be sacrificed before the water
     will run." He grew grave again. "Poor devils!" he added, in a softer tone--"as if they hadn't
     paid tribute already. I lost over a hundred last year, what with pneumonia and malaria, but
     they don't seem to count that--that is the will of the gods. But I say, hadn't you better be
     going into the tent if you want to see the light-up? Smith went off to his plant five minutes
     ago with his gang, so it's about time."
It was almost pitch dark in the huge tent, and as they slipped in through the closed
     portieres, Vincent Dering's voice called to them.
"Be quick, please; and, Carlyon, tell them to shut down the outer screens. We want to have a
     real flash-up, and I believe we are all here now."
Whether that was so or not Erda could not tell. The brief ray of light caused by their
     entrance had only shown her Captain Dering's figure beside his hostess, and given her a glimpse
     of Laila Bonaventura's white dress close by. So it was eerie, in a way, to wait in the
     darkness, knowing it to be full of people she knew; yet to have consciousness of nothing save
     their voices, since age, sex, position, even race, were alike awaiting this new light which was
     to make them manifest. Perhaps the eeriness struck her companions also, for the voices came
     clearly; not in a babel, but answering each other in the listening, waiting silence.
"We are all full of sparks, I assure you, Mrs. Campbell."
"I am weel aware o' it, Doctor Dillon; but it's too much like a brand snatched frae the
     burning to my taste; for Doctor James will have it--"
"Undoubtedly, my dear Ann. It appears to me, sir, and I trust it will to you, as a most
     interesting scientific fact, calculated to confound those who scoff at the possibility of
     eternal punishment in a fire that is not quenched--"
"Or to comfort those who believe in a cleansing one--who seek a place in the crown of stars
     about their Mother's head--who feel the flame of immortality." Its faint hesitancy betrayed
     this voice, as the dryness did the next.
"If I've got to generate my own heaven or hell, I prefer to pass; but if one could turn on a
     fifty-candlepower reflecting lamp during a post mortem or a bacillus hunt, it would be
     useful."
"Yes! Fancy being able to get up at night and see, at once, in all corners of the room if
     there were snakes!"
This brought a laugh till a fragile voice said plaintively, "That's just the worst of it.
     When one begins to see things too clearly, they are so apt to be nasty."
"That, my dear Madam, has always appeared to me as an additional argument against those who
     contend that Perfect Wisdom could not wisely have produced so imperfect a being as Man."
"Surely, Dr. Campbell," interrupted a tart voice, "the necessity for something on which to
     exercise our faith proves that; but then I am only a woman. I confine myself to realities."
"Then what a bore it would be if there were no delusions! By Jove! it would be dull. Who is
     it says the soul of man lies in his imagination?" Captain Dering's voice could not be
     mistaken.
"Just so--and nowhere else."
This came in an aside, and was followed in the same tone by the eager, hesitating voice.
     "Scoffer! When you men of Science spend your lives in listening--to the things which cannot be
     heard--looking for the things that cannot be seen-- Ah! doctor!--you can't impose on me. I know
     you--I have seen you."
The very darkness seemed abashed, and there was silence; till a new voice, young,
     full-throated, broke it. "But how can you tell if things are nasty till you have seen
     them--they may be nice. Ah-h-h!"
It had come like a creation, flooding all things with irresistible light.
A sort of sigh made itself heard; a sigh of vague relief. "By Jove!" said Captain Dering, "it
     will make a difference to the durbar. As a rule you can't see the diamonds and jewels;
     and they are half the show."
Palpably there could be no fear of that. To the uttermost corner of the vast tent, the
     pattern of its lining of shawls was visible; each boss on the parcel-gilt poles glittered and
     shone; the very legend round the arms of England above the Vice-regal chair stood out clear
      "Dieu et mon droit." And the expression on the two groups of dark faces, the one
     which had come by invitation to see, the other which had crept in at the further end, could not
     be mistaken. In the one, indifference struggled with curiosity; in the other assent was mingled
     with awe.
"What are they saying?" asked Lance, who, having come late, stood close to the latter group.
     "Something about Dee-puk-râg. What's that?"
Erda shook her head. "Father Ninian will know--he knows all these things--that is why they
     call him Pidar Narâyan, and let him do anything. Sometimes I wonder if it isn't the best way."
     The last, spoken to herself, was interrupted by Father Ninian's echo.
"The Dee-puk-râg! Why, yes--of course!" He turned to the dark faces in sheer
     delight. "Yea! brothers!" he said in Hindustani, "ye are right! It is the
     Dee-puk-râg--the sign of kingship. Have I not told ye always that the Lord is with
     us--and with you?" Then he turned back to his other hearers: "It means the Song of Light--a
     charm--a spell which the great men of old knew. Is it not so, Ramanund?"
A half-reluctant voice from the invited replied, "The ignorant say so, sir."
A faintly sarcastic smile came to the fine old face. "And they believe its possession marks
     the born ruler of men--the God-sent guide; since, when it is sung, the light comes from the
     stars to help the world on its way--to dispel the darkness! Ah-h-h!"
It had gone! and in the black night which settled blankly on speaker and audience, a faint,
     far cry came from outside. More than one woman's voice echoed it with a little startled gasp of
     suspense.
"It is all right!" called Vincent Dering, "the thing is always popping in and out--I've seen
     it at Euston--it will come back directly." And then, in response to something he alone had
     heard, he whispered, "Don't be alarmed; Eugene will set it right in a moment--really--"
As he bent his head a scent of violets--the scent she always used--assailed him; and that
     half-heard appeal--"Oh, what is it, Vincent?" seemed still in his ears. Even in the darkness he
     knew she must be close to him. He felt the soft ruffle of the lace about her hand upon his
     wrist. It trembled, surely. Did it? Or was it only his own bounding pulse. A sudden imperious
     desire to know--to be certain--swept through him.
Then, with a sort of suffocating rush to heart and brain, came the knowledge that his clasp
     was answered by that small hand--so small, so clinging, so trustful--so dear--so absolutely
     dear--so dear!--so very dear!!
As he stood in the darkness, he knew that every mooring was gone, knew that this--this
     thing--would change--must change--the whole position. It was a light, indeed; a light showing
     the way--a different way! A sort of fierce exultation took possession of him. He knew, now,
     that he had been dreaming till then; that he had been blind.
"Ah! what a relief! That dreadful darkness was getting on my nerves," said a calm voice
     coming to him from out of the flood of white light which seemed to have rent their hands
     asunder.
Their hands--when she stood yonder? He turned, bewildered, to find a pair of grave black eyes
     fixed critically on him.
"I--I--he began.
"It doesn't matter," said Laila Bonaventura, with stolid indifference. "You thought it was
     her hand, of course. I quite understand."
Did she? Did--could--anyone? even he himself?
God! How content--how happy he had been--how certain--
"Dillon! Dillon! For God's sake, where's Dillon?" came an excited voice, as Eugene Smith
     burst into the tent, bringing the afternoon sunshine to war with that unearthly light. "Come
     along, man! There's been an accident in the workshop! I warned them not to touch--one--a mere
     boy--did. Got startled, I suppose, and fell over--onto the circular saw--it was going. His
     leg--I've tried a tourniquet, but I can't stop--"
The remainder was inaudible; the caller and the called, followed by Vincent, glad of any
     interruption to the intolerableness of his confusion, were already running as for dear life
     down the palm-set avenue towards the canal workshop outside the walls.
That it was for death, however, not life, Dr. Dillon saw at a glance; though, without a
     pause, he knelt down in the fateful, irresistible tide of life blood which was ebbing and
     flowing with such awful insistency, and set his teeth in fight.
Yet once he gave an upward glance to the long, low roof so full of driving bands and wheels
     and levers, so full of men's power, so empty of men's passion; and then a straight one to the
     circle of ignorant, awe-stricken, dark faces closing in round him. And as he did so, he
     muttered to himself:--
"I wouldn't have had this happen for a thousand pounds--and a high-caste man, too!"
Undoubtedly; the sacred thread showed on the shoulder under the broad arrow--for the
     twice-born are twice-born even in gaol.
"Lay him on Mother Earth to die, ye of his caste!" said a voice from behind. It was Father
     Ninian's. His haste had driven the colour from his face; he stood breathless, yet calm, his
     right hand raised. In the awestricken circle none stirred; there was no sacred thread upon
     their shoulders.
"Give me a hand, please, Dr. Dillon," said the old man quietly; "he will not die easy there."
     So, between them, they shifted the slight figure from the wooden platform on which it had
     fallen, to the ground all sodden and stained with that tide of blood. A faint content seemed to
     come to the half-conscious face; the head nestled itself into the soft earth as if to rest.
The circle of dark and white faces fell back alike, leaving the doctor and the priest alone
     with death,--the doctor with both hands detaining that ebbing tide of life, the priest with the
      viaticum of another faith on his lips speeding it on its way.
"Lo!" whispered some of the circle. "Hark to his 'Ram Ram!' He knows--Pidar Narâyan
     knows."
</div></body></text></TEI>