<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Hosts of the Lord</title><author>Steel, Flora Annie (1847-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
JULIET
The copper-coloured glow, into which weather-wise Am-ma had looked, distrustfully, as it
     domed the little valley set in its rim of hills, had replaced that of sunset in Eshwara also,
     and Pidar Narâyan's eyes, weather-wise as the fisherman's, looked at it as doubtfully, as he
     walked home with Lance and Vincent Dering when the long strain at the Pool of Immortality was
     over.
"If it were not so early in the year, I should predict a dust-storm--a real electrical
     dust-storm," he said.
Lance, whose hands were full of cut-paper Gods--for in obedience to a sudden impulse, he had
     stopped on his way through the crowd to buy up the old Brahmin's whole stock in trade, and give
     him an extra eight annas to go away and not drum any more--looked up also, and filled his broad
     chest with a great breath. "Perhaps that is it. I've felt choking all day--horrid!"
Vincent Dering laughed. "I don't choke--I tingle; and it is rather jolly. Yes, sir; there is
     a lot of electricity in the air, and I shouldn't wonder if we had a regular black snorter. Glad
     it didn't come in the middle of the miracle 'biz', for, as a general smasher-up of
     ordinary experiences, commend me to a real electrical dust-storm! It seems to attract the
     earth, earthy, in everything. In fact, if there is such a thing as the Devil, and he ever gets
     the upper hand, it is then--"
Father Ninian turned to him quickly, and then to the crowd,-through which they were still
     cleaving that curiously acquiescent way which white faces still cleave through dark ones--"Then
     I trust, my son," he said gently, "that for your sake and theirs the storm may not
     come."
"Or that there isn't a Satanic majesty!" retorted Captain Dering, cynically. "That, sir, is
     the easiest way out of the difficulty."
Lance had looked round on the crowd also. "Well! if there is," he said, "and I had to paint
     him, I'd take that man's face as my model for Lucifer." He pointed to a gosain who was
     forming the centre of a group of gossipers round a syrup-seller's shop, and added--for he knew
     his Milton as well as his Shakespeare--"The superior fiend who gives not Heav'n for
      lost!"
"Looks a bad lot, I admit," remarked Vincent, carelessly. "Have an idea I've seen him before;
     in gaol, I believe. Yes! I'm sure of it. He is the fellow Dillon told me was going to get his
     ticket-of-leave for good conduct. He looks scoundrel enough for that! But really, sir--" he
     turned to Father Ninian again--"I think we may count on their behaviour now." He indicated the
     crowd. "If there was going to be a row it would have come off before this; now they will settle
     down, you'll see, and go on to the next camping-ground to-morrow morning as if nothing had gone
     wrong. They are such creatures of habit; you could see that from their sticking on in
     expectation of that footling old miracle all day!"
Father Ninian, in that curiously irrelevant way he had, put on the gold pince-nez
     which always dangled over his black soutane, and looked round him again. "They will settle
     down," he said quietly, "if nothing new crops up to give them a lead into new ways. That is
     always the danger; and a very small thing does it, sometimes, in India."
They had reached the courtyard which lay between the palace and the Fort, and with a wave of
     his hand in farewell, he passed along the wall to the former, while the others, striking across
     the raised union-jack of paths, made for the latter. The yard was crammed with pilgrims on
     their way to bathe on the river steps.
"Who the deuce are those fellows?" said Vincent, angrily, as half a dozen figures slipped out
     through the door in the bastion, as they approached, and mixing with the crowd, got lost in it,
     while the door was closed behind them by some unseen hand. "I'll talk to Roshan about that. He
     was complaining only this morning that the men were breaking out of barracks. What else can he
     expect if he doesn't look out. By Jove! I'll teach 'em!"
His first words, indeed, as he entered the outer courtyard of the Fort, was to order a sentry
     down to close the doors against all comers without a written pass from him, and as he went by
     the guard-house he gave rather a sharp reprimand to Roshan Khân, who happened to be outside,
     for not having kept his eyes open while in charge of the Fort during his absence. No one was in
     future to use the small door; the key was to be brought to him, and all passes were to be
     stopped for that night.
"Roshan looks in a demon bad temper. I wonder what's up?" remarked Lance, casually, as he
     passed on through a wicket in the massive closed gates to the inner courtyard, where the
     officers' quarters lay, hugging the river wall. It was quite a citadel, a distinct
     fortification of itself, with no entrance or exit except through the outer yard, or by the
     little flight of steps leading down to the river, at the foot of which Lance moored his
     canoe.
"He has been sulky as a bear with me these last few days," replied Captain Dering, with a
     contemptuous smile. "I believe the old Colonel was right after all, and coming here has put
     wind in his head. I shall have to teach Mr. Roshan that, good man as he is, he is only a
      risaldar, before long."
"Poor devil," said Lance under his breath. "I'm always a bit sorry for Roshan. He would be a
     fine fellow--if--if he wasn't so--so civilized."
"Civilized," echoed Vincent, with a laugh. "You haven't seen him fight. I have. Talk of
     devils; he has got one in him, if you like!"
He certainly had at that moment, when, having gone straight to his quarters after Vincent's
     reprimand, he found himself alone, and free to show his feelings.
And yet, had he been calm, he could scarcely have told wherein the grievance lay which for
     the moment clamoured for--no--not redress--revenge.
It was not the first time that he had had to ignore hints, innuendoes, suggestions of Heaven
     knows what impossible intrigues, as he had had that very afternoon. It was not the first time
     that, in his position as intermediary between the ignorance of the native soldier and the
     ignorance of the English officer, he had had to 'ca' canny,' so as not to alienate the
     confidence of either. Indeed, the consciousness of the necessity for this, by enhancing the
     value of his services, had always been a pride to him hitherto. And these particular intrigues
     were so childish; especially if--he paused in his angry pacing of the room, and smiled
     complacently. Why should he give a thought to an impossible plan, when a possible one lay ready
     to his hand? If he married Laila, the land, almost the title, would be his of right. It would
     be easy anyhow to regain. Then with a fresh frown, he remembered Vincent's order. That would
     upset his plans. He had meant to slip out by the bastion gate just before--say an hour
     before--dawn, and cross over to the palace. Akbar Khân had arranged to be there to let him into
     the garden. Now he must make other arrangements. He must find the old eunuch, change the hour
     and the place; since nothing--no! not all the tyranny in the world--should prevent his carrying
     out his intention of seeing his cousin, and claiming her as his--his by right. So he must
     settle this at once; settle it before there was any chance, he told himself bitterly, of his
     superior officer coming out of the mess--where no doubt he was guzzling swine's flesh and
     bibbing wine--(that faint amaze at the presence in his own mind of such antiquated
     half-forgotten ideas assailed him again at this point) to encroach further on his liberty, his
     privileges.
He had to pass the troopers' lines on his way to the main gate, and the quick
      salaams, the ready smiles given him by the men, as they lounged and smoked after
     their long day on duty, soothed his pride.
The Captain had certainly said they had behaved well--kindly, and discreetly; but whose merit
     was that? The Englishman's who gave the word of command, or his, who had drilled them to
     obedience, who lived with them day and night? Without such as he, a native regiment could not
     be managed, if he chose to give the word. He would not, of course, but if he chose--
He set his teeth as he walked out of the Fort, and met at its very gate that surging tide of
     patient, eager faces drifting on, and back again, aimlessly.
He need not, as a matter of fact, have feared any further interference from Vincent Dering,
     for the latter, being very tired after the long day in the sun, and having reason to know that
     part of the night time, at any rate, which is usually given to sleep would be employed in
     something better, had, after staving off hunger with what the cook would produce at a moment's
     notice, and postponing the dinner hour, gone to sleep deliberately, advising Lance to do the
     same.
But the latter had, rather to his own surprise, found this impossible; not even over a cigar
     in the balcony above the sliding, rushing river, the sound of which was as a rule
     sleep-compelling, would sleep come; not even in the cool darkness which was settling on
     Eshwara, despite the curious hint of glow lingering in the sky.
The air was too electrical, he decided. And then--Erda! He had slept the night before, after
     she had said good-by so carelessly, without realizing that the good-by was for ever. And he had
     not had time to think all day. But now, at rest in the cool darkness, looking from his lounge
     chair down the river to that other balcony, he did realize it. For ever! Yes! that regret was
     in his life for ever. And he was so young. Only twenty-five.
Why had this come to him?
Erda! Erda,--his heart's desire.
He sat there voiceless, sucking mechanically at a cigar, long since gone out; but that was as
     much the cry at his heart as if he had allowed himself a fine frenzy of despair in older
     fashion.
And he imagined her as he had seen her--this way, that way, every way, in an unending torture
     of visions--until he exhausted reality, and fancy showed her to him in her wedding dress. And
     then he felt as if he could kill the Reverend David Campbell without shame or fear. He was
     vaguely ashamed of the lack of shame, however, especially when his fancy led him into endless
     mishaps which might befall a man, especially a missionary, before his wedding day.
"There they ate a missionary--"
Yes, sometimes; but there was not much time left for that sort of end--
What a brute he was, when the only thing that mattered was that she should be happy and
     content.
But would she be so?
It went on and on and on, the controversy between himself and that other self, so that he
     felt worn, and harassed, and dirty, and altogether undesirable, when Vincent, about nine
     o'clock, reappeared, dapper and scented as usual, in his mess kit, and expressed surprise at
     finding his companion still undressed. He was hungry as a hunter, he said; besides he wanted to
     have a decent interval between dinner and turning in. And that must be early, for he
     had just heard from the police authorities that though everything was quiet for the night,
     absolutely quiet, they thought it would be safer to have the Pool guarded again at dawn, in
     case of accidents; since none of the pilgrims, though apparently quite resigned, had as yet
     gone on.
"They never do till the next day; Pidar Narâyan told me so," commented Lance, crossly. "Why
     should they rake us up at such an unearthly hour? Why can't they let the people have a row if
     they want one? I'd like it; give a fellow something to do in this beastly hole."
He went off to dress moodily, wishing savage wishes, so adding, perhaps, to that electricity
     in the air. And Vincent gave it his quota of desire also, in his reckless determination to
     regain Paradise, as it was lost, through a woman. And that play of Romeo and Juliet in the
     scented garden--Juliet, whose bounty was "as boundless as the sea"--was a bit of pure paradise
     to him. He had never, he thought, been in love before. He had never known what love was. Those
     other loves of his had been mean, ungenerous, calculating.
So he was at his best, his brightest, during dinner. Lance, on the contrary, was at his
     worst, his dullest; and Vincent made this his excuse for going to his room betimes. He was not
     due at the palace till twelve, but he was anxious to ensure the coast being clear, and Lance
     seemed just in the mood when a fellow sits up sulkily, out of pure cussedness, and drinks
     whiskey-and-water if he can find a companion on whom to vent his cavillings.
In truth Lance would have liked to do so. He wanted to feel miserable; but after Vincent had
     gone, and he was left alone in the balcony, sleep began to assert itself. He found even his
     despair becoming dreamy, and being obstinate, tried to fight against the fact. The result being
     that he finally fell asleep in his lounge chair with a soundness and unconsciousness usually
     reserved for bed. Fell asleep, and promptly relaxed into content with happy dreams of Erda's
     return to him; for his, left to itself, was a healthy soul.
And so were the vast majority of those which, through patient yet eager eyes, were looking
     into the scarce-lit darkness of the streets, as the pilgrims, crowded into an almost solid
     mass, seemed to slide with a slow, almost unseen movement, through them. They were waiting for
     the dawn. If nothing new came before then, they would pass on towards the 'Cradle of the Gods.'
     So, scarcely seen, restless yet restful, their feet on the next rung of the golden stairs, they
     waited.
And overhead the young moon had risen with a copper-coloured edge to its crescent of light.
     For the glow was still in the sky, and the troopers in the Fort, resting, after their long day,
     in Indian fashion by sprawling on their beds and gossiping, had dragged these beds into the
     open and discarded most of their clothing, since the night was strangely still and warm. So
     even the wonder what had become of the risaldar-sahib was languid.
For Roshan Khân had not returned. And yet, as he sat in a quiet courtyard of the city, with
     closed doors, realizing how late it was growing, he had no fear of further reprimand. On the
     contrary, his pulses were bounding with the certainty that he would gain praise. And there was
     something beyond this mere desire for personal advantage in the keen-witted diplomacy with
     which he listened, with which he suggested, with which he led the talkers on to tell what it
     was of the utmost importance that he should know, not so much to himself, as to the Government
     he served. For his vague discontent had vanished, his well-reasoned, well-founded loyalty
     returned at this, the first hint at anything beyond the wild, aimless intrigue with which every
     Indian bazaar teems. But here, in this definite plan, by the collaboration of his troopers, of
     liberating fifteen hundred scoundrels,--or, at least, desperadoes,--of aping the stroke of
     action which made the great mutiny of '57 possible, was something tangible. Something which,
     when known to the uttermost, must be told without delay to his superior officer. A vast pride
     swept through him, as, when the gongs were striking one,--short, yet with lingering vibration
     in the dull, still air,--he made his way, fast as he could, back to the Fort. Without him, and
     such as he, faithful despite limitations, what would the Masters know?
Hours before, as he went out, he had arranged with Akbar Khân that the palace door giving on
     the great square between it and the Fort should be on the latch only, so that he might slip in
     at any time and take his chance of hiding in the garden, his chance of seeing Laila before the
     dawn came and he had to go back to the Fort. The old sinner, indeed, had jumped at this
     indefinite arrangement, which bound him to nothing; which made it unnecessary for him even to
     broach the subject of an interview to his mistress. Since what was easier to say than that it
     had been impossible; as, indeed, it was! Perhaps Roshan Khân had himself grasped this fact;
     perhaps in insisting on this entry to the garden he had been backing more than his own luck,
     and had been meditating a coup d'état of his own. However that may have been, all was
     forgotten in his newly recovered loyalty, his keen ambition, as he hurried back to the Fort
     intent on but one thing--the forewarning and forearming of those whom he had long ago
     deliberately chosen as his masters.
Some of his men were still lounging about on their beds, and he spoke a word to them as he
     passed, warning them to be ready if wanted. So, leaving them in sudden vague excitement, he
     passed on to the inner court. Here, where Lance Carlyon's small band of Sikh pioneers were
     quartered in the long, low building in which the fortified gateway stood, no one was astir. And
     no lights were visible in the opposite building where Lance and Vincent lived. Doubtless
     everyone was in bed.
He passed on, therefore, swiftly to the room he knew to be his Captain's, and knocked. There
     was no answer. He opened the door and looked in. It was empty. A vague wonder assailed him, and
     he passed on to Lance Carlyon's room. It was empty also, and the vague uneasiness died down.
     They must be sitting up still in the balcony overlooking the river, where they sat every day
     after dinner. Stupid of him not to have gone there first; and yet, surely, it was late. Perhaps
     they were uneasy; perhaps they had already heard! An open letter "On Her Majesty's
      Service" lying on the dinner table as he passed through the mess room (which was still
     lit up--sign that the servants had gone to sleep awaiting their masters' call) attracted his
     attention. He glanced at it, half fearing to find himself forestalled by the police
     authorities. No! It was from them, as he had seen at once; but it was only that notice for
     dawn. Ah! what was this? this tiny scrap of paper, which had been twisted to a cocked-hat note,
     lying caught in the fold of the foolscap, with the two words--"twelve
     o'clock"--written on it?
In a woman's writing. Roshan knew enough of invitations from Englishwomen to be sure of
     that.
The vague uneasiness returned, as he went on to the balcony beyond the dining-room. There
     too, the swinging lamp still burnt, and showed him Lance Carlyon fast asleep in a lounge chair;
     but no one else.
Where was Captain Dering? Captain Dering, who had the key of the little door in the bastion;
     Captain Dering, who had had a note with "twelve o'clock" in it?
A sudden thought struck him. If--if there was anything in his vague fear--then, by taking the
     canoe, which lay at the bottom of the stairs, he could slip down stream, and see--
Forgetting everything else, Roshan stole softly past the sleeping Lance, and went down the
     stairs.
The canoe was not there.
Then Captain Dering must have taken it and gone--whither?
There was but one place whither he was likely to go alone at that hour of the night; one
     place, a stair like this leading up to a balcony over the river where he had gone once before
     with a woman, a woman in a dress which marked her for what she was, really--a dress that marked
     her secluded--which made this, shame unutterable!
Roshan's impotent fury rose hot at the inexpressible humiliation. The thought of Captain
     Dering and Laila alone in that balcony meant but one thing to his inherited ideas. No glaze of
     romance was possible. It was shame unutterable, irredeemable. Shame that must be revenged
     without delay. So, forgetting everything else in the world except this, he passed the sleeping
     Lance once more, hurried back to his quarters for his revolver, and only stopping to see that
     one chamber at least was loaded, made his way to that door which he knew would be on the
     latch.
That patient, eager crowd was still thronging the courtyard as he crossed it, pausing a
     moment beside the great gun which centred the union-jack of raised paths.
The "Teacher of Religion!"
Ay! they needed a teacher, needed a lesson; these aliens, these usurpers, these depravers of
     women.
Yet, in sober truth, Vincent Dering, at that moment sitting in the little balcony alone with
     Laila Bonaventura, felt quite virtuous. They had just come in from the garden, where they had
     been strolling and whispering, and now, as they sat together, without a word, scarcely a
     thought, in the faint light of the young moon and a red jewelled hand-lamp--which Laila, with
     that unfailing instinct of hers for all that matched the passionate mystery of the place, had
     set in a carved niche, where it looked like a votive offering to the unseen image of a
     saint--Vincent could feel the warm ivory of her cheek against his own, hear the soft chink of
     her jewels as they slid towards him, following the soft warm curves on which they lay. The red
     light of the lamp glittered faintly in red stars on the myriad facets of looking-glass with
     which the vaulted roof above them was adorned. It fell, reddening the red lights on the
     gold-stiffened crimson waves of her dress, that sent such a bewildering perfume to cloud his
     senses with passionate content.
A vast tenderness, a vast triumph, surged through him at the thought of her. Who dared to
     judge her by the narrow standards of to-day--she, who had gone back boldly to realities!
This was what poets had sung since time began; this was what the world had
     exchanged for Paradise!
Juliet! Juliet!
And if he was the "god of her idolatry," she was to him the "dearest morsel of
      earth."
He bent and whispered the name to her with a kiss.
And as he did so, a step, swift, bold, masterful, sounded in the passage above; the step of
     one with a right to be there.
Vincent, startled, sat listening; but Laila was on her feet in a second, with a reckless
     laugh.
"Father Laurence!" she cried. "Well! let him come. I'm not afraid! For he loved her.
     He must remember!"
So, as a dim figure showed, half seen, in the archway, she stood like a queen, her hand
     raised, her head thrown back; a sight never to be forgotten.
"There is no use in being angry, guardian," she called, in her full-throated voice. "It is
     too late for that. Remember--" She paused, gave a slight scream, and flung herself before
     Vincent.
There was a flash, a second scream, and then the arches rang with the echoes of a
     pistol-shot.
"Laila! Laila!"
"You damned scoundrel! You've killed her!"
"Laila! Laila!"
There were two voices echoing the woman's name, but only that one pistol-shot. Then two
     useless clicks of a trigger, before, with an oath, Roshan Khân flung the revolver from him and
     fled.
</div></body></text></TEI>