<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Farringdons, by Ellen
      Thorneycroft Fowler.</title><author>Fowler, Ellen Thorneycroft (1860-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHRISTOPHER

And when perchance of all perfection
You've seen an end,
Your thoughts may turn in my direction
To find a friend.

There are two things which are absolutely necessary to the well-being of the normal feminine
     mind—namely, one romantic attachment and one comfortable friendship. Elisabeth was perfectly
     normal and extremely feminine; and consequently she provided herself early with these two aids
     to happiness.
In those days the object of her romantic attachment was her cousin Anne. Anne Farringdon was
     one of those graceful, elegant women who appear so much deeper than they really are. All her
     life she had been inspiring devotion which she was utterly unable to fathom; and this was still
     the case with regard to herself and her adoring little worshipper.
People always wondered why Anne Farringdon had never married; and explained the mystery to
     their own satisfaction by conjecturing that she had had a disappointment in her youth, and had
     been incapable of loving twice. It never struck them—which was actually the case—that she had
     been incapable of loving once; and that her single-blessedness was due to
      no unforgotten love-story, but to the unromantic fact that among her score of
     lovers she had never found a man for whom she seriously cared. In a delicate and ladylike
     fashion she had flirted outrageously in her time; but she had always broken hearts so gently,
     and put away the pieces so daintily, that the owners of these hearts had never dreamed of
     resenting the damage she had wrought. She had refused them with such a world of pathos in her
     beautiful eyes—the Farringdon gray-blue eyes, with thick black brows and long black lashes—that
     the poor souls had never doubted her sympathy and comprehension; nor had they the slightest
     idea that she was totally ignorant of the depth of the love which she had inspired, or the
     bitterness of the pain which she had caused.
All the romance of Elisabeth's nature—and there was a great deal of it—was lavished upon Anne
     Farringdon. If Anne smiled, Elisabeth's sky was cloudless; if Anne sighed, Elisabeth's sky grew
     gray. The mere sound of Anne's voice vibrated through the child's whole being; and every little
     trifle connected with her cousin became a sacred relic in Elisabeth's eyes.
Like every Methodist child, Elisabeth was well versed in her Bible; but, unlike most
     Methodist children, she regarded it more as a poetical than an ethical work. When she was only
     twelve, the sixty-eighth Psalm thrilled her as with the sound of a trumpet; and she was
     completely carried away by the glorious imagery of the Book of Isaiah, even when she did not in
     the least understand its meaning. But her favourite book was the Book of Ruth; for was not
     Ruth's devotion to Naomi the exact counterpart of hers to Cousin Anne? And she used to make up
     long stories in her own mind about how
      Cousin Anne should, by some means, lose all her friends and all her money, and be
     driven out of Sedgehill and away from the Osierfield Works; and then how Elisabeth would say,
     "Entreat me not to leave thee," and would follow Cousin Anne to the ends of the earth.
People sometimes smile at the adoration of a young girl for a woman, and there is no doubt
     but that the feeling savours slightly of school-days and bread-and-butter; but there is also no
     doubt that a girl who has once felt it has learned what real love is, and that is no small item
     in the lesson-book of life.
But Elisabeth had her comfortable friendship as well as her romantic attachment; and the
     partner in that friendship was Christopher Thornley, the nephew of Richard Smallwood.
In the days of his youth, when his father was still manager of the Osierfield Works, Richard
     had a very pretty sister; but as Emily Smallwood was pretty, so was she also vain, and the
     strict atmosphere of her home life did not recommend itself to her taste. After many quarrels
     with her stern old father (her mother having died when she was a baby), Emily left home, and
     took a situation in London as governess, in the house of some wealthy people with no
     pretensions to religion. For this her father never forgave her; he called it "consorting with
     children of Belial." In time she wrote to tell Richard that she was going to be married, and
     that she wished to cut off entirely all communication with her old home. After that, Richard
     lost sight of her for many years; but some time after his father's death he received a letter
     from Emily, begging him to come to her at once, as she was dying. He complied with her request,
     and found his once beautiful sister in great
      poverty in a London lodging-house. She told him that she had endured great sorrow,
     having lost her husband and her five eldest children. Her husband had never been unkind to her,
     she said, but he was one of the men who lack the power either to make or to keep money; and
     when he found he was foredoomed to failure in everything to which he turned his hand, he had
     not the spirit to continue the fight against Fate, but turned his face to the wall and died.
     She had still one child left, a fair-haired boy of about two years old, called Christopher; to
     her brother's care she confided this boy, and then she also turned her face to the wall and
     died.
This happened a year or so before the Miss Farringdons adopted Elisabeth; so that when that
     young lady appeared upon the scene, and subsequently grew up sufficiently to require a
     playfellow, she found Christopher Thornley ready to hand. He lived with his bachelor uncle in a
     square red house on the east side of Sedgehill High Street, exactly opposite to the
     Farringdons' lodge. It was one of those big, bald houses with unblinking windows, that stare at
     you as if they had not any eyebrows or eyelashes; and there was not even a strip of greenery
     between it and the High Street. So to prevent the passers-by from looking in and the occupants
     from looking out, the lower parts of the front windows were covered with a sort of black crape
     mask, which put even the sunbeams into half-mourning.
Unlike Elisabeth, Christopher had a passion for righteousness and for honour, but no power of
     artistic perception. His standard was whether things were right or wrong, honourable or
     dishonourable; hers was whether they were beautiful or ugly, pleasant or unpleasant.
     Consequently the two moved
      along parallel lines; and she moved a great deal more quickly than he did.
     Christopher had deep convictions, but was very shy of expressing them; Elisabeth's convictions
     were not particularly deep, but such as they were, all the world was welcome to them as far as
     she was concerned.
As the children grew older, one thing used much to puzzle and perplex Christopher. Elisabeth
     did not seem to care about being good nearly as much as he cared: he was always trying to do
     right, and she only tried when she thought about it; nevertheless, when she did give her
     attention to the matter, she had much more comforting and beautiful thoughts than he had, which
     appeared rather hard. He was not yet old enough to know that this difference between them arose
     from no unequal division of divine favour, but was simply and solely a question of temperament.
     But though he did not understand, he did not complain; for he had been brought up under the
     shadow of the Osierfield Works, and in the fear and love of the Farringdons; and Elisabeth,
     whatever her shortcomings, was a princess of the blood.
Christopher was a day-boy at the Grammar School at Silverhampton, a fine old town some three
     miles to the north of Sedgehill; and there and back he walked every day, wet or fine, and there
     he learned to be a scholar and a gentleman, and sundry other important things.
"Do you hear that noise?" said Elisabeth, one afternoon in the holidays, when she was twelve
     and Christopher fifteen; "that's Mrs. Bateson's pig being killed."
"Hear it?—rather," replied Christopher, standing still in the wood to listen.
     
"Let's go and see it," Elisabeth suggested.
Christopher looked shocked. "Well, you are a horrid girl! Nothing would induce me to go, or
     to let you go either; but I'm surprised at your being so horrid as to wish for such a
     thing."
"It isn't really horridness," Elisabeth explained meekly; "it is interest. I'm so frightfully
     interested in things; and I want to see everything, just to know what it looks like."
"Well, I call it horrid. And, what's more, if you saw it, it would make you feel ill."
"No; it wouldn't."
"Then it ought to," said Christopher, who, with true masculine dulness of perception,
     confounded weakness of nerve with tenderness of heart.
Elisabeth sighed. "Nothing makes me feel ill," she replied apologetically; "not even an
     accident or an after-meeting."
Christopher could not help indulging in a certain amount of envious admiration for an
     organism that could pass unmoved through such physical and spiritual crises as these; but he
     was not going to let Elisabeth see that he admired her. He considered it "unmanly" to admire
     girls.
"Well, you are a rum little cove!" he said.
"Of course, I don't want to go if you think it would be horrid of me; but I thought we might
     pretend it was the execution of Mary Queen of Scots, and find it most awfully exciting."
"How you do go on about Mary Queen of Scots! Not long ago you were always bothering about
     heathen goddesses, and now you have no thought for anything but Mary."
"Oh! but I'm still immensely interested in goddesses, Chris; and I do wish, when you are
     doing
      Latin and Greek at school, you'd find out what colour Pallas Athene's hair was.
     Couldn't you?"
"No; I couldn't."
"But you might ask one of the masters. They'd be sure to know."
Christopher laughed the laugh of the scornful. "I say, you are a duffer to suppose that
     clever men like schoolmasters bother their heads about such rot as the colour of a woman's
     hair."
"Of course, I know they wouldn't about a woman's," Elisabeth hastened to justify herself;
     "but I thought perhaps they might about a goddess's."
"It is the same thing. You've no idea what tremendously clever chaps schoolmasters are—much
     too clever to take any interest in girls' and women's concerns. Besides, they are too old for
     that, too—they are generally quite thirty."
Elisabeth was silent for a moment; and Christopher whistled as he looked across the green
     valley to the sunset, without in the least knowing how beautiful it was. But Elisabeth knew,
     for she possessed an innate knowledge of many things which he would have to learn by
     experience. But even she did not yet understand that because the sunset was beautiful she felt
     a sudden hunger and thirst after righteousness.
"Chris, do you think it is wicked of people to fall in love?" she asked suddenly.
"Not exactly wicked; more silly, I should say," replied Chris generously.
"Because if it is wicked, I shall give up reading tales about it." This was a tremendous and
     unnatural sacrifice to principle on the part of Elisabeth.
Christopher turned upon her sharply. "You
      don't read tales that Miss Farringdon hasn't said you may read, do you?"
"Yes; lots. But I never read tales that she has said I mustn't read."
"You oughtn't to read any tale till you have asked her first if you may."
Elisabeth's face fell. "I never thought of doing such a thing as asking her first. Oh! Chris,
     you don't really think I ought to, do you? Because she'd be sure to say no."
"That is exactly why you ought to ask." Christopher's sense of honour was one of his strong
     points.
Then Elisabeth lost her temper. "That is you all over! You are the most tiresome boy to have
     anything to do with! You are always bothering about things being wrong, till you make them
     wrong. Now I hardly ever think of it; but I can't go on doing things after you've said they are
     wrong, because that would be wrong of me, don't you see? And yet it wasn't a bit wrong of me
     before I knew. I hate you!"
"I say, Betty, I'm awfully sorry lo have riled you; but you asked me."
"I didn't ask you whether I need ask Cousin Maria, stupid! You know I didn't. I asked you
     whether it was wrong to fall in love, and then you went and dragged Cousin Maria in. I wish I'd
     never asked you anything; I wish I'd never spoken to you; I wish I'd got somebody else to play
     with, and then I'd never speak to you again as long as I live."
Of course it was unwise of Christopher to condemn a weakness to which Elisabeth was prone,
     and to condone one to which she was not; but no man has learned wisdom at fifteen, and but few
     at fifty.
     
"You are the most disagreeable boy I have ever met, and I wish I could think of something to
     do to annoy you. I know what I'll do; I'll go by myself and see Mrs. Bateson's pig, just to
     show you how I hate you."
And Elisabeth flew off in the direction of Mrs. Bateson's cottage, with the truly feminine
     intention of punishing the male being who had dared to disapprove of her, by making him
     disapprove of her still more. Her programme, however, was frustrated; for Mrs. Bateson herself
     intervened between Elisabeth and her unholy desires, and entertained the latter with a plate of
     delicious bread-and-dripping instead. Finally, that young lady returned to her home in a more
     magnanimous frame of mind; and fell asleep that night wondering if the whole male sex were as
     stupid as the particular specimen with which she had to do—a problem which has puzzled older
     female brains than hers.
But poor Christopher was very unhappy. It was agony to him when his conscience pulled him one
     way and Elisabeth pulled him the other; and yet this form of torture was constantly occurring
     to him. He could not bear to do what he knew was wrong, and he could not bear to vex Elisabeth;
     yet Elisabeth's wishes and his own ideas of right were by no means always synonymous. His only
     comfort was the knowledge that his sovereign's anger was, as a rule, short-lived, and that he
     himself was indispensable to that sovereign's happiness. This was true; but he did not then
     realize that it was in his office as admiring and sympathizing audience, and not in his person
     as Christopher Thornley, that he was necessary to Elisabeth. A fuller revelation was vouchsafed
     to him later.
     
The next morning Elisabeth was herself again, and was quite ready to enjoy Christopher's
     society and to excuse his scruples. She knew that self of hers when she said that she wished
     she had somebody else to play with, in order that she might withdraw the light of her presence
     from her offending henchman. To thus punish Christopher, until she had found some one to take
     his place, was a course of action which would not have occurred to her. Elisabeth's pride could
     never stand in the way of her pleasure; Christopher's, on the contrary, might. It was a
     remarkable fact that after Christopher had reproved Elisabeth for some fault—which happened
     neither infrequently nor unnecessarily—he was always repentant and she forgiving; yet nine
     times out of ten he had been in the right and she in the wrong. But Elisabeth's was one of
     those exceptionally generous natures which can pardon the reproofs and condone the virtues of
     their friends; and she bore no malice, even when Christopher had been more obviously right than
     usual. But she was already enough of a woman to adapt to her own requirements his penitence for
     right-doing; and on this occasion she took advantage of his chastened demeanour to induce him
     to assist her in erecting a new shrine to Athene in the wood—which meant that she gave all the
     directions and he did all the work.
"You are doing it beautifully, Chris—you really are!" she exclaimed with delight. "We shall
     be able to have a splendid sacrifice this afternoon. I've got some feathers to offer up from
     the fowl cook is plucking; and they make a much better sacrifice than waste paper."
"Why?"
     
Christopher was too shy in those days to put the fact into words; nevertheless, the fact
     remained that Elisabeth interested him profoundly. She was so original, so unexpected, that she
     was continually providing him with fresh food for thought. Although he was cleverer at lessons
     than she was, she was by far the cleverer at play; and though he had the finer character, hers
     was the stronger personality. It was because Elisabeth was so much to him that he now and then
     worried her easy-going conscience with his strictures; for, to do him justice, the boy was no
     prig, and would never have dreamed of preaching to anybody except her. But it must be
     remembered that Christopher had never heard of such things as spiritual evolutions and streams
     of tendency: to him right or wrong meant heaven or hell—neither more nor less; and he was
     overpowered by a burning anxiety that Elisabeth should eventually go to heaven, partly for her
     own sake, and partly (since human love is stronger than dogmas and doctrines) because a heaven,
     uncheered by the presence of Elisabeth, seemed a somewhat dreary place wherein to spend one's
     eternity.
"Why do feathers make a better sacrifice than paper?" repeated Christopher, Elisabeth being
     so much absorbed in his work that she had not answered his question.
"Oh! because they smell; and it seems so much more like a real sacrifice, somehow, if it
     smells."
"I see. What ideas you do get into your head!"
But Elisabeth's volatile thoughts had flown off in another direction. "You really have got
     awfully nice-coloured hair," she remarked, Chris having taken his cap off for the sake of
     coolness, as he was
      heated with his toil. "I do wish I had light hair like yours. Angels, and
     goddesses, and princesses, and people of that kind always have golden hair; but only bad
     fairies and cruel stepmothers have nasty dark hair like me. I think it is horrid to have dark
     hair."
"I don't: I like dark hair best; and I don't think yours is half bad." Christopher never
     overstated a case; but then one had the comfort of knowing that he always meant what he said,
     and frequently a good deal more.
"Don't you really, Chris? I think it is hideous," replied Elisabeth, taking one of her
     elf-locks between her fingers and examining it as if it were a sample of material; "it is like
     that ugly brown seaweed which shows which way the wind blows—no, I mean that shows whether it
     is going to rain or not."
"Never mind; I've seen lots of people with uglier hair than yours." Chris really could be of
     great consolation when he tried.
"Aren't the trees lovely when they have got all their leaves off?" said Elisabeth, her
     thoughts wandering again. "I believe I like them better now than I do in summer. Now they are
     like the things you wish for, and in the summer they are like the things you get; and the
     things you get are never half as nice as the things you wish for."
This was too subtle for Christopher. "I like them best with the leaves on; but anyhow they
     are nicer to look at than the chimneys that we see from our house. You can't think how gloomy
     it is for your rooms to look out on nothing but smoke and chimneys and furnaces. When you go to
     bed at night it's all red, and when you get up in the morning it's all black."
     
"I should like to live in a house like that. I love the smoke and the chimneys and the
     furnaces—they are all so big and strong and full of life; and they make you think."
"What on earth do they make you think about?"
Elisabeth's gray eyes grew dreamy. "They make me think that the Black Country is a wilderness
     that we are all travelling through; and over it there is always the pillar of cloud by day and
     the pillar of fire by night, to tell us which way to go. I make up tales to myself about the
     people in the wilderness; and how they watch the pillar, and how it keeps them from idling in
     their work, or selling bad iron, or doing anything that is horrid or mean, because it is a sign
     to them that God is with them, just as it used to be to the Children of Israel."
Christopher looked up from his work. Here was the old problem: Elisabeth did not think about
     religion half as much as he did, and yet the helpful and beautiful thoughts came to her and not
     to him. Still, it was comforting to know that the smoke and the glare, which he had hated,
     could convey such a message; and he made up his mind not to hate them any more.
"And then I pretend that the people come out of the wilderness and go to live in the country
     over there," Elisabeth continued, pointing to the distant hills; "and I make up lovely tales
     about that country, and all the beautiful things there. That is what is so nice about hills:
     you always think there are such wonderful places on the other side of them."
For some minutes Christopher worked silently, and Elisabeth watched him. Then the latter said
     suddenly:
"Isn't it funny that you never hate people in a
      morning, however much you may have hated them the night before?"
"Don't you?" Rapid changes of sentiment were beyond Christopher's comprehension. He was by no
     means a variable person.
"Oh! no. Last night I hated you, and made up a story in my own mind that another really nice
     boy came to play with me instead of you. And I said nice things to him, and horrid things to
     you; he and I played in the wood, and you had to do lessons all by yourself at school, and had
     nobody to play with. But when I woke up this morning I didn't care about the pretending boy any
     more, and I wanted you."
Christopher looked pleased; but it was not his way to express his pleasure in words. "And so,
     I suppose, you came to look for me," he said.
"Not the first thing. Somehow it always makes you like a person better when you have hated
     them for a bit, so I liked you awfully when I woke this morning and remembered you. When you
     really are fond of a person, you always want to do something to please them; so I went and told
     Cousin Maria that I'd read a lot of books in the library without thinking whether I ought to or
     not; but that now I wanted her to say what I might read and what I mightn't."
This was a course of action that Christopher could thoroughly understand and appreciate. "Was
     she angry?" he asked.
"Not a bit. That is the best of Cousin Maria—she never scolds you unless you really deserve
     it; and she is very sharp at finding out whether you deserve it or not. She said that there
     were a lot of books in the library that weren't suitable for a
      little girl to read; but that it wasn't naughty of me to have read what I chose,
     since nobody had told me not to. And then she said it was good of me to have told her, for she
     should never have found it out if I hadn't."
"And so it was," remarked Christopher approvingly.
"No; it wasn't—and I told her it wasn't. I told her that the goodness was yours, because it
     was you that made me tell. I should never have thought of it by myself."
"I say, you are a regular brick!"
Elisabeth looked puzzled. "I don't see anything brickish in saying that; it was the truth. It
     was you that made me tell, you know; and it wasn't fair for me to be praised for your
     goodness."
"You really are awfully straight, for a girl," said Christopher, with admiration; "you
     couldn't be straighter if you were a boy."
This was high praise, and Elisabeth's pale little face glowed with delight. She loved to be
     commended.
"It was really very good of you to speak to Miss Farringdon about the books," continued
     Christopher; "for I know you'll hate having to ask permission before you read a tale."
"I didn't do it out of goodness," said Elisabeth thoughtfully—"I did it to please you; and
     pleasing a person you are fond of isn't goodness. I wonder if grown-up people get to be as fond
     of religion as they are of one another. I expect they do; and then they do good things just for
     the sake of doing good."
"Of course they do," replied Christopher, who was always at sea when Elisabeth became
     metaphysical.
     
"I suppose," she continued seriously, "that if I were really good, religion ought to be the
     same to me as Cousin Anne."
"The same as Cousin Anne! What do you mean?"
"I mean that if I were really good, religion would give me the same sort of feelings as
     Cousin Anne does."
"What sort of feelings?"
"Oh! they are lovely feelings," Elisabeth answered—"too lovely to explain. Everything is a
     treat if Cousin Anne is there. When she speaks, it's just like music trickling down your back;
     and when you do something that you don't like to please her, you feel that you do like it."
"Well, you are a rum little thing! I should think nobody ever thought of all the queer things
     that you think of."
"Oh! I expect everybody does," retorted Elisabeth, who was far too healthy minded to consider
     herself peculiar. After another pause, she inquired: "Do you like me, Chris?"
"Rather! What a foolish question to ask!" Christopher replied, with a blush, for he was
     always shy of talking about his feelings; and the more he felt the shyer he became.
But Elisabeth was not shy, and had no sympathy with anybody who was. "How much do you like
     me?" she continued.
"A lot."
"But I want to know exactly how much."
"Then you can't. Nobody can tell how much they like anybody. You do ask silly questions!"
"Yes; they can. I can tell how much I like everybody," Elisabeth persisted.
     
"How?"
"I have a sort of thermometer in my mind, just like the big thermometer in the hall; and I
     measure how much I like people by that."
"How much do you like your Cousin Anne?" he asked.
"Ninety-six degrees," replied Elisabeth promptly.
"And your Cousin Maria?"
"Sixty."
"And Mrs. Bateson?"
"Fifty-four." Elisabeth always knew her own mind.
"I say, how—how—how much do you like me?" asked Christopher, with some hesitation.
"Sixty-two," answered Elisabeth, with no hesitation at all.
And Christopher felt a funny, cold feeling round his loyal heart. He grew to know the feeling
     well in after years, and to wonder how Elisabeth could understand so much and yet understand so
     little; but at present he was too young to understand himself.
     
</div></body></text></TEI>