<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Hosts of the Lord</title><author>Steel, Flora Annie (1847-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
UNDER-CURRENTS
Mumtâza Mahal, Roshan Khân's grandmother, lived in a queer little backwater of a house which
     had eddied itself away from the main stream of the town, and jammed itself against a wall of
     the palace as if seeking dignity thereby. For all that it belonged irredeemably to the city,
     and to its evil-smelling lanes. The word house, however, is misleading to western ears, since
     this was simply a well-like courtyard, with a great wooden bed set in the centre under a
     miserable attempt at a tree which was used as a clothes-peg, a rack for saucepans, and a
     variety of other domestic purposes. It fulfilled them to the perfect satisfaction of its
     proprietress, a roundabout old lady, plump as a button-quail, who, when she was not asleep
     inside the arcaded slip of a room on one side, passed her time on the bed in the scanty shade,
     keeping company with a sausage-roll of a pillow and a quilt, both covered in faded, greasy
     silk. As a rule she did nothing save eat pân; though sometimes, as a favour to Erda
     Shepherd, who came to read to her once a week, she would give a few more stitches to a knitted
     comforter which never seemed to get any longer. It had been begun, indeed, under the auspices
     of another "Miss," who had returned to England only to die, as so many do, from exposure, and
     overwork, and homesickness. For the rest, Mumtâza was an arrogant, yet good-natured old soul,
     who, despite those tears on her wedding-day, had kept dissolute Walidâd under her thumb, and
     his son also. Therefore, it was one of her pet grievances--and she had many--that Roshan, her
     grandson, should have defied her authority and entered the army. The great standing grievance,
     however, was that the "pinson" she received from Government because her husband had
     been deported with the Nawab to Calcutta, was not so large as one received by a neighbour and
     gossip whose husband had been hanged in the mutiny! The two old ladies came to loggerheads over
     their respective claims once a month, regularly, when pay-day came round; Mumtâza asserting
     shrilly that to die in a strange country was more painful than hanging, Ashrâf-un-nissa
     contending roundly that if Walidâd had had as much respectful affection for his widow as her
     husband had had for his, he could easily have caused himself to be hanged; since he had
     certainly deserved it.
Whereat there would be war, until some one in the alley, or round the corner did something
     outrageous,--threw slops over some one, or had twins, or imported a new mother-in-law! Then,
     friendly discussion becoming a necessity of life, the big wooden bed would once more hold two
     old ladies, two roly-poly bolsters, two quilts--also two tongues! But these confined
     themselves, for a time, to lesser grievances; such as the general decadence of the age,
     manifested by the reluctance of young people to obey the old.
There was, however, no sign of displeasure in the reception prepared for Roshan, when one
     afternoon, immediately after his arrival at Eshwara, he appeared to prostrate himself at the
     feet of age; at least so he had said in his letter of intimation. Mumtâza Mahal knew her duty
     towards men-folk better than to show temper at once; knew also the suffocating effect of
     ceremonials. So the tarnished treasures of past state had been dug out of the mounds of litter
     heaped up in all four corners of the arcaded room, and set about the courtyard. An old
     elephant-housing covered the wooden bed, and to it Roshan was conducted: his grandmother,
     despite her best green satin trousers, squatting below, on a mat.
The young soldier felt and looked thoroughly uncomfortable. Out of sheer funk of the old
     lady's remarks if he had appeared in his usual mufti of English tweed and a
     close-fitting turban, he had reverted to the airy muslins and embroidered smoking-caps of his
     forbears. He felt chilly, barely decent in them; and, indeed, the whole environment was
     absolutely repugnant to him. His grandmother's tramways could scarcely be otherwise to one who
     had gone ahead by express train like Roshan Khân. Thoroughly well-educated, he knew himself to
     be considered one of the smartest native officers in the army. A first-class polo player, a
     fair cricketer, able to handle cue and racket, and without equal at the foils, he had for years
     met Englishmen on equal terms in sporting matters. What wonder, then, that he sat looking
     inexpressibly bored beside the hookah which was the pride of his grandmamma's heart,
     in that it had belonged to many dead and gone Nawabs? He was simply longing for the solace of a
     smoke, yet he did not dare to use the silver cigarette case with his initials, "R.K." on it,
     which Lance Carlyon had given him at Christmas in return for the fencing lessons. Fortunately,
     however, boredom and yawns are correct during visits of ceremony, so Mumtâza Mahal crossed her
     little fat hands over her little fat green-trousered legs, and told herself the lad was
     improved in both manners and looks; was distinctly more like her brother, the late and sainted
     Nawab. The fact emphasized her regret that, after a brilliant career in a mission school, a
     career which must have led to a minor clerkship, her grandson should have taken the unheard-of
     course of entering the army! If he could even have gone as the Nawab's grand-nephew, with a
     dozen troopers or so as following, it might have been bearable; but, as Walidâd's extraction
     barred all claim to noble descent, enlistment meant something very different. The old lady,
     accustomed to obedience all round, when the dreadful defiance had occurred, ten years before,
     had called the stars to witness that it was all--that everything was--Pidar Narâyan's fault!
     And then she had fallen a-whimpering, knowing right well that but for the latter's
     intercession, she herself would have had no "pinson"; since Government bars those who
     can be proved to be personally implicated in evil doings. And now, as she sat looking at her
     grandson, the same conflicting estimates made her irritable. Why had Pidar Narâyan ever put his
     finger in the Eshwara pie? Yet, without him, where would they all have been? Still, he need not
     have taught the lad to fence, and so turned him into a mean, common soldier.
Now, whether this was true, whether his skill with the foils had turned Roshan's thoughts
     towards a fighting life, or whether it was simply the result of natural aptitudes that way, the
     choice of professions had been wise. His Colonel,--of the old school though he was,--had
     admitted, when pressed, that the young Mahomedan, given practice, might be able to
     lead the regiment as well as a fresh-joined English subaltern. The newer school, again, playing
     the Krieg spiel against him at Simla, and finding itself in grips with a genuine gift
     for tactics, had shaken its head and confessed the hardship of such a talent being barred from
     finding its proper level. Still it was impossible to legislate for exceptions without upsetting
     the every-day army apple-cart.
Roshan himself, being sensible--above all, being of a nation which accepts limitations as a
     law of God--was, as a rule, satisfied with his future risaldar majorship, and, if he
     was lucky, Aide-de-Camp to the Queen, and a few other titles tacked on to it. Like all
     natives of India he lived largely on the approbation of his immediate superiors, and this he
     had without stint; besides, his whole line of thought had become too military for any
     subversion of rule and discipline to seem desirable.
Yet the curb made itself felt sometimes; never more keenly than at his grandmother's scornful
     look, when, in reply to her catechising, he named his income.
"Only that! Bâh! Tis the pay of a coolie!"
"'Tis the pay of my rank, anyhow," he replied sulkily, "and I cannot expect promotion yet;
     the rules--"
She waggled her be-veiled, be-jewelled head cunningly. "Rules! What have rules to do with
     favour, either for men or women? Lo! thy grand-uncle, the Nawab, gave twice that to a coachman
     who had one eye black and the other blue because he fancied him! So, if thou art in favour, as
     thou sayest, ask for more. The Huzoors will give it, sooner than lose thee."
Roshan did not attempt explanation; he simply evaded the point by asserting that the pay was
     sufficient for his wants. In a way it was an unfortunate remark, since it precipitated the
     lecture lurking in the old lady's mind.
"And for the wife's that is to come?" she asked, not without dignity,--the dignity of age
     reminding youth that its turn for duty has come. "And for the son's that has yet to be born?
     Why are these old arms still empty of thy children, Roshan?"
He had his answer ready; one that had hitherto baulked even the matrimonial desires of his
     mother, who, having gone to live with her own people, was backed up by sisters and
     sisters-in-law.
"Because the Most High decreed freedom for wife and son."
It was true. The wife found for him as a boy had died in child-birth.
But Mumtâza had made up her mind to refuse this excuse any longer. Matters were getting
     desperate. Here was Roshan past thirty, and never a child's voice to soothe the passion which
     seems to come back, vicariously, to Indian women in their old age. She had been brooding over
     an appeal ever since she had heard that, after ten years' absence, the lad was once more to be
     within reach of her tongue. So she edged closer to him, an almost pathetic authority in her
     face.
"That is but the skin of the orange, Roshan; I take not that as a gift! There be more wives
     than one, if the one die, even for the Huzoors whom thou apest. Nay! Light of the
     house! frown not," she continued, in sudden alarm at his look. "I did but mean that thou wert
     different from thy fathers. How canst help it? Think not the old woman cannot understand. Was I
     not young once? Was I not wedded with tears to thy grandfather--on whom be peace! So I know the
     heart hath fancies, and thine--listen while I whisper it--is--is for a wife like a
      mem! Wherefore not? Thou hast seen and talked with them--they have seemed better to
     thee than a cow of a black girl! What then? Have not mems married our people ere now?
     And with thee,"--she looked round quickly, to be certain of privacy, then leant closer
     still,--"with thee it would be easy--for there is thy cousin."
"My cousin?" he echoed stupidly.
"Yea! thy cousin, when all is said and done," she repeated, with faint scorn. "Is not the
     Miss at the palace Anâri Begum's granddaughter? Was not Anâri Begum thy grandfather's sister?
     If that is not cousin, what is it?"
He had known these facts before, of course, but they had never presented themselves to him in
     this connection. Yet they came instantly, accredited by custom. His cousin; if so, his wife, if
     he chose, almost by right. And yet from custom also, he--too sensible not to have gauged the
     vast difference between his position as regards Englishmen, and his position as regarded their
     wives, sisters, mothers--was conscious of distinct revolt. "Thou shouldst not say such things,"
     he exclaimed almost angrily; "the Miss-sahib--"
"Miss-sahib indeed!" interrupted Mumtâza with a forced giggle. "Who knows she is
     that? Not even Pidar Narâyan."
"Wherefore?" asked Roshan coldly. "Her mother was Bonaventura-sahib's child and
     heir. That is certain; else the Government would not have continued the grants given to him by
     the Nawab."
An expression of infinite cunning crossed the old lady's face; she tucked another budget of
      pân into her cheek, preparatory to a lengthy explanation.
"Not if it was payment for evidence given, by which Government could find excuse for seizing
     the rest, and sending innocent people to die in Calcutta? Thou knowest the tale, Roshan? How
     Pidar Narâyan said no word when everyone was searching, after Bun-avatâr's death, for Anâri
     Begum, who had disappeared, and how, when the land was being taken, he appeared with a baby, a
     baptized baby, and swore it was Bun-avatâr's lawful heir--that he himself had married them.
     Mayhap he did. But, look you, Anâri was in the palace zenâna ere she disappeared. Who
     is to say she is not thy cousin twice over?... I say not that she is, look you, but who can
     tell. Yet this is certain, Roshan; she hath Anâri Begum's eyes. For I have seen her; but a
     month ago the Miss who reads brought her, not knowing of these tales; for Pidar Narâyan keeps a
     silent tongue. Her name is Laila, and thine Roshan.[4] Is not that a fate? and she hath thy grand-aunt's eyes; ay!
     and thy grandfather's land too; for would it not have been Walidâd's, if Bun-avatâr had not
     ousted him from the wazeer-ship with singing birds?"
Roshan Khân stood up feeling as if he was being suffocated. It was ten years since he had had
     experience of the fine-drawn meshes of vague, almost useless, conspiracy for which Indian women
     have such vast capability; it was ten years since, with eyes open to his own advantage, he had
     cast in his lot loyally with the Government he served. In that time there had not been
     wanting--there never is in India--others, less scrupulous, ready to trade on his connection
     with a dispossessed family, and his possible sense of injustice. He had known how to treat
     them. But this idea bit shrewdly at a feeling which men of his stamp have inevitably--the
     desire for a wife more suitable to their own culture than they can hope to find among their own
     people. He gave an uneasy laugh. "These be dreams, indeed, grandmother. To begin with, Pidar
     Narâyan--"
"Pidar Narâyan! Pidar Narâyan!" echoed the old diplomatist tartly, "Art turned Hindoo, that
     thou dost count Narâyan[5] the Creator of all?" Then she
     suddenly clapped her hands together in absolute impatience and anger. "Yet is it true. He
      is the cause of all! But for him Bun-avatâr would have been as an over-fried fritter,
     a burst bladder, a drum on a hen's back! But for his teaching thee to fence--"
A quick frown came to her hearer's face. "Teaching! Ay! but only enough to make me fit for
     his skill to play with. I know that now. Well! let him try it again--" Roshan's sudden
     fierceness died down to sombre discontent--"but that is fool's talk. He is too old. I could not
     meet him on equal terms." He drew himself up proudly; yet he felt a vague regret at his own
     acquired sense of fair play. Below it lay a savagery that could rejoice in revenge at any
     price, and Mumtâza Mahal, watching him, thought him still more like his ancestors, and nodded
     approvingly.
"Think of it, at least, Roshan," she said, "and remember that it is not as if the girl were a
     real mem. Pidar Narâyan, for all he is so clever, was put to it to find a husband for
     the mother, the baptized baby! He took a poor creature from Martin's school at Lucknow, at
     last, who could not even speak English like a Huzoor--"
"Because he was Italian and a Catholic," put in Roshan, then shrugged his shoulders
     impatiently. "But thou canst not understand. 'Tis impossible! Dreams, grandmother, dreams!"
"Dreams come true even when forgotten, and torchbearers never see their own way," retorted
     the old lady, ending the discussion with proverbial wisdom as a clincher. "So think of it,
     since thoughts cost nothing, and tell no tales."
Roshan felt as if they did the former at any rate, as he strode back toward the fort, telling
     himself he would feel better when he had on his uniform once more. This was his
     metier, not marriage. The best soldiers, the really great soldiers--he paused, the
     knowledge that he could never rise to real greatness coming to make him clinch his right hand
     as if on his sword-hilt. The tempest of revolt which swept through him left him dazed, for he
     had reasoned the matter out with himself thoroughly, and thought he had accepted the situation,
     thought that he had realized that his dignity in the regiment under the present system went
     side by side, and not behind, that of the English officers. Yet here he was at the mercy of
     something too strong for acquired wisdom. He walked on faster to escape into a more wholesome
     environment, and by sheer force of will succeeded in driving away all thought of the past
     interview save a triviality. That was the remembrance that her name was Laila, his Roshan.
     Light and Darkness, Day and Night. A fate indeed.
As he passed into the courtyard, however, on his way to the door in the river bastion, a
     group in its centre, round the old gun, brought his attention back to realities, and he went
     towards it, his slipper-shod feet making no martial clank, this time, on the union-jack of
     raised paths. The group consisted of half a dozen or so of men listening to something which was
     being declaimed, with much gesticulation, by an ash-smeared jogi, whose wide-pierced
     ears, distended by conch-shell rings, and transverse bar of white on his forehead, showed him
     to belong to the sect which claims to have transcendental powers.
Apparently he had been making the claim, for a young man, whose costume smacked of Western
     culture, and whose face was acute, litigious, interrupted him impatiently.
"Yea, yea; possibly thou couldst come over the obstruction, Gorakh-nâth-jee; but the
     question is whether the obstruction be legal. Is it not so, Lala Ramanund?"
Lala Ramanund, whose dress was even more Western, and who had a certain air of distinction,
     due, evidently, to position, assented; adding, as a rider, and with some contempt, that at
     present they had only jogi Gorakh-nâth's word that any interference was intended.
Gorakh-nâth, a tall, muscular man, naked save for his grass-rope girdle, his wild hair twined
     and twisted to a tiara, his wild, half-insane eyes telling of drugs, shot a glance of absolute
     defiance at Ramanund. "Thy name, pundit-jee, is not likely to give friendly witness to
     mine," he began, alluding to the fact that they were respectively called after the founders of
     their absolutely antagonistic sects, "and yet methinks thou couldst, seeing--"
Here Dya Ram, the first speaker, alarmed in his lawyer's soul at the militant tone of the
      jogi, suggested hastily that they might inquire, say at the gate; or stay! there was
     the risaldar coming; he must know.
Once more, as he listened to the question put to him, the expression of his race and creed
     came to Roshan's face, hiding its culture.
"Of a certainty!" he replied haughtily. "The gun belongs to the Fort. It is not to be used as
     a shelter for--for saints!" His contempt was palpable.
"I deny your premise," put in Dya Ram eagerly. "The gun is the people's by prescriptive
     right. I can use it if I choose. The Government professes neutrality; therefore, no one has a
     right to interfere with my religion."
Roshan's face was a study. "Lo! Dya Ram, for thou art my old class-fellow surely, hast gone
     back to the old beliefs since the days when thou didst sign thyself at the end of thy essays,
     and in thy books, 'Dya Ram, Agnostic'?"
Dya Ram gave an uneasy cough. "It is a question of legality--" he began.
"And of money also," put in a new voice cringingly. "The pilgrims come hither to see the
     saint, and then bathe. But if there is no saint, many will not come, and I, who have my right
     on the steps as marker of the caste marks--"
"Right!" echoed the Mahomedan curtly. "Have a care, caste-marker, lest we do not claim the
     courtyard also."
Here Ramanund, who had hitherto listened indifferently, took up the cudgels. "That can
     scarcely be, risaldar-sahib," he said; "our pious folk have come hither to perform
     their offices since time began."
Gorakh-nâth turned on him at once. "Not so, Vaishnava!" he said. "Thou and thine
     know naught of the Beginning of Things. Come to us and Holy Shiv-jee for that! Thou
     art as far from the great wisdom as he"--here he pointed wildly to Roshan--"yea! further,
     despite thy pretence of purity! Despite thy hunger yesterday when, returning to thy lost faith,
     thou didst come here to eat as the twice-born should, and a shadow fell upon thy food! Despite
     thy deafness to this world just now,"--here he laughed jeeringly,--"which kept thee back from
     bearing witness to my truth, to the truth of Shiv-jee's servant!"
Dya Ram looked at him, then at Ramanund perplexedly. "What means he?" he said aside. "Didst
     thou really come hither?"
"My wife was dying," replied Ramanund in a low, rapid undertone, "and I--you
     understand--there--there is nothing certain, you see--and any chance--one goes back at such
     times--" he broke off almost desperately in his confession.
Dya Ram, who had signed himself Agnostic, nodded. He understood what it was to be rudderless
     in a familiar current, and came to the rescue of his friend's consistency by asserting that any
     such decision regarding the gun, if one had been made, would certainly be disputed. That he and
     his--though they demurred to its being counted against them for faith in the worshipping of
     mere matter--would, if necessary, carry the case to the High Court.
"Carry it to the Court of thy god Indra, if need be, Dya Ram," retorted Roshan, and as he
     strode off he spat deliberately in the dust. That also surprised him faintly, for he had
     thought he had learnt tolerance of the Huzoors. So, with a frown and yet with relief,
     he put his hand on the latch which would open the way back to a less disturbing environment. As
     he did so, another hand was on it also. The door opened from within, and Father Ninian stood on
     the threshold barring it; but barring it with smiles.
"Ah! my pupil," he said in English. "I have been listening to your praises from Captain
     Dering, and from Mr. Carlyon too. He says you are the best fencer in the army. You and I must
     cross foils again sometime, eh, my pupil?"
Roshan, as he stepped aside elaborately to let the old man pass, drew himself up and
     saluted.
"If you please, sir; but I have learnt new things since--since those days."
His tone made Father Ninian pause to look at him for an instant; then he replied, "And I have
     not forgotten the old; that makes us equal."
Roshan gave a little hard laugh as he went in; if the old man liked to think so, let him.
But Father Ninian's face as he passed--a black shadow in the sunshine--across the level steps
     leading down to the river wore a wistful smile. Old and new, he thought. New and old.
     Senseless, useless words, fit only for humanity to juggle dreams from, since no man knew the
     unseen beginning, knew the unseen end; knew even his own birth and death. In the endless band
     of life, naught came first, naught last, and the things of to-day might be old, the things of
     yesterday might be new.
"Margherita!"
The name came soundless to the priest's lips, and a quick flush of youth, and hope, and joy
     seemed to smooth away the wrinkles of his face. A faint laugh, a happy laugh, went further
     towards a hearing than the name. It was sixty years ago, nearly, since he had left her. An old
     story indeed, and yet how new. The new wine of it ran in his old veins, thrilled to his old
     brain, and took him back absolutely to a palazzo on the outskirts of Rome, with the pale flood
     of the Tiber flowing beneath a marble loggia. He had never looked on running water since
     without remembrance, and now--his feet having led him unconsciously to the river's edge--he
     stood smiling at the pale flood of the Hari. For he knew that he had fought a good fight, that
     he had kept the promise he had made in order to still her soul; that he had kept her boy,
     Pietro Bonaventura, so far as he could, from harm, and his child, and his child's child,
     gathering them as lambs into the arms of Holy Church.
And then something in the last thought drove the tender human smile from his face. He
     murmured a "Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa," bent to the stream, and dipping his fingers
     in it, crossed himself.
"May Shiv-jee's blessing go with his holy water, Baba-jee," said a voice
     behind him. It was Gorakh-nâth the jogi, who, his sympathizers having departed, had
     come to fill his gourd.
Father Ninian turned; so for a space they stood face to face; representatives of the two
     great supernaturalisms of the world; the one which has held the West, the one which has held
     the East.
The old man's face, at first, returned to kindly human tolerance; for his fifty years of
     Eshwara had widened his sympathies. But, as he stood before the jogi it hardened, and
     the priestly arrogance of the naked ash-smeared figure, stretching a right hand in claim over
     the sanctifying power of the river, was reflected in Father Ninian's as he spread his left hand
     upwards, and turned on his heel with the words, "Vade retro Satanas!"
</div></body></text></TEI>