<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Hosts of the Lord</title><author>Steel, Flora Annie (1847-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
THE WORLD'S DESIRE
The Viceroy's camp was no longer a city of dreams.
Its silence had gone, lost in that indefinable sense of sound which seems to come from the
     heart-beats, even, of unseen humanity; and the whiteness, the purity of it, was stained and
     smirched by the scarlet-as-sin coatees of the innumerable orderlies, who bustled about from
     tent to tent, with huge files of references, or lingered at the tent doors extorting shoe-money
     from the native visitors, who came in shoals to plead for patronage from one or another of the
     bigwigs belonging to the Hosts of the Lord-sahib. Groups of these petitioners,
     awaiting their turn for an interview, were to be seen at most tents; but they stood in crowds
     round one, in which the Commissioner of the Division was making the final arrangements for the
     coming durbar; in consultation with the Under Secretary to Supreme Government. It was
     a difficult task, involving as it did the classification of the aristocracy, plutocracy, and
     democracy of India, in one generally satisfactory Court-guide.
"It cann't be done in this wurrld," remarked the Commissioner, in one of those suave,
     plastic, Cork brogues which might be made of Cork butter from the softness and lack of friction
     they bring to the English language. "An' what's more the Archangel Gabriel couldn't do it in
     heaven, though he'd have a better chance; for the Cherubim wouldn't be wanting seats at all! We
     are bound to displease somebody, so let's cast lots before the Lord; it's Scriptural,
     annyhow."
The Under Secretary looked a trifle shocked, being unacquainted with the Commissioner's
     methods.
"But we must,"--he began.
The other's keen face looked up from the lists for a second. "Of course we must--we govern
     India practically, by cane-bottomed chairs. Ye remember old Gunning. No!--before your time, I
     expect! Well! he kept two hundred miles of North-West frontier as quiet as the grave, for five
     years, by the simple expedient of awarding thirteen seats in his divisional durbar to
     each of his districts, and only taking twelve chairs with him into camp. The mâliks,
     you see, never could tell which would be chosen odd man out, an' the fear of it kept 'em like
     sucking doves."
"Indeed!" remarked the Under Secretary, fidgeting with his lists resignedly, for he was under
     the impression that time was being lost. "I'm afraid that sort of thing wouldn't answer
     nowadays." The elder man looked at him gravely; just one short glance, as he dipped his pen in
     the ink and went on writing, revising, referring.
"Not a bit of it! They'd send down to Whiteway Laidlaw's and get Austrian bent-wood chairs by
     value payable parcel post! The Teuton, sir, is ruinin' British prestige by cheapenin' the seats
     of the mighty. There! that's done--block A's beautiful entirely. Now for block B. Who's your
     favourite, and why are you backing him?"
Once more the junior appeared a trifle shocked. "With reference to Roshan Khân," he began.
     "His Excellency desired me to ask whether it might not be possible to give him a step for
     being, as it were, in his own division. He belongs to Eshwara, I believe."
"The very reason why he cann't get an inch more than his due. But you can tell H. E. that
     I've settled it. I've asked Dering to put him on duty, an' when he is in uniform there's no
     mistaking his place. And then we'll ask him in to the reception afterwards with the sahib
      logue. Who's your next--Dya Ram! what, the little pleader?--Why the blazes should he come
     to durbar?--attorneys don't go to St. James."
"Mr. Cox, the member of parliament--perhaps you may remember him--"
"A little red-haired fellow, was he? who wrote a book about India on the back of his
     two-monthly return ticket?"
"Mr. Cox is a man of great influence with his party, and he supports Dya Ram's--"
"Pestilential little fool," interrupted the Commissioner impartially, impersonally. "It
     wouldn't be bad, though--stop his scurrilous tongue for a bit. Favour does, you know. But I
     cann't see my way to it. Old Hodinuggur would be refusing his 'atta and
      pân[7] again. He did it once, ye know, when some
     low-caste fellow was within sight of him. Said he didn't eat with sweepers; and if Crawford--he
     was Commissioner at the time--"
"Yes!" said the Under Secretary, still more resignedly. He had not yet grasped the fact that
     his coadjutor talked while he worked--
"Hadn't been six foot four and broad in proportion," went on his tormentor imperturbably, "so
     that the--let us call them the subsequent negotiations--diplomatic negotiations--it sounds
     well!--didn't reach the eye of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, the Thakoor--one of our best
     men let me tell you--would have got into trouble--more'd have been the pity."
"Yes," assented the man of Secretariats, "but about Dya Ram--"
"Dya Ram, is it now? Could we put him in under the head 'benevolence' think you? Did he ever
     vaccinate a baby, or breed a horse, or give anything to a female hospital? No! Then the devil
     fly off with him for complicating the problem of British rule in India. Why should he want to
     come to durbar at all? When people change their dress they should change their
     desires, but the only effect our civilization has upon some men I know, is to make them want to
     keep their hat and their boots on at the same time! Well, that's done! I've found a place for
     him where Hodinuggur can't see the tail end of him unless he squints. Now--who's your
     next?"
While this sort of thing was going on inside the tent, Dya Ram and the Thakoor of Hodinuggur
     were in full view of each other, outside it. The former, having scorned the sinful scarlet
     coatees even to the point of refusing to have his patent leather shoes dusted, was walking up
     and down in English fashion. The latter, in a wonderful parcel-gilt coach, was awaiting the
     effect of his ten-rupee tip with perfect patience and serenity; while his retinue, which
     consisted of a dozen ragged retainers carrying lances festooned with tinsel and yaks' tails,
     stared contemptuously at the two sentries pacing up and down below the flagstaff; who--to tell
     truth--seemed so monotonously part of the general show as to suggest that they also were under
     the charge of the two yellow-legged policemen who stood on either side of the rose-bed.
It was high noon, and the various departmental gongs had begun to give their version of the
     meridian, with that unbiased disregard for that of their neighbours which makes the time of day
     an absolute uncertainty in a big camp. But it was calling time evidently; for two superb
     red-coats, blazoned with gold, appeared in company with two big books and a silver inkstand,
     and disappeared with them into the durbar tent. And shortly afterwards an
      aide-de-camp sloped over to it, yawning.
Both Dya Ram and the Thakoor knew that this meant preparation for those, who, having the
      entrée to the Government House, had the right to put down their names in those big
     books; but the fact itself affected their two types very differently. The old Rajput's visit of
     ceremony was of another sort. He, obeying definite orders, would come at a specified time, and
     get his specified salute with his compeers. But Dya Ram was like the wild tribes in one way; he
     was unspecified! He was neither fish nor fowl, flesh nor good red herring.
So, as he watched a young Englishman drive up in a bamboo cart, dash into the tent, and dash
     out again as if the place belonged to him, he felt aggrieved. He even went so far as to
     formulate his grievance in mental words, and then these appeared to him so apposite to a
     leading article, that he took out a note-book, and, after some corrections, stored away, for
     future use, the assertion, that 'the time will come when the colour of the hand which holds
      the pen will be no bar to its writing its name in the Book of----?' He did not feel sure
     of the qualitative noun, and after trying Fate, Fame, Life, and Lord, left a blank instead.
Meanwhile carriages and dogcarts all of sorts had begun to drive up, their occupants
     disappearing into the tent for a second or two, then coming out with the smile of the elect on
     their faces. Father Ninian was one of the first, resplendent in a new soutane and
     sash, with Akbar Khân in his orderly's get-up, oscillating between a palsy of delighted
     servility, and a catalepsy of dignity; the one for his superiors, the other for his equals.
And, after a while, in one of those mysteriously nondescript four-wheeled vehicles that defy
     classification, but may be said to come under the head "phitton" (phaeton) of which
     mission people seem to have a monopoly, came good Mrs. Campbell and her niece, Erda Shepherd;
     the former full of indignant, yet meek alarm, because Dr. James, having come across an old
     friend further down the avenue, had bidden her go on and write his name as well as her own.
"I ken weel how it will be," she asserted to her niece, "for I havena brought my specs, an' a
     body cannot but be nervous with a young man in a scarlet coat glowering at them! I shall put
     the doctor into the wrong book; for, you see, I canna write the two names ane after the ither
     like a marriage lines; for there is one big bookie for the women, and one for the men-folk,
     like a Puseyite chapel! Ay! an' for the matter o' that, like a divorce court--and I sou'd never
     hear the last o't if I evened the doctor to myself!"
"Let me do all three, Auntie," said Erda, with a laugh, as she got out of the carriage.
     "Really, there's no need for you to come,--I'll be back in a minute."
The blaze of sunshine blinded her for the darkness of the tent, and she could scarcely tell
     whose hand it was which stretched itself frankly, eagerly, for hers as she entered. Yet, even
     through her glove she knew the touch, before Lance Carlyon's voice said joyfully,--
"Come to write your name? I've just written mine. Funny our hitting off the same time, isn't
     it?"
The tone of his voice, joined to that startling recognition of his touch--which she could not
     conceal from herself--made her shrink, as if from actual intrusion. "I have to write my uncle's
     and aunt's first," she said coldly. "There was no use in us all coming in."
She walked on as she spoke to where the two books lay on a sort of lectern, while the
      aide-de-camp, seeing the visitor was a lady, came forward politely to assist.
"Not that book, Mansfield," remarked Lance, coolly. "Miss Shepherd wants--Miss Shepherd, will
     you allow me to introduce Captain Mansfield--to write her uncle's name first."
She looked back at him almost angrily, full of resentment at his persistence; but, even in
     the semi-blindness which was still hers, his face showed too kind for that; and as, at that
     moment, another lady came in with a flutter of laces and ribbons to appropriate Captain
     Mansfield's ready services, Erda had to allow Lance to find her a pen.
"That's right! Now for the other book," he said. The aide-de-camp had by this time
     gone to see the laces and ribbons back to their carriage, so the two were alone.
"Your aunt's first, you know." There was a suspicion of friendly chaff in his tone, this
     time, but it was gone in a minute as he went on quickly--"Erdmuth!--is that your name? Why!--it
     means earth-mood--or--or world's desire, doesn't it?"
She felt herself flush. "I did not know that you were such a German scholar," she replied,
     sarcastically. "Yes! my name is Erdmuth Dorothea. I was called so after--after some one you
     most likely know nothing about, Countess Zinzendorf. She was famous enough, though,--" she
     paused, feeling savagely desirous of snubbing him--"But I daresay you never even happened to
     hear of Jean Ziska, Mr. Carlyon?"
He smiled suddenly, broadly. "Jean Ziska!" he echoed. "Rather! We had a pony called Ziska at
     home--a Hungarian--used to eat thistles like a donkey!"
He stopped to laugh, and she was about to turn and rend him, when he continued, half
     apologetically, "Of course I have--only the name, you see, brought back such jolly old times.
     Ziska was the beggar who had his skin made into a drum when he was dead. I don't expect it's
     true, but it's a fine tale; the drum ecclesiastic with a vengeance, and no mistake!"
"Oh! but it is," interrupted the girl, forgetting her annoyance in her eagerness. "My
     grandfather--we are really Moravians, you see, and our name should be Schaeffer,--saw it when
     he was a child. He used to tell me that people said if it was beaten, everybody must--"
But Lance's attention had wandered. He was looking at her signature with a curious, almost
     wistful smile. "Erdmuth!" he repeated thoughtfully; then turned to her. "I say! you really
     ought to come to the ball with that name--do!"
He was simply, she told herself, the most distractingly irrelevant, yet at the same time the
     most appallingly direct, person she had ever come across. "Really, Mr. Carlyon," she began,
     with such heat that the aide-de-camp, returning, stared; until Lance coolly asked him
     if he didn't think Miss Shepherd very unkind not to come to the Bachelor's Ball? Whereupon he,
     having by this time had enough of laces and ribbons, and begun to recognize a distinct charm in
     the glistening coils of hair, half-hidden by a wide hat, promptly asked her for the pleasure of
     a dance.
Erda looked from one to the other aghast, and to her own intense surprise fell back upon the
     woman's all-embracing excuse, "I--I really haven't a dress." It seemed the simplest and
     easiest.
"Oh! anything does for a fancy ball," persisted Lance, argumentatively, as he followed her
     out. "A tailor in the bazaar would run you up a Greek dress in no time, and it would do awfully
     well. All white, don't you know--" his voice slackened and grew soft, as if he saw what he
     described, and the sight made him glad--"all straight folds with a little edge of red-gold
     like--" he paused, then went on boldly--"like the sunshine on your hair. And red-gold bracelets
     high up on your arms--and a red-gold apple in your hand--the World's Desire--" He stopped
     abruptly, with a quick catch in his breath, startled at his own words.
And she, too, held her breath before the vision; for she saw it also. Saw herself, as he had
     described her, and the glamour of it, the desire of it, assailed her, body and soul.
Yet she made a desperate, a passionately resentful effort to ignore them. "I didn't know you
     were so well up in chiffons, Mr. Carlyon," she said, with a forced laugh. "Did you
     ever think of setting up a milliner's shop? One is badly needed in Eshwara."
But the glamour of it had come to Lance Carlyon like a revelation, and the blood was leaping
     in his veins. "I will, if you--" he began.
She scarcely recognized his voice in one way. In another she knew it must be his; for all the
     vitality and strength, the single-mindedness and simplicity which she had seen in him so often,
     were crowded into it; brought into it by fancy, concentrated by a mere suggestion--of
     herself.
The magic of this seemed to encompass her; she sought shelter from it recklessly.
"I?" she interrupted. "I don't go in for that sort of thing, Mr. Carlyon. You seem to forget
     my work--work which I value above--milliners! Try Mrs. Smith--there she is coming in her
     victoria; she is one of the best-dressed women I ever saw."
She could not certainly have looked better than she did as, seeing Lance Carlyon, she called
     to him as her carriage drove up.
"Do you know where Captain Dering is? He promised--"
Here Lance, with guilty haste, interrupted her. He was just about to drive over and give her
     a message. Dering had had a touch of fever; he had been over at the palace arranging about the
     Chinese lanterns for the decorations till late the evening before, and--
"He might have sent a little sooner," put in Mrs. Smith. "I have been waiting; he said he
     would drive me in his dogcart." There was no vexation, only an almost pathetic surprise in her
     voice; and Lance looked guiltier still.
"I'm awfully sorry--it's all my fault--I was late to begin with, and then--" He glanced at
     Erda involuntarily,--compromisingly, it seemed to her.
"I am afraid I kept Mr. Carlyon," she said, haughtily; "most unwillingly, I assure you.
     Thanks so much, but I can get in quite well by myself."
As she drove off, however, her head was in a whirl; and as, when pausing to pick up Dr.
     Campbell, the whole panorama of the camp, the hills behind it, the distant temples of Eshwara,
     the busy place-seekers in the foreground, the scarlet-sin-stains of the chuprassies'
     coats against the dazzling whiteness of the tents, lay before her, one of those rare,
     incomprehensible moods came upon her when the soul retreats into its spiritual body, so that
     the sight grows clear, the touch keen, and you can feel the round world spin beneath your feet,
     see the shadow of earth stretching far among the stars.
The World's Desire! What was it?
Brought up to believe that the heart of man--that mainspring of the spinning world--was vile,
     she had never asked herself why this was so. She had read the story of Adam and Eve with
     unquestioning faith, yet never sought to know what had changed the good to evil.
But now, as her eyes rested on those far-distant peaks with that faint mist about their feet
     hiding the "Cradle of the Gods," and followed, as far as the eye could follow in the nearer
     hills, the climbing track worn by the weariness of that eternal search after righteousness, she
     asked herself what it was which kept mankind so long upon the road; asked herself, for the
     first time, what that first sin had been which had lost Paradise.
No lack of desire after salvation, surely. Generation on generation of Eastern pilgrims had
     worn that path out of the sheer rock, had agonized after good, and remained evil. A little
     shudder of memory ran through her at the thought--how evil! And now the West, with its white
     tents, its white face, its white creed, had come to show a newer, a better way.
Had it? But what had it done for itself? She had worked for two years in London ere coming
     out to India; and another shudder of memory swept over her of what she had seen there.
The World's Desire! Lance Carlyon had called her that--a woman with a red-gold apple in her
     hand.
The sound of angry dispute brought her back to realities. They were passing out of the camp
     under the triumphal arch, and one of its sentries was barring the entrance of an ash-smeared
     figure which was brandishing a stamped petition paper, as if it had been a card of admission,
     and yelling excitedly for "Justice! justice!"
"It is that pernicious fellow, Gorakh-nâth," remarked Dr. Campbell, sententiously. "He
     wishes, no doubt, to appeal against Captain Dering's order, of which I, for one, am heartily
     glad. A Christian government is bound to refuse sanction to the practice of a faith which, it
     is impossible not to see, is degrading in the extreme to those who hold it."
Erda's eyes were still clear; clear with what those who do not see, call dreams.
"Yet it seeks what we do--peace--forgiveness--the cradle of the goodness, the innocence it
     left behind--somehow."
Dr. James Campbell turned to her in dignified, amazed displeasure. "May I ask what has
     caused--"
"That's easy tellin'," interrupted Mrs. Campbell, comfortably. "It's yon hat with feathers,
     when she is accustomed to a pith one. An' she standin' in the sun talkin' to Mr. Carlyon! It's
     just got to the lassie's head. I was the same myself when I was young, Erda; but Dr. James
     thought it a duty--
"And so I do now, my dear," put in her husband. "It is a distinct duty on the part of mission
     workers to take every precaution, and if her head is Erda's weak point, I shall warn
     David--"
Mrs. Campbell nodded hers and smiled, and almost winked. "Oh! Davie will take care of her,
     never fear; he is not a ninny!"
Erda flushed scarlet all over her face and neck. It seemed to her as if she had forgotten her
     cousin, the Reverend David Campbell, altogether. And yet she was engaged to be married to him
     as soon as he returned from a well-earned holiday in England.
A swift remorse left her pale again. Davie, who was so much in earnest, who looked to her
     as--as--
That vision of a woman with a red-gold edging to her white robe and a red-gold apple in her
     hand came to send the blood to her face once more.
</div></body></text></TEI>