<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Clementina</title><author>Mason, Alfred Edward Woodley (1865-1948)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1901</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
CHAPTER XIII
Meanwhile within the room the Princess-mother clung to Clementina. The terror which her sharp
     cry had expressed was visible in her strained and startled face. Her eyes, bright with terror,
     stared at the drawn curtain; she could not avert them; she still must gaze, fascinated by her
     fears; and her dry, whispering lips were tremulous.
"Heaven have mercy!" she whispered; "shut the window! Shut it fast!" and as Clementina moved
     in surprise, she clung the closer to her daughter. "No, do not leave me! Come away! Jesu! here
     are we alone,—two women!"
"Mother," said Clementina, soothing her and gently stroking her hair, as though she in truth
     was the mother and the mother her daughter, "there's no cause for fear."
"No cause for fear! I saw him—the sentry—he is climbing up. Ah!" and again her voice rose to
     a cry as Wogan's foot grated on the window-ledge.
"Hush, mother! A cry will ruin us. It's not the sentinel," said Clementina.

Clementina was laughing, and by her laughter the Princess-mother was in some measure
     reassured.
"Who is it, then?" she asked.
"Can you not guess?" said Clementina, incredulously. "It is so evident. Yet I would not have
     you guess. It is my secret, my discovery. I'll tell you." She heard a man behind the curtain
     spring lightly from the window to the floor. She raised her voice that he might know she had
     divined him. "Your sentinel is the one man who has the right to rescue me. Your sentinel's the
     King."
At that moment Wogan pushed aside the curtain.
"No, your Highness," said he, "but the King's servant."
The Princess-mother dropped into a chair and looked at her visitor with despair. It was not
     the sentinel, to be sure, but, on the other hand, it was Mr. Wogan, whom she knew for a very
     insistent man with a great liking for his own way. She drew little comfort from Mr. Wogan's
     coming.
It seemed, too, that he was not very welcome to Clementina; for she drew back a step and in a
     voice which dropped and had a tremble of disappointment, "Mr. Wogan," she said, "the King is
     well served;" and she stood there without so much as offering him her hand. Wogan had not
     counted on so cold a greeting, but he understood the reason, and was not sure but what he
     approved of it. After all, she had encountered perils on the King's account; she had some sort
     of a justification to believe the King
      would do the like for her. It had not occurred to him or indeed to anyone before;
     but now that he saw the chosen woman so plainly wounded, he felt a trifle hot against his King
     for having disappointed her. He set his wits to work to dispel the disappointment.
"Your Highness, the truth is there are great matters brewing in Spain. His Majesty was needed
     there most urgently. He had to decide between Innspruck and Cadiz, and it seemed that he would
     honour your great confidence in him and at the same time serve you best—"
Clementina would not allow him to complete the sentence. Her cheek flushed, and she said
     quickly,—
"You are right, Mr. Wogan. The King is right. Mine was a girl's thought. I am ashamed of it;"
     and she frankly gave him her hand. Wogan was fairly well pleased with his apology for his King.
     It was not quite the truth, no doubt, but it had spared Clementina a trifle of humiliation, and
     had re-established the King in her thoughts. He bent over her hand and would have kissed it,
     but she stopped him.
"No," said she, "an honest handclasp, if you please; for no woman can have ever lived who had
     a truer friend," and Wogan, looking into her frank eyes, was not, after all, nearly so well
     pleased with the untruth he had told her. She was an uncomfortable woman to go about with
     shifts and contrivances. Her open face, with its broad forehead and
      the clear, steady eyes of darkest blue, claimed truth as a prerogative. The blush
     which had faded from her cheeks appeared on his, and he began to babble some foolish word about
     his unworthiness when the Princess-mother interrupted him in a grudging voice,—
"Mr. Wogan, you were to bring a written authority from the Prince my husband."
Wogan drew himself up straight.
"Your Highness," said he, with a bow of the utmost respect, "I was given such an
     authority."
The Princess-mother held out her hand. "Will you give it me?"
"I said that I was given such an authority. But I have it no longer. I was attacked on my way
     from Ohlau. There were five men against me, all of whom desired that letter. The room was
     small; I could not run away; neither had I much space wherein to resist five men. I knew that
     were I killed and that letter found on me, your Highness would thereafter be too surely guarded
     to make escape possible, and his Highness Prince Sobieski would himself incur the Emperor's
     hostility. So when I had made sure that those five men were joined against me, I twisted that
     letter into a taper and before their faces lit my pipe with it."
Clementina's eyes were fixed steadily and intently upon Wogan's face. When he ended she drew
     a deep breath, but otherwise she did not move. The Princess-mother, however, was unmistakably
     relieved. She spoke with a kindliness she had never
      shown before to Wogan; she even smiled at him in a friendly way.
"We do not doubt you, Mr. Wogan, but that written letter, giving my daughter leave to go, I
     needs must have before I let her go. A father's authority! I cannot take that upon myself."
Clementina took a quick step across to her mother's side.
"You did not hear," she said.
"I heard indeed that Mr. Wogan had burnt the letter."
"But under what stress, and to spare my father and to leave me still a grain of hope. Mother,
     this gentleman has run great risks for me,—how great I did not know; even now in this one
     instance we can only guess and still fall short of the mark."
The Princess-mother visibly stiffened with maternal authority.
"My child, without some sure sign the Prince consents, you must not go."
Clementina looked towards Wogan for assistance. Wogan put his hand into his pocket.
"That sure sign I have," said he. "It is a surer sign than any written letter; for
     handwriting may always be counterfeit. This could never be," and he held out on the palm of his
     hand the turquoise snuff-box which the Prince had given him on New Year's day. "It is a jewel
     unique in all the world, and the Prince gave it me. It is a jewel he treasured not only for its
     value, but its history. Yet he gave it me. It was won by the great King John of
      Poland, and remains as a memorial of the most glorious day in all that warrior's
     glorious life; yet his son gave it me. With his own hands he put it into mine to prove to me
     with what confidence he trusted your Highness's daughter to my care. That confidence was
     written large in the letter I burnt, but I am thinking it is engraved for ever upon this
     stone."
The Princess-mother took the snuff-box reluctantly and turned it over and over. She was
     silent. Clementina answered for her.
"I am ready," she said, and she pointed to a tiny bundle on a chair in which a few clothes
     were wrapped. "My jewels are packed in the bundle, but I can leave them behind me if needs
     be."
Wogan lifted up the bundle and laughed.
"Your Highness teaches a lesson to soldiers; for there is never a knapsack but can hold this
     and still have half its space to spare. The front door is unlatched?"
"M. Chateaudoux is watching in the hall."
"And the hall's unlighted?"
"Yes."
"Jenny should be here in a minute, and before she comes I must tell you she does not know the
     importance of our undertaking. She is the servant to Mrs. Misset, who attends your Highness
     into Italy. We did not let her into the secret. We made up a comedy in which you have your
     parts to play. Your Highness," and he turned to Clementina, "is a rich Austrian heiress, deeply
     enamoured of Captain Lucius O'Toole."

"Captain Lucius O'Toole!" exclaimed the mother, in horror. "My daughter enamoured of a
     Captain Lucius O'Toole!"
"He is one of my three companions," said Wogan, imperturbably. "Moreover, he is six foot
     four, the most creditable lover in the world."
"Well," said Clementina, with a laugh, "I am deeply enamoured of the engaging Captain Lucius
     O'Toole. Go on, sir."
"Your parents are of a most unexampled cruelty. They will not smile upon the fascinating
     O'Toole, but have locked you up on bread and water until you shall agree to marry a wealthy but
     decrepit gentleman of eighty-three."
"I will not," cried Clementina; "I will starve myself to death first. I will marry my six
     feet four or no other man in Christendom."
"Clementina!" cried her mother, deprecatingly.
"But at this moment," continued Wogan, "there very properly appears the fairy godmother in
     the person of a romantical maiden aunt."
"Oh!" said Clementina, "I have a romantical maiden aunt."
"Yes," said Wogan, and turning with a bow to the Princess-mother; "your Highness."
"I?" she exclaimed, starting up in her chair.
"Your Highness has written an encouraging letter to Captain O'Toole," resumed Wogan. The
     Princess-mother gasped, "A letter to Captain O'Toole," and she flung up her hands and fell back
     in her chair.

"On the receipt of the letter Captain O'Toole gathers his friends, borrows a horse here, a
     carriage there, and a hundred guineas from Heaven knows whom, comes to the rescue like a
     knight-errant, and retells the old story of how love laughs at locksmiths."
As Wogan ended, the mother rose from her chair. It may have been that she revolted at the
     part she was to play; it may have been because a fiercer gust shook the curtain and bellied it
     inwards. At all events she flung the curtain aside; the snow drifted through the open window
     onto the floor; outside the open window it was falling like a cascade, and the air was icy.
"Mr. Wogan," she said, stubbornly working herself into a heat to make more sure of her
     resolution, "my daughter cannot go to-night. To-morrow, if the sky clears, yes, but to-night,
     no. You do not know, sir, being a man. But my daughter has fasted through this Lent, and that
     leaves a woman weak. I do forbid her going, as her father would. The very dogs running the
     streets for food keep kennel on such a night. She must not go."
Wogan did not give way, though he felt a qualm of despair, knowing all the stubbornness of
     which the weak are capable, knowing how impervious to facts or arguments.
"Your Highness," he said quickly, "we are not birds of passage to rule our flight by seasons.
     We must take the moment when it comes, and it
      comes now. To-night your daughter can escape; for here's a night made for an
     escape."
"And for my part," cried Clementina, "I would the snow fell faster." She crossed to the open
     window and held out her hands to catch the flakes. "Would they did not melt! I believe Heaven
     sends the snow to shelter me. It's the white canopy spread above my head, that I may go in
     state to meet my King." She stood eager and exultant, her eyes shining, her cheek on fire, her
     voice thrilling with pride. She seemed not to feel the cold. She welcomed the hardships of wind
     and falling snow as her opportunity. She desired not only for escape, but also to endure.
Wogan looked her over from head to foot, filled with pride and admiration. He had made no
     mistake; he had plucked this rose of the world to give to his King. His eyes said it; and the
     girl, reading them, drew a breath and rippled out a laugh of gladness that his trusted servant
     was so well content with her. But the Princess-mother stood unmoved.
"My daughter cannot go to-night," she repeated resentfully. "I do forbid it."
Wogan had his one argument. This one argument was his last resource. He had chosen it
     carefully with an eye to the woman whom it was to persuade. It was not couched as an
     inducement; it did not claim the discharge of an obligation; it was not a reply to any definite
     objection. Such arguments would only have confirmed her in her
      stubbornness. He made accordingly an appeal to sentiment.
"Your Highness's daughter," said he, "spoke a minute since of the hazards my friends and I
     have run to compass her escape. As regards four of us, the words reached beyond our deserts.
     For we are men. Such hazards are our portion; they are seldom lightened by so high an aim. But
     the fifth! The words, however kind, were still below that fifth one's merits; for the fifth is
     a woman."
"I know. With all my heart I thank her. With all my heart I pity her."
"But there is one thing your Highness does not know. She runs our risks,—the risk of capture,
     the risk of the night, the storm, the snow, she a woman by nature timid and frail,—yet with
     never in all her life so great a reason for timidity, or so much frailty of health as now. We
     venture our lives, but she ventures more."
The mother bowed her head; Clementina looked fixedly at Wogan.
"Speak plainly, my friend," she said. "There are no children here."
"Madam, I need but quote to you the words her husband used. For my part, I think that nobler
     words were never spoken, and with her whole heart she repeats them. They are these: 'The boy
     would only live to serve his King; why should he not serve his King before he lives?'"
The mother was still silent, but Wogan could see that the tears overbrimmed her eyes and
     rolled down
      her cheeks. Clementina was silent for a while too, and stood with her eyes fixed
     thoughtfully on Wogan. Then she said gently,—
"Her name."
Wogan told her it, and she said no more; but it was plain that she would never forget it,
     that she had written it upon her heart.
Wogan waited, looking to the Princess, who drying her tears rose from her chair and said with
     great and unexpected dignity,—
"How comes it, sir, that with such servants your King still does not sit upon his throne? My
     daughter shall not fall below the great example set to her. My fears are shamed by it. My
     daughter goes with you to-night."
It was time that she consented, for even as Wogan flung himself upon his knee and raised her
     hand, M. Chateaudoux appeared at the door with a finger on his lips, and behind him one could
     hear a voice grumbling and cursing on the stairs.
"Jenny," said Wogan, and Jenny stumbled into the room. "Quiet," said he; "you will wake the
     house."
"Well, if you had to walk upstairs in the dark in these horrible shoes—"
"Oh, Jenny, your cloak, quick!"
"Take the thing! A good riddance to it; it's dripping wet, and weighs a ton."
"Dripping wet!" moaned the mother.
"I shall not wear it long," said Clementina, advancing from the embrasure of the window.
     Jenny
      turned and looked her over critically from head to foot. Then she turned away
     without a word and let the cloak fall to the ground. It fell about her feet; she kicked it
     viciously away, and at the same time she kicked off one of those shoes of which she so much
     complained. Jenny was never the woman to mince her language, and to-night she was in her
     surliest mood. So she swore simply and heartily, to the mother's utter astonishment and
     indignation.
"Damn!" she said, hobbling across the room to the corner, whither her shoe had fallen.
     "There, there, old lady; don't hold your hands to your ears as though a clean oath would poison
     them!"
The Princess-mother fell back in her chair.
"Does she speak to me?" she asked helplessly.
"Yes," said Wogan; and turning to Jenny, "This is the kind-hearted aunt."
Jenny turned to Clementina, who was picking the cloak from the floor.
"And you are the beautiful heiress," she said sourly. "Well, if you are going to put that wet
     cloak on your shoulders, I wish you joy of the first kiss O'Toole gives you when you jump into
     his arms."
The Princess-mother screamed; Wogan hastened to interfere.
"Jenny, there's the bedroom; to bed with you!" and he took out his watch. At once he uttered
     an exclamation of affright. Wogan had miscalculated the time which he would require. It had
     taken longer than he had anticipated to reach the villa
      against the storm; his conflict with Jenny in the portico had consumed valuable
     minutes; he had been at some pains to over-persuade the Princess-mother; Jenny herself amongst
     the trees in the darkness had waited more than the quarter of an hour demanded of her; Wogan
     himself, absorbed each moment in that moment's particular business,—now bending all his wits to
     vanquish Jenny, now to vanquish the Princess-mother,—even Wogan had neglected how the time
     sped. He looked at his watch. It was twenty-five minutes to ten, and at ten the magistrate
     would be knocking at the door.
"I am ready," said Clementina, drawing the wet cloak about her shoulders and its hood over
     her head. She barely shivered under its wet heaviness.
"There's one more thing to be done before you go," said Wogan; but before he could say what
     that one thing was, Jenny, who had now recovered her shoe, ran across the room and took the
     beautiful heiress by both hands. Jenny was impulsive by nature. The Princess-mother's distress
     and Clementina's fearlessness made her suddenly ashamed that she had spoken so sourly.
"There, there, old lady," she said soothingly; "don't you fret. They are very good friends
     your niece is going with." Then she drew Clementina close to her. "I don't wonder they are all
     mad about you, for I can't but say you are very handsome and richly worth the pains you have
     occasioned us." She kissed Clementina plump upon the
      cheek and whispered in her ear, "O'Toole won't mind the wet cloak, my dear, when
     he sees you."
Clementina laughed happily and returned her kiss with no less sincerity, if with less
     noise.
"Quick, Jenny," said Wogan, "to bed with you!"
He pointed to the door which led to the Princess's bedroom.
"Now you must write a letter," he added to Clementina, in a low voice, as soon as the door
     was shut upon Jenny. "A letter to your mother, relieving her of all complicity in your escape.
     Her Highness will find it to-morrow night slipped under the cover of her toilette."
Clementina ran to a table, and taking up a pen, "You think of everything," she said. "Perhaps
     you have written the letter."
Wogan pulled a sheet of paper from his fob.
"I scribbled down a few dutiful sentiments," said he, "as we drove down from Nazareth,
     thinking it might save time."
"Mother," exclaimed Clementina, "not content with contriving my escape, he will write my
     letters to you. Well, sir, let us hear what you have made of it."
Wogan dictated a most beautiful letter, in which a mother's claims for obedience were
     strongly set out—as a justification, one must suppose, for a daughter's disobedience. But
     Clementina was betrothed to his Majesty King James, and that engagement must be ever the
     highest consideration with
      her, on pain of forfeiting her honour. It was altogether a noble and stately
     letter, written in formal, irreproachable phrases which no daughter in the world would ever
     have written to a mother. Clementina laughed over it, but said that it would serve. Wogan
     looked at his watch again. It was then a quarter to ten.
"Quick!" said he. "Your Highness will wait for me under the fourth tree of the avenue,
     counting from the end."
He left the mother and daughter alone, that his presence might not check the tenderness of
     their farewell, and went down the stairs into the dark hall. M. Chateaudoux was waiting there,
     with his teeth chattering in the extremity of his alarm. Wogan unlatched the door very
     carefully and saw through the chink the sentry standing by the steps. The snow still fell; he
     was glad to note the only light was a white glimmering from the waste of snow upon the
     ground.
"You must go out with her," Wogan whispered to Chateaudoux, "and speak a word to the
     sentry."
"At any moment the magistrate may come," said Chateaudoux, though he trembled so that he
     could hardly speak.
"All the more reason for the sentinel to let your sweetheart run home at her quickest step,"
     said Wogan, and above him he heard Clementina come out upon the landing. He crept up the stairs
     to her.
"Here is my hand," said he, in a low voice. She
      laid her own in his, and bending towards him in the darkness she whispered,—
"Promise me it shall always be at my service. I shall need friends. I am young, and I have no
     knowledge. Promise me!"
She was young indeed. The freshness of her voice, its little tremble of modesty, the
     earnestness of its appeal, carried her youth quite home to Mr. Wogan's heart. She was sweet
     with youth. Wogan felt it more clearly as they stood together in the darkness than when he had
     seen her plainly in the lighted room, with youth mantling her cheeks and visible in the
     buoyancy of her walk. Then she had been always the chosen woman. Wogan could just see her eyes,
     steady and mysteriously dark, shining at him out of the gloom, and a pang of remorse suddenly
     struck through him. That one step she was to take was across the threshold of a prison, it was
     true, but a prison familiar and warm, and into a night of storm and darkness and ice. The road
     lay before her into Italy, but it was a road of unknown perils, through mountains deep in snow.
     And this escape of to-night from the villa, this thunderous flight, with its hardships and its
     dangers, which followed the escape, was only the symbol of her life. She stepped from the
     shelter of her girlhood, as she stepped across the threshold of the villa, into a womanhood
     dark with many trials, storm-swept and wandering. She might reach the queendom which was her
     due, as the berlin in which she was to travel might—nay, surely would—rush
      one day from the gorges into the plains and the sunlight of Italy; but had Wogan
     travelled to Rome in Gaydon's place and talked with Whittington outside the Caprara Palace, it
     is very likely that she would never have been allowed by him to start. Up till now he had
     thought only of her splendid courage, of the humiliation of her capture, of her wounded pride;
     she was the chosen woman. Now he thought of the girl, and wondered of her destiny, and was
     stricken with remorse.
"Promise me," she repeated, and her hand tightened upon his and clung to it. Wogan had no
     fine sentiments wherewith to answer her; but his voice took a depth of sincerity and tenderness
     quite strange to her. Her fingers ceased to tremble.
They went down into the hall. Chateaudoux, who had been waiting in an agony of impatience,
     opened the door and slipped out; Clementina followed him.
The door was left ajar behind them, and Wogan in the hall saw Chateaudoux speak with the
     sentinel, saw the sentinel run hurriedly to Clementina, saw Clementina disappear into the snow.
     Chateaudoux ran back into the hall.
"And you!" he asked, as he barred and locked the door. "The magistrate is coming. I saw the
     lights of the guard across the avenue."
Clementina was outside in the storm; Wogan was within the house, and the lights of the guard
     were already near.
"I go by the way I came," said he; "I have
      time;" and he ran quickly up the stairs. In the room he found the Princess-mother
     weeping silently, and again, as he saw this weak elderly woman left alone to her fears and
     forebodings, remorse took hold on him.
"Courage, madam," said he, as he crossed the room; "she goes to wed a king."
"Sir, I am her mother," replied the Princess, gaining at this moment a suitable dignity from
     her tears. "I was wondering not of the King, but of the man the King conceals."
"You need not, madam," said Wogan, who had no time for eulogies upon his master. "Take his
     servant's loyalty as the measure of his merits."
He looked out of the window and suddenly drew back. He stood for a moment with a look of
     great fear upon his face. For the sentinel was back at his post; Wogan dared not at this moment
     risk a struggle, and perhaps an outcry. Clementina was waiting under the avenue of trees; Wogan
     was within the house, and the lights of the guard were already flaring in the roadway. Even as
     Wogan stood in the embrasure of the window, he heard a heavy knocking on the door.

</div></body></text></TEI>