<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Clementina</title><author>Mason, Alfred Edward Woodley (1865-1948)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1901</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII
The little town of Schlestadt went to bed betimes. By ten o'clock its burghers were in their
     night-caps. A belated visitor going home at that hour found his footsteps ring upon the
     pavement with surprising echoes, and traversed dark street after dark street, seeing in each
     window, perhaps, a mimic moon, but no other light unless his path chanced to lie through
     Herzogstrasse. In that street a couple of windows on the first floor showed bright and
     unabashed, and the curious passer-by could detect upon the blind the shadows of men growing to
     monstrous giants and dwindling to pigmies according as they approached or retired from the lamp
     in the room.
There were three men in that room booted as for a journey. Their dress might have misled one
     into the belief that they were merchants, but their manner of wearing it proclaimed them
     soldiers. Of the three, one, a short, spare man, sat at the table with his head bent over a
     slip of paper. His peruke was pushed back from his forehead and showed that the hair about his
     temples was grey. He had a square face of some strength, and thoughtful eyes.
The second of the three stood by the window. He was, perhaps, a few years younger, thirty-six
      an observer might have guessed to the other's forty, and his face revealed a
     character quite different. His features were sharp, his eyes quick; if prudence was the
     predominating quality of the first, resource took its place in the second. While the first man
     sat patiently at the table, this one stood impatiently at the window. Now he lifted the blind,
     now he dropped it again.
The third sat in front of the fire with his face upturned to the ceiling. He was a tall, big
     man with mighty legs which sprawled one on each side of the hearth. He was the youngest of the
     three by five years, but his forehead at this moment was so creased, his mouth so pursed up,
     his cheeks so wrinkled, he had the look of sixty years. He puffed and breathed very heavily;
     once or twice he sighed, and at each sigh his chair creaked under him. Major O'Toole of
     Dillon's regiment was thinking.
"Gaydon," said he, suddenly.
The man at the table looked up quickly.
"Misset."
The man at the window turned impatiently.
"I have an idea."
Misset shrugged his shoulders.
Gaydon said, "Let us hear it."
O'Toole drew himself up; his chair no longer creaked, it groaned and cracked.
"It is a lottery," said he, "and we have made our fortunes. We three are the winners, and so
     our names are not crossed out."

"But I have put no money in a lottery," objected Gaydon.
"Nor I," said Misset.
"And where should I find money either?" said O'Toole. "But Charles Wogan has borrowed it for
     us and paid it in, and so we're all rich men. What'll I buy with it?"
Misset paced the room.
"The paper came four days ago?" he said.
"Yes, in the morning."
"Five days, then," and he stood listening. Then he ran to the window and opened it. Gaydon
     followed him and drew up the blind. Both men listened and were puzzled.
"That's the sound of horseshoes," said Gaydon.
"But there's another sound keeping pace with the horseshoes," said Misset.
O'Toole leaned on their shoulders, crushing them both down upon the sill of the window.
"It is very like the sound a gentleman makes when he reels home from a tavern."
Gaydon and Misset raised themselves with a common effort springing from a common thought and
     shot O'Toole back into the room.
"What if it is?" began Misset.
"He was never drunk in his life," said Gaydon.
"It's possible that he has reformed," said O'Toole; and the three men precipitated themselves
     down the stairs.
The drunkard was Wogan; he was drunk with fatigue and sleeplessness and pain, but he had
     retained
      just enough of his sober nature to spare a tired mare who had that day served him
     well.
The first intimation he received that his friends were on the watch was O'Toole's voice
     bawling down the street to him.
"Is it a lottery? Tell me we're all rich men," and he felt himself grasped in O'Toole's
     arms.
"I'll tell you more wonderful things than that," stammered Wogan, "when you have shown me the
     way to a stable."
"There's one at the back of the house," said Gaydon. "I'll take the horse."
"No," said Wogan, stubbornly, and would not yield the bridle to Gaydon.
O'Toole nodded approval.
"There are two things," said he, "a man never trusts to his friends. One's his horse; t'
     other's his wife."
Wogan suddenly stopped and looked at O'Toole. O'Toole answered the look loftily.
"It is a little maxim of philosophy. I have others. They come to me in the night."
Misset laughed. Wogan walked on to the stable. It was a long building, and a light was still
     burning. Moreover, a groom was awake, for the door was opened before they had come near enough
     to knock. There were twelve stalls, of which nine were occupied, and three of the nine horses
     stood ready saddled and bridled.
Wogan sat down upon a corn-bin and waited while his mare was groomed and fed. The mare
      looked round once or twice in the midst of her meal, twisting her neck as far as
     her halter allowed.
"I am not gone yet, my lady," said he, "take your time."
Wogan made a ghostly figure in the dim shadowy light. His face was of an extraordinary
     pallor; his teeth chattered; his eyes burned. Gaydon looked at him with concern and said to the
     groom, "You can take the saddles off. We shall need no horses to-night."
The four men returned to the house. Wogan went upstairs first. Gaydon held back the other two
     at the foot of the stairs.
"Not a word, not a question, till he has eaten, or we shall have him in bed for a
     twelvemonth. Misset, do you run for a doctor. O'Toole, see what you can find in the
     larder."
Wogan sat before the fire without a word while O'Toole spread the table and set a couple of
     cold partridges upon it and a bottle of red wine. Wogan ate mechanically for a little and
     afterwards with some enjoyment. He picked the partridges till the bones were clean, and he
     finished the bottle of wine. Then he rose to his feet with a sigh of something very like to
     contentment and felt along the mantel-shelf with his hands. O'Toole, however, had foreseen his
     wants and handed him a pipe newly filled. While Wogan was lighting the tobacco, Misset came
     back into the room with word that the doctor was out upon his last rounds, but would come as
     soon as he had returned home. The four
      men sat down about the fire, and Wogan reached out his hand and felt O'Toole's
     arm.
"It is you," he said. "There you are, the three of you, my good friends, and this is
     Schlestadt. But it is strange," and he laughed a little to himself and looked about the room,
     assuring himself that this indeed was Gaydon's lodging.
"You received a slip of paper?" said he.
"Four days back," said Gaydon.
"And understood?"
"That we were to be ready."
"Good."
"Then it's not a lottery," murmured O'Toole, "and we've drawn no prizes."
"Ah, but we are going to," cried Wogan. "We are safe here. No one can hear us; no one can
     burst in. But I am sure of that. Misset knows the trick that will make us safe from
     interruption, eh?"
Misset looked blankly at Wogan.
"Why, one can turn the key," said he.
"To be sure," said Wogan, with a laugh of admiration for that device of which he had
     bethought himself, and which he ascribed to Misset, "if there's a key; but if there's no key,
     why, a chair tilted against the door to catch the handle, eh?"
Misset locked the door, not at all comprehending that device, and returned to his seat.
"We are to draw the greatest prize that ever was drawn," resumed Wogan, and he broke off.

"But is there a cupboard in the room? No matter; I forgot that this is Gaydon's lodging, and
     Gaydon's not the man to overlook a cupboard."
Gaydon jumped up from his chair.
"But upon my word there is a cupboard," he cried, and crossing to a corner of the room he
     opened a door and looked in. Wogan laughed again as though Gaydon's examination of the cupboard
     was a very good joke.
"There will be nobody in it," he cried. "Gaydon will never feel a hand gripping the life out
     of his throat because he forgot to search a cupboard."
The cupboard was empty, as it happened. But Gaydon had left the door of the street open when
     he went out to meet Wogan; there had been time and to spare for any man to creep upstairs and
     hide himself had there been a man in Schlestadt that night minded to hear. Gaydon returned to
     his chair.
"We are to draw the biggest prize in all Europe," said Wogan.
"There!" cried O'Toole. "Will you be pleased to remember when next I have an idea that I was
     right?"
"But not for ourselves," added Wogan.
O'Toole's face fell.
"Oh, we are to hand it on to a third party," said he.
"Yes."
"Well, after all, that's quite of a piece with our luck."

"Who is the third party?" asked Misset.
"The King."
Misset started up from his chair and leaned forward, his hands upon the arms.
"The King," said O'Toole; "to be sure, that makes a difference."
Gaydon asked quietly, "And what is the prize?"
"The Princess Clementina," said Wogan. "We are to rescue her from her prison in
     Innspruck."
Even Gaydon was startled.
"We four!" he exclaimed.
"We four!" repeated Misset, staring at Wogan. His mouth was open; his eyes started from his
     head; he stammered in his speech. "We four against a nation, against half Europe!"
O'Toole simply crossed to a corner of the room, picked up his sword and buckled it to his
     waist.
"I am ready," said he.
Wogan turned round in his chair and smiled.
"I know that," said he. "So are we all—all ready; is not that so, my friends? We four are
     ready." And he looked to Misset and to Gaydon. "Here's an exploit, if we but carry it through,
     which even antiquity will be at pains to match! It's more than an exploit, for it has the
     sanctity of a crusade. On the one side there's tyranny, oppression, injustice, the one woman
     who most deserves a crown robbed of it. And on the other—"
"There's the King," said Gaydon; and the three brief words seemed somehow to quench and sober
     Wogan.

"Yes," said he; "there's the King, and we four to serve him in his need. We are few, but in
     that lies our one hope. They will never look for four men, but for many. Four men travelling to
     the shrine of Loretto with the Pope's passport may well stay at Innspruck and escape a close
     attention."
"I am ready," O'Toole repeated.
"But we shall not start to-night. There's the passport to be got, a plan to be arranged."
"Oh, there's a plan," said O'Toole. "To be sure, there's always a plan." And he sat down
     again heavily, as though he put no faith in plans.
Misset and Gaydon drew their chairs closer to Wogan's and instinctively lowered their voices
     to the tone of a whisper.
"Is her Highness warned of the attempt?" asked Gaydon.
"As soon as I obtained the King's permission," replied Wogan, "I hurried to Innspruck. There
     I saw Chateaudoux, the chamberlain of the Princess's mother. Here is a letter he dropped in the
     cathedral for me to pick up."
He drew the letter from his fob and handed it to Gaydon. Gaydon read it and handed it to
     Misset. Misset nodded and handed it to O'Toole, who read it four times and handed it back to
     Gaydon with a flourish of the hand as though the matter was now quite plain to him.
"Chateaudoux has a sweetheart," said he, sententiously. "Very good; I do not think the worse
     of him."

Gaydon glanced a second time through the letter.
"The Princess says that you must have the Prince Sobieski's written consent."
"I went from Innspruck to Ohlau," said Wogan. "I had some trouble, and the reason of my
     coming leaked out. The Countess de Berg suspected it from the first. She had a friend, an
     Englishwoman, Lady Featherstone, who was at Ohlau to outwit me."
"Lady Featherstone!" said Misset. "Who can she be?"
Wogan told them of his first meeting with Lady Featherstone on the Florence road, but he knew
     no more about her, and not one of the three knew anything at all.
"So the secret's out," said Gaydon. "But you outstripped it."
"Barely," said Wogan. "Forty miles away I had last night to fight for my life."
"But you have the Prince's written consent?" said Misset.
"I had last night, but I made a spill of it to light my pipe. There were six men against me.
     Had that been found on my dead body, why, there was proof positive of our attempt, and the
     attempt foiled by sure safeguards. As it is, if we lie still a little while, their fears will
     cease and the rumour become discredited."
Misset leaned across Gaydon's arm and scanned the letter.
"But her Highness writes most clearly she will
      not move without that sure token of her father's consent."
Wogan drew from his breast pocket a snuff-box made from a single turquoise.
"Here's a token no less sure. It was Prince Sobieski's New Year's gift to me,—a jewel unique
     and in an unique setting. This must persuade her. His father, great King John of Poland, took
     it from the Grand Vizier's tent when the Turks were routed at Vienna."
O'Toole reached out his hand and engulfed the jewel.
"Sure," said he, "it is a pretty sort of toy. It would persuade any woman to anything so long
     as she was promised it to hang about her neck. You must promise it to the Princess, but not
     give it to her—no, lest when she has got it she should be content to remain in Innspruck. I
     know. You must promise it."
Wogan bowed to O'Toole's wisdom and took back the snuff-box. "I will not forget to promise
     it," said he.
"But here's another point," said Gaydon. "Her Highness, the Princess's mother, insists that a
     woman shall attend upon her daughter, and where shall we find a woman with the courage and the
     strength?"
"I have thought of that," said Wogan. "Misset has a wife. By the luckiest stroke in the world
     Misset took a wife this last spring."
There was at once a complete silence. Gaydon
      stared into the fire, O'Toole looked with intense interest at the ceiling, Misset
     buried his face in his hands. Wogan was filled with consternation. Was Misset's wife dead? he
     asked himself. He had spoken lightly, laughingly, and he went hot and cold as he recollected
     the raillery of his words. He sat in his chair shocked at the pain which he had caused his
     friend. Moreover, he had counted surely upon Mrs. Misset.
Then Misset raised his head from his hands and in a trembling voice he said slowly, "My boy
     would only live to serve his King. Why should he not serve his King before he lives? My wife
     will say the like."
There was a depth of quiet feeling in his words which Wogan would never have expected from
     Misset; and the words themselves were words which he felt no man, no king, however much
     beloved, however generous to his servants, had any right to expect. They took Wogan's breath
     away, and not Wogan's only, but Gaydon's and O'Toole's, too. A longer silence than before
     followed upon them. The very simplicity with which they had been uttered was startling, and
     made those three men doubt at the first whether they had heard aright.
O'Toole was the first to break the silence.
"It is a strange thing that there never was a father since Adam who was not absolutely sure
     in his heart that his first-born must be a boy. When you come to think philosophically about
     it, you'll see that if fathers had their way the world would
      be peopled with sons with never a bit of a lass in any corner to marry them."
O'Toole's reflection, if not a reason for laughter, made a pretext for it, at which all—even
     Misset, who was a trifle ashamed of his display of feeling—eagerly caught. Wogan held his hand
     out and clasped Misset's.
"That was a great saying," said he, "but so much sacrifice is not to be accepted."
Misset, however, was firm. His wife, he said, though naturally timid, could show a fine
     spirit on occasion, and would never forgive one of them if she was left behind. He argued until
     a compromise was reached. Misset should lay the matter openly before his wife, and the four
     crusaders, to use Wogan's term, would be bound by her decision.
"So you may take it that matter's settled," said Misset. "There will be five of us."
"Six," said Wogan.
"There's another man to join us, then," said Gaydon. "I have it. Your servant, Marnier."
"No, not Marnier, nor any man. Listen. It is necessary that when once her Highness is rescued
     we must get so much start as will make pursuit vain. We shall be hampered with a coach, and a
     coach will travel slowly on the passes of Tyrol. The pursuers will ride horses; they must not
     come up with us. From Innspruck to Italy, if we have never an accident, will take us at the
     least four days; it will take our pursuers three. We must have one clear day before her
     Highness's evasion
      is discovered. Now, the chief magistrate of Innspruck visits her Highness's
     apartments twice a day,—at ten in the morning and at ten of the night. The Princess must be
     rescued at night; and if her escape is discovered in the morning she will never reach Italy,
     she will be behind the bars again."
"But the Princess's mother will be left," said Gaydon. "She can plead that her daughter is
     ill."
"The magistrate forces his way into the very bedroom. We must take with us a woman who will
     lie in her Highness's bed with the curtains drawn about her and a voice so weak with suffering
     that she cannot raise it above a whisper, with eyes so tired from sleeplessness she cannot bear
     a light near them. Help me in this. Name me a woman with the fortitude to stay behind."
Gaydon shook his head.
"She will certainly be discovered. The part she plays in the escape must certainly be known.
     She will remain for the captors to punish as they will. I know no woman."
"Nay," said Wogan; "you exaggerate her danger. Once the escape is brought to an issue, once
     her Highness is in Bologna safe, the Emperor cannot wreak vengeance on a woman; it would be too
     paltry." And now he made his appeal to Misset.
"No, my friend," Misset replied. "I know no woman with the fortitude."
"But you do," interrupted O'Toole. "So do I. There's no difficulty whatever in the matter.
     Mrs. Misset has a maid."

"Oho!" said Gaydon.
"The maid's name is Jenny."
"Aha!" said Wogan.
"She's a very good friend of mine."
"O'Toole!" cried Misset, indignantly. "My wife's maid—a very good friend of yours?"
"Sure she is, and you didn't know it," said O'Toole, with a chuckle. "I am the cunning man,
     after all. She would do a great deal for me would Jenny."
"But has she courage?" asked Wogan.
"Faith, her father was a French grenadier and her mother a vivandière. It would be a
     queer thing if she was frightened by a little matter of lying in bed and pretending to be
     someone else."
"But can we trust her with the secret?" asked Gaydon.
"No!" exclaimed Misset, and he rose angrily from his chair. "My wife's
     maid—O'Toole—O'Toole—my wife's maid. Did ever one hear the like?"
"My friend," said O'Toole, quietly, "it seems almost as if you wished to reflect upon Jenny's
     character, which would not be right."
Misset looked angrily at O'Toole, who was not at all disturbed. Then he said, "Well, at all
     events, she gossips. We cannot take her. She would tell the whole truth of our journey at the
     first halt."
"That's true," said O'Toole.
Then for the second time that evening he cried, "I have an idea."

"Well?"
"We'll not tell her the truth at all. I doubt if she would come if we told it her. Jenny very
     likely has never heard of her Highness the Princess, and I doubt if she cares a button for the
     King. Besides, she would never believe but that we were telling her a lie. No. We'll make up a
     probable likely sort of story, and then she'll believe it to be the truth."
"I have it," cried Wogan. "We'll tell her that we are going to abduct an heiress who is dying
     for love of O'Toole, and whose merciless parents are forcing her into a loveless, despicable
     marriage with a tottering pantaloon."
O'Toole brought his hand down upon the arm of the chair.
"There's the very story," he cried. "To be sure, you are a great man, Charles. The most
     probable convincing story that was ever invented! Oh! but you'll hear Jenny sob with pity for
     the heiress and Lucius O'Toole when she hears it. It will be a bad day, too, for the merciless
     parents when they discover Jenny in her Highness's bed. She stands six feet in her
     stockings."
"Six feet!" exclaimed Wogan.
"In her stockings," returned O'Toole. "Her height is her one vanity. Therefore in her shoes
     she is six feet four."
"Well, she must take her heels off and make herself as short as she can."
"You will have trouble, my friend, to persuade her to that," said O'Toole.

"Hush!" said Gaydon. He rose and unlocked the door. The doctor was knocking for admission
     below. Gaydon let him in, and he dressed Wogan's wounds with an assurance that they were not
     deep and that a few days' quiet would restore him.
"I will sleep the night here if I may," said Wogan, as soon as the doctor had gone. "A
     blanket and a chair will serve my turn."
They took him into Gaydon's bedroom, where three beds were ranged.
"We have slept in the one room and lived together since your message came four days ago,"
     said Gaydon. "Take your choice of the beds, for there's not one of us has so much need of a bed
     as you."
Wogan drew a long breath of relief.
"Oh! but it's good to be with you," he cried suddenly, and caught at Gaydon's arm. "I shall
     sleep to-night. How I shall sleep!"
He stretched out his aching limbs between the cool white sheets, and when the lamp was
     extinguished he called to each of his three friends by name to make sure of their company.
     O'Toole answered with a grunt on his right, Misset on his left, and Gaydon from the corner of
     the room.
"But I have wanted you these last three days!" said Wogan. "To-morrow when I tell you the
     story of them you will know how much I have wanted you."
They got, however, some inkling of Wogan's need before the morrow came. In the middle of
      the night they were wakened by a wild scream and heard Wogan whispering in an
     agony for help. They lighted a lamp and saw him lying with his hand upon his throat and his
     eyes starting from his head with horror.
"Quick," said he, "the hand at my throat! It's not the letter so much, it's my life they
     want."
"It's your own hand," said Gaydon, and taking the hand he found it lifeless. Wogan's arm in
     that position had gone to sleep, as the saying is. He had waked suddenly in the dark with the
     cold pressure at his throat, and in the moment of waking was back again alone in the inn near
     Augsburg. Wogan indeed needed his friends.

</div></body></text></TEI>