<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Clementina</title><author>Mason, Alfred Edward Woodley (1865-1948)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1901</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="25">
CHAPTER XXV
An account remains of the marriage ceremony, which took place the next morning in Cardinal
     Origo's house. It was of the simplest kind and was witnessed by few. Murray, Misset and his
     wife, and Maria Vittoria de Caprara made the public part of the company; Wogan stood for the
     King; and the Marquis of Monti Boulorois for James Sobieski, the bride's father. Bride and
     bridegroom played their parts bravely and well, one must believe, for the chronicler speaks of
     their grace and modesty of bearing. Clementina rose at five in the morning, dressed in a robe
     of white, tied a white ribbon about her hair, and for her only ornament fixed a white collar of
     pearls about her neck. In this garb she went at once to the church of San Domenico, where she
     made her confession, and from the church to the Cardinal's Palace. There the Cardinal, with one
     Maas, an English priest from Rome, at his elbow, was already waiting for her. Mr. Wogan
     thereupon read the procuration, for which he had ridden to Rome in haste so many months before,
     and pronounced the consent of the King his master to its terms. Origo asked the Princess
     whether she likewise consented, and the manner in which she spoke her one word, "Yes," seems to
     have stirred the historian to pæans. It
      seems that all the virtues launched that one little word, and were clearly
     expressed in it. The graces, too, for once in a way went hand in hand with the virtues. Never
     was a "Yes" so sweetly spoken since the earth rose out of the sea. In a word, there was no
     ruffle of the great passion which these two, man and woman, had trodden beneath their feet. She
     did not hint of Iphigenia; he borrowed no plumes from Don Quixote. Nor need one fancy that
     their contentment was all counterfeit. They were neither of them grumblers, and "fate" and
     "destiny" were words seldom upon their lips.
One incident, indeed, is related which the chronicler thought to be curious, though he did
     not comprehend it. The Princess Clementina brought from her confessional box a wisp of straw
     which clung to her dress at the knee. Until Wogan had placed the King's ring upon her finger,
     she did not apparently remark it; but no sooner had that office been performed than she
     stooped, and with a friendly smile at her makeshift bridegroom, she plucked it from her skirt
     and let it fall beneath her foot.
And that was all. No words passed between them after the ceremony, for her Royal Highness
     went straight back to the little house in the garden, and that same forenoon set out for
     Rome.
She was not the only witness of the ceremony to take that road that day. For some three hours
     later, to be precise, at half-past two, Maria Vittoria stepped into her coach before the
     Pilgrim Inn. Wogan held the carriage door open for her. He was
      still in the bravery of his wedding clothes, and Maria Vittoria looked him over
     whimsically from the top of his peruke to his shoe-buckles.
"I came to see a fool-woman," said she, "and I saw a fool-man. Well, well!" and she suddenly
     lowered her voice to a passionate whisper. "Why, oh, why did you not take your fortunes in your
     hands at Peri?"
Wogan leaned forward to her. "Do you know so much?"
She answered him quickly. "I will never forgive you. Yes, I know." She forced her lips into a
     smile. "I suppose you are content. You have your black horse."
"You know of the horse, too," said Wogan, colouring to the edge of his peruke. "You know I
     have no further use for it."
"Say that again, and I will beg it of you."
"Nay, it is yours, then. I will send him after you to Rome."
"Will you?" said Maria Vittoria. "Why, then, I accept. There's my hand;" and she thrust it
     through the window to him. "If ever you come to Rome, the Caprara Palace stands where it did at
     your last visit. I do not say you will be welcome. No, I do not forgive you, but you may come.
     Having your horse, I could hardly bar the door against you. So you may come."
Wogan raised her hand to his lips.
"Aye," said she, with a touch of bitterness, "kiss my hand. You have had your way. Here are
     two
      people crossmated, and two others not mated at all. You have made four people
     entirely unhappy, and a kiss on the glove sets all right."
"Nay, not four," protested Wogan.
"Your manners," she continued remorselessly, ticking off the names upon her fingers, "will
     hinder you from telling me to my face the King is happy. And the Princess?"
"She was born to be a queen," replied Wogan, stubbornly. "Happiness, mademoiselle! It does
     not come by the striving after it. That's the royal road to miss it. You may build up your
     house of happiness with all your care through years, and you will find you have only built it
     up to draw down the blinds and hang out the hatchment above the door, for the tenant to inhabit
     it is dead."
Maria Vittoria listened very seriously till he came to the end. Then she made a pouting
     grimace. "That is very fine, moral, and poetical. Your Princess was born to be a queen. But
     what if her throne is set up only in your city of dreams? Well, it is some consolation to know
     that you are one of the four."
"Nay, I will make a shift not to plague myself upon the way the world treats you."
"Ah, but because it treats you well," cried she. "There will be work for you, hurryings to
     and fro, the opportunities of excelling, nights in the saddle, and perhaps again the quick red
     life of battlefields. It is well with you, but what of me, Mr. Wogan? What of me?" and she
     leaned back in her carriage
      and drove away. Wogan had no answer to that despairing question. He stood with
     his head bared till the carriage passed round a corner and disappeared, but the voice rang for
     a long while in his ears. And for a long while the dark eyes abrim with tears, and the tortured
     face, kept him company at nights. He walked slowly back to his lodging, and mounting a horse
     rode out of Bologna, and towards the Apennines.
On one of the lower slopes he came upon a villa just beyond a curve of the road, and reined
     in his horse. The villa nestled on the hillside below him in a terraced garden of oleander and
     magnolias, very pretty to the eye. Cypress hedges enclosed it; the spring had made it a bower
     of rose blossoms, and depths of shade out of whose green darkness glowed here and there a red
     statue like a tutelary god. Wogan dismounted and led his horse down the path to the door. He
     inquired for Lady Featherstone, and was shown into a room from the windows of which he looked
     down on Bologna, that city of colonnades. Lady Featherstone, however, had heard the tramp of
     his horse; she came running up from the garden, and without waiting to hear any particulars of
     her visitor, burst eagerly into the room.
"Well?" she said, and stopped and swayed upon the threshold. Wogan turned from the window
     towards her.
"Your Ladyship was wise, I think, to leave Bologna. The little house in the trees there had
     no such wide prospect as this."

He spoke rather to give her time than out of any sarcasm. She set a hand against the jamb of
     the door, and even so barely sustained her trifling weight. Her knees shook, her childlike face
     grew white as paper, a great terror glittered in her eyes.
"I am not the visitor whom you expect," continued Wogan, "nor do I bring the news which you
     would wish to hear;" and at that she raised a trembling hand. "I beg you—a moment's silence.
     Then I will hear you, Mr. Warner." She made a sort of stumbling run and reached a couch. Wogan
     shut the door and waited. He was glad that she had used the name of Warner. It recalled to him
     that evening at Ohlau when she had stood behind the curtain with a stiletto in her hand, and
     the three last days of his perilous ride to Schlestadt. He needed his most vivid recollections
     to steel his heart against her; for he was beginning to think it was his weary lot to go up and
     down the world causing pain to women. After a while she said, "Now your news;" and she held her
     hand lightly to her heart to await the blow.
"The King married this morning the Princess Clementina," said Wogan. Lady Featherstone did
     not move her hand; she still waited. It was just to hinder this marriage that she had come to
     Italy, but her failure was at this moment of no account. She heard of it with indifference; it
     had no meaning to her. She waited. Wogan's mere presence at the villa told her there was more
     to come. He continued:—

"Last night Mr. Whittington came with the King to Bologna—you understand, no doubt, why;" and
     she nodded without moving her eyes from his face. She made no pretence as to the part she had
     played in the affair. All the world might know it. That was a matter at this moment of complete
     indifference. She waited.
"The King and Mr. Whittington came at nine of the night to the little house which you once
     occupied. I was there, but I was not there alone. Can your Ladyship conjecture whom I brought
     there? Your Ladyship, as I learned last night from Mr. Whittington's own lips, had paid a visit
     secretly, using a key which you had retained to the house on an excuse that you had left behind
     jewels of some value. You saw her Highness the Princess. You told her a story of the King and
     Mlle. de Caprara. I rode to Rome, and when the King came last night Mlle. de Caprara was with
     the Princess. I had evidence against Mr. Whittington, a confession of one of the soldiers of
     the Governor of Trent, the leader of a party of five who attacked me at Peri. No doubt you know
     of that little matter too;" and again Lady Featherstone nodded.
"Thus your double plot—to set the King against the Princess, and the Princess against the
     King—doubly failed."
"Go on," said Lady Featherstone, moistening her dry lips. Wogan told her how from the little
     sitting-room on the ground-floor he had seen the King and Whittington cross the lawn; he
     described
      his interview with the King, and how he had come quietly down the stairs.
"I went into the garden," he went on, "and touched Whittington on the elbow. I told him just
     what I have explained to you. I said, 'You are a coward, a liar, a slanderer of women,' and I
     beat him on the mouth."
Lady Featherstone uttered a cry and drew herself into an extraordinary crouching attitude,
     with her eyes blazing steadily at him. He thought she meant to spring at him; he looked at that
     hand upon her heart to see whether it held a weapon hidden in the fold of her bosom.
"Go on," she said; "and he?"
"He answered me in the strangest quiet way imaginable. 'You insulted Lady Featherstone at
     Ohlau, Mr. Wogan,' said he, 'one evening when she hid behind your curtain. It was a very
     delicate piece of drollery, no doubt. But I shall be glad to show you another, view of it.' It
     is strange how that had rankled in his thoughts. I liked him for it,—upon my soul, I
     did,—though it was the only thing I liked in him."
"Go on," said Lady Featherstone. Mr. Wogan's likes or dislikes were of no more interest to
     her than the failure of her effort to hinder the marriage.
"We went to the bottom of the garden where there is a little square of lawn hedged in with
     myrtle-trees. The night was very dark, so we stripped to our shirts. From the waist upwards
      we were visible to each other as a vague glimmer of white, and thus we fought,
     foot to foot, among the myrtle-trees. We could not see so much as our swords unless they
     clashed more than usually hard, and a spark struck from them. We fought by guesswork and feel,
     and in the end luck served me. I drove my sword through his chest until the hilt rang upon his
     breast-bone."
Then just a movement from Lady Featherstone as though she drew up her feet beneath her.
"He lived for perhaps five minutes. He was in great distress lest harm should come to you;
     and since there was no one but his enemy to whom he could speak, why, he spoke to his enemy. I
     promised him, madam, that with his death the story should be closed, if you left Italy within
     the week."
"And he?" she interrupted,—"he died there. Well?"
"You know the laurel hedge by the sun-dial? There is an out-house where the gardener keeps
     his tools. I found a spade there, and beneath that laurel hedge I buried him."
Lady Featherstone rose to her feet. She spoke no word; she uttered no cry; her face was white
     and terrible. She stood rigid like one paralysed; then she swayed round and fell in a swoon
     upon the floor. And as she fell, something bright slipped from her hand and dropped at Wogan's
     feet. He picked it up. It was a stiletto. He stood looking down at the childish figure with a
     queer compassionate
      smile upon his face. "She could love," said he; "yes, she could love."
He walked out of the house, led his horse back onto the road and mounted it. The night was
     gathering; there were purple shadows upon the Apennines. Wogan rode away alone.

</div></body></text></TEI>