<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of the Amulet : VWWP edition </title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1906</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER XI
BEFORE PHARAOH
IT was the day after the adventure of Julius Cæsar and the Little Black Girl that
     Cyril, bursting into the bathroom to wash his hands for dinner (you have no idea how dirty they
     were, for he had been playing shipwrecked mariners all the morning on the leads at the back of
     the house, where the water‐cistern is), found Anthea leaning her elbows on the edge of the
     bath, and crying steadily into it.
“Hullo!” he said, with brotherly concern, “what’s up now? Dinner’ll be cold before you’ve got
     enough salt‐water for a bath.”
“Go away,” said Anthea fiercely. “I hate you! I hate everybody!”
There was a stricken pause.
“I didn’t know,” said Cyril tamely.
“Nobody ever does know anything,” sobbed Anthea.
“I didn’t know you were waxy. I thought you’d just hurt your fingers with the tap
      again like you did last week,” Cyril carefully
     explained.
“Oh—fingers!” sneered Anthea through her sniffs.
“Here, drop it, Panther,” he said uncomfortably. “You haven’t been having a row or
     anything?”
“No,” she said. “Wash your horrid hands, for goodness’ sake, if that’s what you came for, or
     go.”
Anthea was so seldom cross that when she was cross the others were always more surprised than
     angry.
Cyril edged along the side of the bath and stood beside her. He put his hand on her arm.
“Dry up, do,” he said, rather tenderly for him. And, finding that though she did not at once
     take his advice she did not seem to resent it, he put his arm awkwardly across her shoulders
     and rubbed his head against her ear.
“There!” he said, in the tone of one administering a priceless cure for all possible sorrows.
     “Now, what’s up?”
“Promise you won’t laugh?”
“I don’t feel laughish myself,” said Cyril, dismally.
“Well, then,” said Anthea, leaning her ear against his head, “it’s Mother.”
“What’s the matter with Mother?” asked Cyril, with apparent want of sympathy. “she was all
     right in her letter this morning.”

“Yes; but I want her so.”
“You’re not the only one,” said Cyril briefly, and the brevity of his tone admitted a good
     deal.
“Oh, yes,” said Anthea, “I know. We all want her all the time. But I want her now most
     dreadfully, awfully much. I never wanted anything so much. That Imogen child—the way the
     ancient British Queen cuddled her up! And Imogen wasn’t me, and the Queen wasn’t Mother. And
     then her letter this morning! And about The Lamb liking the salt bathing! And she bathed him in
     this very bath the night before she went away—oh, oh, oh!”
Cyril thumped her on the back.
“Cheer up,” he said. “You know my inside thinking that I was doing? Well, that was partly
     about Mother. We’ll soon get her back. If you’ll chuck it, like a sensible kid, and wash your
     face, I’ll tell you about it. That’s right. You let me get to the tap. Can’t you stop crying?
     Shall I put the door‐key down your back?”
“That’s for noses,” said Anthea, “and I’m not a kid any more than you are,” but she laughed a
     little, and her mouth began to get back into its proper shape. You know what an odd shape your
     mouth gets into when you cry in earnest.
“Look here,” said Cyril, working the soap round and round between his hands in a thick slime
     of grey soapsuds. “I’ve been
      thinking. We’ve only just played with the
     Amulet so far. We’ve got to work it now—work it for all it’s worth. And it isn’t
     only Mother either. There’s Father out there all among the fighting. I don’t howl about it, but
     I think—Oh, bother the soap!” The grey‐lined soap had squirted out under the
     pressure of his fingers, and had hit Anthea’s chin with as much force as though it had been
     shot from a catapult.
“There now,” she said regretfully, “now I shall have to wash my face.”
“You’d have had to do that anyway,” said Cyril with conviction. “Now, my idea’s this. You
     know missionaries?”
“Yes,” said Anthea, who did not know a single one.
“Well, they always take the savages beads and brandy, and stays, and hats, and braces, and
     really useful things—things the savages haven’t got, and never heard about. And the savages
     love them for their kind generousness, and give them pearls, and shells, and ivory, and
     cassowaries. And that’s the way—”
“Wait a sec,” said Anthea, splashing. “I can’t hear what you’re saying. Shells and—”
“Shells, and things like that. The great thing is to get people to love you by being
     generous. And that’s what we’ve got to do. Next time we go into the Past we’ll regularly fit
     out the expedition. You remember how
      the Babylonian Queen froze on to that pocket‐book? Well,
     we’ll take things like that. And offer them in exchange for a sight of the Amulet.”
“A sight of it is not much good.”
“No, silly. But, don’t you see, when we’ve seen it we shall know where it is, and we can go
     and take it in the night when everybody is asleep.”
“It wouldn’t be stealing, would it?” said Anthea thoughtfully, “because it will be such an
     awfully long time ago when we do it. Oh, there’s that bell again.”
As soon as dinner was eaten (it was tinned salmon and lettuce, and a jam tart), and the cloth
     cleared away, the idea was explained to the others, and the Psammead was aroused from sand, and
     asked what it thought would be good merchandise with which to buy the affection of say, the
     Ancient Egyptians, and whether it thought the Amulet was likely to be found in the Court of
     Pharaoh.
But it shook its head, and shot out its snail’s eyes hopelessly.
“I’m not allowed to play in this game,” it said. “Of course I could find out in
     a minute where the thing was, only I mayn’t. But I may go so far as to own that your idea of
     taking things with you isn’t a bad one. And I shouldn’t show them all at once. Take small
     things and conceal them craftily about your persons.”

This advice seemed good. Soon the table was littered over with things which the children
     thought likely to interest the Ancient Egyptians. Anthea brought dolls, puzzle blocks, a wooden
     tea‐service, a green leather case with Nécessaire written on
     it in gold letters. Aunt Emma had once given it to Anthea, and it had then contained scissors,
     penknife, bodkin, stiletto, thimble, corkscrew, and glove‐buttoner. The scissors, knife, and
     thimble, and penknife were, of course, lost, but the other things were there and as good as
     new. Cyril contributed lead soldiers, a cannon, a catapult, a tin‐opener, a tie‐clip, and a
     tennis ball, and a padlock—no key. Robert collected a candle (“I don’t suppose they ever saw a
     self‐fitting paraffin one,” he said), a penny Japanese pin‐tray, a rubber stamp with his
     father’s name and address on it, and a piece of putty.
Jane added a key‐ring, the brass handle of a poker, a pot that had held cold‐cream, a smoked
     pearl button off her winter coat, and a key—no lock.
“We can’t take all this rubbish,” said Robert, with some scorn. “We must just each choose one
     thing.”
The afternoon passed very agreeably in the attempt to choose from the table the four most
     suitable objects. But the four children could not agree what was suitable, and at last Cyril
     said—
“Look here, let’s each be blindfolded and
      reach out, and the first thing you touch you stick to.”
This was done.
Cyril touched the padlock.
Anthea got the Nécessaire.
Robert clutched the candle.
Jane picked up the tie‐clip.
“It’s not much,” she said. “I don’t believe Ancient Egyptians wore ties.”
“Never mind,” said Anthea. “I believe it’s luckier not to really choose. In the stories it’s
     always the thing the wood‐cutter’s son picks up in the forest, and almost throws away because
     he thinks it’s no good, that turns out to be the magic thing in the end; or else some one’s
     lost it, and he is rewarded with the hand of the King’s daughter in marriage.”
“I don’t want any hands in marriage, thank you.” said Cyril firmly.
“Nor yet me,” said Robert. “It’s always the end of the adventures when it comes to the
     marriage hands.”
“Are we ready?” said Anthea.
“It is Egypt we’re going to, isn’t it?—nice Egypt?” said Jane. “I won’t go
     anywhere I don’t know about—like that dreadful big‐wavy burning‐mountain city,” she
     insisted.
Then the Psammead was coaxed into its bag.
“I say,” said Cyril suddenly, “I’m rather sick of kings. And people notice you so in palaces.
     Besides the Amulet’s sure to be in
      a Temple. Let’s just go among the common people, and try to
     work ourselves up by degrees. We might get taken on as Temple assistants.”
“Like beadles,” said Anthea, “or vergers. They must have splendid chances of stealing the
     Temple treasures.”
“Righto!” was the general rejoinder. The charm was held up. It grew big once again, and once
     again the warm golden Eastern light glowed softly beyond it.
As the children stepped through it loud and furious voices rang in their ears. They went
     suddenly from the quiet of Fitzroy Street dining‐room into a very angry Eastern crowd, a crowd
     much too angry to notice them. They edged through it to the wall of a house and stood there.
     The crowd was of men, women, and children. They were of all sorts of complexions, and pictures
     of them might have been coloured by any child with a shilling paint‐box. The colours that child
     would have used for complexions would have been yellow ochre, red ochre, light red, sepia, and
     indian ink. But their faces were painted already—black eyebrows and lashes, and some red lips.
     The women wore a sort of pinafore with shoulder straps, and loose things wound round their
     heads and shoulders. The men wore very little clothing—for they were the working people—and the
     Egyptian boys and girls wore nothing at all, unless you count the little ornaments hung on chains
      round their necks and waists. The children saw all this
     before they could hear anything distinctly. Every one was shouting so.
But a voice sounded above the other voices, and presently it was speaking in a silence.
“Comrades and fellow workers,” it said, and it was the voice of a tall, coppery‐coloured man
     who had climbed into a chariot that had been stopped by the crowd. Its owner had bolted,
     muttering something about calling the Guards, and now the man spoke from it. “Comrades and
     fellow workers, how long are we to endure the tyranny of our masters, who live in idleness and
     luxury on the fruit of our toil? They only give us a bare subsistence wage, and they live on
     the fat of the land. We labour all our lives to keep them in wanton luxury. Let us make an end
     of it!”
A roar of applause answered him.
“How are you going to do it?” cried a voice.
“You look out,” cried another, “or you’ll get yourself into trouble.”
“I’ve heard almost every single word of that,” whispered Robert, “in Hyde Park last
     Sunday!”
“Let us strike for more bread and onions and beer, and a longer mid‐day rest,” the speaker
     went on. “You are tired, you are hungry, you are thirsty. You are poor, your wives and children
     are pining for food. The barns of the rich are full to bursting
     
 with the corn we want, the corn our labour has grown. To the
     granaries!”
“To the granaries!” cried half the crowd; but another voice shouted clear above the tumult,
     “To Pharaoh! To the King! Let’s present a petition to the King! He will listen to the voice of
     the oppressed!”
For a moment the crowd swayed one way and another—first towards the granaries and then
     towards the palace. Then, with a rush like that of an imprisoned torrent suddenly set free, it
     surged along the street towards the palace, and the children were carried with it. Anthea found
     it difficult to keep the Psammead from being squeezed very uncomfortably.
The crowd swept through the streets of dull‐looking houses with few windows, very high up,
     across the market where people were not buying but exchanging goods. In a momentary pause
     Robert saw a basket of onions exchanged for a hair comb and five fish for a string of beads.
     The people in the market seemed better off than those in the crowd; they had finer clothes, and
     more of them. They were the kind of people who, nowadays, would have lived at Brixton or
     Brockley.
“What’s the trouble now?” a languid, large‐eyed lady in a crimped, half‐transparent linen
     dress, with her black hair very much braided and puffed out, asked of a date‐seller.
“Oh, the working‐men—discontented as
      usual,” the man answered. “Listen to them. Anyone would
     think it mattered whether they had a little more or less to eat. Dregs of society!” said the
     date‐seller.
“Scum!” said the lady.
“And I’ve heard that before, too,” said Robert.
At that moment the voice of the crowd changed, from anger to doubt, from doubt to fear. There
     were other voices shouting; they shouted defiance and menace, and they came nearer very
     quickly. There was the rattle of wheels and the pounding of hoofs. A voice shouted,
     “Guards!”
“The Guards! The Guards!” shouted another voice, and the crowd of workmen took up the cry.
     “The Guards! Pharaoh’s Guards!” And swaying a little once more, the crowd hung for a moment as
     it were balanced. Then as the trampling hoofs came nearer the workmen fled dispersed, up alleys
     and into the courts of houses, and the Guards in their embossed leather chariots swept down the
     street at the gallop, their wheels clattering over the stones, and their dark‐coloured, blue
     tunics blown open and back with the wind of their going.
“So that riot’s over,” said the crimped‐linen‐dressed lady; “that’s a blessing!
     And did you notice the Captain of the Guard? What a very handsome man he was, to be sure!”
The four children had taken advantage of the moment’s pause before the crowd turned
      to fly to edge themselves and drag each other into an arched
     doorway.
Now they each drew a long breath and looked at the others.
“We’re well out of that,” said Cyril.
“Yes,” said Anthea, “but I do wish the poor men hadn’t been driven back before they could get
     to the King. He might have done something for them.”
“Not if he was the one in the Bible he wouldn’t,” said Jane. “He had a hard heart.”
“Ah, that was the Moses one,” Anthea explained. “The Joseph one was quite different. I should
     like to see Pharaoh’s house. I wonder whether it’s like the Egyptian Court in the Crystal
     Palace.”
“I thought we decided to try to get taken on in a Temple,” said Cyril in injured tones.
“Yes, but we’ve got to know some one first. Couldn’t we make friends with a Temple
     doorkeeper—we might give him the padlock or something. I wonder which are temples and which are
     palaces,” Robert added, glancing across the market‐place to where an enormous gateway with huge
     side buildings towered towards the sky. To right and left of it were other buildings only a
     little less magnificent.
“Did you wish to seek out the Temple of Amen‐Rā?” asked a soft voice behind them, “or the
     Temple of Mut, or the Temple of Khonsu?”
They turned to find beside them a young
      man. He was shaved clean from head to foot, and on his feet
     were light papyrus sandals. He was clothed in a linen tunic of white, embroidered heavily in
     colours. He was gay with anklets, bracelets, and armlets of gold, richly inlaid. He wore a ring
     on his finger, and he had a short jacket of gold embroidery something like the Zouave soldiers
     wear, and on his neck was a gold collar with many amulets hanging from it. But among the
     amulets the children could see none like theirs.
“It doesn’t matter which Temple,” said Cyril frankly.
“Tell me your mission,” said the young man. “I am a divine father of the Temple of Amen‐Rā
     and perhaps I can help you.”
“Well,” said Cyril, “we’ve come from the great Empire on which the sun never sets.”
“I thought somehow that you’d come from some odd, out‐of‐the‐way spot,” said the priest with
     courtesy.
“And we’ve seen a good many palaces. We thought we should like to see a Temple, for a
     change,” said Robert.
The Psammead stirred uneasily in its embroidered bag.
“Have you brought gifts to the Temple?” asked the priest cautiously.
“We have got some gifts,” said Cyril with equal caution. “You see there’s magic
     mixed up in it. So we can’t tell you everything. But we don’t want to give our gifts for
     nothing.”

“Beware how you insult the god,” said the priest sternly. “I also can do magic. I can make a
     waxen image of you, and I can say words which, as the wax image melts before the fire, will
     make you dwindle away and at last perish miserably.”
“Pooh!” said Cyril stoutly, “that’s nothing. I can make fire
     itself!”
“I should jolly well like to see you do it,” said the priest unbelievingly.
“Well, you shall,” said Cyril, “nothing easier. Just stand close round me.”
“Do you need no preparation—no fasting, no incantations?” The priest’s tone was
     incredulous.
“The incantation’s quite short,” said Cyril, taking the hint; “and as for fasting, it’s not
     needed in my sort of magic. Union Jack, Printing Press, Gunpowder, Rule Britannia!
     Come, Fire, at the end of this little stick!”
He had pulled a match from his pocket, and as he ended the incantation which contained no
     words that it seemed likely the Egyptian had ever heard he stooped in the little crowd of his
     relations and the priest and struck the match on his boot. He stood up, shielding the flame
     with one hand.
“See?” he said, with modest pride. “Here, take it into your hand.”
“No, thank you,” said the priest, swiftly backing. “Can you do that again?”
“Yes.”
“Then come with me to the great double
      house of Pharaoh. He loves good magic, and he will raise you
     to honour and glory. There’s no need of secrets between initiates,” he went on confidentially.
     “The fact is, I am out of favour at present owing to a little matter of failure of prophecy. I
     told him a beautiful princess would be sent to him from Syria, and, lo! a woman thirty years
     old arrived. But she was a beautiful woman not so long ago. Time is only a mode of
     thought, you know.”
The children thrilled to the familiar words.
“So you know that too, do you?” said Cyril.
“It is part of the mystery of all magic, is it not?” said the priest. “Now if I bring you to
     Pharaoh the little unpleasantness I spoke of will be forgotten. And I will ask Pharaoh, the
     Great House, Son of the Sun, and Lord of the South and North, to decree that you shall lodge in
     the Temple. Then you can have a good look round, and teach me your magic. And I will teach you
     mine.”
This idea seemed good—at least it was better than any other which at that moment occurred to
     anybody, so they followed the priest through the city.
The streets were very narrow and dirty. The best houses, the priest explained, were built
     within walls twenty to twenty‐five feet high, and such windows as showed in the walls were very
     high up. The tops of palm‐trees showed above the walls. The poor
      people’s houses were little square huts with a door and two
     windows, and smoke coming out of a hole in the back.
“The poor Egyptians haven’t improved so very much in their building since the first time we
     came to Egypt,” whispered Cyril to Anthea.
The huts were roofed with palm branches, and everywhere there were chickens, and goats, and
     little naked children kicking about in the yellow dust. On one roof was a goat, who had climbed
     up and was eating the dry palm‐leaves with snorts and head‐tossings of delight. Over every
     house door was some sort of figure or shape.
“Amulets,” the priest explained, “to keep off the evil eye.”
“I don’t think much of your ‘nice Egypt,’” Robert whispered to Jane; “it’s simply not a patch
     on Babylon.”
“Ah, you wait till you see the palace,” Jane whispered back.
The palace was indeed much more magnificent than anything they had yet seen that day, though
     it would have made but a poor show beside that of the Babylonian King. They came to it through
     a great square pillared doorway of sandstone that stood in a high brick wall. The shut doors
     were of massive cedar, with bronze hinges, and were studded with bronze nails. At the side was
     a little door and a wicket gate, and through this the priest led the children. He seemed
      to know a word that made the sentries make way for him.
Inside was a garden, planted with hundreds of different kinds of trees and flowering shrubs,
     a lake full of fish, with blue lotus flowers at the margin, and ducks swimming about
     cheerfully, and looking, as Jane said, quite modern.
“The guard‐chamber, the store‐houses, the Queen’s house,” said the priest, pointing them
     out.
They passed through open courtyards, paved with flat stones, and the priest whispered to a
     guard at a great inner gate.
“We are fortunate,” he said to the children, “Pharaoh is even now in the Court of Honour.
     Now, don’t forget to be overcome with respect and admiration. It won’t do any harm if you fall
     flat on your faces. And whatever you do, don’t speak until you’re spoken to.”
“There used to be that rule in our country,” said Robert, “when my father was a little
     boy.”
At the outer end of the great hall a crowd of people were arguing with and even shoving the
     Guards, who seemed to make it a rule not to let anyone through unless they were bribed to do
     it. The children heard several promises of the utmost richness, and wondered whether they would
     ever be kept.
All round the hall were pillars of painted
      wood. The roof was of cedar, gorgeously inlaid. About
     half‐way up the hall was a wide, shallow step that went right across the hall; then a little
     farther on another; and then a steep flight of narrower steps, leading right up to the throne
     on which Pharaoh sat. He sat there very splendid, his red and white double crown on his head,
     and his sceptre in his hand. The throne had a canopy of wood and wooden pillars painted in
     bright colours. On a low, broad bench that ran all round the hall sat the friends, relatives,
     and courtiers of the King, leaning on richly‐covered cushions.
The priest led the children up the steps till they all stood before the throne; and then,
     suddenly, he fell on his face with hands outstretched. The others did the same, Anthea falling
     very carefully because of the Psammead.
“Raise them,” said the voice of Pharaoh, “that they may speak to me.”
The officers of the King’s household raised them.
“Who are these strangers?” Pharaoh asked, and added very crossly, “And what do you mean,
     Rekh‐marā, by daring to come into my presence while your innocence is not established?”
“Oh, great King,” said the young priest, “you are the very image of Rā, and the likeness of
     his son Horus in every respect. You know the thoughts of the hearts of the gods and of men, and
     you have divined
      that these strangers are the children of the children of the
     vile and conquered Kings of the Empire where the sun never sets. They know a magic not known to
     the Egyptians. And they come with gifts in their hands as tribute to Pharaoh, in whose heart is
     the wisdom of the gods, and on his lips their truth.”
“That is all very well,” said Pharaoh, “but where are the gifts?”
The children, bowing as well as they could in their embarrassment at finding themselves the
     centre of interest in a circle more grand, more golden and more highly coloured than they could
     have imagined possible, pulled out the padlock, the Nécessaire, and the tie‐clip. “But it’s not tribute all the same,” Cyril muttered.
     “England doesn’t pay tribute!”
Pharaoh examined all the things with great interest when the chief of the household had taken
     them up to him. “Deliver them to the Keeper of the Treasury,” he said to one near him. And to
     the children he said—
“A small tribute, truly, but strange, and not without worth. And the magic, O Rekh‐marā?”
“These unworthy sons of a conquered nation ...” began Rekh‐marā.
“Nothing of the kind!” Cyril whispered angrily.
“... of a vile and conquered nation, can make fire to spring from dry wood—in the sight of
     all.”


“I should jolly well like to see them do it,” said Pharaoh, just as the priest had done.
So Cyril, without more ado, did it.
“Do more magic,” said the King, with simple appreciation.
“He cannot do any more magic,” said Anthea suddenly, and all eyes were turned on her,
     “because of the voice of the free people who are shouting for bread and onions and beer and a
     long mid‐day rest. If the people had what they wanted, he could do more.”
“A rude‐spoken girl,” said Pharaoh. “But give the dogs what they want,” he said, without
     turning his head. “Let them have their rest and their extra rations. There are plenty of slaves
     to work.”
A richly‐dressed official hurried out.
“You will be the idol of the people,” Rekh‐marā whispered joyously; “the Temple of Amen will
     not contain their offerings.”
Cyril struck another match, and all the court was overwhelmed with delight and wonder. And
     when Cyril took the candle from his pocket and lighted it with the match, and then held the
     burning candle up before the King the enthusiasm knew no bounds.
“Oh, greatest of all, before whom sun and moon and stars bow down,” said Rekh‐marā
     insinuatingly, “am I pardoned? Is my innocence made plain?”
“As plain as it ever will be, I daresay,” said
      Pharaoh shortly. “Get along with you. You are pardoned. Go
     in peace.” The priest went with lightning swiftness.
“And what,” said the King suddenly, “is it that moves in that sack? Show me, oh
     strangers.”
There was nothing for it but to show the Psammead.
“Seize it,” said Pharaoh carelessly. “A very curious monkey. It will be a nice little novelty
     for my wild beast collection.”
And instantly, the entreaties of the children availing as little as the bites of the
     Psammead, though both bites and entreaties were fervent, it was carried away from before their
     eyes.
“Oh, do be careful!” cried Anthea. “At least keep it dry! Keep it in its sacred
     house!”
She held up the embroidered bag.
“It’s a magic creature,” cried Robert; “it’s simply priceless!”
“You’ve no right to take it away,” cried Jane incautiously. “It’s a shame, a barefaced
     robbery, that’s what it is!”
There was an awful silence. Then Pharaoh spoke.
“Take the sacred house of the beast from them,” he said, “and imprison all. To‐night after
     supper it may be our pleasure to see more magic. Guard them well, and do not torture
     them—yet!”
“Oh, dear!” sobbed Jane, as they were led
      away. “I knew exactly what it would be! Oh, I wish you
     hadn’t!”
“Shut up, silly,” said Cyril. “You know you would come to Egypt. It was your own
     idea entirely. Shut up. It’ll be all right.”
“I thought we should play ball with queens,” sobbed Jane, “and have no end of larks! And now
     everything’s going to be perfectly horrid!”
The room they were shut up in was a room, and not a dungeon, as the elder ones
     had feared. That, as Anthea said, was one comfort. There were paintings on the wall that at any
     other time would have been most interesting. And a sort of low couch, and chairs.
When they were alone Jane breathed a sigh of relief.
“Now we can get home all right,” she said.
“And leave the Psammead?” said Anthea reproachfully.
“Wait a sec. I’ve got an idea,” said Cyril. He pondered for a few moments. Then he began
     hammering on the heavy cedar door. It opened, and a guard put in his head.
“Stop that row,” he said sternly, “or—”
“Look here,” Cyril interrupted, “it’s very dull for you isn’t it? Just doing nothing but
     guard us. Wouldn’t you like to see some magic? We’re not too proud to do it for you. Wouldn’t
     you like to see it?”
“I don’t mind if I do,” said the guard.
“Well then, you get us that monkey of
      ours that was taken away, and we’ll show you.”
“How do I know you’re not making game of me?” asked the soldier. “Shouldn’t wonder if you
     only wanted to get the creature so as to set it on me. I daresay its teeth and claws are
     poisonous.”
“Well, look here,” said Robert. “You see we’ve got nothing with us? You just shut the door,
     and open it again in five minutes, and we’ll have got a magic—oh, I don’t know—a magic flower
     in a pot for you.”
“If you can do that you can do anything,” said the soldier, and he went out and barred the
     door.
Then, of course, they held up the Amulet. They found the East by holding it up, and turning
     slowly till the Amulet began to grow big, walked home through it, and came back with a geranium
     in full scarlet flower from the staircase window of the Fitzroy Street house.
“Well!” said the soldier when he came in. “I really am—!”
“We can do much more wonderful things than that—oh, ever so much,” said Anthea persuasively,
     “if we only have our monkey. And here’s twopence for yourself.”
The soldier looked at the twopence.
“What’s this?” he said.
Robert explained how much simpler it was to pay money for things than to exchange them as the
     people were doing in the market.
     
 Later on the soldier gave the coins to his captain, who,
     later still, showed them to Pharaoh, who of course kept them and was much struck with the idea.
     That was really how coins first came to be used in Egypt. You will not believe this, I daresay,
     but really, if you believe the rest of the story, I don’t see why you shouldn’t believe this as
     well.
“I say,” said Anthea, struck by a sudden thought, “I suppose it’ll be all right about those
     workmen? The King won’t go back on what he said about them just because he’s angry with
     us?”
“Oh, no,” said the soldier, “you see, he’s rather afraid of magic. He’ll keep to his word
     right enough.”
“Then that’s all right,” said Robert; and Anthea said softly and coaxingly—
“Ah, do get us the monkey, and then you’ll see some lovely magic. Do—there’s a
     nice, kind soldier.”
“I don’t know where they’ve put your precious monkey, but if I can get another chap to take
     on my duty here I’ll see what I can do,” he said grudgingly, and went out.
“Do you mean,” said Robert, “that we’re going off without even trying for the
     other half of the Amulet?”
“I really think we’d better,” said Anthea tremulously.
“Of course the other half of the Amulet’s here somewhere or our half wouldn’t have
      brought us here. I do wish we could find it. It is a pity we
     don’t know any real magic. Then we could find out. I do wonder where it
     is—exactly.”
If they had only known it, something very like the other half of the Amulet was very near
     them. It hung round the neck of some one, and that some one was watching them through a chink,
     high up in the wall, specially devised for watching people who were imprisoned. But they did
      not know.
There was nearly an hour of anxious waiting. They tried to take an interest in the picture on
     the wall, a picture of harpers playing very odd harps and women dancing at a feast. They
     examined the painted plaster floor, and the chairs were of white painted wood with coloured
     stripes at intervals.
But the time went slowly, and every one had time to think of how Pharaoh had said, “Don’t
     torture them—yet.”
“If the worst comes to the worst,” said Cyril, “we must just bunk, and leave the Psammead. I
     believe it can take care of itself well enough. They won’t kill it or hurt it when they find it
     can speak and give wishes. They’ll build it a temple, I shouldn’t wonder.”
“I couldn’t bear to go without it,” said Anthea, “and Pharaoh said ‘After supper,’ that won’t
     be just yet. And the soldier was curious. I’m sure we’re all right for the
     present.”
All the same, the sounds of the door
      being unbarred seemed one of the prettiest sounds
     possible.
“Suppose he hasn’t got the Psammead?” whispered Jane.
But that doubt was set at rest by the Psammead itself; for almost before the door was open it
     sprang through the chink of it into Anthea’s arms, shivering and hunching up its fur.
“Here’s its fancy overcoat,” said the soldier, holding out the bag, into which the Psammead
     immediately crept.
“Now,” said Cyril, “what would you like us to do? Anything you’d like us to get for you?”
“Any little trick you like,” said the soldier. “If you can get a strange flower blooming in
     an earthenware vase you can get anything, I suppose,” he said. “I just wish I’d got two men’s
     loads of jewels from the King’s treasury. That’s what I’ve always wished for.”
At the word “wish” the children knew that the Psammead would attend to
      that bit of magic. It did, and the floor was littered with a spreading heap of
     gold and precious stones.
“Any other little trick?” asked Cyril loftily. “Shall we become invisible? Vanish?”
“Yes, if you like,” said the soldier; “but not through the door, you don’t.”
He closed it carefully and set his broad Egyptian back against it.

“No! no!” cried a voice high up among the tops of the tall wooden pillars that stood against
     the wall. There was a sound of some one moving above.
The soldier was as much surprised as anybody.
“That’s magic, if you like,” he said.
And then Jane held up the Amulet, uttering the word of Power. At the sound of it and at the
     sight of the Amulet growing into the great arch the soldier fell flat on his face among the
     jewels with a cry of awe and terror.
The children went through the arch with a quickness born of long practice. But Jane stayed in
     the middle of the arch and looked back.
The others, standing on the dining‐room carpet in Fitzroy Street, turned and saw her still in
     the arch. “Some one’s holding her,” cried Cyril. “We must go back.”
But they pulled at Jane’s hands just to see if she would come, and, of course, she did
     come.
Then, as usual, the arch was little again and there they all were.
“Oh, I do wish you hadn’t!” Jane said crossly. “It was so interesting. The
     priest had come in and he was kicking the soldier, and telling him he’d done it now, and they
     must take the jewels and flee for their lives.”
“And did they?”


“I don’t know. You interfered,” said Jane ungratefully. “I should have liked to
     see the last of it.”
As a matter of fact, none of them had seen the last of it—if by “it” Jane meant the adventure
     of the Priest and the Soldier.
</div></body></text></TEI>