<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Story of the Amulet : VWWP edition </title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1906</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III
THE PAST
THE learned gentleman had let his dinner get quite cold. It was mutton chop, and as
     it lay on the plate it looked like a brown island in the middle of a frozen pond, because the
     grease of the gravy had become cold, and consequently white. It looked very nasty, and it was
     the first thing the children saw when, after knocking three times and receiving no reply, one
     of them ventured to turn the handle and softly to open the door. The chop was on the end of a
     long table that ran down one side of the room. The table had images on it and queer‐shaped
     stones, and books. And there were glass cases fixed against the wall behind, with little
     strange things in them. The cases were rather like the ones you see in jewellers’ shops.
The “poor learned gentleman” was sitting at a table in the window, looking at something very
     small which he held in a pair of fine pincers. He had a round spy‐glass sort of thing in one
     eye—which reminded the
      children of watchmakers, and also of the long snail’s eyes of
     the Psammead.
The gentleman was very long and thin, and his long, thin boots stuck out under the other side
     of his table. He did not hear the door open, and the children stood hesitating. At last Robert
     gave the door a push, and they all started back, for in the middle of the wall that the door
     had hidden was a mummy‐case—very, very, very big—painted in red and yellow and green and black,
     and the face of it seemed to look at them quite angrily.
You know what a mummy‐case is like, of course? If you don’t you had better go to the British
     Museum at once and find out. Anyway, it is not at all the sort of thing that you expect to meet
     in a top‐floor front in Bloomsbury, looking as though it would like to know what business
      you had there.
So everyone said, “Oh!” rather loud, and their boots clattered as they stumbled back.
The learned gentleman took the glass out of his eye and said—
“I beg your pardon,” in a very soft, quiet pleasant voice—the voice of a gentleman who has
     been to Oxford.
“It’s us that beg yours,” said Cyril politely. “We are sorry to disturb you.”
“Come in,” said the gentleman, rising—with the most distinguished courtesy, Anthea told
     herself. “I am delighted to see you. Won’t you sit down? No, not there; allow me to move that
     papyrus.”


He cleared a chair, and stood smiling and looking kindly through his large, round
     spectacles.
“He treats us like grown‐ups,” whispered Robert, “and he doesn’t seem to know how many of us
     there are.”
“Hush,” said Anthea, “it isn’t manners to whisper. You say, Cyril—go ahead.”
“We’re very sorry to disturb you,” said Cyril politely, “but we did knock three times, and
     you didn’t say ‘Come in,’ or ‘Run away now,’ or that you couldn’t be bothered just now, or to
     come when you weren’t so busy, or any of the things people do say when you knock at doors, so
     we opened it. We knew you were in because we heard you sneeze while we were waiting.”
“Not at all,” said the gentleman; “do sit down.”
“He has found out there are four of us,” said Robert, as the gentleman cleared three more
     chairs. He put the things off them carefully on the floor. The first chair had things like
     bricks that tiny, tiny birds’ feet have walked over when the bricks were soft, only the marks
     were in regular lines. The second chair had round things on it like very large, fat, long, pale
     beads. And the last chair had a pile of dusty papers on it.
The children sat down.
“We know you are very, very learned,” said Cyril, “and we have got a charm, and we want you
     to read the name on it, because it
      isn’t in Latin or Greek, or Hebrew, or any of the languages
      we know—”
“A thorough knowledge of even those languages is a very fair foundation on which to build an
     education,” said the gentleman politely.
“Oh!” said Cyril blushing, “but we only know them to look at, except Latin—and I’m only in
     Cæsar with that.”
The gentleman took off his spectacles and laughed. His laugh sounded rusty, Cyril thought, as
     though it wasn’t often used.
“Of course!” he said. “I’m sure I beg your pardon. I think I must have been in a dream. You
     are the children who live downstairs, are you not? Yes. I have seen you as I have passed in and
     out. And you have found something that you think to be an antiquity, and you’ve brought it to
     show me? That was very kind. I should like to inspect it.”
“I’m afraid we didn’t think about your liking to inspect it,” said the truthful Anthea. “It
     was just for us because we wanted to know the name on it—”
“Oh, yes—and, I say,” Robert interjected, “you won’t think it rude of us if we ask you first,
     before we show it, to be bound in the what‐do‐you‐call‐it of—”
“In the bonds of honour and upright dealing,” said Anthea.
“I’m afraid I don’t quite follow you,” said the gentleman, with gentle nervousness.

“Well, it’s this way,” said Cyril. “We’ve got part of a charm. And the Sammy—I mean,
     something told us it would work, though it’s only half a one; but it won’t work unless we can
     say the name that’s on it. But, of course, if you’ve got another name that can lick ours, our
     charm will be no go; so we want you to give us your word of honour as a gentleman—though I’m
     sure, now I’ve seen you, that it’s not necessary; but still I’ve promised to ask you, so we
     must. Will you please give us your honourable word not to say any name stronger than the name
     on our charm?”
The gentleman had put on his spectacles again and was looking at Cyril through them. He now
     said: “Bless me!” more than once, adding, “Who told you all this?”
“I can’t tell you,” said Cyril. “I’m very sorry, but I can’t.”
Some faint memory of a far‐off childhood must have come to the learned gentleman just then,
     for he smiled.
“I see,” he said. “It is some sort of game that you are engaged in? Of course! Yes! Well, I
     will certainly promise. Yet I wonder how you heard of the names of power?”
“We can’t tell you that either,” said Cyril; and Anthea said, “Here is our charm,” and held
     it out.
With politeness, but without interest, the gentleman took it. But after the first glance
      all his body suddenly stiffened, as a pointer’s does when he
     sees a partridge.
“Excuse me,” he said in quite a changed voice, and carried the charm to the window.
He looked at it; he turned it over. He fixed his spy‐glass in his eye and looked again. No
     one said anything. Only Robert made a shuffling noise with his feet till Anthea nudged him to
     shut up.
At last the learned gentleman drew a long breath.
“Where did you find this?” he asked.
“We didn’t find it. We bought it at a shop. Jacob Absalom the name is—not far from Charing
     Cross,” said Cyril.
“We gave seven‐and‐sixpence for it,” added Jane.
“It is not for sale, I suppose? You do not wish to part with it? I ought to tell you that it
     is extremely valuable—extraordinarily valuable, I may say.”
“Yes,” said Cyril, “we know that, so of course we want to keep it.”
“Keep it carefully, then,” said the gentleman impressively; “and if ever you should wish to
     part with it, may I ask you to give me the refusal of it?”
“The refusal?”
“I mean, do not sell it to anyone else until you have given me the opportunity of buying
     it.”
“All right,” said Cyril, “we won’t. But we
     
 don’t want to sell it. We want to make it do things.”
“I suppose you can play at that as well as at anything else,” said the gentleman; “but I’m
     afraid the days of magic are over.”
“They aren’t really,” said Anthea earnestly. “You’d see they aren’t if I could
     tell you about our last summer holidays. Only I mustn’t. Thank you very much. And can you read
     the name?”
“Yes, I can read it.”
“Will you tell it us?”
“The name,” said the gentleman, “is Ur Hekau Setcheh.”
“Ur Hekau Setcheh,” repeated Cyril. “Thanks awfully. I do hope we haven’t taken up too much
     of your time.”
“Not at all,” said the gentleman. “And do let me entreat you to be very, very careful of that
     most valuable specimen.”
They said “thank you” in all the different polite ways they could think of, and filed out of
     the door and down the stairs. Anthea was last. Half‐way down to the first landing she turned
     and ran up again.
The door was still open, and the learned gentleman and the mummy‐case were standing opposite
     to each other, and both looked as though they had stood like that for years.
The gentleman started when Anthea put her hand on his arm.
“I hope you won’t be cross and say it’s not
      my business,” she said, “but do look at your chop! Don’t you
     think you ought to eat it? Father forgets his dinner sometimes when he’s writing, and Mother
     always says I ought to remind him if she’s not at home to do it herself, because it’s so bad to
     miss your regular meals. So I thought perhaps you wouldn’t mind my reminding you, because you
     don’t seem to have anyone else to do it.”
She glanced at the mummy‐case; it certainly did not look as though it would ever
     think of reminding people of their meals.
The learned gentleman looked at her for a moment before he said—
“Thank you, my dear. It was a kindly thought. No, I haven’t anyone to remind me about things
     like that.”
He sighed, and looked at the chop.
“It looks very nasty,” said Anthea.
“Yes,” he said, “it does. I’ll eat it immediately, before I forget.”
As he ate it he sighed more than once. Perhaps because the chop was nasty, perhaps because he
     longed for the charm which the children did not want to sell, perhaps because it was so long
     since anyone cared whether he ate his chops or forgot them.
Anthea caught the others at the stair‐foot. They woke the Psammead, and it taught them
     exactly how to use the word of power, and to make the charm speak. I am not going to tell you
     how this is done, because you might try to do it. And for
      you any such trying would be almost sure to end in
     disappointment. Because in the first place it is a thousand million to one against your ever
     getting hold of the right sort of charm, and if you did, there would be hardly any chance at
     all of your finding a learned gentleman clever enough and kind enough to read the word for
     you.
The children and the Psammead crouched in a circle on the floor—in the girls’ bedroom,
     because in the parlour they might have been interrupted by old Nurse’s coming in to lay the
     cloth for tea—and the charm was put in the middle of the circle.
The sun shone splendidly outside, and the room was very light. Through the open window came
     the hum and rattle of London, and in the street below they could hear the voice of the
     milkman.
When all was ready, the Psammead signed to Anthea to say the word. And she said it.
Instantly the whole light of all the world seemed to go out. The room was dark. The world
     outside was dark—darker than the darkest night that ever was. And all the sounds went out too,
     so that there was a silence deeper than any silence you have ever even dreamed of imagining. It
     was like being suddenly deaf and blind, only darker and quieter even than that.
But before the children had got over the sudden shock of it enough to be frightened,
      a faint, beautiful light began to show in the middle of the
     circle, and at the same moment a faint, beautiful voice began to speak. The light was too small
     for one to see anything by, and the voice was too small for you to hear what it said. You could
     just see the light and just hear the voice.
But the light grew stronger. It was greeny, like glow‐worms’ lamps, and it grew and grew till
     it was as though thousands and thousands of glow‐worms were signalling to their winged
     sweethearts from the middle of the circle. And the voice grew, not so much in loudness as in
     sweetness (though it grew louder, too), till it was so sweet that you wanted to cry with
     pleasure just at the sound of it. It was like nightingales, and the sea, and the fiddle, and
     the voice of your mother when you have been a long time away, and she meets you at the door
     when you get home.
And the voice said—
“Speak. What is it that you would hear?”
I cannot tell you what language the voice used. I only know that everyone present understood
     it perfectly. If you come to think of it, there must be some language that everyone could
     understand, if we only knew what it was. Nor can I tell you how the charm spoke, nor whether it
     was the charm that spoke, or some presence in the charm. The children could not have told you
     either. Indeed, they could not look at the charm while it was speaking, because
      the light was too bright. They looked instead at the green
     radiance on the faded Kidderminster carpet at the edge of the circle. They all felt very quiet,
     and not inclined to ask questions or fidget with their feet. For this was not like the things
     that had happened in the country when the Psammead had given them their wishes. That had been
     funny somehow, and this was not. It was something like Arabian Nights magic, and something like
     being in church. No one cared to speak.
It was Cyril who said at last—
“Please we want to know where the other half of the charm is.”
“The part of the Amulet which is lost,” said the beautiful voice, “was broken and ground into
     the dust of the shrine that held it. It and the pin that joined the two halves are themselves
     dust, and the dust is scattered over many lands and sunk in many seas.”
“Oh, I say!” murmured Robert, and a blank silence fell.
“Then it’s all up?” said Cyril at last; “it’s no use our looking for a thing that’s smashed
     into dust, and the dust scattered all over the place.”
“If you would find it,” said the voice, “You must seek it where it still is, perfect as
     ever.”
“I don’t understand,” said Cyril.
“In the Past you may find it,” said the voice.
“I wish we may find it,” said Cyril.

The Psammead whispered crossly, “Don’t you understand? The thing existed in the Past. If you
     were in the Past, too, you could find it. It’s very difficult to make you understand things.
     Time and space are only forms of thought.”
“I see,” said Cyril.
“No, you don’t,” said the Psammead, “and it doesn’t matter if you don’t, either. What I mean
     is that if you were only made the right way, you could see everything happening in the same
     place at the same time. Now do you see?”
“I’m afraid I don’t,” said Anthea; “I’m sorry I’m so stupid.”
“Well, at any rate, you see this. That lost half of the Amulet is in the Past. Therefore it’s
     in the Past we must look for it. I mustn’t speak to the charm myself. Ask it things! Find
     out!”
“Where can we find the other part of you?” asked Cyril obediently.
“In the Past,” said the voice.
“What part of the Past?”
“I may not tell you. If you will choose a time, I will take you to the place that then held
     it. You yourselves must find it.”
“When did you see it last?” asked Anthea—“I mean, when was it taken away from you?”
The beautiful voice answered—
“That was thousands of years ago. The Amulet was perfect then, and lay in a shrine, the last
     of many shrines, and I
      worked wonders. Then came strange men with strange weapons
     and destroyed my shrine, and the Amulet they bore away with many captives. But of these, one,
     my priest, knew the word of power, and spoke it for me, so that the Amulet became invisible,
     and thus returned to my shrine, but the shrine was broken down, and ere any magic could rebuild
     it, one spoke a word before which my power bowed down and was still. And the Amulet lay there,
     still perfect, but enslaved. Then one coming with stones to rebuild the shrine, dropped a hewn
     stone on the Amulet as it lay, and one half was sundered from the other. I had no power to seek
     for that which was lost. And there being none to speak the word of power, I could not rejoin
     it. So the Amulet lay in the dust of the desert many thousand years, and at last came a small
     man, a conqueror with an army, and after him a crowd of men who sought to seem wise, and one of
     these found half the Amulet and brought it to this land. But none could read the name. So I lay
     still. And this man dying and his son after him, the Amulet was sold by those who came after to
     a merchant, and from him you bought it, and it is here, and now, the name of power having been
     spoken, I also am here.”
This is what the voice said. I think it must have meant Napoleon by the small
      man, the conqueror. Because I know I have been told that he
     took an army to Egypt, and that afterwards a lot of wise people went grubbing in the sand, and
     fished up all sorts of wonderful things, older than you would think possible. And of these I
     believe this charm to have been one, and the most wonderful one of all.
Everyone listened: and everyone tried to think. It is not easy to do this clearly when you
     have been listening to the kind of talk I have told you about.
At last Robert said—
“Can you take us into the Past—to the shrine where you and the other thing were together. If
     you could take us there, we might find the other part still there after all these thousands of
     years.”
“Still there? silly!” said Cyril. “Don’t you see, if we go back into the Past it won’t be
     thousands of years ago. It will be now for us—won’t it?” He appealed to the
     Psammead, who said—
“You’re not so far off the idea as you usually are!”
“Well,” said Anthea, “will you take us back to when there was a shrine and you were safe in
     it—all of you?”
“Yes,” said the voice. “You must hold me up, and speak the word of power, and one by one,
     beginning with the first‐born, you shall pass through me into the Past. But let the last that
     passes be the one that holds
      me, and let him not lose his hold, lest you lose me, and so
     remain in the Past for ever.”
“That’s a nasty idea,” said Robert.
“When you desire to return,” the beautiful voice went on, “hold me up towards the East, and
     speak the word. Then, passing through me, you shall return to this time and it shall be the
     present to you.”
“But how—”
A bell rang loudly.
“Oh crikey!” exclaimed Robert, “that’s tea! Will you please make it proper daylight again so
     that we can go down. And thank you so much for all your kindness.”
“We’ve enjoyed ourselves very much indeed, thank you!” added Anthea politely.
The beautiful light faded slowly. The great darkness and silence came and these suddenly
     changed to the dazzlement of day and the great soft, rustling sound of London, that is like
     some vast beast turning over in its sleep.
The children rubbed their eyes, the Psammead ran quickly to its sandy bath, and the others
     went down to tea. And until the cups were actually filled tea seemed less real than the
     beautiful voice and the greeny light.
After tea Anthea persuaded the others to allow her to hang the charm round her neck with a
     piece of string.
“It would be so awful if it got lost,” she said: “it might get lost anywhere, you know, and
     it would be rather beastly for us to have to stay in the Past for ever and ever, wouldn’t
     it?”
</div></body></text></TEI>