<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Good Comrade, by Una L.
      Silberrad</title><author>Silberrad, Una Lucy (1872-1955). </author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1907</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER XV
THE GOOD COMRADE
Rawson-Clew was very busy that autumn, so busy that the events which had taken place in
     Holland were rather blotted out of his mind; he had not exactly forgotten them, only among the
     press of other things he did not often think about them and they soon came to take their proper
     unimportant place among his recollections. Julia he thought of occasionally, but less and less
     in connection with the foolish holiday, more in connection with some chance saying or doing.
     Things recalled her, a passage in a book, a sentiment she would have shared, an opinion she
     would have combated. Or perhaps it was that some one he met set him thinking of her shrewd
     swift judgments; some scene in which he played a part that made him imagine her an amused
     spectator of its unconscious absurdity. He had turned her thyme flowers out of his pocket; he
     had no sentiment about them or her, but he did not forget her; their acquaintance had, to a
     certain extent, been a thing of mind, and in mind it seemed he occasionally came in contact
     with her still. Also there is no doubt she must have been one of those virile people who take
     hold, for though one could sometimes overlook her presence, in absence one did not forget.
Of herself and her doings he never heard; at first he had half thought he might have some communication
      from Mr. Gillat, but as the autumn went on and he heard nothing, he came to the
     conclusion that she really must have arranged something satisfactorily and there was an end to
     the whole affair. He settled down to his own concerns and became very thoroughly absorbed in
     them, to the exclusion of nearly everything else. For women he never had much taste, and now,
     being busy and preoccupied, he got into the way of scanning them more critically than ever when
     he did happen to come across them. Not comparing them with any ideal standard, but just finding
     them uninteresting, whether they were the cultivated, well-bred girls of the country, or the
     smart young matrons and wide-awake maidens of the town.
That autumn the young Rawson-Clew, Captain Polkington's acquaintance, came into a fortune and
     took a wife. The latter was, perhaps, on the whole, a wise proceeding, for, though the wife in
     question would undoubtedly help him in the rapid and inevitable spending of the fortune, she
     was likely also to enable him to get more for his money than if he were spending alone.
     Rawson-Clew was not introduced to this lady till the winter, then, one evening, he met her at a
     friend's "at home."
She was very pretty, small and fair and plump, with childish blue eyes, and an anything but
     childish mind behind them. She had dainty little feet, as well shaped as any he had ever seen,
     and she was perfectly dressed, her gown a diaphanous creation of melting colours and floating
     softness, which suggested more than it revealed of her person, like a nymph's drapery. She was
     the centre of attraction and talked and laughed a great deal, the latter in little tinkles like
     a child of five, the former from the top of her throat with the faintest lisp and in the
     strange jargon that was the slang of the moment. She knew no more of Florentine art or Wagner
     or Egyptology
      than Julia did, and cared even less. She set out to be intelligently ignorant—to
     be anything else was called "middle-class" in her set—and she achieved her end, although she
     could do some things extremely well—play bridge, gamble in stocks and shares and anything else,
     and arrange lights and colours with the skill of an artist when a suitable setting for her
     pretty self was concerned. She had all the charms of womanly weakness without any old-fashioned
     and grandmotherly narrowness; she was quite free and emancipated in mind and manners, no man
     had to modify his language for her; she preferred a double meaning to a single one, and a
      risque story to a plain one. She had an excellent taste in dinners, a critical one in
     liqueurs, and a catholic one in men.
She was most gracious to Rawson-Clew when he was introduced, breaking up her court and
     dismissing her admirers solely to accommodate him. The instant she saw him, before she heard
     who he was, she picked him out as the game best worthy of her prowess, and she lost no time in
     addressing herself to the chase with the skill and determination of a Diana—though that perhaps
     is hardly a good comparison, enthusiasm for the chase being about the only quality she shared
     with the maiden huntress.
Rawson-Clew did not show signs of succumbing at once to her charms; she hardly expected that
     he would, for she gave him credit for knowing his own value and was not displeased thereby;
     where is the pleasure of sport if the quarry be captured at the outset? But if he did not
     succumb he did all that was otherwise expected of him, standing in attendance on her and
     sitting by her when he was invited to the settee she had chosen in a quiet corner. So well,
     indeed, did he comport himself that by the time they parted she felt fairly satisfied with her progress.
     
Perhaps she would have been less satisfied if she had heard something he said soon after. A
     man he knew left the house at the same time he did and persuaded him to come to the club. On
     the way the little lady came in for some discussion; the other man chiefly gave his opinion
     though he once asked Rawson-Clew what he thought of his young cousin's wife.
"As a wife?" he answered; "I should not think of her. If I wanted, as I certainly do not, the
     privilege of paying that kind of woman's bills, I should not bother to marry her."
The other man laughed, but if he quarrelled with anything in the answer, it appeared to be
     the taste rather than the judgment. He maintained that the lady was charming; Rawson-Clew
     merely said—
"Think so?" and did not even trouble to defend his opinion.
At the club he found a box that had come for him by parcels post. A wooden one with the
     address printed on a card and nailed to the lid, which was screwed down. It did not look
     particularly interesting; he told one of the club servants to unscrew it for him. When he came
     to examine the contents he found, first a lot of damp packing, and then a wide-necked stoppered
     bottle, two-thirds full of white powder. It bore a label printed neatly like the address—
"Herr Van de Greutz's Explosive.
"Formula as he said it...."
For a moment Rawson-Clew held the bottle, staring at it in blank astonishment; so tense was
     his attitude that it caught the other man's attention.
"Hullo!" he said, "some one sent you an infernal machine?"
     
Rawson-Clew roused himself. "No," he answered shortly.
He put the bottle back in the box after he had felt in the packing and found nothing, then he
     fastened it up with more care than was perhaps necessary. He looked at the address on the lid,
     but it told him nothing more than it had at first; neither that nor the name of the post-office
     from which it was sent gave any clue to the sender. And yet he felt as if Julia were at his
     elbow with that mute sympathy in her eyes which had been there when they talked of failure in
     the wood on the Dunes.
He rose, and taking the box, went towards the door; the other man watched him curiously. "One
     would think you had found a ghost in your box," he said.
"I'm not sure that I have not," Rawson-Clew looked back to answer; "the ghost of a good
     comrade."
Then he went home.
When he was alone in his chambers and secure from interruption, he opened the box again and
     took out all the packing, carefully sorting it. But he found nothing, no scrap of paper, no
     clue of any sort; he took off the linen rag that fastened in the bottle stopper, but that
     betrayed nothing either; and yet he thought of Julia.
She was the only person who could know about the explosive. It had never been actually spoken
     of last summer, but the chances were she knew. She was the only person who could have known or
     who could have got it. It was like her, so like that he was as sure as if her name were in the
     box that she was the sender. How she had got the stuff he could not think, he knew the
     difficulties in the way; but she had done it somehow, and now she had sent it to him, without
     name for fear of embarrassing him, without clue, with no desire for thanks—loyal, generous,
     able little comrade! He looked up again; he felt as if she were bodily present;
     the whole thing, astounding as he had found it at first, was somehow so characteristic of her.
     And because of her presence he suddenly wished he had not been to that evening's entertainment
     and sat close by his cousin's wife and heard the things she said, and answered the things she
     looked. He felt as if he were not clean, as if he had no right to entertain even the ghost of
     the good comrade.
Rawson-Clew was not self-conscious; it never occurred to him to think if he appeared
     ridiculous, whether he was alone or in company. He took off his dress coat and flung it aside
     with a feeling of disgust; its sleeve had brushed that woman's bare arm; he could almost fancy
     that a suggestion of the scent she used clung to it. He put it out of sight and fetched some
     other garment before he came back to the thing which had recalled Julia. And yet the girl was
     no lily-child with the dew of dawn upon her; he did not for one instant think she was;
     probably, had she been, she would not have been the good comrade. The facts of life were not
     strange to her, she knew them, good and bad; was not above laughing at what was funny even if
     it was somewhat coarse, but she had no taste for lascivious wallowing no matter under what name
     disguised. A man could be at home with her, he could speak the truth to her; but he would not
     make a point of taking her into the society of that woman, any more than he would invite a
     friend to look at the sink, unless there was some purpose to serve.
Rawson-Clew took up the bottle and looked at it, and looked at the address card on the lid,
     all over again; and there grew in his mind the conviction that he been a remarkable and
     particular fool. Not because he had taken that holiday on the Dunes, nor yet because he had
     failed to get the explosive and Julia had succeeded—he be
     lieved that a man might have average intelligence and yet fail there, for he
     thought she had more than average. But because he had failed to recognise a fact that had been
     existent all the time—the need he had for the good comrade. Why had he a better liking for his
     work than of old? Because it was such as she would have liked, could have done well, every now
     and then he fancied her there. Why did he find new pleasure in the hours he spent reading
     Renaissance Italian, old memoirs, the ripe wisdom of the late Tudors and early Stuarts? Because
     he found her in the pages, saw her laugh sometimes, heard her contradict at others; felt her,
     invisible and not always recognised, at his elbow.
He looked round; why should not the presence be fact instead of fancy? He would go to Mr.
     Gillat and find her whereabouts; if Julia was in England, as she probably was, seeing that the
     box was posted in London, the old man would know where she was. He would go to Berwick
     Street—he looked at the clock—no, not now; it was too late, or rather too early; he would have
     to wait till the morning was a good deal older.
Unfortunately the carrying out of the plan did not prove very successful. Berwick Street he
     found, and No. 31 he found, but not Mr. Gillat; he was gone and had left no address. Mrs. Horn
     did not seem troubled by the omission; he had paid everything before he went away, and he
     practically never had any letters to be sent on; why, she asked, should she bother after his
     address?
Rawson-Clew could not tell her why she should, nor did he give any reason why he himself
     should. He went away and, reversing the order of his previous search, went to Marbridge.
But failure awaited him there, too. When he came to the Polkingtons' house he found it empty,
     the blinds
      down, the steps uncleaned, and bills announcing that it was to let in the
     windows. He stood and looked at it in the grey afternoon, and for a moment he was conscious of
     a feeling of desolation and disappointment which was almost absurd. He turned away and began to
     make inquiries about the family. He soon learnt all that was commonly known. They had been gone
     from East Street some little time now; they must have left before the box containing the
     explosive was posted. Julia had sent it to Aunt Jane's lawyer, before she set out for the
     cottage, asking him to dispatch it at a given date, and he had fulfilled her request, thinking
     it a wedding present and the date specified one near the impending ceremony. This, of course,
     Rawson-Clew did not find out; he found out several things about the Polkingtons though, their
     debts and difficulties, their sale and the break up of the family. He also found out that the
     youngest Miss Polkington was married and the second, and now only remaining one, had come home
     before the break up. As to where the family were now, that was not quite so clear; Mrs.
     Polkington was with one of her married daughters; her address was easily obtainable and
     apparently considered all that any one could require, and quite sufficient to cover the rest of
     the family. Captain Polkington—nobody thought much about him—when they did, it was generally
     concluded he was with his wife. As for Julia, she must have got a situation of some
     sort—unless, which was unlikely, she was with her parents. Rawson-Clew took Mrs. Polkington's
     address—it was all he could get—and determined to write to her.
It did occur to him to write to Julia at her sister's house and request that his letter was
     forwarded; but he did not do so; he was not at all sure she would answer; he wanted
     to see her face to face this time. He wrote to Mrs. Polkington and asked her for
     Julia's address, introducing himself as a friend met in Holland, and explaining his reason,
     vaguely to be connected with that time.
When Mrs. Polkington received the letter she thought it over a little; then she showed it to
     Violet, and they discussed it together. At the outset they made a mistake; they only knew of
     one person of the name of Rawson-Clew—the Captain's young acquaintance; he had certainly gone
     away from Marbridge last spring and so in point of time could have met Julia in Holland, only
     it was not likely that he had, or that he had become friendly with her. At least so Violet
     said; Mrs. Polkington, who knew what remarkable things herself and family could do in the way
     of getting to know people, was inclined to think differently. On one point, however, they were
     agreed; it would be very unpleasant to have to tell one in the position of Mr. Rawson-Clew
     about Julia's present proceedings. Giving the address would be giving the information, or
     something like it—one would have to explain—"Miss Julia Snooks, White's Cottage, near
     Halgrave."
"We can't do that," Violet said with decision.
"I might say I would forward a letter, perhaps?" Mrs. Polkington suggested.
But Violet did not think that would do either. "Julia would answer it," she said; "and that
     would be quite as bad; you know, she is not in the least ashamed of herself."
Mrs. Polkington did know it. "I believe you are right," she said, with the air of one
     convinced against her will; "Julia has voluntarily cut herself adrift from her own class; it
     would be unpleasant and embarrassing for her as well as for other people to force her into any
     connection with it again; I don't think any purpose can be served by reopening an acquaintance
     with Mr. Raw
     son-Clew, we did not know him at Marbridge"—she never forgot that his circle there
     did not think her good enough to know. "I cannot imagine that it would be advantageous for
     Julia to write to him or hear from him under the present circumstances. He comes of a Norfolk
     family, too (Mrs. Polkington always knew about people's families even when she did not know
     them personally; it was the sort of information that interested her); I don't know what part of
     the county his people belong to, very likely nowhere near Julia; but supposing it were near
     enough for him to know from the address what kind of a place Julia was in, it really might be
     so awkward; we ought to be very careful for dear Richard's sake, especially seeing his
     connection with the Palace. I really think it would be wiser as you say, to be on the safe
     side."
So she kept on that side, which, being, interpreted meant leaving Rawson-Clew's information
     much where it was before. She wrote very nicely, somewhat involved, not at all baldly; but
     reduced to plain terms her letter came to this—she was not going to tell Julia's address or
     anything about her.
So Rawson-Clew read it, and very angry he was. And the worst of all was that on the same
     night that he received this letter, he also received orders to go at once to Constantinople. He
     had no time for anything and no choice but to go and leave the search. But during his journey
     across Europe an idea came to him with the suddenness of an inspiration. He knew what Julia had
     done—she had "retired," even as she had said she hoped to on the first day they walked
     together. She had retired somewhere from shams and hypocrisy, from society and her family;
     possibly even she had adopted the corduroy and onions part of the ambition; if so, that would ex
     plain her mother's refusal, based on some kind of pride, to give her address. She
     had retired, and she had taken Johnny Gillat with her, and her own people had washed their
     hands of her! He knew now what to look for when he should come back. He might not be back for
     two months or even three, but when he did come he would be able to find Julia and talk to her
     about the explosive—and other things.
It may be here said that the wonderful explosive did not do what was expected of it, either
     in England or Holland, for it was found to decompose on keeping. It did everything else that
     was boasted of it, but no one succeeded in keeping it more than fifteen months, an irremediate
     defect in an explosive for military purposes. This, of course, was not discovered at first, and
     the honour and glory of obtaining the specimen was considerable, if only there had been some
     one to take it. Rawson-Clew did not consider himself the person.


</div></body></text></TEI>