<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Daphne, or Marriage a la Mode : VWWP
      edition</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1909</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">

CHAPTER V
IN the drawing-room at Heston Park two ladies were seated. One was a well-preserved
      woman of fifty, with a large oblong face, good features, a double chin, and abundant grey hair
      arranged in waved bandeaux above a forehead which should
      certainly have implied strength of character, and a pair of challenging black eyes. Lady
      Barnes moved and spoke with authority; it was evident that she had been accustomed to do so
      all her life; to trail silk gowns over Persian carpets, to engage expensive cooks and rely on
      expensive butlers, with a strict attention to small economies all the time; to impose her will
      on her household and the clergyman of the parish; to give her opinions on books, and expect
      them to be listened to; to abstain from politics as unfeminine, and to make up for it by the
      strongest of views on Church questions. She belonged to an English type common throughout all
      classes—quite harmless and tolerable when things go well, but apt to be soured and twisted by
      adversity.
And Lady Barnes, it will be remembered,
       had known adversity. Not much of it, nor for long together;
      but in her own opinion she had gone through “great trials,” to the profit of her Christian
      character. She was quite certain, now, that everything had been for the best, and that
      Providence makes no mistakes. But that, perhaps, was because the “trials” had only lasted
      about a year; and then, so far as they were pecuniary, the marriage of her son with Miss
      Daphne Floyd had entirely relieved her of them. For Roger now made her a handsome allowance,
      and the chastened habits of a most uncomfortable year had been hastily abandoned.
Nevertheless, Lady Barnes's aspect on this autumn afternoon was not cheerful, and her
      companion was endeavouring, with a little kind embarrassment, both to soothe an evident
      irritation and to avoid the confidences that Roger's mother seemed eager to pour out. Elsie
      French, whom Washington had known three years before as Elsie Maddison, was in that bloom of
      young married life when all that was lovely in the girl seems to be still lingering, while yet
      love and motherhood have wrought once more their old transforming miracle on sense and spirit.
      In her afternoon dress of dainty sprigged silk, with just a touch of austerity in the broad
      muslin collar and cuffs—her curly brown hair simply parted on
       her brow, and gathered classically on a shapely head—her
      mouth a little troubled, her brow a little puckered over Lady Barnes's discontents—she was a
      very gracious vision. Yet behind the gentleness, as even Lady Barnes knew, there were
      qualities and characteristics of a singular strength.
Lady Barnes indeed was complaining, and could not be stopped.
“You see, dear Mrs. French,” she was saying in a rapid, lowered voice, and with many glances
      at the door, “the trouble is that Daphne is never satisfied. She has some impossible ideal in
      her mind, and then everything must be sacrificed to it. She began with going into ecstasies
      over this dear old house, and now!—there's scarcely a thing in it she does not want to change.
      Poor Edward and I spent thousands upon it, and we really flattered ourselves that we had some
      taste; but it is not good enough for Daphne!”
The speaker settled herself in her chair with a slight but emphatic clatter of bangles and
      rustle of skirts.
“It's the ceilings, isn't it?” murmured Elsie French, glancing at the heavy decoration, the
      stucco bosses and pendants above her head, which had replaced, some twenty years before, a
      piece of Adam design, sparing and felicitous.
“It's everything!” Lady Barnes's tone
       was now more angry than fretful. “I don't, of course, like
      to say it—but really Daphne's self-confidence is too amazing!”
“She does know so much,” said Elsie French reflectively. “Doesn't she?”
“Well, if you call it knowing. She can always get some tiresome person, whom she calls an
      ‘expert,’ to back her up. But I believe in liking what you do like, and not being
      bullied into what you don't like!”
“I suppose if one studies these things—” Elsie French began timidly.
“What's the good of studying!” cried Lady Barnes; “one has one's own taste, or one
      hasn't.”
Confronted with this form of the Absolute, Elsie French looked perplexed; especially as her
      own artistic sympathies were mainly with Daphne. The situation was certainly awkward. At the
      time of the Barnes's financial crash, and Sir Edward Barnes's death, Heston Park, which
      belonged to Lady Barnes, was all that remained to her and her son. A park of a hundred acres
      and a few cottages went with the house; but there was no estate to support it, and it had to
      be let, to provide an income for the widow and the boy. Much of the expensive furniture had
      been sold before letting, but enough remained to satisfy the wants of a not very exacting
      tenant.
Lady Barnes had then departed to weep
       in exile on a pittance of about seven hundred a year. But
      with the marriage of her son to Miss Floyd and her millions, the mother's thoughts had turned
      fondly back to Heston Park. It was too big for her, of course; but the young people clearly
      must redeem it, and settle there. And Daphne had been quite amenable. The photographs charmed
      her. The house, she said, was evidently in a pure style, and it would be a delight to make it
      habitable again. The tenant, however, had a lease, and refused to turn out until at last
      Daphne had frankly bribed him to go. And now, after three years of married life, during which
      the young couple had rented various “places,” besides their house in London and a villa at
      Tunis, Heston Park had been vacated, Daphne and Roger had descended upon it—as Lady Barnes's
      tenants at a high rent—intent upon its restoration; and Roger's mother had been invited to
      their councils.
Hence, indeed, these tears. When Daphne first stepped inside the ancestral mansion of the
      Trescoes—such had been Lady Barnes's maiden name—she had received a severe shock. The outside,
      the shell of the house—delightful! But inside!—heavens! what taste, what decoration—what ruin
      of a beautiful thing! Half the old mantelpieces gone, the ceilings spoilt, the decorations
      “busy,” pretentious, overdone, and
       nothing left to console her but an ugly row of bad Lelys
      and worse Highmores—the most despicable collection of family portraits she had ever set eyes
      upon!
Roger had looked unhappy. “It was father and mother did it,” he admitted penitently. “But
      after all, Daphne, you know they are Trescoes!”—this with a defensive and
      protecting glance at the Lelys.
Daphne was sorry for it. Her mouth tightened, and certain lines appeared about it which
      already prophesied what the years would make of the young face. Yet it was a pretty mouth—the
      mouth, above all, of one with no doubts at all as to her place and rights in the world. Lady
      Barnes had pronounced it “common” in her secret thoughts before she had known its owner six
      weeks. But the adjective had never yet escaped the “bulwark of the teeth.” Outwardly the
      mother and daughter-in-law were still on good terms. It was indeed but a week since the son
      and his wife had arrived—with their baby girl—at Heston Park, after a summer of yachting and
      fishing in Norway; since Lady Barnes had journeyed thither from London to meet them; and Mr.
      and Mrs. French had accepted an urgent invitation from Roger, quite sufficiently backed by
      Daphne, to stay for a few days with Mr. French's old pupil, before the reopening of Eton.

During that time there had been no open quarrels of any kind; but Elsie French was a
      sensitive creature, and she had been increasingly aware of friction and annoyance behind the
      scenes. And now here was Lady Barnes let loose! and Daphne might appear at any moment, before
      she could be re-caged.
“She puts you down so!” cried that lady, making gestures with the paper-knife she had just
      been employing on the pages of a Mudie book. “If I tell her that something or other—it doesn't
      matter what—cost at least a great deal of money, she has a way of smiling at you that is
      positively insulting! She doesn't trouble to argue; she begins to laugh, and raises her
      eyebrows. I—I always feel as if she had struck me in the face! I know I oughtn't to speak like
      this; I hadn't meant to do it, especially to a country-woman of hers, as you are.”
“Am I?” said Elsie, in a puzzled voice.
Lady Barnes opened her eyes in astonishment.
“I meant”—the explanation was hurried—“I thought—Mrs. Barnes was a South American? Her
      mother was Spanish, of course; you see it in Daphne.”
“Yes; in her wonderful eyes,” said Mrs. French warmly; “and her grace—isn't she graceful! My
      husband says she moves like a sea-wave. She has given her eyes to the child.”

“Ah! and other things too, I'm afraid!” cried Lady Barnes, carried away. “But here is the
      baby.”
For the sounds of a childish voice were heard echoing in the domed hall outside. Small feet
      came pattering, and the drawing-room door was burst open by Roger Barnes, holding a little
      girl of nearly two and a half by the hand.
Lady Barnes composed herself. It is necessary to smile at children, and she endeavoured to
      satisfy her own sense of it.
“Come in, Beatty; come and kiss granny!” And Lady Barnes held out her arms.
But the child stood still, surveyed her grandmother with a pair of startling eyes, and then,
      turning, made a rush for the door. But her father was too quick for her. He closed it with a
      laugh, and stood with his back to it. The child did not cry, but, with flaming cheeks, she
      began to beat her father's knees with her small fists.
“Go and kiss granny, darling,” said Roger, stroking her dark head.
Beatty turned again, put both her hands behind her, and stood immovable.
“Not kiss granny,” she said firmly. “Don't love granny.”
“Oh, Beatty”—Mrs. French knelt down beside her—“come and be a good little girl, and I'll
      show you picture-books.”

“I not Beatty—I Jemima Ann,” said the small thin voice. “Not be a dood dirl—do
      upstairs.”
She looked at her father again, and then, evidently perceiving that he was not to be moved
      by force, she changed her tactics. Her delicate, elfish face melted into the sweetest smile;
      she stood on tiptoe, holding out to him her tiny arms. With a laugh of irrepressible pride and
      pleasure, Roger stooped to her and lifted her up. She nestled on his shoulder—a small
      odalisque, dark, lithe, and tawny, beside her handsome, fair-skinned father. And Roger's
      manner of holding and caressing her showed the passionate affection with which he regarded
      her.
He again urged her to kiss her grandmother; but the child again shook her head. “Then,” said
      he craftily, “father must kiss granny.” And he began to cross the room.
But Lady Barnes stopped him, not without dignity. “Better not press it, Roger: another
      time.”
Barnes laughed, and yielded. He carried the child away, murmuring to her, “Naughty, naughty
      'ittie girl!”—a remark which Beatty, tucked under his ear, and complacently sucking her thumb,
      received with complete indifference.
“There, you see!” said the grandmother, with slightly flushed cheeks, as the door closed:
      “the child has been already taught to dislike
       me, and if Roger had attempted to kiss me, she would
      probably have struck me.”
“Oh, no!” cried Mrs. French. “She is a loving little thing.”
“Except when she is jealous,” said Lady Barnes, with significance. “I told you she has
      inherited more than her eyes.”
Mrs. French rose. She was determined not to discuss her hostess any more, and she walked
      over to the bow window as though to look at the prospects of the weather, which had threatened
      rain. But Roger's mother was not to be repressed. Resentment and antagonism, nurtured on a
      hundred small incidents and trifling jars, and, to begin with, a matter of temperament, had
      come at last to speech. And in this charming New Englander, the wife of Roger's best friend,
      sympathetic, tender, with a touch in her of the nun and the saint, Lady Barnes could not help
      trying to find a supporter. She was a much weaker person than her square build and her double
      chin would have led the bystander to suppose; and her feelings had been hurt.
So that when Mrs. French returned to say that the sun seemed to be coming out, her
      companion, without heeding, went on, with emotion: “It's my son I am thinking of, Mrs. French.
      I know you're safe, and that Roger depends upon Mr. French more than upon anyone else in the
       world, so I can't help just saying a word to you about my
      anxiety. You know, when Roger married, I don't think he was much in love—in fact, I'm sure he
      wasn't. But now—it's quite different. Roger has a very soft heart, and he's very domestic. He
      was always the best of sons to me, and as soon as he was married he became the best of
      husbands. He's devoted to Daphne now, and you see how he adores the child. But the fact is,
      there's a person in this neighbourhood” (Lady Barnes lowered her voice and looked round
      her)—“I only knew it for certain this morning-who ... well, who might make trouble. And
      Daphne's temper is so passionate and uncontrolled that—”
“Dear Lady Barnes, please don't tell me any secrets!” Elsie French implored, and laid a
      restraining hand on the mother's arm, ready, indeed, to take up her work and fly. But Lady
      Barnes's chair stood between her and the door, and the occupant of it was substantial.
Laura Barnes hesitated, and in the pause two persons appeared upon the garden path outside,
      coming towards the open windows of the drawing-room. One was Mrs. Roger Barnes; the other was
      a man, remarkably tall and slender, with a stoop like that of an overgrown schoolboy, silky
      dark hair and moustache, and pale grey eyes.

“Dr. Lelius!” said Elsie, in astonishment. “Was Daphne expecting him?”
“Who is Dr. Lelius?” asked Lady Barnes, putting up her eyeglass.
Mrs. French explained that he was a South German art-critic, from Würzburg, with a great
      reputation. She had already met him at Eton and at Oxford.
“Another expert!” said Lady Barnes with a shrug.
The pair passed the window, absorbed apparently in conversation. Mrs. French escaped. Lady
      Barnes was left to discontent and solitude.
But the solitude was not for long.
When Elsie French descended for tea, an hour later, she was aware, from a considerable
      distance, of people and tumult in the drawing-room. Daphne's soprano voice—agreeable, but
      making its mark always, like its owner—could be heard running on. The young mistress of the
      house seemed to be admonishing, instructing someone. Could it be her mother-in-law?
When Elsie entered, Daphne was walking up and down in excitement.
“One cannot really live with bad pictures because they happen to be one's ancestors! We
      won't do them any harm, mamma! of course not. There is a room upstairs where they can be
      stored—most carefully—and anybody
       who is interested in them can go and look at them. If they
      had only been left as they were painted!—not by Lely, of course, but by some drapery man in
      his studio—passe encore! they might have been just bearable.
      But you see some wretched restorer went and daubed them all over a few years ago.”
“We went to the best man we could find! We took the best advice!” cried Lady Barnes, sitting
      stiff and crimson in a deep arm-chair, opposite the luckless row of portraits that Daphne was
      denouncing.
“I'm sure you did. But then, you see, nobody knew anything at all about it in those days.
      The restorers were all murderers. Ask Dr. Lelius.”
Daphne pointed to the stranger, who was leaning against an arm-chair beside her in an
      embarrassed attitude, as though he were endeavouring to make the chair a buffer between
      himself and Lady Barnes.
Dr. Lelius bowed.
“It is a modern art,” he said with diffidence, and an accent creditably slight—“a quite
      modern art. We hafe a great man at Würzburg.”
“I don't suppose he professes to know anything about English pictures, does he?” asked Lady
      Barnes with scorn.
“Ach!—I do not propose that Mrs. Barnes
       entrust him wid dese pictures, Madame. It is now too
      late.”
And the willowy German looked, with a half-repressed smile, at the row of pictures—all
      staring at the bystander with the same saucer eyes, the same wooden arms, and the same
      brilliance of modern paint and varnish, which not even the passage of four years since it was
      applied had been able greatly to subdue.
Lady Barnes lifted shoulders and eyes—a woman's angry protest against the tyranny of
      knowledge.
“All the same, they are my forbears, my kith and kin,” she said, with emphasis. “But of
      course Mrs. Barnes is mistress here: I suppose she will do as she pleases.”
The German stared politely at the carpet. It was now Daphne's turn to shrug. She threw
      herself into a chair, with very red cheeks, one foot hanging over the other, and the fingers
      of her hands, which shone with diamonds, tapping the chair impatiently. Her dress of a
      delicate pink, touched here and there with black, her wide black hat, and the eyes which
      glowed from the small pointed face beneath it; the tumbling masses of her dark hair as
      contrasted with her general lightness and slenderness; the red of the lips, the whiteness of
      the hands and brow, the dainty irregularity of feature: these things made a Watteau sketch of
      her, all pure
       colour and lissomeness, with dots and scratches of intense
      black. Daphne was much handsomer than she had been as a girl, but also a trifle less refined.
      All her points were intensified—her eyes had more flame; the damask of her cheek was deeper;
      her grace was wilder, her voice a little shriller than of old.
While the uncomfortable silence which the two women had made around them still lasted, Roger
      Barnes appeared on the garden steps.
“Hullo! any tea going?” He came in, without waiting for an answer, looked from his mother to
      Daphne, from Daphne to his mother, and laughed uncomfortably.
“Still bothering about those beastly pictures?” he said as he helped himself to a cup of
      tea.
“Thank you, Roger!” said Lady Barnes.
“I didn't mean any harm, mother.” He crossed over to her and sat down beside her. “I say,
      Daphne, I've got an idea. Why shouldn't mother have them? She's going to take a house, she
      says. Let's hand them all over to her!”
Lady Barnes's lips trembled with indignation. “The Trescoes who were born and died in this
      house, belong here!” The tone of the words showed the stab to feeling and self-love. “It would
      be a sacrilege to move them.”
“Well then, let's move ourselves!” exclaimed
       claimed Daphne, springing up. “We can let this house again,
      can't we, Roger?”
“We can, I suppose,” said Roger, munching his bread and butter; “but we're not going
      to.”
He raised his head and looked quietly at her.
“I think we'd better!” The tone was imperious. Daphne, with her thin arms and hands locked
      behind her, paused beside her husband.
Dr. Lelius, stealthily raising his eyes, observed the two. A strange little scene—not
      English at all. The English, he understood, were a phlegmatic people. What had this little
      Southerner to do among them? And what sort of fellow was the husband?
It was evident that some mute colloquy passed between the husband and wife—disapproval on
      his part, attempt to assert authority, defiance on hers. Then the fair-skinned English face,
      confronting Daphne, wavered and weakened, and Roger smiled into the eyes transfixing him.
“Ah!” thought Lelius, “she has him, de poor fool!”
Roger, coming over to his mother, began a murmured conversation. Daphne, still breathing
      quick, consented to talk to Dr. Lelius and Mrs. French. Lelius, who travelled widely,
       had brought her news of some pictures in a château of the
      Bourbonnais—pictures that her whole mind was set on acquiring. Elsie French noticed the
       expertise of her talk; the intellectual development it implied; the passion of
      will which accompanied it. “To the dollar, all things are possible,”—one might have phrased it
      so.
The soft September air came in through the open windows, from a garden flooded with western
      sun. Suddenly through the subdued talk which filled the drawing-room—each group in it avoiding
      the other—the sound of a motor arriving made itself heard.
“Heavens! who on earth knows we're here?” said Barnes, looking up.
For they had only been camping a week in the house, far too busy to think of neighbours.
      They sat expectant and annoyed, reproaching each other with not having told the butler to say
      “Not at home.” Lady Barnes's attitude had in it something else—a little anxiety; but it
      escaped notice. Steps came through the hall, and the butler, throwing open the door,
      announced—
“Mrs. Fairmile.”
Roger Barnes sprang to his feet. His mother, with a little gasp, caught him by the arm
      instinctively. There was a general rise and a movement of confusion, till the new-comer,
      advancing, offered her hand to Daphne.

“I am afraid, Mrs. Barnes, I am disturbing you all. The butler told me you had only been
      here a few days. But Lady Barnes and your husband are such old friends of mine that, as soon
      as I heard—through our old postmistress, I think—that you had arrived, I thought I might
      venture.”
The charming voice dropped, and the speaker waited, smiling, her eyes fixed on Daphne.
      Daphne had taken her hand in some bewilderment, and was now looking at her husband for
      assistance. It was clear to Elsie French, in the background, that Daphne neither knew the lady
      nor the lady's name, and that the visit had taken her entirely by surprise.
Barnes recovered himself quickly. “I had no idea you were in these parts,” he said, as he
      brought a chair forward for the visitor, and stood beside her a moment.
Lady Barnes, observing him, as she stiffly greeted the new-comer—his cool manner, his
      deepened colour—felt the usual throb of maternal pride in him, intensified by alarm and
      excitement.
“Oh, I am staying a day or two with Duchess Mary,” said the new-comer. “She is a little
      older—and no less gouty, poor dear, than she used to be. Mrs. Barnes, I have heard a great
      deal of you—though you mayn't know anything about me, Ah! Dr. Lelius?”

The German, bowing awkwardly, yet radiant, came forward to take the hand extended to
      him.
“They did nothing but talk about you at the Louvre, when I was there last week,” she said,
      with a little confidential nod. “You have made them horribly uncomfortable about some of their
      things. Isn't it a pity to know too much?”
She turned towards Daphne. “I'm afraid that's your case too.” She smiled, and the smile lit
      up a face full of delicate lines and wrinkles, which no effort had been made to disguise; a
      tired face, where the eyes spoke from caverns of shade, yet with the most appealing and
      persuasive beauty.
“Do you mean about pictures?” said Daphne, a little coldly. “I don't know as much as Dr.
      Lelius.”
Humour leapt into the eyes fixed upon her; but Mrs. Fairmile only said: “That's not given to
      the rest of us mortals. But after all, having's better than knowing.
       Don't—don't you possess the Vitali Signorelli?”
Her voice was most musical and flattering. Daphne smiled in spite of herself. “Yes, we do.
      It's in London now—waiting till we can find a place for it.”
“You must let me make a pilgrimage—when it comes. But you know you'd find a
       number of things at Upcott—where I'm staying now—that would
      interest you. I forget whether you've met the Duchess?”
“This is our first week here,” said Roger, interposing. “The house has been let till now. We
      came down to see what could be made of it.”
His tone was only just civil. His mother, looking on, said to herself that he was angry—and
      with good reason.
But Mrs. Fairmile still smiled.
“Ah! the Lelys!” she cried, raising her hand slightly towards the row of portraits on the
      wall. “The dear impossible things! Are you still discussing them—as we used to do?”
Daphne started. “You know this house, then?”
The smile broadened into a laugh of amusement, as Mrs. Fairmile turned to Roger's
      mother.
“Don't I, dear Lady Barnes—don't I know this house?”
Lady Barnes seemed to straighten in her chair. “Well, you were here often enough to know
      it,” she said abruptly. “Daphne, Mrs. Fairmile is a distant cousin of ours.”
“Distant, but quite enough to swear by!” said the visitor, gaily. “Yes, Mrs. Barnes, I knew
      this house very well in old days. It has many charming points.” She looked round
       with a face that had suddenly become coolly critical, an
      embodied intelligence.
Daphne, as though divining for the first time a listener worthy of her steel, began to talk
      with some rapidity of the changes she wished to make. She talked with an evident desire to
      show off, to make an impression. Mrs. Fairmile listened attentively, occasionally throwing in
      a word of criticism or comment, in the softest, gentlest voice. But somehow, whenever she
      spoke, Daphne felt vaguely irritated. She was generally put slightly in the wrong by her
      visitor, and Mrs. Fairmile's extraordinary knowledge of Heston Park, and of everything
      connected with it, was so odd and disconcerting. She had a laughing way, moreover, of
      appealing to Roger Barnes himself to support a recollection or an opinion, which presently
      produced a contraction of Daphne's brows. Who was this woman? A cousin—a cousin who knew every
      inch of the house, and seemed to be one of Roger's closest friends? It was really too strange
      that in all these years Roger should never have said a word about her!
The red mounted in Daphne's cheek. She began, moreover, to feel herself at a disadvantage to
      which she was not accustomed. Dr. Lelius, meanwhile, turned to Mrs. Fairmile, whenever she was
      allowed to speak, with a joyous yet inarticulate deference he had never shown to his
       hostess. They understood each other at a word or a glance.
      Beside them Daphne, with all her cleverness, soon appeared as a child for whom one makes
      allowances.
A vague anger swelled in her throat. She noticed, too, Roger's silence and Lady Barnes's
      discomfort. There was clearly something here that had been kept from her—something to be
      unravelled!
Suddenly the new-comer rose. Mrs. Fairmile wore a dress of some pale grey stuff,
      cobweb-light and transparent, over a green satin. It had the effect of sea-water, and her grey
      hat, with its pale green wreath, framed the golden-grey of her hair. Every one of her few
      adornments was exquisite—so was her grace as she moved. Daphne's pink-and-black vivacity
      beside her seemed a pinchbeck thing.
“Well, now, when will you all come to Upcott?” Mrs. Fairmile said graciously, as she shook
      hands. “The Duchess will be enchanted to see you any day, and—”
“Thank you! but we really can't come so far,” said a determined voice. “We have only a shaky
      old motor—our new one isn't ready yet—and besides, we want all our time for the house.”
“You make him work so hard? ”
Mrs. Fairmile, laughing, pointed to the speaker. Roger looked up involuntarily, and Daphne
      saw the look.

“Roger has nothing to do,” she said, quickly. “Thank you very much: we will certainly come.
      I'll write to you. How many miles did you say it was?”
“Oh, nothing for a motor!—twenty-five. We used to think it nothing for a ride, didn't
      we?”
The speaker, who was just passing through the door, turned towards Roger, who, with Lelius,
      was escorting her, with a last gesture—gay, yet, like all her gestures, charged with a slight
      yet deliberate significance.
They disappeared. Daphne walked to the window, biting her lip.
As she stood there Herbert French came into the room, looking a little shy and ill at ease,
      and behind him three persons, a clergyman in an Archdeacon's apron and gaiters, and two
      ladies. Daphne, perceiving them sideways in a mirror to her right, could not repress a gesture
      and muttered sound of annoyance.
French introduced Archdeacon Mountford, his wife and sister. Roger, it seemed, had met them
      in the hall, and sent them in. He himself had been carried off on some business by the head
      keeper.
Daphne turned ungraciously. Her colour was very bright, her eyes a little absent and
       wild. The two ladies, both clad in pale brown stuffs, large
      mushroom hats, and stout country boots, eyed her nervously, and as they sat down, at her
      bidding, they left the Archdeacon—who was the vicar of the neighbouring town—to explain, with
      much amiable stammering, that seeing the Duchess's motor at the front door, as they were
      crossing the park, they presumed that visitors were admitted, and had ventured to call.
Daphne received the explanation without any cordiality. She did indeed bid the callers sit
      down, and ordered some fresh tea. But she took no pains to entertain them, and if Lady Barnes
      and Herbert French had not come to the rescue, they would have fared but ill. The Archdeacon,
      in fact, did come to grief. For him Mrs. Barnes was just a “foreigner,” imported from some
      unknown and, of course, inferior milieu, one who had never
      been “a happy English child,” and must therefore be treated with indulgence. He endeavoured to
      talk to her—kindly—about her country. A branch of his own family, he informed her, had settled
      about a hundred years before this date in the United States. He gave her, at some length, the
      genealogy of the branch, then of the main stock to which he himself belonged, presuming that
      she was, at any rate, acquainted with the name? It was, he said, his strong
       opinion that American women were very “bright.” For himself
      he could not say that he even disliked the accent, it was so “quaint.” Did Mrs. Barnes know
      many of the American bishops? He himself had met a large number of them at a reception at the
      Church House, but it had really made him quite uncomfortable! They wore no official dress, and
      there was he—a mere Archdeacon!—in gaiters. And, of course, no one thought of calling them “my
      lord.” It certainly was very curious—to an Englishman. And Methodist bishops!—such as he was
      told America possessed in plenty—that was still more curious. One of the Episcopalian bishops,
      however, had preached—in Westminster Abbey—a remarkable sermon, on a very sad subject, not
      perhaps a subject to be discussed in a drawing-room—but still—
Suddenly the group on the other side of the room became aware that the Archdeacon's amiable
      prosing had been sharply interrupted—that Daphne, not he, was holding the field. A gust of
      talk arose—Daphne declaiming, the Archdeacon, after a first pause of astonishment, changing
      aspect and tone. French, looking across the room, saw the mask of conventional amiability
      stripped from what was really a strong and rather tyrannical face. The man's prominent mouth
      and long upper lip emerged. He drew his chair back from Daphne's; he
       tried once or twice to stop or argue with her, and finally
      he rose abruptly.
“My dear!”—his wife turned hastily—“We must not detain Mrs. Barnes longer!”
The two ladies looked at the Archdeacon—the god of their idolatry; then at Daphne.
      Hurriedly, like birds frightened by a shot, they crossed the room and just touched their
      hostess's hand; the Archdeacon, making up for their precipitancy by a double dose of dignity,
      bowed himself out; the door closed behind them.
“Daphne!—my dear! what is the matter?” cried Lady Barnes, in dismay.
“He spoke to me impertinently about my country!” said Daphne, turning upon her, her black
      eyes blazing, her cheeks white with excitement.
“The Archdeacon!—he is always so polite.”
“He talked like a fool—about things he doesn't understand!” was Daphne's curt reply, as she
      gathered up her hat and some letters, and moved towards the door.
“About what? My dear Daphne! He could not possibly have meant to offend you! Could he, Mr.
      French?” Lady Barnes turned plaintively towards her very uncomfortable companions.
Daphne confronted her.
“If he chooses to think America immoral
       and degraded because American divorce laws are different
      from the English laws, let him think it!—but he has no business to air his views to an
      American—at a first visit, too!” said Daphne passionately, and, drawing herself up, she swept
      out of the room, leaving the others dumbfoundered.
“Oh dear! oh dear!” wailed Lady Barnes. “And the Archdeacon is so important! Daphne might
      have been rude to anybody else—but not to the Archdeacon!”
“How did they manage to get into such a subject—so quickly?” asked Elsie in
      bewilderment.
“I suppose he took it for granted that Daphne agreed with him! All decent people do.”
Lady Barnes's wrath was evident—so was her indiscretion. Elsie French applied herself to
      soothing her, while Herbert French disappeared into the garden with a book. His wife, however,
      presently observed from the drawing-room that he was not reading. He was pacing the lawn, with
      his hands behind him, and his eyes on the grass. The slight, slowly-moving figure stood for
      meditation, and Elsie French knew enough to understand that the incidents of the afternoon
      might well supply any friend of Roger Barnes's with food for meditation. Herbert had not been
      in the
       drawing-room when Mrs. Fairmile was calling, but no doubt
      he had met her in the hall when she was on her way to her carriage.
Meanwhile Daphne, in her own room, was also employed in meditation. She had thrown herself,
      frowning, into a chair beside a window which overlooked the park. The landscape had a gentle
      charm—spreading grass, low hills, and scattered woods—under a warm September sun. But it had
      no particular accent, and Daphne thought it both tame and depressing; like an English society
      made up of Archdeacon Mountfords and their womenkind! What a futile, irritating man!—and what
      dull creatures were the wife and sister!—mere echoes of their lord and master. She had behaved
      badly, of course; in a few days she supposed the report of her outburst would be all over the
      place. She did not care. Even for Roger's sake she was not going to cringe to these poor
      provincial standards.
And all the time she knew very well that it was not the Archdeacon and his fatuities that
      were really at fault. The afternoon had been decided not by the Mountfords' call, but by that
      which had preceded it.
</div></body></text></TEI>