<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Camera Fiend by E.W. Hornung</title><author>Hornung, Ernest William (1866-1921)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1911</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">
AFTER THE FAIR
 Mr. Upton was dumfoundered when the top-floor door in Glasshouse Street was opened before
     Eugene Thrush could insert his key; for it was the sombre Mullins who admitted the gentleman as
     though nothing had happened to him except a fairly recent shave. 
 “I thought he was in prison?” exclaimed the ironmaster when the two were closeted. 
 “Do you ever read your paper?” 
 “I haven't looked at one since Plymouth.” 
 “Well, I howked him out first thing yesterday morning.” 
 “You did, Thrush?” 
 “Why not? I had need of the fellow, and that part of the game was up.” 
 Mr. Upton showed symptoms of his old irritability under the Thrush mannerism. 
 “My good fellow, I wish to goodness you'd explain yourself!” 
 “If I cared to be profane,” returned Thrush, mixing drinks in the corner, “I should refer
     you to the first chapter of the Book of Job. I provided the prisoner, and I'd a perfect right
     to take him away again. Blessed be the song of the Thrush!” 

 “You say you provided him?” 
 “In other words, I laid the information against my own man, but only with his own consent.” 
 “Well, well, you must have your joke, I suppose. I can afford to put up with it now.” 
 “It wasn't meant as a joke,” returned Thrush, and drank deep while his client sipped. “If it
     had come off it would have been the coup of my career; as it
     didn't—quite—one must laugh it off at one's own expense. Your son has told you what that poor
     old sinner made him think he'd done?” 
 “Of course.” 
 “Would it surprise you to hear that one or two others thought the same thing?” 
 “Not you, Thrush?” 
 “Not I to quite the same positive extent as my rascal Mullins. He jumped to it from
     scratch!” 
 “He connected Tony with the Park murder?” 
 “From the word “go.”” 
 “On the strength of an asthma cigarette and my poor wife's dream?” 
 “No; he didn't know about the dream. But he refused to believe in two independent mysteries
     at one time and on one spot. The eternal unities was too many measles for Mullins, though he
     never heard tell of 'em in his life.” 
 Mr. Upton was no longer irritated by the other's
      flippancy. He looked at Thrush with a shining face. 
 “And you never told me what was in your minds!” 
 “It was poison even in mine; it would have been deadly poison to you, in the state you were
     in. I say! I'll wear batting-gloves the next time we shake hands!” and Thrush blew softly on
     his mangled fingers. 
 “You believed he'd done it, and you kept it to yourself,” murmured Mr. Upton, still much
     impressed. “Tell me, my dear fellow—did you believe it after that interview with Baumgartner in
     his house?” 
 Thrush emptied his glass at once. 
 “Don't remind me of that interview, Mr. Upton; there was the lad on the other side of so
     much lath-and-plaster, and I couldn't scent him through it! But he never made a sound, confound
     him!” 
 “Tony's told me about that; they were whispering, for reasons of their own.” 
 “I ought to have seen that old man listening! His ears must have grown before my purblind
     eyes! But his story was an extraordinarily interesting and circumstantial effort. And to come
     back to your question, it did fit in with the theory of a fatal accident on your boy's part; he
     was frightened to show his face at school after sleeping in the Park,
      let alone what he was supposed to have done there; and that, he believed, would
     break his mother's heart in any case.” 
 “By Jove, and so it might! It wouldn't take much just now,” said Mr. Upton, sadly. 
 “So he thought of the ship you wouldn't let him go out in—and the whole thing fitted in! Of
     course he had told the old ruffian—saving his presence elsewhere—all about the forbidden
     voyage; and that gentleman of genius had it ready for immediate use. I'm bound to say he used
     it on me with excellent effect.” 
 “Same here,” said the ironmaster—“though I'd no idea what you suspected. I thought it a
     conceivable way out of any bad scrape, for that particular boy.” 
 “It imposed upon us all,” said Thrush, “but one. I was prepared to believe it if you did,
     and you believed it because you didn't know your boy as well as you do now. But Miss Upton, who
     seems to know him better than anybody else—do you remember how she wouldn't hear of it for a
     moment?” 
 “I do so, God bless her!” 
 “That shook me, or rather it prevented me from accepting what I never had quite accepted in
     my heart. That's another story, and you're only in the mood for one at present; but after
     seeing
      Baumgartner on Saturday, I thought I'd like to know a little more about him, not
     from outsiders but from the inside of his own skull. So I went to the British Museum to have a
     look at his books. It was after hours for getting books, but I made such representations that
     they cut their red tape for once; and I soon read enough to wonder whether my grave and
     reverend seignior was quite all there. Spiritualism one knows, but here was spiritualism with a
     difference; psychic photography one had heard about, but here was a psychical photographer gone
     mad or bad! When a gifted creature puts into admirable English his longing to snap-shoot the
     souls of murderers coming up through the drop, like the clown at Drury Lane, you begin to want
     him elected to a fauteuil in Broadmoor. Will you believe me when I tell you
     that I stumbled mentally on the very thing I shall presently prove to have been the truth, and
     that I dismissed it from my mind as the wildest impossibility?” 
 “I don't see how you're going to prove it now,” remarked Mr. Upton, who hoped there would be
     no such proof, for the sake of the girl who had been good to his boy; but that was a private
     consideration which there was no necessity to express. 
 “I shall want another chat with your lad when he's had his sleep out,” replied Thrush,
     significantly; “he's told me quite enough to make me eager for
      more. But you haven't told me anything about your own adventures?” 
 And he got another drink to help him listen; for as a rule the ironmaster was only succinct
     when thoroughly irate. But now for once he was both brief and amiable. 
 “What have I to tell compared with you?” he asked. “Those damned old wooden walls only
     cleared the Thames on Sunday morning, and they weren't near Plymouth when I left last night;
     but my little aluminium lot broke all her records before I broke one of her wheels. What I want
     to know is what you did from the time I left on Sunday night to that great moment this
     morning.” 
 “I sat down to watch Baumgartner, his house,” replied Thrush. “The merit of those quiet
     little streets is that there are always apartments of sorts, though not always the most
     admirable sort, to be had in half the houses. There was quite a choice bang opposite
     Baumgartner's, and I'd taken a front room before you were through Hammersmith. Of course I
     explained that I had lost a last train, and the landlady's son embarrassed me with pyjamas of
     inadequate dimensions. Well, I sat at the front window all night, for no better reasons than my
     strong feeling about the doctor's writings, and your daughter's disbelief in his yarn about her
     brother. Soon after five in the morning the old bird came out,
      and I was after him like knife. I tracked him to Knightsbridge without much
     difficulty, excepting the one of avoiding being spotted, but there that happened by the merest
     accident. He was passing under the scaffolding outside the church they're pulling down there,
     and he's so tall he knocked his hat off. I admit I was too close. He saw, and must have
     recognised me; but I shouldn't have recognised him if I hadn't seen him start out. He was
     wearing a false beard and spectacles!” 
 “That's proof positive,” said ingenuous Mr. Upton, under his breath. 
 “Well, I confess it's something like it in this case; but it was a very awkward moment for
     me. I hadn't to let him see I knew him, nor yet that I was following him, and the only way was
     to abandon the chase as openly as possible. It was then I decided that it was no use leaving
     poor old Mullins in pawn to the police. I redeemed him without delay. We went back to my new
     rooms together, which I needn't tell you I liked so much that I brought a suit-case and took
     them for a week. Of course, as we had lost the run of Baumgartner, the next best thing was to
     watch for his return. Mullins took that on while I got some sleep; when I awoke the Park Lane
     murder was the latest, and I won't say I didn't suspect who'd done it. Perhaps I didn't tell
     you he had his camera with him as
      well as beard and goggles, and all three figured in the first reports.” 
 “But all this time you had no idea my boy was in the house?” 
 “None whatever; we saw the girl once or twice, but that was all until I wired last night.
     What I never saw myself was Baumgartner's return; but in the afternoon I sent Mullins round to
     another road to try and get a room overlooking the place from the back. Well, the houses were
     too much class for that; but one was empty, and he got the key and risked going back to prison
     for the cause! Suffice it that he set eyes on both man and boy before I sent that wire.” 
 “And you left my son in that murderer's clutches a minute longer than you could help?” It
     was a previous incarnation of Pocket's father that broke in with this. 
 “You must remember in the first place that I couldn't be in the least sure it was your son;
     in the second, if murder had been intended, murder would have been done with as little delay in
     his case as in the others; thirdly, that we've nothing to show that Dr. Baumgartner is an
     actual murderer at all, but, fourthly, that to raid his place was the way to make him one. Poor
     Mullins, too, as the original Sherlock of the show, was desperately against calling in the
     police under any circumstances.
      He assured me there was no sign of bad blood about the house, until the small
     hours, and then he saw your son make his escape. I told him he should have collared the lad,
     but he lost sight of him in the night and preferred to keep an eye on that poor desperate
     doctor.” 
 Thrush treated this part of his narrative with the peculiar confidence which most counsel
     reserve for the less satisfactory aspects of their case. But Mr. Upton was not in a mood to
     press a point of grievance against anybody. And the name of Mullins reminded him that his
     curiosity on a very different point had not been gratified. 
 “Why on earth did you have Mullins run in?” he inquired, with characteristic absence of
     finesse. 
 “I'm not very proud of it,” replied Thrush. “It didn't come off, you see.” 
 “But whatever could the object have been?” 
 “I must have a damn-it if I'm to tell you that,” said Thrush; and the ironmaster concluded
     that he meant a final drink, from the action which he suited to the oath. “It was one way that
     occurred to me of putting salt on the lad.” 
 “Tony?” 
 “Yes.” 
 “You puzzle me more and more.” 
 “Well, you see, I gathered that he was a particularly honourable boy, of fine sensibilities,
     and
      yet Mullins thought he had shot this man by accident and was lying low. I only
     thought that, if that were so, the news of an innocent man's arrest would bring him into the
     open as quick as anything. Mullins proving amenable to terms, and having really been within a
     hundred miles of both murders at the time they were committed, the rest was elementary. But
     what's the good of talking about it? It didn't come off.” 
 “It very nearly did! I can tell you that straight from Tony; he was going to give himself up
     yesterday morning, if he hadn't accidentally satisfied himself of his own innocence.” 
 Mr. Upton said more than this, but it was the explicit statement of fact that alone afforded
     Thrush real consolation. His spectacled eyes blinked keenly behind their flashing lenses; the
     button of a nose underneath twitched as though it scented battle once again; and the drink with
     the opprobrious name was suddenly put down unfinished. 
 “If only I could find that camera!” he cried. “It's the touchstone of the whole thing, mark
     my words. If it's an accomplice who did this thing, he's got it; even if not——” 
 He stood silenced by a sudden thought, a gleam of light that illumined his whole flushed
     face. 
 “Mullins!” he roared. Mullins was on the spot with somewhat suspicious alacrity. “Get the
      almanac, Mullins, and look up Time of High Water at London Bridge to-day!” 
 He himself flopped down behind the telephone to ring up the cab-office in Bolton Street. But
     it takes time even for a Eugene Thrush to consume all but three large whiskies and sodas; and
     the afternoon was already far advanced. 
</div></body></text></TEI>