<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Camera Fiend by E.W. Hornung</title><author>Hornung, Ernest William (1866-1921)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1911</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
THE SECRET OF THE CAMERA
 The camera had been placed upon a folded newspaper, for the better preservation of the hotel
     table-cloth. Its apertures were still choked with mud; beads of slime kept breaking out along
     the joints. And Phillida was still explaining to Pocket how the thing had come into her
     possession. 
 “The rain was the greatest piece of luck, though another big slice was an iron gangway to
     the foreshore about a hundred yards up-stream. It was coming down so hard at the time that I
     couldn't see another creature out in it except myself. I don't believe a single soul saw me run
     down that gangway and up again; but I dropped my purse over first for an excuse if anybody did.
     I popped
      the camera under my waterproof, and carried it up to the King's Road before I
     could get a cab. But I never expected to find you awake and about again; next to the rain
     that's the best luck of all!” 
 “Why?” 
 “Because you know all about photography and I don't. Suppose he took a last photograph, and
     suppose that led directly to the murder!” 
 “That's an idea.” 
 “The man threw the camera into the river, but the plate would be in it still, and you could
     develop it!” 
 The ingenious hypothesis had appealed to the eager credulity of the boy; but at the final
     proposition he shook a reluctant head. 
 “I'm afraid there's not much chance of there being anything to develop; the slide's been
     open all this time, you see.” 
 “I know. I tried to shut it, but the wood must have swollen in the water. Yet the more it
     has swollen, the better it ought to keep out the light, oughtn't it?” 
 “I'm afraid there isn't a dog's chance,” he murmured, as he handled the camera again. Yet it
     was not of the folding-bellows variety, but was one of the earlier and stronger models in box
     form, and it had come through its ordeal wonderfully on the whole. Nothing was absolutely
     broken; but
      the swollen slide jammed obstinately, until in trying to shut it by main force,
     Pocket lost his grip of the slimy apparatus, and sent it flying to the floor, all but the slide
     which came out bodily in his hand. 
 “That settles it,” remarked Phillida, resignedly. The exposed plate stared them in the face,
     a sickly yellow in the broad daylight. It was cracked across the middle, but almost dry and
     otherwise uninjured. 
 “I am sorry!” exclaimed Pocket, as they stood over the blank sheet of glass and gelatine; it
     was like looking at a slate from which some infinitely precious message had been expunged
     unread. “I'm not sure that you weren't right after all; what's water-tight must be more or less
     light-tight, when you come to think of it. I say, what's all this? The other side oughtn't to
     bulge like that!” 
 He picked the broken plate out of the side that was already open, and weighed the slide in
     his hand; it was not heavy enough to contain another plate, he declared with expert conviction;
     yet the side which had not been opened was a slightly bulging but distinctly noticeable
     convexity. Pocket opened it at a word from Phillida, and an over-folded packet of MS. leapt
     out. 
 “It's his writing!” cried the girl, with pain and awe in her excitement. She had dropped the
     document at once. 

 “It's in English,” said Pocket, picking it up. 
 “It must be what he was writing all last night!” 
 “It is.” 
 “You see what it is!” urged Phillida, feebly. But she watched him closely as he read to
     himself:— 
 “June 20,190-.” 
 “It is a grim coincidence that I should sit down to reveal the secret of my latter days on
     what is supposed to be the shortest night of the year; for they must come to an end at sunrise,
     viz., at 3.44 according to the almanac, and it is already after 10 p.m. Even if I sit at my
     task till four I shall have less than six hours in which to do justice to the great
      ambition and the crowning folly of my life. I used the underlined word advisedly;
     some would substitute “monomania,” but I protest I am as sane as they are, fail as I may to
     demonstrate that fact among so many others to be dealt with in the very limited time at my
     disposal. Had I more time, or the pen of a readier writer, I should feel surer of vindicating
     my head if not my heart. But I have been ever deliberate in all things (excepting, certainly,
     the supreme folly already mentioned), and I would be as deliberate over the last words I shall
     ever write, as in my final preparations for death——”. 

 “What is it?” asked Phillida, for his eyes had dilated as he read, and he was breathing
     hard. 
 “He practically says he was going to commit suicide at daybreak! He's said so once already,
     but now he says it in so many words!” 
 “Well, we know he didn't do it,” said Phillida, as though she found a crumb of comfort in
     the thought. 
 “I'm not so sure about that.” 
 “Go on reading it aloud. I can bear it if that's the worst.” 
 “But it isn't, Phillida. I can see it isn't!” 
 “Then let us read it together. I'd rather face it with you than afterwards all by myself.
     We've seen each other through so much, surely we can—surely——” 
 Her words were swept away in a torrent of tears, and it was with dim eyes but a palpitating
     heart that Pocket looked upon the forlorn drab figure of the slip of a girl; for as yet,
     despite her pretext to Mr. Upton, she had taken no thought for her mourning, that unfailing
     distraction to the normally bereaved, but had put on anything she could find of a neutral tint;
     and yet it was just her dear disdain of appearance, the intimate tears gathering in her great
     eyes, unchecked, and streaming down the fresh young face, the very shabbiness of her coat and
     skirt, that made her what she was
      in his sight. Outside, the rain had stopped, and Trafalgar Square was drying in
     the sun, that streamed in through the open window of the hotel sitting-room, and poured its
     warm blessing on the two young heads bent as one over the dreadful document. 
 This was the part they read together, now in silence, now one and now the other whispering a
     few sentences aloud:—. 
 “What I have called my life's ambition demands but little explanation here. I have never
     made any secret of it, but, on the contrary, I have given full and frank expression to my
     theories in places where they are still accessible to the curious. I refer to my signed
     articles on spirit photography in Light Human Nature, The Occult
      Review and other periodicals, but particularly to the paper entitled “The Flight of
     the Soul,” in The Nineteenth Century and After for January of last year. The
     latter article contains my last published word on the matter which has so long engrossed my
     mind. It took me some months to prepare and to write, and its reception did much to drive me to
     the extreme measures I have since employed. Treated to a modicum of serious criticism by the
     scientific press, but more generally received with ignorant and intolerant derision, which is
     the Englishman's
      attitude towards whatsoever is without his own contracted ken, my article, the
     work of months, was dismissed and forgotten in a few days. I had essayed the stupendous feat of
     awaking the British nation to a new idea, and the British nation had responded with a
     characteristic snore of unfathomable indifference. My name has not appeared in its vermin press
     from that day to this; it was not mentioned in the paragraph about the psychic photographer
     which went the rounds about a year ago. Yet I was that photographer. I am the serious and
     accredited inquirer to whom the London hospitals refused admittance to their pauper deathbeds,
     thronged though those notoriously are by the raw material of the British medical profession.
     Begin at the bottom of the British medical ladder, and you are afforded the earliest and most
     frequent opportunities of studying (if not accelerating) the phenomena of human dissolution;
     but against the foreign scientist the door is closed, without reference either to the quality
     of his credentials or the purity of his aims. I can conceive no purer and no loftier aim than
     mine. It is as high above that of your ordinary physician as heaven itself is high above this
     earth. Your physician wrestles with death to lengthen life, whereas I would sacrifice a million
     lives to prove that there is no such thing as death; that this human life of ours, by which we
     set such
      childish store, is but a fleeting phase of the permanent life of the spirit. One
     shrinks from setting down so trite a truism; it is the common ground of all religion, but I
     have reached it from the opposite pole. Religion is to me the unworthy triumph of instinct over
     knowledge, a lazy substitution of invention for discovery. Religion invites us to take her
     postulates on trust; but a material age is deserving of material proofs, and it is these proofs
     I have striven to supply. Surely it is a higher aim, and not a lower, to appeal to the senses
     that cannot deceive, rather than to the imagination which must and does? But I am trenching
     after all upon ground which I myself have covered before to-day; it is my function to-night to
     relate a personal narrative rather than to reiterate personal views. Suffice it that to me, for
     many years, the only path to the Invisible has been the path of so-called spiritualism; the
     only lamp that illumined that path, so that all who saw might follow it for themselves, the
     lamp of spirit photography. It is a path with a bad name, a path infested with quacks and
     charlatans, and by false guides who rival the religious fanatics in the impudence of their
     appeal to man's credulity. Even those who bear the lamp I hold aloft are too often jugglers and
     rogues, to whose wiles, unfortunately, the simple science of photography lends itself all too
     readily. Nothing is
      easier than the production of impossible pictures by a little manipulation of
     film or plate; if the spiritual apparition is not to be enticed within range of the lens,
     nothing easier than to fabricate an approximate effect. And what spiritualist has yet succeeded
     in summoning spirits at will? It is the crux of the whole problem of spiritualism, to establish
     any sort or form of communication with disembodied spirits at the single will of the embodied;
     hence the periodical exposure of the paid medium, the smug scorn of the unbeliever, and the
     discouragement of genuine exploration beyond the environment of the flesh. There is one moment,
     and only one, at which a man may be sure that he stands, for however brief a particle of time,
     in the presence of a disembodied soul. It is the moment at which soul and body part company in
     what men call death. The human watcher sees merely the collapse of the human envelope; but many
     a phenomenon invisible to the human eye has been detected and depicted by that of the camera,
     as everybody knows who has the slightest acquaintance with the branch of physics known as
     “fluorescence.” The invisible spirit of man surely falls within this category. To the crystal
     eye of science it is not so much invisible as elusive and intractable. Once it has fled this
     earth, the sovereign opportunity is gone; but photography may often intercept the actual flight
     of the soul.” 

 “I say no more than “often” because there are special difficulties into which I need not
     enter here; but they would disappear, or at least be minimised, if the practice received the
     encouragement it deserves, instead of the forbidding ban of a sentimental generation. It would
     hurt nobody; it would comfort and convince the millions who at present have only their
     Churches' word for the existence of an eternal soul in their perishable bodies. It would prove
     more, in the course of a few experiments, than all the Churches have proved between them in
     nineteen centuries. Yet how are my earnest applications received, in hospitals where men die
     daily, in prisons where they are still occasionally put to death? I am refused, rebuffed,
     gratuitously reprimanded; in fact, I am driven ultimately to the extreme course of taking human
     life, on my own account, in order to prove the life eternal. Call it murder, call it what you
     will; in a civilisation which will not hear of a lethal chamber for congenital imbeciles it
     would be waste of time to urge the inutility of a life as an excuse for taking it, or the
     misery of an individual as a reason for sending him to a world which cannot use him worse than
     this world. I can only say that I have not deprived the State of one conceivably profitable
     servant, or cut short a single life of promise or repute. I have picked my few victims with
     infinite care from
      amid the moral or material wreckage of life; either they had nothing to live for,
     or they had no right to live. Charlton, the licensed messenger, had less to live for than any
     man I ever knew; in the course of our brief acquaintance he frequently told me how he wished he
     was dead. I came across him in Kensington, outside a house to which an unseemly fracas had
     attracted my attention as I passed. Charlton had just been ejected for being drunk and
     insolent, and refusing to leave without an extra sixpence. I befriended him. He was indeed
     saturated with alcohol and honeycombed with disease; repulsive in appearance, and cantankerous
     in character, his earnings were so slender that he was pitifully clad, and without a night's
     lodging oftener than not. He had not a friend in the world, and was suffering from an incurable
     malady of which the end was certain agony. I resolved to put him out of his misery, and at the
     same time to try to photograph the escape of his soul. A favourable opportunity did not present
     itself for some time, during which Charlton subsisted largely on my bounty; at last one morning
     I found him asleep on a bench in Holland Walk, and not another being in sight, and I shot him
     with a cheap pistol which I had purchased second-hand for the purpose, and which I left beside
     him on the seat. Yet the weapon it was that cast a doubt upon the
      authenticity of the suicide, despite my final precaution of stuffing a number of
     cartridges into the dead man's pocket; pot-house associates came forward to declare that he
     could never have possessed either the revolver or its price without their knowledge. Hence the
     coroner's repudiation of the verdict at the inquest. Yet it is to be feared that the fate of
     such as poor Charlton excites but little public interest in its explanation, and that the
     police themselves never took more than an academic interest in the case.” 
 “To me it was a bitter disappointment on other grounds. I had lost very few seconds between
     pulling the revolver trigger and pressing the bulb of my pneumatic shutter; but one had to get
     back into position for this, and the fact remains that I was too late. The result may be found
     among my negatives. It is dreadfully good of the dead man, if not a unique photograph of actual
     death; but it lacks the least trace of the super-normal. The flight of the soul had been too
     quick for me; it would be too quick again unless I hit upon some new method. I had not only
     failed to leave convincing evidence of suicide, but the fatal pause between pistol-shot and
     snap-shot was due entirely to my elaborate attempt in that direction. It was not worth making
     again. The next case should be a more honest breach of the Sixth
      Commandment; the shot to be fired, and the photograph taken, at the same range
     and all but at the same instant. There would be no further point in leaving the weapon behind,
     so I was free to choose the one best suited to my purpose, and to adapt it at my leisure to my
     peculiar needs. Eventually I evolved the ingenious engine which, no doubt, has already
     explained itself better than I could possibly explain it; if not, the discoverer of the camera
     need not hesitate to experiment with the pistol, as it will not be loaded when found.” 
 There was a brief discussion here. The children could not understand about the pistol; but
     only one of them cared what had become of it. For Phillida it was enough to know that the
     writer of this shameless rigmarole, with its pompous periods and its callous gusto, must long
     ago have lost his reason. She had no doubt whatever about that, and already it had brought a
     new light into her eyes. She would pause to discuss nothing else. It was her finger that
     pointed the way through the next passages. 
 “The perfection or completion of my device was the secret work of many weeks; it brings me
     down almost to the other day, and to what I have described as the supreme folly of my life. I
     had everything in readiness for another attempt to
      liberate and photograph a human soul in consecutive fractions of a second. But
     the right man was never in the right place at the right time; one saw him by the dozen in a
     crowd, but the people one met all by themselves, in the early summer mornings, stayed one's
     hand repeatedly by the eager brightness of their eyes or a happy elasticity of step. Once an
     out-patient at the Brompton Hospital, whom I had dogged all the way down to Richmond Park, was
     cheated of a merciful end by dusk falling just as I had him to myself. No; the dawn and the
     drunkard were still my best chance. So it was that the wretch whose name I forget met with his
     death in Hyde Park last Tuesday morning. I knew him by sight as a pot-house loafer of the
     Charlton circle, but it was quite by chance that I followed his uncertain footsteps through the
     Park, and saw him go deliberately to bed in the drenching dew. His face filled in his tale; it
     was another farrago of privation and excess. This was the type that caused me no compunction:
     having aimed and focussed at the same time, as my invention provides, I despatched the poor
     devil as he lay on his side, with his hat over his eyes, and exposed my plate as he rolled over
     on his face. It may be reckoned an offensive detail, but the click of my instantaneous shutter
     coincided with the last clutter in his throat.” 

 “I need hardly say that I had looked about me pretty thoroughly before firing, and my first
     act after taking the photograph was to make another wary survey of the scene. It had the
     advantage that one could see a considerable distance in three directions, and in none of these,
     neither right nor left along the path, nor yet straight ahead across the grass on the edge of
     which my victim lay, was a living creature to be seen. This was very reassuring, as I felt that
     I could see a good deal farther than the report of my small automatic pistol was likely to be
     heard; for it is a remarkable feature of most shooting cases, especially where a pistol has
     been used, and in the open air, how seldom it is that a witness can be found who has actually
     heard the fatal shot. In the fourth quarter, where there was a bank of shrubbery behind some
     iron palings, I looked last, for I was standing with my back that way. How shall I describe my
     sensations on turning round? There was a young lad within a few feet of me, on the other side
     of the palings; and this young lad was flourishing a revolver in his right hand!” 
 “At first I made certain he had seen everything; but his blank and frank bewilderment was
     more reassuring at a second glance, and at a third I guessed what had happened to him. His
     crumpled clothes were dank with dew. His eyes were puddles
      of utter stupefaction. He had been sleeping in the Park, and walking in his
     sleep, and in all probability it was my shot which had brought him to himself; of this,
     however, I was less sure, and in my doubt I was disastrously inspired to accuse him of having
     fired the shot himself. It never struck me that he could mistake the body behind me for a
     living man; it was with a wild idea of being the first to accuse the other, that I asked him if
     he knew what he had done, and seized his revolver at the same moment. I had the wit to grasp it
     in my hot hand until the barrel was just warm enough to help me convince the child that he
     really had fired the shot; but, since he could not see it for myself, I was not going out of my
     way just then to tell him it was a fatal shot. Already I regretted that I had gone so far, and
     yet already I saw myself committed to a course of action as rash as it was now inevitable. The
     boy became convulsed with asthma; I could not leave him there, to tell his story when the body
     was discovered, to have it disproved perhaps on the spot, at the latest on a comparison of
     bullets, and the truth brought home to me through his description. Again, when I had taken him
     to my house, with all sorts of foolish precautions, and still more foolish risks, I had to keep
     him there. How could I let him loose to blurt out his story and implicate
      me more readily than ever after what he had seen of me at home? I had to keep him
     there—I repeat it—alive or dead. And I was not the kind of murderer (if I am one at all) to
     take a young and innocent life, if I could help it, to preserve my own; on the contrary, I had,
     and I hope I always should have had, humanity enough at least to do what I could for a
     fellow-creature battling with an attack which almost threatened to remove him from my path
     without my aid.” 
 There followed a few remarks on Pocket's character as the writer read it. They were not
     uncomplimentary to Pocket personally, but they betrayed a profound disdain for the typically
     British institution of which Pocket was too readily accepted as a representative product. His
     general ignorance and credulity received a grim tribute; they were the very qualities the
     doctor would have demanded in a chosen dupe. Yet he appeared to have enjoyed the youth's
     society, his transparent honesty, his capacity for enthusiastic interest, whether in the
     delights of photography or in the horrors of war. Baumgartner seemed aware that he had been
     somewhat confidential on both subjects, and that either his contempt of human life, or his
     ambitions in the matter of psychic photography, would have been better kept to himself; but, on
     the other hand,
      he “greatly doubted whether they taught boys to put two and two together, at
     these so-called public schools”; and, after all, it was not detection by the boy, but through
     the boy, that he had to fear. 
 “The madness of keeping him prisoner, as he had been from the beginning, in spite of all
     pretences and persuasions to the contrary, was another thing to which Baumgartner had been
     thoroughly alive all along. He had regarded it from the first as “the certain beginning of the
     end”; from the first, he had been prepared with specious explanations for any such inquisitor
     as the one who had actually arrived no later than the Saturday afternoon. He wrote without
     elation of his interview with Thrush, whose name he knew; the doctor had not been deceived as
     to the transitory character of his own deception. It was the same with the letter which he had
     pretended to post, which could only have kept the boy quiet for a day or two, if he had posted
     it, but which the boy himself had discovered never to have been posted at all. There was a
     sufficiently cool description of the desperate mood into which Baumgartner's intuition of the
     boy's discovery had thrown him on the Sunday night.” 
 “It was then,” he wrote, “that I formed a
      project which I should have been sorry indeed to carry out, though I should
     certainly have done so if he had given me the chance I sought. It must be understood that my
     second attempt to photograph the flight of the soul had proved as great a fiasco as the first.
     Suddenly I hit upon a perfectly conceivable (even though it seem a wilfully grotesque)
     explanation of my failure. What if the human derelicts I had so far chosen for my experiments
     had no souls to photograph? Sodden with drink, debauched, degraded, and spiritually blurred or
     blunted to the last degree, these after all were the least likely subjects to yield results to
     the spirit photographer. I should have chosen saints instead of sinners such as these, entities
     in which the soul was a major and not a minor factor. I thought of the saintliest men I knew in
     London, of some Jesuit Fathers of my acquaintance, of a “light” specialist I know of who is
     destroying himself by inches in the cause of science, of certain missioners in the slums; but I
     did not think twice of any one of them; their lives are much too valuable for me to cut them
     short on the mere chance of a compensating benefit to mankind at large. Last, and longest, I
     thought of the boy upstairs. I had not meant to sacrifice him; a young life, of some promise,
     is only less sacred to me than a mature life rich in beneficent activities. But this young
      fellow was going to be my ruin. I could see it in his eyes. He had found me out
     about the letter; he would be the means of my being found out and stopped for ever in the work
     of my life. It was his life or mine; it should be his; but I was not going to take it there in
     the house, for reasons I need not enter into here, and I intended to take more than his life
     while I was about it. But he never gave me the chance. I did my best to get him to go out with
     me this morning. But he refused, as a horse refuses a jump, or a dog the water. He said he was
     ill; he looked ill. But I have no doubt he was well enough to make his escape soon after my
     back was turned. I see he has broken into my dark-room for the clothes I took away from him
     before I went out; he would scarcely remain after that; but, to tell the truth, I have hardly
     given him a thought since my return.” 
 The readers shuddered over this long paragraph. More than once the boy broke in with his own
     impulsive version of the awful moments on the Sunday night and the Monday morning, in his
     bedroom at the top of the doctor's house. He declared that nothing short of main force would
     have dragged him out-of-doors that morning, that he felt it in his bones that he would never
     come back alive. Then he would be sorry he had said so much. 

 It only increased his companion's anguish. She was reading every word religiously, with a
     most painful fascination; it was as though every word drew blood. There was a brief but
     terrible account of the murder of Sir Joseph Schelmerdine outside his own house in Park Lane.
     It was the rashest of all the crimes; but, apparently, the one occasion on which the doctor had
     disguised himself before hand; and that only because Sir Joseph and he knew and disliked each
     other so intensely that a “straight” interview was out of the question. As it was he had
     escaped by a miracle, after lying all day in a straw-loft, creeping into a carriage at
     nightfall, and getting out on the wrong side when it drove round to its house. Baumgartner
     described the incident with a callous relish, as perhaps the most exciting in his long career;
     he was going on to explain his subsequent return, in propria persona,  and
     yet by stealth, when he paused in the middle of a sentence which was never finished. And his
     statement concluded as follows, in less careful language and a more flowing hand:— 
 “I thought the fool had cleared out long ago. The day's excitement must have driven him
     clean out of my head. I never thought of him when I got back, never till I saw the damage to
     the darkroom window and missed his clothes. I didn't
      waste two thoughts upon him then. I had my negative to develop. A magnificent
     negative it was, too, yet another absolute failure from the practical point of view, perhaps
     from the same reason as its predecessors. South African mines may produce gold and diamonds
     (licit and illicit!) but their yield in souls is probably the poorest to the square mile
     anywhere on earth. Schelmerdine never had one in his gross carcass. So there was an end of him,
     and a good riddance to rotten clay. I have not thought of him again all night. I have thought
     of nothing but this perhaps passionately dispassionate statement that I have made up my mind to
     leave behind me. It has given me strange pleasure to write, a satisfaction which I have no
     longer the time to attempt to analyse; all night long my pen has scarcely paused, and I not
     conscious of a moment's weariness of mind, body, or hand. Only sometimes have I paused to light
     my pipe. I had made such a pause, perhaps half an hour ago, when in the terrible stillness of
     the night I heard a footstep in the hall. My nerves were somewhat on edge with all this
     writing; it might be my imagination. I stole to my door, and as I opened it the one below shut
     softly. I waited some time, heard nothing more, went down with my lamp, and threw open the
     drawing-room door. There was my young fellow, not gone at all, but
      sitting in the dark with one whose name there is no need to mention. I do not
     wish to be misunderstood. It was all innocent enough, even I never doubted that. But somehow
     the sight of that boy and girl, sitting there in the dark without a word, afraid to go to
     bed—afraid of me—made the blood boil over in my veins. I could have trampled on that lad, my
     Jonah whom I had pictured overboard at last, and I did hurl the lamp at his head. I am glad it
     missed him. I am glad he made good his escape while I was seeing his companion safe upstairs.
     If I had found him where I left him, God knows what violence I might not have done him after
     all. The boy has good in him, and more courage than he knows himself; again I say that I am
     glad he has escaped unscathed. His life was not safe, but now I shall only take my own.” 
 “Yes! I have made up my mind; it is better than leaving it to the common hangman of this
     besotted country. I know what to expect in enlightened England: either a death unfit for a dog,
     or existence worse than death in a criminal lunatic asylum. I prefer my own peculiar quietus;
     it has stood on my table all night long, ready and pointed at my heart; a hand upon the door, a
     step behind me, and I should have rolled over dead at their feet. So it will be if even now
     they are waiting for me outside; but, if not, I know where to go,
      where already it is broad daylight, where the wide open space will quicken and
     enhance every ray, and the broad river multiply the sun by a million facets of living fire. It
     is not the light that will fail me, there; and as I have served others, so also will I serve
     myself, and it may be with better fortune than they have brought me. Who knows? It would be in
     keeping with the poetic ironies of this existence. At all events, unless waylaid at once, I am
     giving it a chance. I shall place the camera on the parapet of the Embankment. I have fitted
     the shutter with a specially long pneumatic tube, and the bulb will do its double work as usual
     when my fingers relax. I have long had it all in my mind. I have written full instructions on
     the envelope which I shall stick by the flap to the open slide; if we are found by a reasonably
     intelligent person, the slide will be shut, and the camera handed over bodily to the police.
     They, I think, may be trusted to honour one's last instructions, if only out of curiosity;
     their eyes will be the first to read what I fear they will describe as my “full confession.”
     Well, it is “full,” and the substantive must be left to them. So long as the document does not
     fall into one little pair of gentle hands, I shall lie easy in whatever ignominious grave they
     lay me. That is why I hide it where I do: since, if it fell first into those hands, it would
     never see the light at all.” 

 There was a little more, but Phillida suddenly snatched the MS. away, and wept over the end,
     bitterly, and yet not altogether in bitterness, while Pocket picked up the camera and set it
     back in its place on the muddy newspaper. Phillida folded up the packet, and after a moment's
     hesitation went away with it, jingling keys in her other hand. On her return she stood
     petrified on the threshold. 
 Pocket was seated at the table, the red bulb of the pneumatic shutter between his finger and
     thumb; he pressed the bulb, and there was a loud metallic snap inside the camera; he released
     the pressure, and the shutter snapped like a shutter and nothing else. Phillida came forward
     with a cry. Pocket had taken the top off the camera; it was like a box without the lid, and on
     the one side there was nothing between the lens and the grooved carrier for the slide, but on
     the other there was an automatic pistol, fixed down with wires, as a wild beast might be
     lashed, and its muzzle pointing through the orifice intended for the second lens of the
     stereoscopic camera. 
 Pocket pressed again, and again the mild clash of the shutter was preceded by the vicious
     one that would have been an explosion if there had been another cartridge in the pistol. 
 “And we never guessed it!” said he. “That's why he went in for this sort of double camera,
      and rigged it up to take both kinds of shot in quick succession. It's the
     cleverest thing I ever heard of in my life.” 
 He spoke as if it were only clever! Phillida stared at it and him without a word. 
 “The cleverest part is the way you aim. I do believe he relied altogether on that spot about
     the middle of the focussing screen. I've been trying it against the window, and where that spot
     comes the pistol's pointing every time. It's a fixed focus, about ten to fifteen feet, I fancy,
     and the spot isn't quite in the middle of the screen, but just enough to the left to allow. I
     don't quite see how the one bulb works everything, but these springs and things are a bit
     confusing. We shan't understand everything till we take it to pieces.” 
 “You mean the police won't!” said Phillida, bitterly. 
 “The police! I never thought of them.” 
 “What do you mean to do with this—this infernal machine?” the girl asked, her voice breaking
     over the perfectly applicable term. 
 “What do you mean to do with—the writing?” demanded Pocket in his turn. 
 “Burn it! I've asked for a fire in my room; it's locked away meanwhile.” 
 “Well, this is yours, too,” said Pocket, deliberately, “to do what you like with as well.” 

 “They wouldn't think so!” 
 “They'll never know.” 
 Phillida shook her head, and not without some scorn. “You couldn't keep it to yourself,” she
     said. “You would have to tell.” 
 “Well, but not everybody,” said poor Pocket. “Only my father, if you like!” he added,
     valiantly. 
 “Mr. Upton would feel bound to tell.” 
 “I don't see that. Didn't you hear what he said about a man's secrets dying with him?” 
 “He's so kind! He says that; he said it again to me; but this is the mystery of the day.
     It'll be the talk for months, if not years. And as yet only you and I, in all the world, have
     found it out!” 
 She looked at him so wistfully, so sweetly and sadly and confidentially, that he would have
     been either more or less than human boy if he had failed to see her heart's desire, and how it
     was still in his power to save her the supreme humiliation and distress of sharing their secret
     with the world. He made up his mind on the spot; and yet it was a mind that looked both ways at
     every turn of affairs, and even then he saw what he was going to lose. Fred and Horace would
     not sit nearly so spellbound as they might have done, would probably back their penetration of
     the mystery against his! There would be no boasting about it in front of the
      hall fire at school, no breathing it even to Smith minor out
     for a walk; no adventure to recount all his days; and Pocket was one to whom the salt of an
     adventure would always be its subsequent recital. But he could “play the game” as well as
     Horace himself, when he happened to have no doubt as to the game to play. And now he had none
     whatever. 
 “Phillida, if you wish it, I'll never breathe a syllable of all this to a single soul on
     earth, I don't care who they are, or what they do to me!” 
 He wanted them to put him on the rack that moment. 
 “Oh, Tony, do you mean it?” 
 Her eyes had filled. 
 “Of course I mean it! I'll swear it more solemnly than I've ever sworn anything in my life
     so far.” 
 “No, no! Your word's enough. Don't I know what that's worth, after this terrible week?” 
 And she cried again at its hideous memories, so that Pocket turned away and put the camera
     together again, and wrapped it up in her waterproof, so that he might not see her tears. 
 “I'll never breathe a single word to a single soul,” he vowed, “except yourself.” 
 She caught at that through her tears. He could talk to her about it, always, as much as ever
     he
      liked; it would be a bond between them all their lives. And not until she said
     it, to be just to Pocket, did he think of a reward or look beyond those days. 
 But what were they to do with a stereoscopic camera containing an automatic pistol? It was
     not to be burnt in a grate like a sheaf of MS. They thought about it for some time with anxious
     faces; for it was getting on towards evening now, though the sun was out again, and it was
     lighter than the early afternoon; but Mr. Upton might be back any minute. It was Phillida who
     at last said she knew. She would not tell him what she meant to do; but she put on her
     waterproof again, little as it was wanted now, and the camera under it as before; and together
     they sallied forth into the noisy and crowded Strand. 
 Pocket did not know where he was, and Phillida would not tell him where she was going,
     neither could he question her in that alarming throng. He felt a frightful sense of guilt and
     danger, not so much to himself as to her, with that lethal weapon concealed about her; every
     man who looked at them was a detective in his eyes, and past the policemen at the corners he
     wanted to run. But they gained the middle of Waterloo Bridge undetected and ensconced
     themselves in a recess without creating a sensation. 

 “Now, then,” said Phillida, “will you focus Westminster Bridge and the Houses of Parliament,
     or shall I?” 
 There they were before them against the sunset, the long lithe bridge, the stately towers.
     But Pocket could not see Phillida's drift until she aimed herself, and, aiming, let the square
     black box slip clean through her fingers into the depths of the river from which she had only
     retrieved it a couple of hours before, as a body is committed to the deep. 
 She bewailed her stupidity; he had the wit to echo her then, and in a loud voice, that any
     eye-witness or passer-by might be struck with the genuine severity of their loss. But there had
     been no eye-witness who thought it worth while to rally them on the occurrence, and the busy
     townsfolk hastening past were all too much engrossed in their own affairs to take any interest
     in those of the boy and girl who seemed themselves in something of a hurry to get back to the
     Strand. 
 And in the Strand the first thing they saw was a yellow poster bearing but four words in
     enormous black letters:— 
 CHELSEA INQUEST 
 CAMERA CLUE! 

 Phillida slipped her hand within Pocket's arm. Pocket was man enough to press it to his
     side. 
 THE END 
 Printed in Great Britain by Wyman & Sons, Ltd., London and Reading 
</div></body></text></TEI>