<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Camera Fiend by E.W. Hornung</title><author>Hornung, Ernest William (1866-1921)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1911</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
MR. EUGENE THRUSH
 The remarkable Mr. Thrush was a duly qualified solicitor, who had never been the man for
     that orderly and circumscribed profession. The tide of events which had turned his talents into
     their present channel, was known to but few of his many boon companions, and much nonsense was
     talked about him and his first career. It was not the case (as anybody might have ascertained)
     that he had been struck off the rolls in connection with the first great scandal in which he
     was professionally concerned. Nor was there much more truth in the report that he drank, in the
     ordinary interpretation of the term. 
 It is true, however, that Mr. Thrush had a tall tumbler on his dressing-table, to help him
     shave for the evening of that fateful Friday. He was
      dressing for an early dinner before a first night. His dressing-room, in which he
     also slept in Spartan simplicity, was the original powder-closet of the panelled library out of
     which it led. There was a third room in which his man Mullins prepared breakfast and spent the
     day. But the whole was a glorified garret, at the top of such stairs as might have sent a
     nervous client back for an escort. 
 Mullins, with the expression of an undertaker's mute (a calling he had followed in his day),
     was laying out his master's clothes as mournfully as though his master were in them, instead of
     chatting genially as he shaved. 
 “I'm sorry to have missed your evidence, Mullins, but if we go into this case it's no use
     letting the police smell the competitive rat too soon. Inquests are not in my line, and they'd
     have wondered what the devil I was doing there, especially as you refrained from saying you
     were in my service.” 
 “I had no call, sir.” 
 “Quite right, Mullins! An ideal witness, I can see you were. So you'd only to describe the
     finding of the body?” 
 “That was all, sir.” 
 “And your description was really largely founded on fact?” 
 Mullins stood like a funereal grenadier at his gentleman's shaving elbow. “I told the truth,
      sir, and nothing but the truth,” said he, with sombre dignity. 
 “But not the whole truth, eh, Mullins! What about the little souvenirs you showed me
     yesterday?” 
 “There was no call to name them either, sir. The cheroot-end I must have picked up a hundred
     yards away, and even the medicine-cork wasn't on the actual scene of the murder.” 
 “That's all right, Mullins. I don't see what they could possibly have to do with it, myself;
     and really, but for the fluke of your being the one to find the body, and picking the
     first-fruits for what they're worth, it's the last kind of case that I should dream of touching
     with a ten-foot pole. By the way, I suppose they won't require you at the adjourned inquest?” 
 “They may not require me, sir, but I should like to attend, if quite convenient,” replied
     Mullins deferentially. “The police were very stingy with their evidence to-day; they've still
     to produce the fatal bullet, and I should like a sight of that, sir.” 
 Mr. Thrush did not continue the conversation, possibly because he took as little real
     interest as he professed in the case which was being thrust upon him, but more obviously owing
     to the necessary care in shaving the corners of a delightfuly long and mobile mouth. Indeed,
     the whole face emerging from the lather, as a cast from its clay, would have
      delighted any eye but its own. It was fat and flabby as the rest of Eugene
     Thrush; there was quite a collection of chins to shave; and yet anybody but himself must have
     recognised the invincible freshness of complexion, the happy penetration of every glance, as an
     earnest of inexhaustible possibilities beneath the burden of the flesh. Great round spectacles,
     through which he stared like a wise fish in an aquarium, were caught precariously on a button
     of a nose which in itself might have prevented the superficial observer from taking him any
     more seriously than he took himself. 
 Mr. Upton, who arrived before Thrush was visible, was an essentially superficial and
     antipathetic observer of unfamiliar types; and being badly impressed by the forbidding
     staircase, he had determined on the landing to sound his man before trusting him. In the rank
     undergrowth of his prejudices there was no more luxuriant weed than an innate abhorrence of
     London and all Londoners, which neither the cause of his visit nor the murky mien of Mullins
     was calculated to abate. The library of books in solid bindings, many of them legal tomes, was
     the first reassuring feature; another was the large desk, made business-like with pigeon-holes
     and a telephone; but Mr. Upton was only beginning to recover confidence when Eugene Thrush
     shook it sadly at his first entry. 

 It might have been by his face, or his fat, or his evening clothes seen from the motorist's
     dusty tweeds, almost as much as by the misplaced joviality with which Thrush exclaimed: “I'm
     sorry to have kept you waiting, sir, and the worst of it is that I can't let you keep me!” 
 This touched a raw nerve in the ironmaster, as the kind of reception one had to come up to
     London to incur. “Then I'll clear out!” said he, and would have been as good as his word but
     for its instantaneous effect. 
 Thrush had pulled out a gold watch after a stare of kindly consternation. 
 “I really am rather rushed,” said he; “but I can give you four minutes, if that's any good
     to you.” 
 Now, at first sight, before a word was spoken, Mr. Upton would have said four hours or four
     days of that boiled salmon in spectacles would have been no good to him; but the precise term
     of minutes, together with a seemlier but not less decisive manner, had already quickened the
     business man's respect for another whose time was valuable. This is by no means to say that
     Thrush had won him over in a breath. But the following interchange took place rapidly. 
 “I understand you're a detective, Mr. Thrush?” 
 “Hardly that, Mr.——I've left your card in the other room.” 

 “Upton is my name, sir.” 
 “I don't aspire to the official designation, Mr. Upton, an inquiry agent is all I presume to
     call myself.” 
 “But you do inquire into mysteries?” 
 “I've dabbled in them.” 
 “As an amateur?” 
 “A paid amateur, I fear.” 
 “I come on a serious matter, Mr. Thrush—a very serious matter to me!” 
 “Pardon me if I seem anything else for a moment; as it happens, you catch me dabbling, or
     rather meddling, in a serious case which is none of my business, but strictly a matter for the
     police, only it happens to have come my way by a fluke. I am not a policeman, but a private
     inquisitor. If you want anything or anybody ferreted out, that's my job and I should put it
     first.” 
 “Mr. Thrush, that's exactly what I do want, if only you can do it for me! I had reason to
     fear, from what I heard this morning, that my youngest child, a boy of sixteen, had disappeared
     up here in London, or been decoyed away. And now there can be no doubt about it!” 
 So, in about one of the allotted minutes, Thrush was trusted on grounds which Mr. Upton
     could not easily have explained; but the time was up before he had concluded a briefly
     circumstantial report of the facts within his knowledge. 

 “When can I see you again?” he asked abruptly of Thrush. 
 “When? What do you mean, Mr. Upton?” 
 “The four minutes must be more than up.” 
 “Go on, my dear sir, and don't throw good time after bad. I'm only dining with a man at his
     club. He can wait.” 
 “Thank you, Mr. Thrush.” 
 “More good time! How do you know the boy hasn't turned up at school or at home while you've
     been fizzing in a cloud of dust?” 
 “I was to have a wire at the hotel I always stop at; there's nothing there; but the first
     thing they told me was that my boy had been for a bed which they couldn't give him the night
     before last. I did let them have it! But it seems the manager was out, and his understrappers
     had recommended other hotels; they've just been telephoning to them all in turn, but at every
     one the poor boy seems to have fared the same. Then I've been in communication with these
     infernal people in St. John's Wood, and with the doctor, but none of them have heard anything.
     I thought I'd like to do what I could before coming to you, Mr. Thrush, but that's all I've
     done or know how to do. Something must have happened!” 
 “It begins to sound like it,” said Thrush gravely. 

 “But there are happenings and happenings; it may be only a minor accident. One moment!” 
 And he returned to the powder-closet of its modish day, where Mullins was still pursuing his
     ostensibly menial avocation. What the master said was inaudible in the library, but the man
     hurried out in front of him, and was heard clattering down the evil stairs next minute. 
 “In less than an hour,” explained Thrush, “he will be back with a list of the admissions at
     the principal hospitals for the last forty-eight hours. I don't say there's much in it; your
     boy had probably some letter or other means of easier indentification about him; but it's worth
     trying.” 
 “It is, indeed!” murmured Mr. Upton, much impressed. 
 “And while he is trying it,” exclaimed Eugene Thrush, lighting up as with a really great
     idea, “you'll greatly oblige me by having a whisky-and-soda in the first place.” 
 “No, thank you! I haven't had a bite all day. It would fly to my head.” 
 “But that's its job; that's where it's meant to fly,” explained the convivial Mr. Thrush,
     preparing the potion with practised hand. Baited with a biscuit it was eventually swallowed,
     and a flagging giant refreshed by his surrender. It made
      him like his new acquaintance too well to bear the thought of detaining him any
     more. 
 “Go to your dinner, man, and let me waylay you later!” 
 “Thank you, I prefer to keep you now I've got you, Mr. Upton! My man begins his round by
     going to tell my pal I can't dine with him at all. Not a word, I beg! I'll have a bite with you
     instead when Mullins gets back, and in a taxi that won't be long.” 
 “But do you think you can do anything?” 
 The question floated in pathetic evidence on a flood of inarticulate thanks. 
 “If you give me time, I hope so,” was the measured answer. “But the needle in the hay is
     nothing to the lost unit in London, and it will take time. I'm not a magazine detective, Mr.
     Upton; if you want a sixpenny solution for soft problems, don't come to me!” 
 At an earlier stage the ironmaster would have raised his voice and repeated that this was a
     serious matter; even now he looked rather reproachfully at Eugene Thrush, who came back to
     business on the spot. 
 “I haven't asked you for a description of the boy, Mr. Upton, because it's not much good if
     we've got to keep the matter to ourselves. But is there anything distinctive about him besides
     the asthma?” 
 “Nothing; he was never an athlete, like my other boys.” 

 “Come! I call that a distinction in itself,” said Mr. Thrush, smiling down his own
     unathletic waistcoat. “But as a matter of fact, nothing could be better than the very complaint
     which no doubt unfits him for games.” 
 “Nothing better, do you say?” 
 “Emphatically, from my point of view. It's harder to hide a man's asthma than to hide the
     man himself.” 
 “I never thought of that.” 
 It was impossible to tell whether Thrush had thought of it before that moment. The round
     glasses were levelled at Mr. Upton with an inscrutable stare of the marine eyes behind them. 
 “I suppose it has never affected his heart?” he inquired nonchalantly; but the nonchalance
     was a thought too deliberate for paternal perceptions quickened as were those of Mr. Upton. 
 “Is that why you sent round the hospitals, Mr. Thrush?” 
 “It was one reason, but honestly not the chief.” 
 “I certainly never thought of his heart!” 
 “Nor do I think you need now, in the case of so young a boy,” said Thrush earnestly. “On the
     other hand, I shouldn't be surprised if his asthma were to prove his best friend.” 

 “It owes him something!” 
 “Do you know what he does for it?” 
 “Yes, I do,” said Mr. Upton, remembering the annoying letter he seemed to have received some
     weeks before. “He smokes, against his doctor's orders.” 
 “Do you mean tobacco?” 
 “No—some stuff for asthma.” 
 “In cigarettes?” 
 “Yes.” 
 “Do you know the name?” 
 “I have it here.” 
 The offensive letter was not only produced, but offered for inspection after a precautionary
     glance. Thrush was on his feet to receive it in outstretched hand. Already he looked
     extraordinarily keen for his bulk, but the reading of the letter left him alive and alert to
     the last superfluous ounce. 
 “But this is magnificent!” he cried, with eyes as round as their glasses. 
 “I confess I don't see why.” 
 “Cigarettes d'Auvergne!” 
 “Some French rubbish.” 
 “The boy has evidently been dependent on them?” 
 “It looks like it.” 
 “And this man Bompas made him give them all up?” 

 “So he has the impudence to say.” 
 “Is it possible you don't see the importance of all this?” 
 Mr. Upton confessed incompetence unashamed. 
 “I never heard of these cigarettes before; they're an imported article; you can't get them
     everywhere, I'll swear! Your boy has got to rely on them; he's out of reach of the doctor who's
     forbidden them; he'll try to get them somewhere! If he's been trying in London, I'll find out
     where before I'm twenty-four hours older!” 
 “But how can you?” asked Mr. Upton, less impressed with the possibility than by this rapid
     if obvious piece of reasoning. 
 “A. V. M.!” replied Eugene Thrush, with cryptic smile. 
 “Who on earth is he?” 
 “Nobody; it's the principle on which I work.” 
 “A. V. M.?” 
 “Otherwise the old nursery game of Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral.” 
 Again Mr. Upton had to prevent himself by main force from declaring it all no laughing
     matter; but his silence was almost bellicose. 
 “You divide things into two,” explained Thrush, “and go on so dividing them until you come
     down to the indivisible unit which is the answer to the riddle. Animal or Vegetable? Vegetable
     or
      Mineral? Northern or Southern Hemisphere? Ah! I thought your childhood was not so
     very much longer ago than mine.” 
 Mr. Upton had shrugged an impatient recognition of the game. 
 “In this case it's Chemists Who Do Sell D'Auvergne Cigarettes and Chemists Who Don't.
     Then—Chemists Who Do and Did Yesterday, and Chemists Who Do but Didn't! But we can probably
     improve on the old game by playing both rounds at once.” 
 “I confess I don't quite follow,” said Mr. Upton, “though there seems some method in the
     madness.” 
 “It's all the method I've got,” rejoined Thrush frankly. “But you shall see it working, for
     unless I'm much mistaken this is Mullins back sooner than I expected.” 
 Mullins it was, and with the negative information expected and desired, though the
     professional melancholy of his countenance might have been the precursor of the worst possible
     news. The hospitals on his rapid round had included Charing Cross, St. Thomas's, St. George's,
     and the Royal Free; but he had telephoned besides to St. Mary's and St. Bartholomew's. At none
     of these institutions had a young gentleman of the name of Upton, or of unknown name, been
     admitted in the last forty-eight hours. Mullins, however, looked as
      sympathetically depressed as though no news had lost its proverbial value; and he
     had one of those blue-black faces that lend themselves to the look, his chin being in perpetual
     mourning for the day before. 
 “Don't go, Mullins! I've another job for you,” said Eugene Thrush. “Take the telephone
     directory and the London directory, and sit you down at my desk. Look up “chemists” under
     “trades”; there are pages of them. Work through the list with the telephone directory, and ring
     up every chemist who's on the telephone, beginning with the ones nearest in, to ask if he keeps
     d'Auvergne Cigarettes for asthma. Make a note of the first few who do; go round to them all in
     turn, and be back here at nine with a box from each. Complain to each of the difficulty of
     getting 'em elsewhere—say you wonder there's so little demand—and with any luck you should find
     out whether and to whom they've sold any since Wednesday evening.” 
 “But surely that's the whole point?” suggested the ironmaster. 
 “It's the next point,” said Thrush. “The first is to divide the chemists of London into the
     Animals who keep the cigarettes and the Vegetables who don't. I should really like to play the
     next round myself, but Mullins must do something while we're out.” 

 “While we're out, Mr. Thrush?” 
 “My dear Mr. Upton, you're going to step across into the Cafe Royal with me, and have a
     square meal before you crack up!” 
 “And what about your theatre?” asked Mr. Upton, to whom resistance was a physical
     impossibility, when they had left the sombre Mullins entrenched behind telephone and
     directories. 
 “The theatre! I was only going out of curiosity to see the sort of tripe that any manager
     has the nerve to serve up on a Friday in June; but I'm not going to chuck the drama that's come
     to me!” 
 The ironmaster dined with his head in a whirl. It was a remarkably good dinner that Thrush
     ordered, if as inappropriate to the occasion as to his own weight. His guest, however, knew no
     more what he was eating or drinking than he knew the names of the people in diamonds and white
     waistcoats who stared at the distraught figure in the country clothes. It even escaped his
     observation that the obese Thrush was an unblushing gourmet with a cynical lust for Burgundy.
     The conscious repast of Mr. Upton consisted entirely of the conversation of Eugene Thrush, and
     of that conversation only such portions as exploited his professional theories, and those
     theories only as bearing on the case in hand. He was merely bored when Thrush tried to distract
      him with some account of the murder in which he himself was only interested
     because his myrmidon happened to have discovered the body. What was the murder of some
     ragamuffin in Hyde Park to a man from the country who had lost his son? 
 “I don't see how your theory can work there,” he sighed, out of pure politeness, when Thrush
     paused to punish the wine. 
 “It should work all right,” returned Thrush. “You take an absolutely worthless life; what do
     you do it for? It must be one of two motives: either you have a grudge against the fellow or
     his existence is a menace to you. Revenge or fear; he wants your money, or he's taken your
     wife! But what revenge can there be upon a poor devil without the price of a bed on his
     indescribable person? He hasn't anything to bless himself with, and he makes it a bit too hot
     for somebody who has, eh? So you whittle it down. And then perhaps by sheer luck you run your
     blade into the root of the matter.” 
 Thrush gave up trying to take the other out of himself, since his boldest statements were
     allowed to pass unchallenged, unless they dealt with the one subject on the poor man's mind.
     The cessation of his voice, however, caused a twinge of conscience in the bad listener; he made
     a mental grab at the last phrase, and was astonished to find it germane to his own thoughts. 

 “That's the second time you've mentioned luck, Mr. Thrush!” 
 “When was the first?” 
 “You spoke of Friday as an unlucky day, as God knows this one is to me! Are you of a
     superstitious turn of mind?” 
 “Not seriously.” 
 “You don't believe in dreams, for example?” 
 “That's another question,” said Thrush, his spectacles twinkling to colossal rubies as he
     sipped his Santenay. “Why do you ask?” 
 “If you're a disbeliever it's no use my telling you.” 
 “Perhaps I'm neither one thing nor the other.” 
 “Have you ever known a mystery solved through a dream?” 
 “I've heard of one,” said Thrush, with a significant stress upon the verb; “that's the
     famous old murder in the Red Barn a hundred years ago. The victim's mother dreamed three nights
     running that her missing daughter was buried in the Red Barn, and there she was all the time.
     There may have been other cases.” 
 “Cases in which a parent has dreamt of an absent child, at the very time at which something
     terrible has happened to that child?” 
 “Any amount of those.” 
 The father's voice had trembled with the question. Thrush put down his glass as he gave his
     answer,
      and his spectacled eyes fixed themselves in a more attentive stare. 
 “Do you think they're all coincidences?” demanded Mr. Upton hoarsely. 
 “Some of them may be, but certainly not all,” was the reply. “That would be the greatest
     coincidence of the lot!” 
 “I hardly like to tell you why I ask,” said Mr. Upton, much agitated; for he could be as
     emotional as most irascible men. 
 “You've been dreaming about the boy?” 
 “Not I; but my poor wife has; that was one reason why I daren't tell her he had
     disappeared.” 
 “Why? What was the dream?” 
 “That she saw him—and heard a shot.” 
 “A shot!” 
 Thrush looked as though he had heard one himself, but only until he had time to think. 
 “She says she did hear one,” added Mr. Upton, “and that she wasn't dreaming at all.” 
 “But when was this?” 
 “Between six and seven yesterday morning.” This time Thrush did not move a muscle of his
     face; it only lit up like a Chinese lantern, and again he was quick to quench the inner flame;
     but now the coincidence was complete. Coincidences, however, had nothing to say to the A. V. M.
     system, neither was Eugene Thrush the man to jump to
      wild conclusions on the strength of one. He asked whether the boy was very fond
     of shooting in the holidays, as though that might have accounted for the dream, but his father
     was not aware that he had ever smelt powder in his life. He little dreamt what Thrush was
     driving at! The tone of subsequent inquiries concerning Mrs. Upton's health (already mentioned
     as the great reason for keeping the affair as long as possible a secret) sounded purely
     compassionate to an ear unconsciously aching for compassion. 
 “Then that accounts for it,” said Thrush, when he had heard the whole sad story. There was
     the faintest ring of disappointment in his tone. “What do you mean?” 
 “That anybody as ill as that, more particularly a lady, is naturally fanciful, I'm afraid.” 
 “Then you think it a mere delusion, after all?” 
 “My dear Mr. Upton, it would be presumption to express an opinion either way. I only say,
     don't think too much about that dream. And since you won't keep me company in my cups, we may
     as well rejoin the faithful Mullins.” 
 They ran into Mullins, as it happened, in Glasshouse Street, and Mr. Upton for one would not
     have recognised him as the same being. His sepulchral face was alight with news—it was the
     transformation of the undertaker's mute into the
      wedding guest. And yet he had only one box of the d'Auvergne Cigarettes to show
     for his evening's work, and that chemist had declared it was the first he had sold for weeks. 
 Thrush ordered his man upstairs, and took his late guest's hand as soon as ever he dared. 
 “You need a good night's rest, my dear sir, and it's no use climbing to my masthead for
     nothing. Mullins and I will do best if you don't mind leaving us to ourselves for the night;
     but first thing tomorrow morning I shall be at your service again, and I hope there will be
     some progress to report.” 
 Mullins was waiting for him with all the lights on, his solemn face still more strikingly
     illuminated. 
 “Look at this, sir, look at this! These are the d'Auvergne Cigarettes!” 
 “So I perceive.” 
 “This stump is the stump of a d'Auvergne Cigarette.” 
 “I hope you enjoyed it, Mullins.” 
 “I didn't smoke it, sir!” 
 “Who did?” 
 “That's for you to say, sir; but it's one of the little things I collected near the scene of
     the murder, but took for a common cheroot, yesterday morning in Hyde Park.” 
 “Near the actual place?” 

 Thrush had pounced upon the stump, and was holding it under the strongest of the electric
     lamps. 
 “Under a seat, sir, not above a hundred yards away!” 
</div></body></text></TEI>