<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Camera Fiend by E.W. Hornung</title><author>Hornung, Ernest William (1866-1921)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1911</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
MALINGERING
 Pocket had put the fragments of his poor letter together again, and was still poring over
     those few detached and mutilated words, which were the very ones his tears had blotted, when
     there came a warning chink of tea-things on the stairs. He was just able to thrust the pieces
     back into his pocket, and to fling himself at full length on the bed, before Dr. Baumgartner
     entered with a tray. 
 “There, my young fellow! This will make a man of you! Then we shall see you yourself again
     by supper-time.” 
 “I'm not coming down again,” said Pocket. “Don't force me, please” 
 “Force you?” Baumgartner cocked a keen eye at the open window. “What a tyrant you would make
     me out! On the contrary, I think you show your wisdom in remaining quiet. Perhaps you would be
     quieter still with the window shut—so—and
      fastened to prevent it rattling. I will open it when I come up again. There shall
     not be a sound in the house to disturb you.” 
 And he took to tiptoes there and then, gliding about with a smiling stealth that set Pocket
     shivering on the bed; he shivered the more when an admirable doctor's hand, cool and smooth as
     steel, was laid upon his forehead. 
 “A little fever, I'm afraid! I should get right into bed, if I were you. It's nothing to be
     alarmed about, much less astonished; you have been through so much, my poor young fellow.” 
 “I have indeed!” cried Pocket, with unguarded bitterness. 
 And Baumgartner paused between the foot of the bed and the door. 
 “But there's one consolation for you,” he said at length, in a sibilant whisper. “They've
     had that letter of yours at home quite a long time now—ever since yesterday morning, haven't
     they?” 
 The bed shook under Pocket when the door was shut—he only hoped it was not before. Up to the
     last minute, he felt quite sure that Dr. Baumgartner, suspicious as he was, had suspected
     nothing of the discovery downstairs behind his back. If he himself had betrayed anything it was
     in the last few seconds, when it had been all that he could do to keep from screaming out his
     knowledge of
      the other's trickery. To play such a trick upon a broken-hearted boy! To have the
     heart to play it! No wonder he felt feverish to that wicked hand; the wonder was that he had
     actually lain there listening to the smooth impostor gratuitously revelling in his imposition! 
 Rage and disappointment seized him by turns, and both together; at first they bit deeper
     even than the fear of Baumgartner—a fear felt from the beginning, and naturally redoubled now.
     Disappointment had the sharper tooth: his letter had ever gone, not one of his people knew a
     thing about him yet, his tears had not drawn theirs, they had not hung in anxious conclave on
     his words! Not that he had recognised any such subtle consolations as factors in his temporary
     and comparative peace of mind; now that they were gone, he could not have said what it was he
     missed; he only knew that he could least forgive Baumgartner for this sudden sense of cruel and
     crushing disappointment. 
 The phase passed, for the boy had the temperament that sees the other side eventually, and
     of course there was something to be said for the doctor's stratagem. He could understand it,
     after all; the motive was not malevolent; it was to relieve his mind and keep him quiet. The
     plan had succeeded perfectly, and nobody was really any the worse off. His people would have
     known he was
      alive and well on the Friday; but that was all, and they had no reason yet to
     assume his death. No; even Pocket came to see that his letter had been more of a relief to
     write than it could have been to read; that, indeed, it could only have aggravated the anxiety
     and suspense at home. Yet there was in him some fibre which the deliberate deception had
     fretted and frayed beyond reason or forgiveness. He saw all there was to be said about it; he
     could imagine Baumgartner himself putting the case with irresistible logic, with characteristic
     plausibility, and all the mesmeric wisdom of a benevolent serpent; but for once, the boy felt,
     he would not be taken in. It was not coming to that, however, for he had quite decided not to
     betray his knowledge of the fraud—if only he had not already done so! 
 His fears on that score were largely allayed by Baumgartner's manner when at length he
     returned with another tray; for nothing could have been more considerate and sympathetic, and
     even fatherly, than the doctor's behaviour then. Pocket had never touched his tea; he was very
     gently chidden for that. Obstinately he declared he did not want any supper either: it was true
     he did not want to want any, or another bite of that man's bread, but he was sorry as soon as
     the words were out. It was against his reasoned policy to show
      temper, and he was beginning to feel very hungry besides. The doctor said,
     “You'll think better of that, my young fellow,” which turned a mere remark into more than half
     an absolute resolution. The second tray was set with a lighted candle on a chair by the
     bedside. The boy eyed it wistfully with set teeth, and Baumgartner eyed the boy. 
 “Is there anything you could fancy, my young fellow?” 
 “Nothing to eat.” 
 “Is there any book?” 
 “Yes,” said Pocket, without a moment's premeditation. “There's the book I was reading
     yesterday.” 
 “What was that?” 
 “Some Frenchman on hallucinations.” 
 “So you were reading that book!” remarked the doctor, with detestable aplomb. “I wondered
     who had taken it down. It is a poor book. I have destroyed it.” 
 “I'm sorry,” said Pocket, and tried to look it rather than revolted. 
 “I am not,” rejoined Baumgartner. “Even if it were a good book, it is no book for you at the
     present time. It is morbid to dwell on what is done and over.” 
 “If it is over,” murmured the boy. 
 “It is over!” said Baumgartner, fiercely. 

 “Well,” said Pocket, “I'm glad I read what he'd got to say about somnambulism.” 
 “Why?” 
 Pocket did not say it was a satisfaction to have done anything in spite of such a despot as
     his questioner. But he did say it was a comfort to know that others besides himself had
     committed terrible deeds in their sleep. 
 “But,” he added, “they always seem to have dreamt the dreadful thing as well. Now, the funny
     thing is that I remember nothing until the shot woke me and I found myself where you saw me.” 
 “I'm glad you find it funny!” 
 The sneer seemed strangely unworthy of a keen intelligence; the increased asperity of
     Baumgartner's manner, and his whole conduct about a harmless book, altogether inexplicable. 
 “You know what I mean,” replied the boy, with spirit. 
 “Yes, I know what you mean! You mean to go out of your mind, and to do your best to drive me
     out of mine, for the sake of a technically human life less precious than the average dog's!” 
 And, much as it puzzled him, there was certainly something more human about this sudden
     outburst than in anything Dr. Baumgartner had said since the scene between them in the bedroom
     below. He even slammed the door behind him when he
      went. But Pocket preferred that novel exhibition, for its very heat and violence,
     to the sleek and calculated solicitude of the doctor's final visit, with pipe and candle, when
     the one by the bedside had burnt down almost to the socket. 
 “My young fellow!” he exclaimed in unctuous distress. “Not a bite eaten in all these hours!
     Do you know that it's nearly midnight?” 
 “I'm not hungry,” replied Pocket, lying gloriously for once. “I told you I wasn't well.” 
 “You'll be worse if you don't force yourself to eat.” 
 “I can't help that.” 
 “Well, well!” said the doctor, instead of the objurgation that seemed to tremble for an
     instant on his lips. He replaced between them the oval hook of clear amber enclosing the thin
     round one of black nicotine, and he puffed until the cruel carved face was hotter and more
     infuriate than ever, under the swirling smoke of mimic battle. To the boy it was all but a
     living face, and a vile one, capable of nameless atrocities; and the hard-frozen face of
     Baumgartner was capable of looking on. 
 “Well, well! If I am to have you ill on my hands it's my own fault. I take the
     responsibility for everything that has happened since the very first moment we met. Remember
     that, my young fellow! I took the law into my own hands, and
      you I took into my own house for better or worse. You were worse then, remember,
     and yet I took you in! Is it not strange that your asthma has entirely left you under my roof?
     Does it not lead you to believe in me, my young fellow—to trust me perhaps more than you have
     done?” 
 It did not. Pocket was not going to lie about that; he held his tongue stubbornly instead.
     He still believed in his own explanation, derived from one of his many doctors, and moreover
     already mentioned to this one, of the sudden cessation of his chronic complaint. He hated
     Baumgartner for forgetting that, and pretending for a moment to take any credit to himself.
     That again was not worthy of so cool and keen a brain, much less of the candid character with
     which Pocket had supposed himself to be dealing. The very young are pathetically apt to see
     their own virtues in those whom they trust at all; but the schoolboy's faith in Dr. Baumgartner
     had been shattered to its base; and now (as sure a symptom of his youth) he could see no virtue
     at all. 
 “You must trust me again,” said Baumgartner, as though he knew what he had forfeited. “I
     know what will do you good.” 
 “What?” asked Pocket, out of mere incredulous curiosity. 
 “Fresh air; some exercise; a glimpse of the
      beautiful town we live in, before another soul is about, before the sun itself is
     up!” 
 Pocket hardly knew what made him shudder at the proposition. It might have been the poignant
     picture of that other early morning, which came before him in a scorching flash. But there was
     something also in the way the doctor was bending over him in bed, holding his pipe nearer
     still, so that the two dreadful faces seemed of equal size. And Baumgartner's had become a
     dreadful face in the boy's eyes now; there was none among those cruel waxworks to match it in
     cold intellectual cruelty; and its smile—its new and strange smile it must have been that made
     him shudder and shake his head. 
 “But, my young fellow,” urged the doctor, “it will do you so much good. And not a soul will
     see us so early, early in the morning!” 
 Again that insinuating smile inspired a horror of which the boy himself could have offered
     no satisfactory explanation, especially as there was much to commend the proposal to his mind.
     But his face was white enough as he moved it from side to side on the pillow. 
 “I tell you I'm ill,” he whimpered. “How can I go out with you, when you see I can't eat a
     bite?” 
 Baumgartner gave it up for the night. He was coming back in the early, early lovely summer's
      morning; then they would see, would they not? Pocket had a last wave from the
     hideous meerschaum head, and a nod from the other. He was alone for the night. And he meant to
     be alone next morning when the doctor took his early walk; let him prowl by himself. Pocket was
     not going with him. He had never been more determined about anything than that. It was an
     animal instinct of fear and deep revulsion, an impulse quite distinct from a further
     determination to slip away in his turn as soon as the coast was clear. On this course he was
     equally decided, but on other and more palpable grounds. Baumgartner had broken his side of
     their treaty, so the treaty was torn up with the letter which had never gone. And Pocket was
     going instead of his letter—going straight to his people to tell them all, and have that poor
     innocent man set free before the day was out. 
 The night's immunity was meanwhile doubly precious; but it had been secured, or rather its
     continuance could only be assured, at a price which he wondered even now if he could pay. He
     was a growing, hungry boy, no longer ailing in wind or limb. Distress of mind was his one
     remaining ill; the rest was sham; and distress of mind did not prevent him from feeling
     ravenous after fasting ten or eleven hours. Here was food still within his reach, even at his
     side; but he felt committed
      to his declaration that he could not eat. If the tray were still untouched in the
     morning, surely there could be no further question of his going out with Baumgartner; but there
     was an “if.” The boy was not used to being very stern with himself; his strongest point was not
     self-denial. Much of his moral stamina had been expended in nightly tussles for mere breath; he
     had grit enough there. But his temperament was self-indulgent, and that he triumphed over
     positive pangs only shows the power of that rival instinct not to accompany the doctor a yard
     from his door. 
 Yet it meant more hours with the food beside him than he could endure lying still. He got
     up, inch by inch, for he knew who lay underneath; and he opened the window, which Baumgartner
     had broken his promise to open, by even slower and more laborious degrees. He leant out as he
     had done that first morning, it might have been a month ago; and this scene must have
     challenged comparison with that, had his mind been even as free from dread and terror as it had
     been then. But all he saw was the few remaining lighted windows in the backs of those other
     houses; he could not have sworn there was a moon. The moon poured no beam of comfort on his
     aching head; but the lighted windows were as the open eyes of honest men, who would not see him
     come to harm; and
      the last rumble in the streets was a faint but cheering chorus for lonely ears. 
 Once a motor-horn blew a solo near at hand, and Pocket half recognised its note; but he did
     not connect it with quite another set of sounds, which grew but gradually on his ear out of the
     bowels of the house. Somebody was knocking and ringing at the doctor's door, not furiously, but
     with considerable pertinacity. Pocket was thrilled to the marrow just at first, and flew from
     the open window to the landing outside his door. The house was in perfect darkness, and still
     as death in the patient intervals between each measured attempt to rouse the inmates without
     disturbing the street. It came to Pocket that it must be Baumgartner himself, gone out for
     something without his key; and the boy was about to run down and let him in, when he distinctly
     heard the retreat of feet down the front steps, and then a chuckle on the next landing as the
     doctor closed his bedroom door. 
 Who could it have been? Baumgartner's chuckle suggested the police; but in that case it was
     the boy upstairs who was going to have the last laugh, though a grim one, and very terribly at
     his own expense. He could not close an eye for thinking of it, and listening for another
     knocking and ringing down below. But nothing happened
      until the doctor returned between five and six, still with his meerschaum pipe,
     still in his alpaca jacket, but wearing also the goblin hat and cloak of their first meeting,
     to renew and intensify the animal fear that glued the boy to his bed. 
 “It is a pity,” said Baumgartner, standing at the window which Pocket had left open. “The
     air is like champagne at this hour, and not a cloud in the sky! It would do you more good than
     lying there. It is you who are making yourself ill. If I thought you were doing it on purpose
     ”—and his eyes blazed—“I'd feed you like a fowl!” 
 “It's so likely that I should do it on purpose,” muttered Pocket, with schoolboy sarcasm.
     His eyes, however, were purposely closed, and they had missed the old daggers in Baumgartner's. 
 “You know best,” said the doctor. “But you are missing the morning of your life! Not a cloud
     in the sky, only the golden rain in my little garden. I suppose you have not learnt what the
     golden rain is at your public school? You English call it laburnum; but we Germans have more
     imagination, thank God!” 
 Pocket did not open his eyes again till he had gone; next instant he had the door open too,
     as the doctor's step was creaking down the lower flight of stairs. Once more Pocket ventured
     out upon the landing, not quite to the banisters; he trusted to
      his ears as before. They told him the doctor had gone into his dark-room. His
     heart sank. It was only for a moment. The dark-room door shut sharply. The steps came creaking
     back along the hall, went grating out upon the doorstep. There was another sharp shutting. Food
     at last! 
 It was neither very nice nor half enough for a famishing lad, that plate of cold mixed meats
     from the restaurant, with a hard stale roll to eke them out. But Pocket felt he had a fresh
     start in life when he had eaten every crumb and emptied his water-bottle. Nor was he without
     plan or purpose any longer; he was only doubtful whether to knock at Phillida's door and shout
     goodbye, or to leave her a note explaining all. Baumgartner would be out for hours; he always
     was, on these early jaunts of his; there would almost be time to wait and say goodbye properly
     when the girl came down. She would hardly hinder him a second time, and he longed to see her
     and speak to her again, especially if that was to be the end between them. He did not mean it
     to be the end, by any means; but any nonsense that might have been gathering in the schoolboy's
     head was, at this point, more than rudely dispelled by the discovery that Dr. Baumgartner had
     removed his clothes! 
 Pocket swore an oath that would have shocked him in a schoolfellow; it was a practice he
     indeed
      abhorred, but decent words would not meet such a case. It was to be met by
     action, however, just as that locked door had been met, and the policeman's prohibition in the
     Park. He knew where his clothes must be. He slipped his overcoat, which he was using as a
     dressing-gown, over his pyjamas, and ran right downstairs as Dr. Baumgartner had done not many
     minutes before him. His clothes were in the dark-room. But the dark-room door had a Yale lock;
     there was no forcing it by foot or shoulder, though Pocket in his passion tried both. So round
     he went without a moment's hesitation to the dark-room window by way of the little
     conservatory. The blind was drawn. That mattered nothing. He went back for a plant-pot, and
     smashed both it and a sheet of ruby glass with one vicious blow. 
 Entry was simple after that; he had only to be careful not to cut his hands or feet. Inside,
     he removed the broken glass, closed the window, and let the blind down as he had found it,
     without looking twice at his clothes. There they were for him to carry upstairs at his leisure.
     They were not his only property in that room either. His revolver was there somewhere under
     lock and key. He might want it, waking, if Dr. Baumgartner came back before his time. 
 It was easily located; of the lockers, built in
      with the shelves on the folding doors, only one was actually locked, and the
     revolver was not in the others. Pocket went to his waistcoat for one of those knives beloved of
     schoolboys, with the hook for extracting stones from hoofs, among other superfluous implements.
     Pocket had never used this one, had often felt inclined to wrench it off because it was hard to
     open and in the way of the other tools. But he used it now with as little hesitation as he had
     done the other damage, with almost a lust for breakage; and there was his revolver, safe and
     sound as his clothes. 
 It had been honoured with a place beside a rack of special negatives; at least, there were
     other racks, in the other lockers, not locked up like that; and there was no other treasure
     that Pocket could see. He had his hand on his own treasure, was in the act of taking it,
     trembling a little, but more elated, as he stood in a ruby flood only partially diluted by the
     broken window behind the blind. 
 At that moment there came such a thunder of knuckles on the door beside him that the
     revolver caught in the rack of negatives, and brought the whole lot crashing about his toes.
    
</div></body></text></TEI>