<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Chink In The Armour, by
      Mrs. Belloc Lowndes.</title><author>Belloc-Lowndes, Marie (1868-1947)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1912</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II
With easy, leisurely steps, constantly stopping to look into the windows of the quaint shops
     they passed on the way, Sylvia Bailey and Anna Wolsky walked up the steep, the almost
     mountainous byways and narrow streets which lead to the top of Montmartre.
The whole population seemed to have poured itself out in the open air on this sunny day; even
     the shopkeepers had brought chairs out of their shops and sat on the pavement, gaily laughing
     and gossiping together in the eager way Parisians have. As the two foreign ladies, both young,
     both in their very different fashion good-looking, walked past the sitting groups of
     neighbours—men, women, and children would stop talking and stare intently at them, as is also a
     Parisian way.
At first Sylvia had disliked the manner in which she was stared at in Paris, and she had been
     much embarrassed as well as a little amused by the very frank remarks called forth in omnibuses
     as well as in the street by the brilliancy of her complexion and the bright beauty of her fair
     hair. But now she was almost used to this odd form of homage, which came quite as often from
     women as from men.
"The Rue Jolie?" answered a cheerful-looking man in answer to a question. "Why, it's ever so
     much further up!" and he vaguely pointed skywards.
And it was much further up, close to the very top of the great hill! In fact, it took the two
     ladies a long time to find it, for the Rue Jolie was the funniest, tiniest little street,
     perched high up on what might almost have been a mountain side.
As for No. 5, Rue Jolie, it was a queer miniature house more like a Swiss châlet than
     anything else, and surrounded by a gay, untidy little garden full of flowers, the kind of
     half-wild, shy, and yet hardy flowers that come up, year after year, without being tended or
     watered.
"Surely a fortune-teller can't live here?" exclaimed Sylvia Bailey, remembering the stately,
     awe-inspiring rooms in which "Pharaoh" received his clients in Bond Street.
"Oh, yes, this is evidently the place!"
Anna Wolsky smiled good-humouredly; she had become extremely fond of the young Englishwoman;
     she delighted in Sylvia's radiant prettiness, her kindly good-temper, and her eager pleasure in
     everything.
A large iron gate gave access to the courtyard which was so much larger than the house built
     round it. But the gate was locked, and a pull at the rusty bell-wire produced no result.
They waited a while. "She must have gone out," said Sylvia, rather disappointed.
But Madame Wolsky, without speaking, again pulled at the rusty wire, and then one of the
     châlet windows was suddenly flung open from above, and a woman—a dark, middle-aged
     Frenchwoman—leant out.
"Qui est là?" and then before either of them could answer, the woman had drawn back:
     a moment later they heard her heavy progress down the creaky stairs of her dwelling.
At last she came out into the courtyard, unlocked the iron gate, and curtly motioned to the
     two ladies to follow her.
"We have come to see Madame Cagliostra," said Sylvia timidly. She took this stout,
     untidily-dressed woman for the fortune-teller's servant.
"Madame Cagliostra, at your service!" The woman turned round, her face breaking into a broad
     smile. She evidently liked the sound of her peculiar name.
They followed her up a dark staircase into a curious little sitting-room. It was scrupulously
     clean, but about it hung the faint odour which the French eloquently describe as "shut in," and
     even on this beautiful hot day the windows were tightly closed.
On the red walls hung various drawings of hands, of hearts, and of heads, and over the plain
     mantelpiece was a really fine pastel portrait of a man, in eighteenth century dress and
     powdered hair.
"My ancestor, Count Cagliostro, ladies!" exclaimed the fat little woman proudly. "As you will
     soon see, if you have, as I venture to suppose, come to consult me, I have inherited the great
     gifts which made Count Cagliostro famous." She waited a moment. "What is it you desire of me?
     Do you wish for the Grand Jeu? Or do you prefer the Crystal?"
Madame Cagliostra gave a shrewd, measuring glance at the two young women standing before her.
     She was wondering how much they were good for.
"No doubt you have been told," she said suddenly, "that my fee is five francs. But if you
     require the Grand Jeu it will be ten francs. Come, ladies, make up your minds; I will give you
     both the Grand Jeu for fifteen francs!"
Sylvia Bailey's lip quivered; she felt a wild wish to burst out laughing. It was all so
     absurd; this funny queer house; this odd, stuffy, empty-looking room; and this vulgar,
     common-looking woman asserting that she was descended from the famous Count Cagliostro! And
     then, to crown everything, the naïve, rather pathetic, attempt to get an extra five francs out
     of them.
But Sylvia was a very kindly, happy-natured creature, and she would not have hurt the
     feelings of even a Madame Cagliostra for the world.
She looked at her friend questioningly. Would it not be better just to give the woman five
     francs and go away? They surely could not expect to hear anything of any value from such a
     person. She was evidently a fraud!
But Anna Wolsky was staring at Madame Cagliostra with a serious look.
"Very well," she exclaimed, in her rather indifferent French. "Very well! We will both take
     the Grand Jeu at fifteen francs the two."
She turned and smiled at Sylvia. "It will be," she said, quaintly, and in English, "my
     'treat,' dear friend." And then, as Sylvia shook her head decidedly—there were often these
     little contests of generosity between the two women—she added rather sharply,
"Yes, yes! It shall be so. I insist! I see you do not believe in our hostess's gift. There
     are, however, one or two questions I must ask, and to which I fancy she can give me an answer.
     I am anxious, too, to hear what she will say about you."
Sylvia smiled, and gave way.
Like most prosperous people who have not made the money they are able to spend, Mrs. Bailey
     did not attach any undue importance to wealth. But she knew that her friend was not as well off
     as herself, and therefore she was always trying to pay a little more of her share than was
     fair. Thanks to Madame Wolsky's stronger will, she very seldom succeeded in doing so.
"We might at least ask her to open the window," she said rather plaintively. It really was
     dreadfully stuffy!
Madame Cagliostra had gone to a sideboard from which she was taking two packs of exceedingly
     dirty, queer-looking cards. They were the famous Taro cards, but Sylvia did not know that.
When the fortune-teller was asked to open the window, she shook her head decidedly.
"No, no!" she said. "It would dissipate the influences. I cannot do that! On the contrary,
     the curtains should be drawn close, and if the ladies will permit of it I will light my
     lamp."
Even as she spoke she was jerking the thick curtains closely together; she even pinned them
     across so that no ray of the bright sunlight outside could penetrate into the room.
For a few moments they were in complete darkness, and Sylvia felt a queer, eerie sensation of
     fear, but this soon passed away as the lamp—the "Suspension," as Madame Cagliostra
     proudly called it—was lit.
When her lamp was well alight, the soothsayer drew three chairs up to the round table, and
     motioned the two strangers to sit down.
"You will take my friend first," said Anna Wolsky, imperiously; and then, to Sylvia, she
     said, in English, "Would you rather I went away, dear? I could wait on the staircase till you
     were ready for me to come back. It is not very pleasant to have one's fortune told when one is
     as young and as pretty as you are, before other people."
"Of course I don't mind your being here!" cried Sylvia Bailey, laughing—then, looking
     doubtfully at Madame Cagliostra, though it was obvious the Frenchwoman did not understand
     English, "The truth is that I should feel rather frightened if you were to leave me here all by
     myself. So please stay."
Madame Cagliostra began dealing out the cards on the table. First slowly, then quickly, she
     laid them out in a queer pattern; and as she did so she muttered and murmured to herself. Then
     a frown came over her face; she began to look disturbed, anxious, almost angry.
Sylvia, in spite of herself, grew interested and excited. She was sorry she had not taken off
     her wedding-ring. In England the wise woman always takes off her wedding-ring on going to see a
     fortune-teller. She was also rather glad that she had left her pearls in the safe custody of M.
     Girard. This little house in the Rue Jolie was a strange, lonely place.
Suddenly Madame Cagliostra began to speak in a quick, clear, monotonous voice.
Keeping her eyes fixed on the cards, which now and again she touched with a fat finger, and
     without looking at Sylvia, she said:
"Madame has led a very placid, quiet life. Her existence has been a boat that has always lain
     in harbour—" She suddenly looked up: "I spent my childhood at Dieppe, and that often suggests
     images to me," she observed complacently, and then she went on in quite another tone of
     voice:—
"To return to Madame and her fate! The boat has always been in harbour, but now it is about
     to put out to sea. It will meet there another craft. This other craft is, to Madame, a foreign
     craft, and I grieve to say it, rather battered. But its timbers are sound, and that is well,
     for it looks to me as if the sails of Madame's boat would mingle, at any rate for a time with
     this battered craft."
"I don't understand what she means," said Sylvia, in a whisper. "Do ask her to explain,
     Anna!"
"My friend asks you to drop metaphor," said the older woman, drily.
The soothsayer fixed her bright, beady little eyes on Sylvia's flushed face.
"Well," she said deliberately, "I see you falling in love, and I also see that falling in
     love is quite a new experience. It burns, it scorches you, does love, Madame. And for awhile
     you do not know what it means, for love has never yet touched you with his red-hot finger."
"How absurd!" thought Sylvia to herself. "She actually takes me for a young girl! What
     ridiculous mistakes fortune-tellers do make, to be sure!"
"—But you cannot escape love," went on Madame Cagliostra, eagerly. "Your fate is a fair man,
     which is strange considering that you also are a fair woman; and I see that there is already a
     dark man in your life."
Sylvia blushed. Bill Chester, just now the only man in her life, was a very dark man.
"But this fair man knows all the arts of love." Madame Cagliostra sighed, her voice softened,
     it became strangely low and sweet. "He will love you tenderly as well as passionately. And as
     for you, Madame—but no, for me to tell you what you will feel and what you will do
     would not be delicate on my part!"
Sylvia grew redder and redder. She tried to laugh, but failed. She felt angry, and not a
     little disgusted.
"You are a foreigner," went on Madame Cagliostra. Her voice had grown hard and expressionless
     again.
Sylvia smiled a little satiric smile.
"But though you are a foreigner," cried the fortune-teller with sudden energy, "it is quite
     possible that you will never go back to your own country! Stop—or, perhaps, I shall say too
     much! Still if you ever do go back, it will be as a stranger. That I say with certainty. And I
     add that I hope with all my heart that you will live to go back to your own country,
     Madame!"
Sylvia felt a vague, uneasy feeling of oppression, almost of fear, steal over her. It seemed
     to her that Madame Cagliostra was looking at her with puzzled, pitying eyes.
The soothsayer again put a fat and not too clean finger down on the upturned face of a
     card.
"There is something here I do not understand; something which I miss when I look at you as I
     am now looking at you. It is something you always wear—"
She gazed searchingly at Sylvia, and her eyes travelled over Mrs. Bailey's neck and
     bosom.
"I see them and yet they are not there! They appear like little balls of light. Surely it is
     a necklace?"
Sylvia looked extremely surprised. Now, at last, Madame Cagliostra was justifying her claim
     to a supernatural gift!
"These balls of light are also your Fate!" exclaimed the woman impetuously. "If you had them
     here—I care not what they be—I should entreat you to give them to me to throw away."
Madame Wolsky began to laugh. "I don't think you would do that," she observed drily.
But Madame Cagliostra did not seem to hear the interruption.
"Have you heard of a mascot?" she said abruptly. "Of a mascot which brings good fortune to
     its wearer?"
Sylvia bent her head. Of course she had heard of mascots.
"Well, if so, you have, of course, heard of objects which bring misfortune to their
     wearers—which are, so to speak, unlucky mascots?"
And this time it was Anna Wolsky who, leaning forward, nodded gravely. She attributed a run
     of bad luck she had had the year before to a trifling gift, twin cherries made of enamel, which
     a friend had given her, in her old home, on her birthday. Till she had thrown that little
     brooch into the sea, she had been persistently unlucky at play.
"Your friend," murmured Madame Cagliostra, now addressing herself to Anna and not to Sylvia,
     "should dispossess herself as quickly as possible of her necklace, of these round balls. They
     have already brought her ill-fortune in the past, they have lowered her in the estimation of an
     estimable person—in fact, if she is not very careful, indeed, even if she be very careful—it
     looks to me, Madame, as if they would end by strangling her!"
Sylvia became very uncomfortable. "Of course she means my pearls," she whispered. "But how
     absurd to say they could ever do me harm."
"Look here," said Anna Wolsky earnestly, "you are quite right, Madame; my friend has a
     necklace which has already played a certain part in her life. But is it not just because of
     this fact that you feel the influence of this necklace so strongly? I entreat you to speak
     frankly. You are really distressing me very much!"
Madame Cagliostra looked very seriously at the speaker.
"Well, perhaps it is so," she said at last. "Of course, we are sometimes wrong in our
     premonitions. And I confess that I feel puzzled—exceedingly puzzled—to-day. I do not know that
     I have ever had so strange a case as that of this English lady before me! I see so many roads
     stretching before her—I also see her going along more than one road. As a rule, one does not
     see this in the cards."
She looked really harassed, really distressed, and was still conning her cards anxiously.
"And yet after all," she cried suddenly, "I may be wrong! Perhaps the necklace has less to do
     with it than I thought! I do not know whether the necklace would make any real difference! If
     she takes one of the roads open to her, then I see no danger at all attaching to the
     preservation of this necklace. But the other road leads straight to the House of Peril."
"The House of Peril?" echoed Sylvia Bailey.
"Yes, Madame. Do you not know that all men and women have their House of Peril—the house
     whose threshold they should never cross—behind whose door lies misery, sometimes
     dishonour?"
"Yes," said Anna Wolsky, "that is true, quite true! There has been, alas! more than one House
     of Peril in my life." She added, "But what kind of place is my friend's House of Peril?"
"It is not a large house," said the fortune-teller, staring down at the shining surface of
     her table. "It is a gay, delightful little place, ladies—quite my idea of a pretty dwelling.
     But it is filled with horror unutterable to Madame. Ah! I entreat you"—she stared sadly at
     Sylvia—"to beware of unknown buildings, especially if you persist in keeping and in wearing
     your necklace."
"Do tell us, Madame, something more about my friend's necklace. Is it, for instance, of great
     value, and is it its value that makes it a source of danger?"
Anna Wolsky wondered very much what would be the answer to this question. She had had her
     doubts as to the genuineness of the pearls her friend wore. Pearls are so exquisitely imitated
     nowadays, and these pearls, if genuine, were of such great value!
At first she had not believed them to be real, then gradually she had become convinced of
     Sylvia's good faith. If the pearls were false, Sylvia did not know it.
But Madame Cagliostra's answer was disappointing—or prudent.
"I cannot tell you that," she said. "I cannot even tell you of what the necklace is composed.
     It may be of gold, of silver, of diamonds, of pearls—it may be, I'm inclined to think it is,
     composed of Egyptian scarabei. They, as you know, often bring terrible ill-fortune in their
     train, especially when they have been taken from the bodies of mummies. But the necklace has
     already caused this lady to quarrel with a very good and sure friend of hers—of that I am sure.
     And, as I tell you, I see in the future that this necklace may cause her very serious
     trouble—indeed, I see it wound like a serpent round her neck, pressing ever tighter and
     tighter—"
She suddenly began shuffling the cards. "And now," she said in a tone of relief, "I will deal
     with you, Madame," and she turned to Anna with a smile.
Sylvia drew her chair a little away from the table.
She felt depressed and uncomfortable. What an odd queer kind of fortune had been told her!
     And then it had all been so muddled. She could scarcely remember what it was that had
     been told her.
Two things, however, remained very clear in her mind: The one was the absurd prediction that
     she might never go back to her own country; the second was all that extraordinary talk about
     her pearls. As to the promised lover, the memory of the soothsayer's words made her feel very
     angry. No doubt Frenchwomen liked that sort of innuendo, but it only disgusted her.
Yet it was really very strange that Madame Cagliostra had known, or rather had divined, that
     she possessed a necklace by which she laid great store. But wasn't there such a thing as
     telepathy? Isn't it supposed by some people that fortune-tellers simply see into the minds of
     those who come to them, and then arrange what they see there according to their fancy?
That, of course, would entirely account for all that the fortune-teller had said about her
     pearls.
Sylvia always felt a little uncomfortable when her pearls were not lying round her pretty
     neck. The first time she had left them in the hotel bureau, at her new friend's request, was
     when they had been together to some place of amusement at night, and she had felt quite
     miserable, quite lost without them. She had even caught herself wondering whether M. Girard was
     perfectly honest, whether she could trust him not to have her dear pearls changed by some
     clever jeweller, though, to be sure, she felt she would have known her string of pearls
     anywhere!
But what was this that was going on between the other two?
Madame Cagliostra dealt out the pack of cards in a slow, deliberate fashion—and then she
     uttered a kind of low hoarse cry, and mixed the cards all together, hurriedly.
Getting up from the table, she exclaimed, "I regret, Madame, that I can tell you
     nothing—nothing at all! I feel ill—very ill!" and, indeed, she had turned, even to Sylvia's
     young and unobservant eyes, terribly pale.
For some moments the soothsayer stood staring into Anna Wolsky's astonished face.
"I know I've disappointed you, Mesdames, but I hope this will not prevent your telling your
     friends of my powers. Allow me to assure you that it is not often that I am taken in this
     way!"
Her voice had dropped to a whisper. She was now gazing down at the pack of cards which lay on
     the table with a look of horror and oppression on her face.
"I will only charge five francs," she muttered at last, "for I know that I have not satisfied
     you."
Sylvia sprang to the window. She tore apart the curtains and pulled up the sash.
"No wonder the poor woman feels faint," she said quickly. "It's absurd to sit with a window
     tight shut in this kind of room, which is little more than a box with three people in it!"
Madame Cagliostra had sunk down into her chair again.
"I must beg you to go away, Mesdames," she muttered, faintly. "Five francs is all I ask of
     you."
But Anna Wolsky was behaving in what appeared to Sylvia a very strange manner. She walked
     round to where the fortune-teller was sitting.
"You saw something in the cards which you do not wish to tell me?" she said imperiously. "I
     do not mind being told the truth. I am not a child."
"I swear I saw nothing!" cried the Frenchwoman angrily. "I am too ill to see anything. The
     cards were to me perfectly blank!"
In the bright sunlight now pouring into the little room the soothsayer looked ghastly, her
     skin had turned a greenish white.
"Mesdames, I beg you to excuse me," she said again. "If you do not wish to give me the five
     francs, I will not exact any fee."
She pointed with a shaking finger to the door, and Sylvia put a five-franc piece down on the
     table.
But before her visitors had quite groped their way to the end of the short, steep staircase,
     they heard a cry.
"Mesdames!" then after a moment's pause, "Mesdames, I implore you to come back!"
They looked at one another, and then Anna, putting her finger to her lips, went back up the
     stairs, alone.
"Well," she said, briefly, "I knew you had something to tell me. What is it?"
"No," said Madame Cagliostra dully. "I must have the other lady here, too. You must both be
     present to hear what I have to say."
Anna went to the door and called out, "Come up Sylvia! She wants to see us both
     together."
There was a thrill of excitement, of eager expectancy in Madame Wolsky's voice; and Sylvia,
     surprised, ran up again into the little room, now full of light, sun, and air.
"Stand side by side," ordered the soothsayer shortly. She stared at them for a moment, and
     then she said with extreme earnestness:—
"I dare not let you go away without giving you a warning. Your two fates are closely
     intertwined. Do not leave Paris for awhile, especially do not leave Paris together. I see you
     both running into terrible danger! If you do go away—and I greatly fear that you will do
     so—then I advise you, together and separately, to return to Paris as soon as possible."
"One question I must ask of you," said Anna Wolsky urgently. "How goes my luck? You know what
     I mean? I play!"
"It is not your luck that is threatened," replied the fortune-teller, solemnly; "on the
     contrary, I see wonderful luck; packets of bank-notes and rouleaux of gold! It is not your
     luck—it is something far, far more important that is in peril. Something which means far more
     to you even than your luck!"
The Polish woman smiled rather sadly.
"I wonder what that can be?" she exclaimed.
"It is your life!"
"My life?" echoed Anna. "I do not know that I value my life as much as you think I do."
"The English have a proverb, Madame, which says: 'A short life and a merry one.'"
"Can you predict that I shall have, if a short life, then a merry one?"
"Yes," said Madame Cagliostra, "that I can promise you." But there was no smile on her pale
     face. "And more, I can predict—if you will only follow my advice, if you do not leave Paris
     for, say"—she hesitated a moment, as if making a silent calculation—"twelve weeks, I can
     predict you, if not so happy a life, then a long life and a fairly merry one. Will you take my
     advice, Madame?" she went on, almost threateningly. "Believe me, I do not often offer advice to
     my clients. It is not my business to do so. But I should have been a wicked woman had I not
     done so this time. That is why I called you back."
"Is it because of something you have seen in the cards that you tender us this advice?" asked
     Anna curiously.
But Madame Cagliostra again looked strangely frightened.
"No, no!" she said hastily. "I repeat that the cards told me nothing. The cards were a blank.
     I could see nothing in them. But, of course, we do not only tell fortunes by cards"—she spoke
     very quickly and rather confusedly. "There is such a thing as a premonition."
She waited a moment, and then, in a business-like tone, added, "And now I leave the question
     of the fee to the generosity of these ladies!"
Madame Wolsky smiled a little grimly, and pulled out a twenty-franc piece.
The woman bowed, and murmured her thanks.
When they were out again into the roughly paved little street, Anna suddenly began to
     laugh.
"Now, isn't that a typical Frenchwoman? She really did feel ill, she really saw nothing in my
     cards, and, being an honest woman, she did not feel that she could ask us to pay! Then, when we
     had gone away, leaving only five francs, her thrift got the better of her honesty; she felt she
     had thrown away ten good francs! She therefore called us back, and gave us what she took to be
     very excellent advice. You see, I had told her that I am a gambler. She knows, as we all know,
     that to play for money is a foolish thing to do. She is aware that in Paris it is not very easy
     for a stranger to obtain admittance—especially if that stranger be a respectable woman—to a
     gambling club. She therefore said to herself, 'I will give this lady far more than ten francs'
     worth of advice. I will tell her not to go away! As long as she remains in Paris she cannot
     lose her money. If she goes to Dieppe, Trouville, any place where there is a Casino, she will
     lose her money. Therefore I am giving her invaluable advice—worth far more than the ten francs
     which she ought to be made to give me, and which she shall be made to give me!'"
"I suppose you are right," said Sylvia thoughtfully. "And yet—and yet—she certainly spoke
     very seriously, did she not, Anna? She seemed quite honestly—in fact, terribly afraid that we
     should go away together."
"But there is no idea of our going away together," said Madame Wolsky, rather crossly. "I
     only wish there were! You are going on to Switzerland to join your friends, and as for me, in
     spite of Madame Cagliostra's mysterious predictions, I shall, of course, go to some place—I
     think it will be Dieppe (I like the Dieppe Casino the best)—where I can play. And the memory of
     you, my dear little English friend, will be my mascot. You heard her say that I should be
     fortunate—that I should have an extraordinary run of good fortune?"
"Yes," said Sylvia, "but do not forget"—she spoke with a certain gravity; death was a very
     real thing to her, for she had seen in the last two years two deathbeds, that of her father,
     that of her husband—"do not forget, Anna, that she told you you would not live long if you went
     away."
"She was quite safe in saying that to me," replied the other hastily. "People who play—those
     who get the gambling fever into their system when they are still young—do not, as a rule, live
     very long. Their emotions are too strong, too often excited! Play should be reserved for the
     old—the old get so quickly deadened, they do not go through the terrible moments younger people
     do!"
</div></body></text></TEI>