<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Marriage, by H. G.
      Wells</title><author>Wells, Herbert George (1866-1946)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1912</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER THE THIRD
The Man Who Fell Out of the Sky

For the next week Marjorie became more nearly
       introspective than she had ever been in her life before. She began to doubt her
      hitherto unshaken conviction that she was a single, consistent human being. She found such
      discords and discrepancies between mood and mood, between the conviction of this hour and the
      feeling of that, that it seemed to her she was rather a collection of samples of emotion and
      attitude than anything so simple as an individual.
For example, there can be no denying there was one Marjorie in the bundle who was immensely
      set up by the fact that she was engaged, and going to be at no very remote date mistress of a
      London house. She was profoundly Plessingtonian, and quite the vulgarest of the lot. The new
      status she had attained and the possibly beautiful house and the probably successful
      dinner-parties and the arrangements and the importance of such a life was the substance of
      this creature's thought. She designed some queenly dresses. This was the Marjorie most in
      evidence when it came to talking with her mother and Daphne. I am afraid she patronized
      Daphne, and ignored the fact that Daphne, who had begun with a resolute magnanimity, was
      becoming annoyed and resentful.
And she thought of things she might buy, and the jolly feeling of putting them about and
      making fine effects with them. One thing she told Daphne, she had clearly resolved upon; the
      house should be always full and brimming over with beautiful flowers. "I've always wished
      mother would have more flowers—and
       not keep them so long when she has them...."
Another Marjorie in the confusion of her mind was doing her sincerest, narrow best to
      appreciate and feel grateful for and return the devotion of Mr. Magnet. This Marjorie accepted
      and even elaborated his views, laid stress on his voluntary subjection, harped upon his
      goodness, brought her to kiss him.
"I don't deserve all this love," this side of Marjorie told Magnet. "But I mean to learn to
      love you——"
"My dear one!" cried Magnet, and pressed her hand....
A third Marjorie among the many was an altogether acuter and less agreeable person. She was
      a sprite of pure criticism, and in spite of the utmost efforts to suppress her, she declared
      night and day in the inner confidences of Marjorie's soul that she did not believe in Mr.
      Magnet's old devotion at all. She was anti-Magnet, a persistent insurgent. She was dreadfully
      unsettling. It was surely this Marjorie that wouldn't let the fact of his baldness alone, and
      who discovered and insisted upon a curious unbeautiful flatness in his voice whenever he was
      doing his best to speak from the heart. And as for this devotion, what did it amount to? A
      persistent unimaginative besetting of Marjorie, a growing air of ownership, an expansive,
      indulgent, smiling disposition to thwart and control. And he was always touching her! Whenever
      he came near her she would wince at the freedoms a large, kind hand might take with her elbow
      or wrist, at a possible sudden, clumsy pat at some erring strand of hair.
Then there was an appraising satisfaction in his eye.
On the third day of their engagement he began, quite abruptly, to call her "Magsy." "We'll
      end
       this scandal of a Girl Pope," he said. "Magsy Magnet, you'll be—M.M. No women
      M.P.'s for us, Magsy...."
She became acutely critical of his intellectual quality. She listened with a new alertness
      to the conversations at the dinner-table, the bouts of wit with her father. She carried off
      utterances and witticism for maturer reflection. She was amazed to find how little they could
      withstand the tests and acids of her mind. So many things, such wide and interesting fields,
      he did not so much think about as cover with a large enveloping shallowness....
He came strolling around the vicarage into the garden one morning about eleven, though she
      had not expected him until lunch-time; and she was sitting with her feet tucked up on the aged
      but still practicable garden-seat reading Shaw's "Common Sense of Municipal Trading." He came
      and leant over the back of the seat, and she looked up, said "Good morning. Isn't it perfectly
      lovely?" and indicated by a book still open that her interest in it remained alive.
"What's the book, Magsy?" he asked, took it out of her slightly resisting hand, closed it
      and read the title. "Um," he said; "Isn't this a bit stiff for little women's brains?"
All the rebel Marjories were up in arms at that.
"Dreadful word, 'Municipal.' I don't like it." He shook his head with a grimace of
      humorous distaste.
"I suppose women have as good brains as men," said Marjorie, "if it comes to that."
"Better," said Magnet. "That's why they shouldn't trouble about horrid things like Municipal
      and Trading.... On a day like this!"
"Don't you think this sort of thing is interesting?"
      
"Oh!" he said, and flourished the book. "Come! And besides—Shaw!"
"He makes a very good case."
"But he's such a—mountebank."
"Does that matter? He isn't a mountebank there."
"He's not sincere. I doubt if you had a serious book on Municipal Trading, Magsy, whether
      you'd make head or tail of it. It's a stiff subject. Shaw just gets his chance for a smart
      thing or so.... I'd rather you read a good novel."
He really had the air of taking her reading in hand.
"You think I ought not to read an intelligent book."
"I think we ought to leave those things to the people who understand."
"But we ought to understand."
He smiled wisely. "There's a lot of things you have to understand," he said,
      "nearer home than this."
Marjorie was ablaze now. "What a silly thing to say!" she cried, with an undergraduate's
      freedom. "Really, you are talking nonsense! I read that book because it interests me. If I
      didn't, I should read something else. Do you mean to suggest that I'm reading like a child,
      who holds a book upside down?"
She was so plainly angry that he was taken aback. "I don't mean to suggest—" he began, and
      turned to greet the welcome presence, the interrogative eye of Mrs. Pope.
"Here we are!" he said, "having a quarrel!"
"Marjorie!" said Mrs. Pope.
"Oh, it's serious!" said Mr. Magnet, and added
       with a gleam: "It's about Municipal Trading!"
Mrs. Pope knew the wicked little flicker in Marjorie's eye better than Mr. Magnet. She had
      known it from the nursery, and yet she had never quite mastered its meaning. She had never yet
      realized it was Marjorie, she had always regarded it as something Marjorie, some other
      Marjorie, ought to keep under control. So now she adopted a pacificatory tone.
"Oh! lovers' quarrels," she said, floating over the occasion. "Lovers' quarrels. You mustn't
      ask me to interfere!"
Marjorie, already a little ashamed of her heat, thought for an instant she ought to stand
      that, and then decided abruptly with a return to choler that she would not do so. She stood
      up, and held out her hand for her book.
"Mr. Magnet," she said to her mother with remarkable force and freedom as she took it, "has
      been talking unutterable nonsense. I don't call that a lovers' quarrel—anyhow."
Then, confronted with a double astonishment, and having no more to say, she picked up her
      skirt quite unnecessarily, and walked with a heavenward chin indoors.
"I'm afraid," explained Mr. Magnet, "I was a little too free with one of Magsy's favourite
      authors."
"Which is the favourite author now?" asked Mrs. Pope, after a reflective pause, with a
      mother's indulgent smile.
"Shaw." He raised amused eyebrows. "It's just the age, I suppose."
"She's frightfully loyal while it lasts," said Mrs. Pope. "No one dare say a word against
      them."
"I think it's adorable of her," said Mr. Magnet—with an answering loyalty and gusto.

The aviation accident occurred while Mrs. Pope, her two eldest daughters, and Mr. Magnet
      were playing golf-croquet upon the vicarage lawn. It was a serene, hot afternoon, a little too
      hot to take a game seriously, and the four little figures moved slowly over the green and
      grouped and dispersed as the game required. Mr. Magnet was very fond of golf-croquet, he
      displayed a whimsical humour and much invention at this game, it was not too exacting
      physically; and he could make his ball jump into the air in the absurdest manner. Occasionally
      he won a laugh from Marjorie or Daffy. No one else was in sight; the pseudo-twins and Theodore
      and Toupee were in the barn, and Mr. Pope was six miles away at Wamping, lying prone, nibbling
      grass blades and watching a county cricket match, as every good Englishman, who knows what is
      expected of him, loves to do.... Click went ball and mallet, and then after a long interval,
      click. It seemed incredible that anything could possibly happen before tea.
But this is no longer the world it was. Suddenly this tranquil scene was slashed and rent by
      the sound and vision of a monoplane tearing across the heavens.
A purring and popping arrested Mr. Magnet in mid jest, and the monster came sliding up the
      sky over the trees beside the church to the east, already near enough to look big, a great
      stiff shape, big buff sails stayed with glittering wire, and with two odd little wheels
      beneath its body. It drove up the sky, rising with a sort of upward heaving, until the croquet
      players could see the driver and a passenger perched behind him quite clearly. It passed a
      little to the right of the church tower and only a few yards above the level of the flagstaff,
      there wasn't fifty feet of clearance altogether, and as it did so Marjorie
       could see both driver and passenger making hasty movements. It became immense
      and over-shadowing, and every one stood rigid as it swept across the sun above the vicarage
      chimneys. Then it seemed to drop twenty feet or so abruptly, and then both the men cried out
      as it drove straight for the line of poplars between the shrubbery and the meadow. "Oh, oh,
      OH!" cried Mrs. Pope and Daffy. Evidently the aviator was trying to turn sharply; the huge
      thing banked, but not enough, and came about and slipped away until its wing was slashing into
      the tree tops with a thrilling swish of leaves and the snapping of branches and stays.
"Run!" cried Magnet, and danced about the lawn, and the three ladies rushed sideways as the
      whole affair slouched down on them. It came on its edge, hesitated whether to turn over as a
      whole, then crumpled, and amidst a volley of smashing and snapping came to rest amidst
      ploughed-up turf, a clamorous stench of petrol, and a cloud of dust and blue smoke within
      twenty yards of them. The two men had jumped to clear the engine, had fallen headlong, and
      were now both covered by the fabric of the shattered wing.
It was all too spectacular for word or speech until the thing lay still. Even then the
      croquet players stood passive for awhile waiting for something to happen. It took some seconds
      to reconcile their minds to this sudden loss of initiative in a monster that had been so
      recently and threateningly full of go. It seemed quite a long time before it came into
      Marjorie's head that she ought perhaps to act in some way. She saw a tall young man wriggling
      on all fours from underneath the wreckage of fabric. He stared at her rather blankly. She went
      forward with a vague idea of helping him. He stood up,
       swayed doubtfully on his legs, turned, and became energetic, struggling
      mysteriously with the edge of the left wing. He gasped and turned fierce blue eyes over his
      shoulder.
"Help me to hold the confounded thing up!" he cried, with a touch of irritation in his voice
      at her attitude.
Marjorie at once seized the edge of the plane and pushed. The second man, in a peculiar
      button-shaped head-dress, was lying crumpled up underneath, his ear and cheek were bright with
      blood, and there was a streak of blood on the ground near his head.
"That's right. Can you hold it if I use only one hand?"
Marjorie gasped "Yes," with a terrific weight as it seemed suddenly on her wrists.
"Right O," and the tall young man had thrust himself backwards under the plane until it
      rested on his back, and collared the prostrate man. "Keep it up!" he said fiercely when
      Marjorie threatened to give way. He seemed to assume that she was there to obey orders, and
      with much grunting and effort he had dragged his companion clear of the wreckage.
The man's face was a mass of blood, and he was sickeningly inert to his companion's
      lugging.
"Let it go," said the tall young man, and Marjorie thanked heaven as the broken wing flapped
      down again.
She came helpfully to his side, and became aware of Daffy and her mother a few paces off.
      Magnet—it astonished her—was retreating hastily. But he had to go away because the sight of
      blood upset him—so much that it was always wiser for him to go away.
"Is he hurt?" cried Mrs. Pope.
      
"We both are," said the tall young man, and then as though these other people didn't matter
      and he and Marjorie were old friends, he said: "Can we turn him over?"
"I think so." Marjorie grasped the damaged man's shoulder and got him over skilfully.
"Will you get some water?" said the tall young man to Daffy and Mrs. Pope, in a way that
      sent Daffy off at once for a pail.
"He wants water," she said to the parlourmaid who was hurrying out of the house.
The tall young man had gone down on his knees by his companion, releasing his neck, and
      making a hasty first examination of his condition. "The pneumatic cap must have saved his
      head," he said, throwing the thing aside. "Lucky he had it. He can't be badly hurt. Just
      rubbed his face along the ground. Silly thing to have come as we did."
He felt the heart, and tried the flexibility of an arm.
"That's all right," he said.
He became judicial and absorbed over the problems of his friend's side. "Um," he remarked.
      He knelt back and regarded Marjorie for the first time. "Thundering smash," he said. His face
      relaxed into an agreeable smile. "He only bought it last week."
"Is he hurt?"
"Rib, I think—or two ribs perhaps. Stunned rather. All this—just his nose."
He regarded Marjorie and Marjorie him for a brief space. He became aware of Mrs. Pope on his
      right hand. Then at a clank behind, he turned round to see Daphne advancing with a pail of
      water. The two servants were now on the spot, and the odd-job man, and the old lady who did
      out the church, and Magnet hovered doubtfully in the distance. Suddenly
       with shouts and barks of sympathetic glee the pseudo-twins, Theodore and Toupee
      shot out of the house. New thoughts were stirring in the young aviator. He rose, wincing a
      little as he did so. "I'm afraid I'm a little rude," he said.
"I do hope your friend isn't hurt," said Mrs. Pope, feeling the duty of a hostess.
"He's not hurt much—so far as I can see. Haven't we made rather a mess of your
      lawn?"
"Oh, not at all!" said Mrs. Pope.
"We have. If that is your gardener over there, it would be nice if he kept back the people
      who seem to be hesitating beyond those trees. There will be more presently. I'm afraid I must
      throw myself on your hands." He broke into a chuckle for a moment. "I have, you know. Is it
      possible to get a doctor? My friend's not hurt so very much, but still he wants expert
      handling. He's Sir Rupert Solomonson, from"—he jerked his head back—"over beyond Tunbridge
      Wells. My name's Trafford."
"I'm Mrs. Pope and these are my daughters."
Trafford bowed. "We just took the thing out for a lark," he said.
Marjorie had been regarding the prostrate man. His mouth was a little open, and he showed
      beautiful teeth. Apart from the dry blood upon him he was not an ill-looking man. He was
      manifestly a Jew, a square-rigged Jew (you have remarked of course that there are
      square-rigged Jews, whose noses are within bounds, and fore-and-aft Jews, whose noses aren't),
      with not so much a bullet-head as a round-shot, cropped like the head of a Capuchin monkey.
      Suddenly she was down and had his head on her knee, with a quick movement that caught
      Trafford's eye. "He's better," she said. "His eyelids flickered. Daffy, bring the water."
She had felt a queer little repugnance at first with
       this helpless man, but now that professional nurse who lurks in the composition
      of so many women, was uppermost. "Give me your handkerchief," she said to Trafford, and with
      Daffy kneeling beside her and also interested, and Mrs. Pope a belated but more experienced
      and authoritative third, Sir Rupert was soon getting the best of attention.
"Wathall..." said Sir Rupert suddenly, and tried again: "Wathall." A third effort gave
      "Wathall about, eh?"
"If we could get him into the shade," said Marjorie.
"Woosh," cried Sir Rupert. "Weeeooo!"
"That's all right," said Trafford. "It's only a rib or two."
"Eeeeeyoooo!" said Sir Rupert.
"Exactly. We're going to carry you out of the glare."
"Don't touch me," said Sir Rupert. "Gooo."
It took some little persuasion before Sir Rupert would consent to be moved, and even then he
      was for a time—oh! crusty. But presently Trafford and the two girls had got him into the shade
      of a large bush close to where in a circle of rugs and cushions the tea things lay prepared.
      There they camped. The helpful odd-job man was ordered to stave off intruders from the
      village; water, towels, pillows were forthcoming. Mr. Magnet reappeared as tentative
      assistance, and Solomonson became articulate and brave and said he'd nothing but a stitch in
      his side. In his present position he wasn't at all uncomfortable. Only he didn't want any one
      near him. He enforced that by an appealing smile. The twins, invited to fetch the doctor,
      declined, proffering Theodore. They had conceived juvenile passions for the tall young man,
      and did not want to leave him. He certainly
       had a very nice face. So Theodore after walking twice round the wreckage, tore
      himself away and departed on Rom's bicycle. Enquiry centred on Solomonson for a time. His
      face, hair and neck were wet but no longer bloody, and he professed perfect comfort so long as
      he wasn't moved, and no one came too near him. He was very clear about that though perfectly
      polite, and scrutinized their faces to see if they were equally clear. Satisfied upon this
      point he closed his eyes and spoke no more. He looked then like a Capuchin monkey lost in
      pride. There came a pause. Every one was conscious of having risen to an emergency and behaved
      well under unusual circumstances. The young man's eye rested on the adjacent tea-things,
      lacking nothing but the coronation of the teapot.
"Why not," he remarked, "have tea?"
"If you think your friend——" began Mrs. Pope.
"Oh! he's all right. Aren't you, Solomonson? There's nothing more now until the
      doctor."
"Only want to be left alone," said Solomonson, and closed his heavy eyelids again.
Mrs. Pope told the maids, with an air of dismissal, to get tea.
"We can keep an eye on him," said Trafford.
Marjorie surveyed her first patient with a pretty unconscious mixture of maternal gravity
      and girlish interest, and the twins to avoid too openly gloating upon the good looks of
      Trafford, chose places and secured cushions round the tea-things, calculating to the best of
      their ability how they might secure the closest proximity to him. Mr. Magnet and Toupee had
      gone to stare at the monoplane; they were presently joined by the odd-job man in an
      interrogative mood. "Pretty complete smash, sir!"
       said the odd-job man, and then perceiving heads over the hedge by the
      churchyard, turned back to his duty of sentinel. Daffy thought of the need of more cups and
      plates and went in to get them, and Mrs. Pope remarked that she did hope Sir Rupert was not
      badly hurt....
"Extraordinary all this is," remarked Mr. Trafford. "Now, here we were after lunch, twenty
      miles away—smoking cigars and with no more idea of having tea with you than—I was going to
      say—flying. But that's out of date now. Then we just thought we'd try the thing.... Like a
      dream."
He addressed himself to Marjorie: "I never feel that life is quite real until about three
      days after things have happened. Never. Two hours ago I had not the slightest intention of
      ever flying again."
"But haven't you flown before?" asked Mrs. Pope.
"Not much. I did a little at Sheppey, but it's so hard for a poor man to get his hands on a
      machine. And here was Solomonson, with this thing in his hangar, eating its head off. Let's
      take it out," I said, "and go once round the park. And here we are.... I thought it wasn't
      wise for him to come...."
Sir Rupert, without opening his eyes, was understood to assent.
"Do you know," said Trafford, "The sight of your tea makes me feel frightfully hungry."
"I don't think the engine's damaged?" he said cheerfully, "do you?" as Magnet joined them.
      "The ailerons are in splinters, and the left wing's not much better. But that's about all
      except the wheels. One falls so much lighter than you might suppose—from the smash.... Lucky
      it didn't turn over. Then, you know, the engine comes on the top of you, and
       you're done."

The doctor arrived after tea, with a bag and a stethoscope in a small coffin-like box, and
      the Popes and Mr. Magnet withdrew while Sir Rupert was carefully sounded, tested, scrutinized,
      questioned, watched and examined in every way known to medical science. The outcome of the
      conference was presently communicated to the Popes by Mr. Trafford and the doctor. Sir Rupert
      was not very seriously injured, but he was suffering from concussion and shock, two of his
      ribs were broken and his wrist sprained, unless perhaps one of the small bones was displaced.
      He ought to be bandaged up and put to bed....
"Couldn't we—" said Mrs. Pope, but the doctor assured her his own house was quite the best
      place. There Sir Rupert could stay for some days. At present the cross-country journey over
      the Downs or by the South Eastern Railway would be needlessly trying and painful. He would
      with the Popes' permission lie quietly where he was for an hour or so, and then the doctor
      would come with a couple of men and a carrying bed he had, and take him off to his own house.
      There he would be, as Mr. Trafford said, "as right as ninepence," and Mr. Trafford could put
      up either at the Red Lion with Mr. Magnet or in the little cottage next door to the doctor.
      (Mr. Trafford elected for the latter as closer to his friend.) As for the smashed aeroplane,
      telegrams would be sent at once to Sir Rupert's engineers at Chesilbury, and they would have
      all that cleared away by mid-day to-morrow....
The doctor departed; Sir Rupert, after stimulants,
       closed his eyes, and Mr. Trafford seated himself at the tea-things for some more
      cake, as though introduction by aeroplane was the most regular thing in the world.
He had very pleasant and easy manners, an entire absence of self-consciousness, and a quick
      talkative disposition that made him very rapidly at home with everybody. He described all the
      sensations of flight, his early lessons and experiments, and in the utmost detail the events
      of the afternoon that had led to this disastrous adventure. He made his suggestion of "trying
      the thing" seem the most natural impulse in the world. The bulk of the conversation fell on
      him; Mr. Magnet, save for the intervention of one or two jests, was quietly observant; the
      rest were well disposed to listen. And as Mr. Trafford talked his eye rested ever and again on
      Marjorie with the faintest touch of scrutiny and perplexity, and she, too, found a curious
      little persuasion growing up in her mind that somewhere, somehow, she and he had met and had
      talked rather earnestly. But how and where eluded her altogether....
They had sat for an hour—the men from the doctor's seemed never coming—when Mr. Pope
      returned unexpectedly from his cricket match, which had ended a little prematurely in a rot on
      an over-dry wicket. He was full of particulars of the day's play, and how Wiper had got a most
      amazing catch and held it, though he fell; how Jenks had deliberately bowled at a man's head,
      he believed, and little Gibbs thrown a man out from slip. He was burning to tell all this in
      the utmost detail to Magnet and his family, so that they might at least share the retrospect
      of his pleasure. He had thought out rather a good pun on Wiper, and he was naturally a little
      thwarted to find all this good, rich talk crowded out
       by a more engrossing topic.
At the sight of a stranger grouped in a popular manner beside the tea-things, he displayed a
      slight acerbity, which was if anything increased by the discovery of a prostrate person with
      large brown eyes and an expression of Oriental patience and disdain, in the shade of a bush
      near by. At first he seemed scarcely to grasp Mrs. Pope's explanations, and regarded Sir
      Rupert with an expression that bordered on malevolence. Then, when his attention was directed
      to the smashed machine upon the lawn, he broke out into a loud indignant: "Good God! What
      next?"
He walked towards the wreckage, disregarding Mr. Trafford beside him. "A man can't go away
      from his house for an hour!" he complained.
"I can assure you we did all we could to prevent it," said Trafford.
"Ought never to have had it to prevent," said Mr. Pope. "Is your friend hurt?"
"A rib—and shock," said Trafford.
"Well—he deserves it," said Mr. Pope. "Rather than launch myself into the air in one of
      those infernal things, I'd be stood against a wall and shot."
"Tastes differ, of course," said Trafford, with unruffled urbanity.
"You'll have all this cleared away," said Mr. Pope.
"Mechanics—oh! a complete break-down party—are speeding to us in fast motors," said
      Trafford. "Thanks to the kindness of your domestic in taking a telegram for me."
"Hope they won't kill any one," said Mr. Pope, and just for a moment the conversation hung
      fire. "And your friend?" he asked.
"He goes in the next ten minutes—well, whenever
       the litter comes from the doctor's. Poor old Solomonson!"
"Solomonson?"
"Sir Rupert."
"Oh!" said Mr. Pope. "Is that the Pigmentation Solomonson?"
"I believe he does do some beastly company of that sort," said Trafford. "Isn't it amazing
      we didn't smash our engine?"
Sir Rupert Solomonson was indeed a familiar name to Mr. Pope. He had organized the
      exploitation of a number of pigment and bye-product patents, and the ordinary and deferred
      shares of his syndicate has risen to so high a price as to fill Mr. Pope with the utmost
      confidence in their future; indeed he had bought considerably, withdrawing capital to do so
      from an Argentine railway whose stock had awakened his distaste and a sort of moral aversion
      by slumping heavily after a bad wheat and linseed harvest. This discovery did much to mitigate
      his first asperity, his next remark to Trafford was almost neutral, and he was even asking Sir
      Rupert whether he could do anything to make him comfortable, when the doctor returned with a
      litter, borne by four hastily compiled bearers.

Some brightness seemed to vanish when the buoyant Mr. Trafford, still undauntedly cheerful,
      limped off after his more injured friend, and disappeared through the gate. Marjorie found
      herself in a world whose remaining manhood declined to see anything but extreme annoyance in
      this gay, exciting rupture of the afternoon. "Good God!" said Mr. Pope. "What next? What
      next?"
"Registration, I hope," said Mr. Magnet,—"and
       relegation to the desert of Sahara."
"One good thing about it," said Mr. Pope—"it all wastes petrol. And when the petrol supply
      gives out—they're done."
"Certainly we might all have been killed!" said Mrs. Pope, feeling she had to bear her
      witness against their visitors, and added: "If we hadn't moved out of the way, that is."
There was a simultaneous movement towards the shattered apparatus, about which a small
      contingent of villagers, who had availed themselves of the withdrawal of the sentinel, had now
      assembled.
"Look at it!" said Mr. Pope, with bitter hostility. "Look at it!"
Everyone had anticipated his command.
"They'll never come to anything," said Mr. Pope, after a pause of silent hatred.
"But they have to come to something," said Marjorie.
"They've come to smash!" said Mr. Magnet, with the true humorist's air.
"But consider the impudence of this invasion, the wild—objectionableness of it!"
"They're nasty things," said Mr. Magnet. "Nasty things!"
A curious spirit of opposition stirred in Marjorie. It seemed to her that men who play
      golf-croquet and watch cricket matches have no business to contemn men who risk their lives in
      the air. She sought for some controversial opening.
"Isn't the engine rather wonderful?" she remarked.
Mr. Magnet regarded the engine with his head a little on one side. "It's the usual sort," he
      said.
"There weren't engines like that twenty years ago."
"There weren't people like you twenty years
       ago," said Mr. Magnet, smiling wisely and kindly, and turned his back on the
      thing.
Mr. Pope followed suit. He was filled with the bitter thought that he would never now be
      able to tell the history of the remarkable match he had witnessed. It was all spoilt for
      him—spoilt for ever. Everything was disturbed and put out.
"They've left us our tennis lawn," he said, with a not unnatural resentment passing to
      invitation. "What do you say, Magnet? Now you've begun the game you must keep it up?"
"If Marjorie, or Mrs. Pope, or Daffy...?" said Magnet.
Mrs. Pope declared the house required her. And so with the gravest apprehensions, and an
      insincere compliment to their father's energy, Daffy and Marjorie made up a foursome for that
      healthy and invigorating game. But that evening Mr. Pope got his serve well into the bay of
      the sagging net almost at once, and with Marjorie in the background taking anything he left
      her, he won quite easily, and everything became pleasant again. Magnet gloated upon Marjorie
      and served her like a missionary giving Bibles to heathen children, he seemed always looking
      at her instead of the ball, and except for a slight disposition on the part of Daffy to slash,
      nothing could have been more delightful. And at supper Mr. Pope, rather crushing his wife's
      attempt to recapitulate the more characteristic sayings and doings of Sir Rupert and his
      friend, did after all succeed in giving every one a very good idea indeed of the more
      remarkable incidents of the cricket match at Wamping, and made the pun he had been accustomed
      to use upon the name of Wiper in a new and improved form. A general talk about cricket and the
      Immense Good of cricket followed. Mr. Pope said
       he would make cricket-playing compulsory for every English boy.
Everyone it seemed to Marjorie was forgetting that dark shape athwart the lawn, and all the
      immense implication of its presence, with a deliberate and irrational skill, and she noted
      that the usual move towards the garden at the end of the evening was not made.

In the night time Marjorie had a dream that she was flying about in the world on a monoplane
      with Mr. Trafford as a passenger.
Then Mr. Trafford disappeared, and she was flying about alone with a curious uneasy feeling
      that in a minute or so she would be unable any longer to manage the machine.
Then her father and Mr. Magnet appeared very far below, walking about and disapproving of
      her. Mr. Magnet was shaking his head very, very sagely, and saying: "Rather a stiff job for
      little Marjorie," and her father was saying she would be steadier when she married. And then,
      she wasn't clear how, the engine refused to work until her bills were paid, and she began to
      fall, and fall, and fall towards Mr. Magnet. She tried frantically to pay her bills. She was
      falling down the fronts of skyscrapers and precipices—and Mr. Magnet was waiting for her below
      with a quiet kindly smile that grew wider and wider and wider....
She woke up palpitating.

Next morning a curious restlessness came upon Marjorie. Conceivably it was due to the
      absence of Magnet, who had gone to London to deliver his long
       promised address on The Characteristics of English Humour to the
       Literati Club. Conceivably she missed his attentions. But it crystallized out in the
      early afternoon into the oddest form, a powerful craving to go to the little town of Pensting,
      five miles off, on the other side of Buryhamstreet, to buy silk shoelaces.
She decided to go in the donkey cart. She communicated her intention to her mother, but she
      did not communicate an equally definite intention to be reminded suddenly of Sir Rupert
      Solomonson as she was passing the surgery, and make an inquiry on the spur of the moment—it
      wouldn't surely be anything but a kindly and justifiable impulse to do that. She might see Mr.
      Trafford perhaps, but there was no particular harm in that.
It is also to be remarked that finding Theodore a little disposed to encumber her vehicle
      with his presence she expressed her delight at being released from the need of going, and
      abandoned the whole expedition to him—knowing as she did perfectly well that if Theodore hated
      anything more than navigating the donkey cart alone, it was going unprotected into a shop to
      buy articles of feminine apparel—until he chucked the whole project and went fishing—if one
      can call it fishing when there are no fish and the fisherman knows it—in the decadent
      ornamental water.
And it is also to be remarked that as Marjorie approached the surgery she was seized with an
      absurd and powerful shyness, so that not only did she not call at the surgery, she did not
      even look at the surgery, she gazed almost rigidly straight ahead, telling herself, however,
      that she merely deferred that kindly impulse until she had bought her laces. And so it
      happened that about half a mile beyond the end of Buryhamstreet she came round a corner upon
       Trafford, and by a singular fatality he also was driving a donkey, or, rather,
      was tracing a fan-like pattern on the road with a donkey's hoofs. It was a very similar donkey
      to Marjorie's, but the vehicle was a governess cart, and much smarter than Marjorie's
      turn-out. His ingenuous face displayed great animation at the sight of her, and as she drew
      alongside he hailed her with an almost unnatural ease of manner.
"Hullo!" he cried. "I'm taking the air. You seem to be able to drive donkeys forward. How do
      you do it? I can't. Never done anything so dangerous in my life before. I've just been missed
      by two motor cars, and hung for a terrible minute with my left wheel on the very verge of an
      unfathomable ditch. I could hear the little ducklings far, far below, and bits of mould
      dropping. I tried to count before the splash. Aren't you—white?"
"But why are you doing it?"
"One must do something. I'm bandaged up and can't walk. It hurt my leg more than I knew—your
      doctor says. Solomonson won't talk of anything but how he feels, and I don't care a
      rap how he feels. So I got this thing and came out with it."
Marjorie made her inquiries. There came a little pause.
"Some day no one will believe that men were ever so foolish as to trust themselves to
      draught animals," he remarked. "Hullo! Look out! The horror of it!"
A large oil van—a huge drum on wheels—motor-driven, had come round the corner, and after a
      preliminary and quite insufficient hoot, bore down upon them, and missing Trafford as it
      seemed by a miracle, swept past. Both drivers did wonderful things with whips and reins, and
      found themselves alone in the
       road again, with their wheels locked and an indefinite future.
"I leave the situation to you," said Trafford. "Or shall we just sit and talk until the next
      motor car kills us?"
"We ought to make an effort," said Marjorie, cheerfully, and descended to lead the two
      beasts.
Assisted by an elderly hedger, who had been taking a disregarded interest in them for some
      time, she separated the wheels and got the two donkeys abreast. The old hedger's opinion of
      their safety on the king's highway was expressed by his action rather than his words; he
      directed the beasts towards a shady lane that opened at right angles to the road. He stood by
      their bridles while Marjorie resumed her seat.
"It seems to me clearly a case for compromise," said Trafford. "You want to go that way, I
      want to go that way. Let us both go this way. It is by such arrangements that
      civilization becomes possible."
He dismissed the hedger generously and resumed his reins.
"Shall we race?" he asked.
"With your leg?" she inquired.
"No; with the donkeys. I say, this is rather a lark. At first I thought it was both
      dangerous and dull. But things have changed. I am in beastly high spirits. I feel there will
      be a cry before night; but still, I am——I wanted the companionship of an unbroken person. It's
      so jolly to meet you again."
"Again?"
"After the year before last."
"After the year before last?"
"You didn't know," said Trafford, "I had met you before? How aggressive I must have seemed!
      Well, I wasn't quite clear. I spent the greater part of last night—my ankle being
      foolish in the small
       hours—in trying to remember how and where."
"I don't remember," said Marjorie.
"I remembered you very distinctly, and some things I thought about you, but not where it had
      happened. Then in the night I got it. It is a puzzle, isn't it? You see, I was
      wearing a black gown, and I had been out of the sunlight for some months—and my eye, I
      remember it acutely, was bandaged. I'm usually bandaged somewhere.

'I was a King in Babylon
And you were a Christian slave'
—I mean a candidate."
Marjorie remembered suddenly. "You're Professor Trafford."
"Not in this atmosphere. But I am at the Romeike College. And as soon as I recalled
      examining you I remembered it—minutely. You were intelligent, though unsound—about
      cryo-hydrates it was. Ah, you remember me now. As most young women are correct by rote and
      unintelligent in such questions, and as it doesn't matter a rap about anything of that sort,
      whether you are correct or not, as long as the mental gesture is right——" He paused for a
      moment, as though tired of his sentence. "I remembered you."
He proceeded in his easy and detached manner, that seemed to make every topic possible, to
      tell her his first impressions of her, and show how very distinctly indeed he remembered
      her.
"You set me philosophizing. I'd never examined a girls' school before, and I was suddenly
      struck by the spectacle of the fifty of you. What's going to become of them all?"
"I thought," he went on, "how bright you were, and how keen and eager you were—you,
      I mean, in particular—and just how certain it was your brightness
       and eagerness would be swallowed up by some silly ordinariness or other—stuffy
      marriage or stuffy domestic duties. The old, old story—done over again with a sort of
      threadbare badness. (Nothing to say against it if it's done well.) I got quite sentimental and
      pathetic about life's breach of faith with women. Odd, isn't it, how one's mind runs on. But
      that's what I thought. It's all come back to me."
Marjorie's bright, clear eye came round to him. "I don't see very much wrong with the lot of
      women," she reflected. "Things are different nowadays. Anyhow——"
She paused.
"You don't want to be a man?"
"No!"
She was emphatic.
"Some of us cut more sharply at life than you think," he said, plumbing her unspoken
      sense.
She had never met a man before who understood just how a girl can feel the slow obtuseness
      of his sex. It was almost as if he had found her out at something.
"Oh," she said, "perhaps you do," and looked at him with an increased interest.
"I'm half-feminine, I believe," he said. "For instance, I've got just a woman's joy in
      textures and little significant shapes. I know how you feel about that. I can spend hours,
      even now, in crystal gazing—I don't mean to see some silly revelation of some silly person's
      proceedings somewhere, but just for the things themselves. I wonder if you have ever been in
      the Natural History Museum at South Kensington, and looked at Ruskin's crystal collection? I
      saw it when I was a boy, and it became—I can't help the word—an obsession. The inclusions like
      moss and like trees, and all sorts of fantastic things, and the cleavages and enclosures with
      little bubbles, and the
       lights and shimmer—What were we talking about? Oh, about the keen way your
      feminine perceptions cut into things. And yet somehow I was throwing contempt on the feminine
      intelligence. I don't do justice to the order of my thoughts. Never mind. We've lost the
      thread. But I wish you knew my mother."
He went on while Marjorie was still considering the proper response to this.
"You see, I'm her only son and she brought me up, and we know each other—oh! very well. She
      helps with my work. She understands nearly all of it. She makes suggestions. And to this day I
      don't know if she's the most original or the most parasitic of creatures. And that's the way
      with all women and girls, it seems to me. You're as critical as light, and as
      undiscriminating.... I say, do I strike you as talking nonsense?"
"Not a bit," said Marjorie. "But you do go rather fast."
"I know," he admitted. "But somehow you excite me. I've been with Solomonson a week, and
      he's dull at all times. It was that made me take out that monoplane of his. But it did him no
      good."
He paused.
"They told me after the exam.," said Marjorie, "you knew more about crystallography—than
      anyone."
"Does that strike you as a dull subject?"
"No," said Marjorie, in a tone that invited justifications.
"It isn't. I think—naturally, that the world one goes into when one studies molecular
      physics is quite the most beautiful of Wonderlands.... I can assure you I work sometimes like
      a man who is exploring a magic palace.... Do you know anything
       of molecular physics?"
"You examined me," said Marjorie.
"The sense one has of exquisite and wonderful rhythms—just beyond sound and sight! And
      there's a taunting suggestion of its being all there, displayed and confessed, if only one
      were quick enough to see it. Why, for instance, when you change the composition of a felspar
      almost imperceptibly, do the angles change? What's the correspondence between the altered
      angle and the substituted atom? Why does this bit of clear stuff swing the ray of light so
      much out of its path, and that swing it more? Then what happens when crystals gutter down, and
      go into solution. The endless launching of innumerable little craft. Think what a clear
      solution must be if only one had ultra-microscopic eyes and could see into it, see the
      extraordinary patternings, the swimming circling constellations. And then the path of a ray of
      polarized light beating through it! It takes me like music. Do you know anything of the
      effects of polarized light, the sight of a slice of olivine-gabbro for instance between
      crossed Nicols?"
"I've seen some rock sections," said Marjorie. "I forget the names of the rocks."
"The colours?"
"Oh yes, the colours."
"Is there anything else so rich and beautiful in all the world? And every different mineral
      and every variety of that mineral has a different palette of colours, a different scheme of
      harmonies—and is telling you something."
"If only you understood."
"Exactly. All the ordinary stuff of life—you know—the carts and motor cars and dusty roads
      and—cinder sifting, seems so blank to me—with that persuasion of swing and subtlety beneath it
      all. As
       if the whole world was fire and crystal and aquiver—with some sort of cotton
      wrappers thrown over it...."
"Dust sheets," said Marjorie. "I know."
"Or like a diamond painted over!"
"With that sort of grey paint, very full of body—that lasts."
"Yes." He smiled at her. "I can't help apologetics. Most people think a professor of science
      is just——"
"A professor of science."
"Yes. Something all pedantries and phrases. I want to clear my character. As though it is
      foolish to follow a vortex ring into a vacuum, and wise to whack at a dirty golf ball on a
      suburban railway bank. Oh, their golf! Under high heaven!... You don't play golf, do you, by
      any chance?"
"Only the woman's part," said Marjorie.
"And they despise us," he said. "Solomonson can hardly hide how he despises us. Nothing is
      more wonderful than the way these people go on despising us who do research, who have this
      fever of curiosity, who won't be content with—what did you call those wrappers?"
"Dust sheets."
"Yes, dust sheets. What a life! Swaddling bands, dust sheets and a shroud! You know,
      research and discovery aren't nearly so difficult as people think—if only you have the courage
      to say a thing or try a thing now and then that it isn't usual to say or try. And after all——"
      he went off at a tangent, "these confounded ordinary people aren't justified in their
      contempt. We keep on throwing them things over our shoulders, electric bells, telephones,
      Marconigrams. Look at the beautiful electric trains that come towering down the
       London streets at nightfall, ships of light in full sail! Twenty years ago they
      were as impossible as immortality. We conquer the seas for these—golfers, puts arms in their
      hands that will certainly blow them all to bits if ever the idiots go to war with them, come
      sailing out of the air on them——"
He caught Marjorie's eye and stopped.
"Falling out of the air on them," corrected Marjorie very softly.
"That was only an accident," said Mr. Trafford....
So they began a conversation in the lane where the trees met overhead that went on and went
      on like a devious path in a shady wood, and touched upon all manner of things....

In the end quite a number of people were aggrieved by this dialogue, in the lane that led
      nowhither....
Sir Rupert Solomonson was the first to complain. Trafford had been away "three mortal
      hours." No one had come near him, not a soul, and there hadn't been even a passing car to
      cheer his ear.
Sir Rupert admitted he had to be quiet. "But not so damned quiet."
"I'd have been glad," said Sir Rupert, "if a hen had laid an egg and clucked a bit. You
      might have thought there had been a Resurrection or somethin', and cleared off everybody.
      Lord! it was deadly. I'd have sung out myself if it hadn't been for these infernal
      ribs...."
Mrs. Pope came upon the affair quite by accident.
"Well, Marjorie," she said as she poured tea for the family, "did you get your laces?"
"Never got there, Mummy," said Marjorie, and
       paused fatally.
"Didn't get there!" said Mrs. Pope. "That's worse than Theodore! Wouldn't the donkey go,
      poor dear?"
There was nothing to colour about, and yet Marjorie felt the warm flow in neck and cheek and
      brow. She threw extraordinary quantities of candour into her manner. "I had a romantic
      adventure," she said rather quietly. "I was going to tell you."
(Sensation.)
"You see it was like this," said Marjorie. "I ran against Mr. Trafford...."
She drank tea, and pulled herself together for a lively description of the wheel-locking and
      the subsequent conversation, a bright ridiculous account which made the affair happen by
      implication on the high road and not in a byeway, and was adorned with every facetious
      ornament that seemed likely to get a laugh from the children. But she talked rather fast, and
      she felt she forced the fun a little. However, it amused the children all right, and Theodore
      created a diversion by choking with his tea. From first to last Marjorie was extremely careful
      to avoid the affectionate scrutiny of her mother's eye. And had this lasted the whole
      afternoon? asked Mrs. Pope. "Oh, they'd talked for half-an-hour," said Marjorie, or more, and
      had driven back very slowly together. "He did all the talking. You saw what he was yesterday.
      And the donkeys seemed too happy together to tear them away."
"But what was it all about?" asked Daffy curious.
"He asked after you, Daffy, most affectionately," said Marjorie, and added, "several times."
      (Though Trafford had as a matter of fact displayed a quite remarkable disregard of all her
      family.)
"And," she went on, getting a plausible idea at
       last, "he explained all about aeroplanes. And all that sort of thing. Has Daddy
      gone to Wamping for some more cricket?..."
(But none of this was lost on Mrs. Pope.)

Mr. Magnet's return next day was heralded by nearly two-thirds of a column in the
       Times.
The Lecture on the Characteristics of Humour had evidently been quite a serious affair, and
      a very imposing list of humorists and of prominent people associated with their industry had
      accepted the hospitality of the Literati.
Marjorie ran her eyes over the Chairman's flattering introduction, then with a queer faint
      flavour of hostility she reached her destined husband's utterance. She seemed to hear the flat
      full tones of his voice as she read, and automatically the desiccated sentences of the
      reporter filled out again into those rich quietly deliberate unfoldings of sound that were
      already too familiar to her ear.
Mr. Magnet had begun with modest disavowals. "There was a story, he said,"—so the report
      began—"whose hallowed antiquity ought to protect it from further exploitation, but he was
      tempted to repeat it because it offered certain analogies to the present situation. There were
      three characters in the story, a bluebottle and two Scotsmen. (Laughter.) The bluebottle
      buzzed on the pane, otherwise a profound silence reigned. This was broken by one of the
      Scotsmen trying to locate the bluebottle with zoölogical exactitude. Said this Scotsman:
      'Sandy, I am thinking if yon fly is a birdie or a beastie.' The other replied: 'Man, don't
      spoil good whiskey with religious conversation.' (Laughter.) He was tempted, Mr. Magnet
      resumed, to ask himself and
       them why it was that they should spoil the aftereffects of a most excellent and
      admirably served dinner by an academic discussion on British humour. At first he was pained by
      the thought that they proposed to temper their hospitality with a demand for a speech. A
      closer inspection showed that he was to introduce a debate and that others were to speak, and
      that was a new element in their hospitality. Further, he was permitted to choose the subject
      so that he could bring their speeches within the range of his comprehension. (Laughter.) His
      was an easy task. He could make it easier; the best thing to do would be to say nothing at
      all. (Laughter.)"
For a space the reporter seemed to have omitted largely—perhaps he was changing places with
      his relief—and the next sentence showed Mr. Magnet engaged as it were in revising a hortus
       siccus of jokes. "There was the humour of facts and situations," he was saying, "or that
      humour of expression for which there was no human responsibility, as in the case of Irish
      humour; he spoke of the humour of the soil which found its noblest utterance in the bull.
      Humour depended largely on contrast. There was a humour of form and expression which had many
      local varieties. American humour had been characterized by exaggeration, the suppression of
      some link in the chain of argument or narrative, and a wealth of simile and metaphor which had
      been justly defined as the poetry of a pioneer race."...
Marjorie's attention slipped its anchor, and caught lower down upon: "In England there was a
      near kinship between laughter and tears; their mental relations were as close as their
      physical. Abroad this did not appear to be the case. It was different in France. But perhaps
      on the whole it would be
       better to leave the humour of France and what some people still unhappily chose
      to regard as matters open to controversy—he referred to choice of subject—out of their
      discussion altogether. ('Hear, hear,' and cheers.)"...
Attention wandered again. Then she remarked:—it reminded her in some mysterious way of a
      dropped hairpin—"It was noticeable that the pun to a great extent had become démodé...."
At this point the flight of Marjorie's eyes down the column was arrested by her father's
      hand gently but firmly taking possession of the Times. She yielded it without
      reluctance, turned to the breakfast table, and never resumed her study of the social
      relaxations of humorists....
Indeed she forgot it. Her mind was in a state of extreme perplexity. She didn't know what to
      make of herself or anything or anybody. Her mind was full of Trafford and all that he had said
      and done and all that he might have said and done, and it was entirely characteristic that she
      could not think of Magnet in any way at all except as a bar-like shadow that lay across all
      her memories and all the bright possibilities of this engaging person.
She thought particularly of the mobile animation of his face, the keen flash of enthusiasm
      in his thoughts and expressions....
It was perhaps more characteristic of her time than of her that she did not think she was
      dealing so much with a moral problem as an embarrassment, and that she hadn't as yet felt the
      first stirrings of self-reproach for the series of disingenuous proceedings that had rendered
      the yesterday's encounter possible. But she was restless, wildly restless as a bird whose nest
      is taken. She could abide nowhere. She fretted through the morning, avoided Daffy in a
       marked manner, and inflicted a stinging and only partially merited rebuke upon
      Theodore for slouching, humping and—of all trite grievances!—not washing behind his ears. As
      if any chap washed behind his ears! She thought tennis with the pseudo-twins might assuage
      her, but she broke off after losing two sets; and then she went into the garden to get fresh
      flowers, and picked a large bunch and left them on the piano until her mother reminded her of
      them. She tried a little Shaw. She struggled with an insane wish to walk through the wood
      behind the village and have an accidental meeting with someone who couldn't possibly appear
      but whom it would be quite adorable to meet. Anyhow she conquered that.
She had a curious and rather morbid indisposition to go after lunch to the station and meet
      Mr. Magnet as her mother wished her to do, in order to bring him straight to the vicarage to
      early tea, but here again reason prevailed and she went.
Mr. Magnet arrived by the 2.27, and to Marjorie's eye his alighting presence had an effect
      of being not so much covered with laurels as distended by them. His face seemed whiter and
      larger than ever. He waved a great handful of newspapers.
"Hullo, Magsy!" he said. "They've given me a thumping Press. I'm nearer swelled head than
      I've ever been, so mind how you touch me!"
"We'll take it down at croquet," said Marjorie.
"They've cleared that thing away?"
"And made up the lawn like a billiard table," she said.
"That makes for skill," he said waggishly. "I shall save my head after all."
For a moment he seemed to loom towards kissing her, but she averted this danger by a
      business-like
       concern for his bag. He entrusted this to a porter, and reverted to the triumph
      of overnight so soon as they were clear of the station. He was overflowing with kindliness
      towards his fellow humorists, who had appeared in force and very generously at the banquet,
      and had said the most charming things—some of which were in one report and some in another,
      and some the reporters had missed altogether—some of the kindliest.
"It's a pleasant feeling to think that a lot of good fellows think you are a good fellow,"
      said Mr. Magnet.
He became solicitous for her. How had she got on while he was away? She asked him how one
      was likely to get on at Buryhamstreet; monoplanes didn't fall every day, and as she said that
      it occurred to her she was behaving meanly. But he was going on to his next topic before she
      could qualify.
"I've got something in my pocket," he remarked, and playfully: "Guess."
She did, but she wouldn't. She had a curious sinking of the heart.
"I want you to see it before anyone else," he said. "Then if you don't like it, it can go
      back. It's a sapphire."
He was feeling nervously in his pockets and then the little box was in her hand.
She hesitated to open it. It made everything so dreadfully concrete. And this time the sense
      of meanness was altogether acuter. He'd bought this in London; he'd brought it down, hoping
      for her approval. Yes, it was—horrid. But what was she to do?
"It's—awfully pretty," she said with the glittering symbol in her hand, and indeed he had
      gone to one of those artistic women who are reviving and
       improving upon the rich old Roman designs. "It's so beautifully made."
"I'm so glad you like it. You really do like it?"
"I don't deserve it."
"Oh! But you do like it?"
"Enormously."
"Ah! I spent an hour in choosing it."
She could see him. She felt as though she had picked his pocket.
"Only I don't deserve it, Mr. Magnet. Indeed I don't. I feel I am taking it on false
      pretences."
"Nonsense, Magsy. Nonsense! Slip it on your finger, girl."
"But I don't," she insisted.
He took the box from her, pocketed it and seized her hand. She drew it away from him.
"No!" she said. "I feel like a cheat. You know, I don't—I'm sure I don't love——"
"I'll love enough for two," he said, and got her hand again. "No!" he said at her gesture,
      "you'll wear it. Why shouldn't you?"
And so Marjorie came back along the vicarage avenue with his ring upon her hand. And Mr.
      Pope was evidently very glad to see him....
The family was still seated at tea upon rugs and wraps, and still discussing humorists at
      play, when Professor Trafford appeared, leaning on a large stick and limping, but resolute, by
      the church gate. "Pish!" said Mr. Pope. Marjorie tried not to reveal a certain dismay, there
      was dumb, rich approval in Daphne's eyes, and the pleasure of Theodore and the pseudo-twins
      was only too scandalously evident. "Hoo-Ray!" said Theodore, with ill-concealed relief.
Mrs. Pope was the incarnate invocation of tact
       as Trafford drew near.
"I hope," he said, with obvious insincerity, "I don't invade you. But Solomonson is
      frightfully concerned and anxious about your lawn, and whether his men cleared it up properly
      and put things right." His eye went about the party and rested on Marjorie. "How are you?" he
      said, in a friendly voice.
"Well, we seem to have got our croquet lawn back," said Mr. Pope. "And our nerves are
      recovering. How is Sir Rupert?"
"A little fractious," said Trafford, with the ghost of a smile.
"You'll take some tea?" said Mrs. Pope in the pause that followed.
"Thank you," said Trafford and sat down instantly.
"I saw your jolly address in the Standard," he said to Magnet. "I haven't read
      anything so amusing for some time."
"Rom dear," said Mrs. Pope, "will you take the pot in and get some fresh tea?"
Mr. Trafford addressed himself to the flattery of Magnet with considerable skill. He had
      detected a lurking hostility in the eyes of the two gentlemen that counselled him to
      propitiate them if he meant to maintain his footing in the vicarage, and now he talked to them
      almost exclusively and ignored the ladies modestly but politely in the way that seems natural
      and proper in a British middle-class house of the better sort. But as he talked chiefly of the
      improvement of motor machinery that had recently been shown at the Engineering Exhibition, he
      did not make that headway with Marjorie's father that he had perhaps anticipated. Mr. Pope
      fumed quietly for a time, and then suddenly spoke out.
"I'm no lover of machines," he said abruptly,
       slashing across Mr. Trafford's description. "All our troubles began with
      villainous saltpetre. I'm an old-fashioned man with a nose—and a neck, and I don't want the
      one offended or the other broken. No, don't ask me to be interested in your valves and
      cylinders. What do you say, Magnet? It starts machinery in my head to hear about them...."
On such occasions as this when Mr. Pope spoke out, his horror of an anti-climax or any sort
      of contradiction was apt to bring the utterance to a culmination not always to be
      distinguished from a flight. And now he rose to his feet as he delivered himself.
"Who's for a game of tennis?" he said, "in this last uncontaminated patch of air? I and
      Marjorie will give you a match, Daffy—if Magnet isn't too tired to join you."
Daffy looked at Marjorie for an instant.
"We'll want you, Theodore, to look after the balls in the potatoes," said Mr. Pope lest that
      ingenuous mind should be corrupted behind his back....
Mrs. Pope found herself left to entertain a slightly disgruntled Trafford. Rom and Syd
      hovered on the off chance of notice, at the corner of the croquet lawn nearest the tea things.
      Mrs. Pope had already determined to make certain little matters clearer than they appeared to
      be to this agreeable but superfluous person, and she was greatly assisted by his opening upon
      the subject of her daughters. "Jolly tennis looks," he said.
"Don't they?" said Mrs. Pope. "I think it is such a graceful game for a girl."
Mr. Trafford glanced at Mrs. Pope's face, but her expression was impenetrable.
"They both like it and play it so well," she said. "Their father is so skillful and
      interested in
       games. Marjorie tells me you were her examiner a year or so ago."
"Yes. She struck my memory—her work stood out."
"Of course she is clever," said Mrs. Pope. "Or we shouldn't have sent her to Oxbridge. There
      she's doing quite well—quite well. Everyone says so. I don't know, of course, if Mr. Magnet
      will let her finish there."
"Mr. Magnet?"
"She's just engaged to him. Of course she's frightfully excited about it, and naturally he
      wants her to come away and marry. There's very little excuse for a long engagement. No."
Her voice died in a musical little note, and she seemed to be scrutinizing the tennis with
      an absorbed interest. "They've got new balls," she said, as if to herself.
Trafford had rolled over, and she fancied she detected a change in his voice when it came.
      "Isn't it rather a waste not to finish a university career?" he said.
"Oh, it wouldn't be wasted. Of course a girl like that will be hand and glove with her
      husband. She'll be able to help him with the scientific side of his jokes and all that. I
      sometimes wish it had been Daffy who had gone to college though. I sometimes think we've
      sacrificed Daffy a little. She's not the bright quickness of Marjorie, but there's something
      quietly solid about her mind—something stable. Perhaps I didn't want her to go away
      from me.... Mr. Magnet is doing wonders at the net. He's just begun to play—to please
      Marjorie. Don't you think he's a dreadfully amusing man, Mr. Trafford? He says such
       quiet things."

The effect of this éclaircissement upon Mr. Trafford
       was not what it should have been. Properly he ought to have realized at once
      that Marjorie was for ever beyond his aspirations, and if he found it too difficult to regard
      her with equanimity, then he ought to have shunned her presence. But instead, after his first
      shock of incredulous astonishment, his spirit rose in a rebellion against arranged facts that
      was as un-English as it was ungentlemanly. He went back to Solomonson with a mood of
      thoughtful depression giving place to a growing passion of indignation. He presented it to
      himself in a generalized and altruistic form. "What the deuce is the good of all this talk of
      Eugenics," he asked himself aloud, "if they are going to hand over that shining girl to that
      beastly little area sneak?"
He called Mr. Magnet a "beastly little area sneak!"
Nothing could show more clearly just how much he had contrived to fall in love with Marjorie
      during his brief sojourn in Buryhamstreet and the acuteness of his disappointment, and nothing
      could be more eloquent of his forcible and undisciplined temperament. And out of ten thousand
      possible abusive epithets with which his mind was no doubt stored, this one, I think, had come
      into his head because of the alert watchfulness with which Mr. Magnet followed a conversation,
      as he waited his chance for some neat but brilliant flash of comment....
Trafford, like Marjorie, was another of those undisciplined young people our age has
      produced in such significant quantity. He was just six-and-twenty, but the facts that he was
      big of build, had as an only child associated much with grown-up people, and was already a
      conspicuous success in the
       world of micro-chemical research, had given him the self-reliance and assurance
      of a much older man. He had still to come his croppers and learn most of the important lessons
      in life, and, so far, he wasn't aware of it. He was naturally clean-minded, very busy and
      interested in his work, and on remarkably friendly and confidential terms with his mother who
      kept house for him, and though he had had several small love disturbances, this was the first
      occasion that anything of the kind had ploughed deep into his feelings and desires.
Trafford's father had died early in life. He had been a brilliant pathologist, one of that
      splendid group of scientific investigators in the middle Victorian period which shines ever
      more brightly as our criticism dims their associated splendours, and he had died before he was
      thirty through a momentary slip of the scalpel. His wife—she had been his wife for five
      years—found his child and his memory and the quality of the life he had made about her too
      satisfying for the risks of a second marriage, and she had brought up her son with a
      passionate belief in the high mission of research and the supreme duty of seeking out and
      expressing truth finely. And here he was, calling Mr. Magnet a "beastly little area
      sneak."
The situation perplexed him. Marjorie perplexed him. It was, had he known it, the beginning
      for him of a lifetime of problems and perplexities. He was absolutely certain she didn't love
      Magnet. Why, then, had she agreed to marry him? Such pressures and temptations as he could see
      about her seemed light to him in comparison with such an undertaking.
Were they greater than he supposed?
His method of coming to the issue of that problem
       was entirely original. He presented himself next afternoon with the air of an
      invited guest, drove Mr. Pope who was suffering from liver, to expostulatory sulking in the
      study, and expressed a passionate craving for golf-croquet, in spite of Mrs. Pope's extreme
      solicitude for his still bandaged ankle. He was partnered with Daffy, and for a long time he
      sought speech with Marjorie in vain. At last he was isolated in a corner of the lawn, and with
      the thinnest pretence of inadvertence, in spite of Daffy's despairing cry of "She plays next!"
      he laid up within two yards of her. He walked across to her as she addressed herself to her
      ball, and speaking in an incredulous tone and with the air of a comment on the game, he said:
      "I say, are you engaged to that chap Magnet?"
Marjorie was amazed, but remarkably not offended. Something in his tone set her trembling.
      She forgot to play, and stood with her mallet hanging in her hand.
"Punish him!" came the voice of Magnet from afar.
"Yes," she said faintly.
His remark came low and clear. It had a note of angry protest. "Why?"
Marjorie, by the way of answer, hit her ball so that it jumped and missed his, ricochetted
      across the lawn and out of the ground on the further side.
"I'm sorry if I've annoyed you," said Trafford, as Marjorie went after her ball, and Daffy
      thanked heaven aloud for the respite.
They came together no more for a time, and Trafford, observant with every sense, found no
      clue to the riddle of her grave, intent bearing. She played very badly, and with unusual care
      and deliberation. He felt he had made a mess of things altogether,
       and suddenly found his leg was too painful to go on. "Partner," he asked, "will
      you play out my ball for me? I can't go on. I shall have to go."
Marjorie surveyed him, while Daffy and Magnet expressed solicitude. He turned to go, mallet
      in hand, and found Marjorie following him.
"Is that the heavier mallet?" she asked, and stood before him looking into his eyes and
      weighing a mallet in either hand.
"Mr. Trafford, you're one of the worst examiners I've ever met," she said.
He looked puzzled.
"I don't know why," said Marjorie, "I wonder as much as you. But I am"; and seeing
      the light dawning in his eyes, she turned about, and went back to the debacle of her game.

After that Mr. Trafford had one clear desire in his being which ruled all his other desires.
      He wanted a long, frank, unembarrassed and uninterrupted conversation with Marjorie. He had a
      very strong impression that Marjorie wanted exactly the same thing. For a week he besieged the
      situation in vain. After the fourth day Solomonson was only kept in Buryhamstreet by sheer
      will-power, exerted with a brutality that threatened to end that friendship abruptly. He went
      home on the sixth day in his largest car, but Trafford stayed on beyond the limits of decency
      to perform some incomprehensible service that he spoke of as "clearing up."
"I want," he said, "to clear up."
"But what is there to clear up, my dear boy?"
"Solomonson, you're a pampered plutocrat," said Trafford, as though everything was
      explained.
"I don't see any sense in it at all," said Solomonson,
       and regarded his friend aslant with thick, black eyebrows raised.
"I'm going to stay," said Trafford.
And Solomonson said one of those unhappy and entirely disregarded things that ought never to
      be said.
"There's some girl in this," said Solomonson.
"Your bedroom's always waiting for you at Riplings," he said, when at last he was going
      off....
Trafford's conviction that Marjorie also wanted, with an almost equal eagerness, the same
      opportunity for speech and explanations that he desired, sustained him in a series of
      unjustifiable intrusions upon the seclusion of the Popes. But although the manner of Mr. and
      Mrs. Pope did change considerably for the better after his next visit, it was extraordinary
      how impossible it seemed for him and Marjorie to achieve their common end of an encounter.
Always something intervened.
In the first place, Mrs. Pope's disposition to optimism had got the better of her earlier
      discretions, and a casual glance at Daphne's face when their visitor reappeared started quite
      a new thread of interpretations in her mind. She had taken the opportunity of hinting at this
      when Mr. Pope asked over his shirt-stud that night, "What the devil that—that chauffeur chap
      meant by always calling in the afternoon."
"Now that Will Magnet monopolizes Marjorie," she said, after a little pause and a rustle or
      so, "I don't see why Daffy shouldn't have a little company of her own age."
Mr. Pope turned round and stared at her. "I didn't think of that," he said. "But, anyhow, I
      don't like the fellow."
"He seems to be rather clever," said Mrs. Pope,
       "though he certainly talks too much. And after all it was Sir Rupert's
      aeroplane. He was only driving it to oblige."
"He'll think twice before he drives another," said Mr. Pope, wrenching off his
      collar....
Once Mrs. Pope had turned her imagination in this more and more agreeable direction, she was
      rather disposed, I am afraid, to let it bolt with her. And it was a deflection that certainly
      fell in very harmoniously with certain secret speculations of Daphne's. Trafford, too, being
      quite unused to any sort of social furtiveness, did perhaps, in order to divert attention from
      his preoccupation with Marjorie, attend more markedly to Daphne than he would otherwise have
      done. And so presently he found Daphne almost continuously on his hands. So far as she was
      concerned, he might have told her the entire history of his life, and every secret he had in
      the world, without let or hindrance. Mrs. Pope, too, showed a growing appreciation of his
      company, became sympathetic and confidential in a way that invited confidence, and threw a lot
      of light on her family history and Daffy's character. She had found Daffy a wonderful study,
      she said. Mr. Pope, too, seemed partly reconciled to him. The idea that, after all, both motor
      cars and monoplane were Sir Rupert's, and not Trafford's, had produced a reaction in the
      latter gentleman's favour. Moreover, it had occurred to him that Trafford's accident had
      perhaps disposed him towards a more thoughtful view of mechanical traction, and that this
      tendency would be greatly helped by a little genial chaff. So that he ceased to go indoors
      when Trafford was there, and hung about, meditating and delivering sly digs at this new victim
      of his ripe, old-fashioned humour.
Nor did it help Trafford in his quest for Marjorie
       and a free, outspoken delivery that the pseudo-twins considered him a person of
      very considerable charm, and that Theodore, though indisposed to "suck up" to him publicly—I
      write here in Theodorese—did so desire intimate and solitary communion with him, more
      particularly in view of the chances of an adventitious aeroplane ride that seemed to hang
      about him—as to stalk him persistently—hovering on the verge of groups, playing a waiting game
      with a tennis ball and an old racquet, strolling artlessly towards the gate of the avenue when
      the time seemed ripening for his appearance or departure.
On the other hand, Marjorie was greatly entangled by Magnet.
Magnet was naturally an attentive lover; he was full of small encumbering services, and it
      made him none the less assiduous to perceive that Marjorie seemed to find no sort of pleasure
      in all the little things he did. He seemed to think that if picking the very best rose he
      could find for her did not cause a very perceptible brightening in her, then it was all the
      more necessary quietly to force her racquet from her hand and carry it for her, or help her
      ineffectually to cross a foot-wide ditch, or offer to read her in a rich, abundant, well
      modulated voice, some choice passage from "The Forest Lovers" of Mr. Maurice Hewlett. And
      behind these devotions there was a streak of jealousy. He knew as if by instinct that it was
      not wise to leave these two handsome young people together; he had a queer little disagreeable
      sensation whenever they spoke to one another or looked at one another. Whenever Trafford and
      Marjorie found themselves in a group, there was Magnet in the midst of them. He knew the value
      of his Marjorie, and did not mean to lose
       her....
Being jointly baffled in this way was oddly stimulating to Marjorie's and Trafford's mutual
      predisposition. If you really want to throw people together, the thing to do—thank God for
      Ireland!—is to keep them apart. By the fourth day of this emotional incubation, Marjorie was
      thinking of Trafford to the exclusion of all her reading; and Trafford was lying awake at
      nights—oh, for half an hour and more—thinking of bold, decisive ways of getting at Marjorie,
      and bold, decisive things to say to her when he did.
(But why she should be engaged to Magnet continued, nevertheless, to puzzle him extremely.
      It was a puzzle to which no complete solution was ever to be forthcoming....)

At last that opportunity came. Marjorie had come with her mother into the village, and while
      Mrs. Pope made some purchases at the general shop she walked on to speak to Mrs. Blythe the
      washerwoman. Trafford suddenly emerged from the Red Lion with a soda syphon under each arm.
      She came forward smiling.
"I say," he said forthwith, "I want to talk with you—badly."
"And I," she said unhesitatingly, "with you."
"How can we?"
"There's always people about. It's absurd."
"We'll have to meet."
"Yes."
"I have to go away to-morrow. I ought to have gone two days ago. Where can we
      meet?"
She had it all prepared.
      
"Listen," she said. "There is a path runs from our shrubbery through a little wood to a
      stile on the main road." He nodded. "Either I will be there at three or about half-past five
      or—there's one more chance. While father and Mr. Magnet are smoking at nine.... I might get
      away."
"Couldn't I write?"
"No. Impossible."
"I've no end of things to say...."
Mrs. Pope appeared outside her shop, and Trafford gesticulated a greeting with the syphons.
      "All right," he said to Marjorie. "I'm shopping," he cried as Mrs. Pope approached.

All through the day Marjorie desired to go to Trafford and could not do so. It was some
      minutes past nine when at last with a swift rustle of skirts that sounded louder than all the
      world to her, she crossed the dimly lit hall between dining-room and drawing-room and came
      into the dreamland of moonlight upon the lawn. She had told her mother she was going upstairs;
      at any moment she might be missed, but she would have fled now to Trafford if an army pursued
      her. Her heart seemed beating in her throat, and every fibre of her being was aquiver. She
      flitted past the dining-room window like a ghost, she did not dare to glance aside at the
      smokers within, and round the lawn to the shrubbery, and so under a blackness of trees to the
      gate where he stood waiting. And there he was, dim and mysterious and wonderful, holding the
      gate open for her, and she was breathless, and speechless, and near sobbing. She stood before
      him for a moment, her face moonlit and laced with the shadows of little twigs, and then his
      arms
       came out to her.
"My darling," he said, "Oh, my darling!"
They had no doubt of one another or of anything in the world. They clung together; their
      lips came together fresh and untainted as those first lovers' in the garden.
"I will die for you," he said, "I will give all the world for you...."
They had thought all through the day of a hundred statements and explanations they would
      make when this moment came, and never a word of it all was uttered. All their anticipations of
      a highly strung eventful conversation vanished, phrases of the most striking sort went like
      phantom leaves before a gale. He held her and she clung to him between laughing and sobbing,
      and both were swiftly and conclusively assured their lives must never separate again.

Marjorie never knew whether it was a moment or an age before her father came upon them. He
      had decided to take a turn in the garden when Magnet could no longer restrain himself from
      joining the ladies, and he chanced to be stick in hand because that was his habit after
      twilight. So it was he found them. She heard his voice falling through love and moonlight like
      something that comes out of an immense distance.
"Good God!" he cried, "what next!"
But he still hadn't realized the worst.
"Daffy," he said, "what in the name of goodness——?"
Marjorie put her hands before her face too late.
"Good Lord!" he cried with a rising inflection,
       "it's Madge!"
Trafford found the situation difficult. "I should explain——"
But Mr. Pope was giving himself up to a towering rage. "You damned scoundrel!" he said.
      "What the devil are you doing?" He seized Marjorie by the arm and drew her towards him. "My
      poor misguided girl!" he said, and suddenly she was tensely alive, a little cry of horror in
      her throat, for her father, at a loss for words and full of heroic rage, had suddenly swung
      his stick with passionate force, and struck at Trafford's face. She heard the thud, saw
      Trafford wince and stiffen. For a perfectly horrible moment it seemed to her these men, their
      faces queerly distorted by the shadows of the branches in the slanting moonlight, might fight.
      Then she heard Trafford's voice, sounding cool and hard, and she knew that he would do nothing
      of the kind. In that instant if there had remained anything to win in Marjorie it was
      altogether won. "I asked your daughter to meet me here," he said.
"Be off with you, sir!" cried Mr. Pope. "Don't tempt me further, sir," and swung his stick
      again. But now the force had gone out of him. Trafford stood with a hand out ready for him,
      and watched his face.
"I asked your daughter to meet me here, and she came. I am prepared to give you any
      explanation——"
"If you come near this place again——"
For some moments Marjorie's heart had been held still, now it was beating violently. She
      felt this scene must end. "Mr. Trafford," she said, "will you go. Go now. Nothing shall keep
      us apart!"
Mr. Pope turned on her. "Silence, girl!" he said.
"I shall come to you to-morrow," said Trafford.
      
"Yes," said Marjorie, "to-morrow."
"Marjorie!" said Mr. Pope, "will you go indoors."
"I have done nothing——"
"Be off, sir."
"I have done nothing——"
"Will you be off, sir? And you, Marjorie—will you go indoors?"
He came round upon her, and after one still moment of regard for Trafford—and she looked
      very beautiful in the moonlight with her hair a little disordered and her face alight—she
      turned to precede her father through the shrubbery.
Mr. Pope hesitated whether he should remain with Trafford.
A perfectly motionless man is very disconcerting.
"Be off, sir," he said over his shoulder, lowered through a threatening second, and followed
      her.
But Trafford remained stiffly with a tingling temple down which a little thread of blood was
      running, until their retreating footsteps had died down into that confused stirring of little
      sounds which makes the stillness of an English wood at night.
Then he roused himself with a profound sigh, and put a hand to his cut and bruised
      cheek.
"Well!" he said.
</div></body></text></TEI>