<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Chink In The Armour, by
      Mrs. Belloc Lowndes.</title><author>Belloc-Lowndes, Marie (1868-1947)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1912</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">
CHAPTER XXI
But the longest night, the most haunted night, and Chester's night had indeed been haunted,
     comes to an end at last. After he had had another bath and a good breakfast he felt a very
     different man to what he had done three or four hours ago, lying awake in the sinister,
     companioned atmosphere of his bed-room at the Pension Malfait.
Telling his courteous landlord that he would not be in to luncheon, Chester left the house,
     and as it was still far too early to seek out Sylvia, he struck out, with the aid of the little
     pocket-map of the environs of Paris with which he had been careful to provide himself, towards
     the open country.
And as he swung quickly along, feeling once more tired and depressed, the Englishman wondered
     more and more why Sylvia Bailey cared to stay in such a place as Lacville. It struck him as
     neither town nor country—more like an unfinished suburb than anything else, with almost every
     piece of spare land up for sale.
He walked on and on till at last he came to the edge of a great stretch of what looked like
     primeval woodland. This surely must be part of the famous Forest of Montmorency, which his
     guide-book mentioned as being the great attraction of Lacville? He wondered cynically whether
     Sylvia had ever been so far, and then he plunged into the wood, along one of the ordered alleys
     which to his English eyes looked so little forest-like, and yet which made walking there very
     pleasant.
Suddenly there fell on his ear the sound of horses trotting quickly. He looked round, and
     some hundred yards or so to his right, at a place where four roads met under high arching
     trees, he saw two riders, a man and a woman, pass by. They had checked their horses to a walk,
     and as their voices floated over to him, the woman's voice seemed extraordinarily, almost
     absurdly, familiar—in fact, he could have sworn it was Sylvia Bailey's voice.
Chester stopped in his walk and shrugged his shoulders impatiently. She must indeed be
     dwelling in his thoughts if he thus involuntarily evoked her presence where she could by no
     stretch of possibility be.
But that wandering echo brought Sylvia Bailey very near to Chester, and once more he recalled
     her as he had seen her sitting at the gambling table the night before.
In grotesque juxtaposition he remembered, together with that picture of Sylvia as he had seen
     her last night, the case of a respectable old lady, named Mrs. Meeks, the widow of a clergyman
     who had had a living in the vicinity of Market Dalling.
Not long after her husband's death this old lady—she had about three hundred a year, and
     Chester had charge of her money matters—went abroad for a few weeks to Mentone. Those few weeks
     had turned Mrs. Meeks into a confirmed gambler. She now lived entirely at Monte Carlo in one
     small room.
He could not help remembering now the kind of remarks that were made by the more prosperous
     inhabitants of Market Dalling, his fellow citizens, when they went off for a short holiday to
     the South, in January or February. They would see this poor lady, this Mrs. Meeks, wandering
     round the gaming tables, and the sight would amuse and shock them. Chester knew that one of the
     first things said to him after the return of such people would be, "Who d'you think I saw at
     Monte Carlo? Why, Mrs. Meeks, of course! It's enough to make her husband turn in his
     grave."
And now he told himself ruefully that it would be enough to make honest George Bailey turn in
     his grave could he see his pretty, sheltered Sylvia sitting in the Casino at Lacville,
     surrounded by the riffraff collected there last night, and actually taking an active part in
     the game as well as risking her money with business-like intentness.
He wondered if he could persuade Sylvia to leave Lacville soon. In any case he would himself
     stay on here three or four days—he had meant only to stay twenty-four hours, for he was on his
     way to join a friend whose Swiss holiday was limited. The sensible thing for Sylvia to do would
     be to go back to England.
Chester reached the Villa du Lac at half-past eleven and as he went out into the charming
     garden where he was told he would find Mrs. Bailey he told himself that Lacville was not
     without some innocent attractions. But Mrs. Bailey was not alone in this lovely garden. Sitting
     on the lawn by her was the Frenchman who had been with her when Chester had first caught sight
     of her at the Casino the night before.
The two were talking so earnestly that they only became aware of his approach when he was
     close to them, and though Chester was not a particularly observant man, he had an instant and
     most unpleasant impression that he had come too soon; that Sylvia was not glad to see him; and
     that the Frenchman was actually annoyed, even angered, by his sudden appearance.
"We might begin lunch a little earlier than twelve o'clock," said Sylvia, getting up. "They
     serve lunch from half-past eleven, do they not?" she turned to the Comte de Virieu.
"Yes, Madame, that is so," he said; and then he added, bowing, "And now perhaps I should say
     good-bye. I am going into Paris, as you know, early this afternoon, and then to Brittany. I
     shall be away two nights."
"You will remember me to your sister, to—to the Duchesse," faltered Sylvia.
Chester looked at her sharply. This Frenchman's sister? The Duchesse?—how very intimate
     Sylvia seemed to be with the fellow!
As the Count turned and sauntered back to the house she said rather breathlessly,
"The Comte de Virieu has been very kind to me, Bill. He took me into Paris to see his sister;
     she is the Duchesse d'Eglemont. You will remember that the Duc d'Eglemont won the Derby two
     years ago?"
And as he made no answer she went on, as if on the defensive.
"The Comte de Virieu has to go away to the funeral of his godmother. I am sorry, for I should
     have liked you to have become friends with him. He was at school in England—that is why he
     speaks English so well."
While they were enjoying the excellent luncheon prepared for them by M. Polperro, Chester was
     uncomfortably aware that the Count, sitting at his solitary meal at another table, could,
     should he care to do so, overhear every word the other two were saying.
But Paul de Virieu did not look across or talk as an Englishman would probably have done had
     he been on familiar terms with a fellow-guest in an hotel. Instead he devoted himself, in the
     intervals of the meal, to reading a paper. But now and again Chester, glancing across, could
     see the other man's eyes fixed on himself with a penetrating, thoughtful look. What did this
     Frenchman mean by staring at him like that?
As for Sylvia, she was obviously ill at ease. She talked quickly, rather disconnectedly, of
     the many things appertaining to her life at home, in Market Dalling, which she had in common
     with the English lawyer. She only touched on the delightful time she had had in Paris, and she
     said nothing of Lacville.
Long before the others had finished, Count Paul got up; before leaving the dining-room, he
     turned and bowed ceremoniously to Sylvia and her companion. With his disappearance it seemed to
     Chester that Sylvia at once became her natural, simple, eager, happy self. She talked less, she
     listened more, and at last Chester began to enjoy his holiday.
They went out again into the garden, and the wide lawn, with its shaded spaces of deep green,
     was a delicious place in which to spend a quiet, idle hour. They sat down and drank their
     coffee under one of the cedars of Lebanon.
"This is a very delightful, curious kind of hotel," he said at last. "And I confess that now
     I understand why you like Lacville. But I do wonder a little, Sylvia"—he looked at her
     gravely—"that you enjoy going to that Casino."
"You see, there's so very little else to do here!" she exclaimed, deprecatingly. "And then,
     after all, Bill, I don't see what harm there is in risking one's money if one can afford to do
     so!"
He shook his head at her—playfully, but seriously too. "Don't you?" he asked dryly.
"Why, there's Madame Wachner," said Sylvia suddenly, and Chester thought there was a little
     touch of relief in her voice.
"Madame Wachner?" And then the Englishman, gazing at the stout, squat figure which was
     waddling along the grass towards them, remembered.
This was the good lady who had been so kind to him the night before; nay, who had actually
     offered to give him a bed if the Pension Malfait had been closed.
"We 'ave lunched in the town," she said, partly addressing Chester, "and so I thought I would
     come and ask you, Madame Sylvia, whether you and your friend will come to tea at the Villa des
     Muguets to-day?" She fixed her bright little eyes on Sylvia's face.
Sylvia looked at Chester; she was smiling; he thought she would like him to accept.
"That is very kind of you," he said cordially.
Sylvia nodded her head gaily: "You are more than kind, dear Madame Wachner," she exclaimed.
     "We shall be delighted to come! I thought of taking Mr. Chester a drive through the Forest of
     Montmorency. Will it do if we are with you about five?"
"Yes," said Madame Wachner.
And then, to Chester's satisfaction, she turned and went away. "I cannot stay now," she said,
     "for l'Ami Fritz is waiting for me. 'E does not like to be kept waiting."
"What a nice woman!" said Chester heartily, "and how lucky you are, Sylvia, to have made her
     acquaintance in such a queer place as this. But I suppose you have got to know quite a number
     of people in the hotel?"
"Well, no—," she stopped abruptly. She certainly had come to know the Comte de Virieu, but he
     was the exception, not the rule.
"You see, Bill, Lacville is the sort of place where everyone thinks everyone else rather
     queer! I fancy some of the ladies here—they are mostly foreigners, Russians, and Germans—think
     it very odd that I should be by myself in such a place."
She spoke without thinking—in fact she uttered her thoughts aloud.
"Then you admit that it is rather a queer place for you to be staying in by
     yourself," he said slowly.
"No, I don't!" she protested eagerly. "But don't let's talk of disagreeable things—I'm going
     to take you such a splendid drive!"
Chester never forgot that first day of his at Lacville. It was by far the pleasantest day he
     spent there, and Sylvia Bailey, woman-like, managed entirely to conceal from him that she was
     not as pleased with their expedition as was her companion.
Thanks to M. Polperro's good offices, they managed to hire a really good motor; and once
     clear of the fantastic little houses and the waste ground which was all up for sale, how
     old-world and beautiful were the little hamlets, the remote stretches of woodland and the quiet
     country towns through which they sped!
On their way back, something said by Sylvia surprised and disturbed Chester very much. She
     had meant to conceal the fact that she was riding with Paul de Virieu each morning, but it is
     very difficult for one accustomed always to tell the truth to use deceit. And suddenly a
     careless word revealed to Chester that the horsewoman whose voice had sounded so oddly familiar
     to him in the Forest that morning had really been Sylvia herself!
He turned on her quickly: "Then do you ride every morning with this Frenchman?" he asked
     quietly.
"Almost every morning," she answered. "His sister lent me a horse and a riding habit. It was
     very kind of her," she raised her voice, and blushed deeply in the rushing wind.
Chester felt his mind suddenly fill with angry suspicion. Was it possible that this Comte de
     Virieu, this man of whom that nice Madame Wachner had spoken with such scorn as a confirmed
     gambler, was "making up" to Sylvia? It was a monstrous idea—but Chester, being a solicitor,
     knew only too well that in the matter of marriage the most monstrous and disastrous things are
     not only always possible but sometimes probable. Chester believed that all Frenchmen regard
     marriage as a matter of business. To such a man as this Count, Mrs. Bailey's fortune would be a
     godsend.
"Sylvia!" he exclaimed, in a low, stern voice.
He turned round and looked at her. She was staring straight before her; the colour had faded
     from her cheek; she looked pale and tired.
"Sylvia!" he repeated. "Listen to me, and—and don't be offended."
She glanced quickly at the man sitting by her side. His voice was charged with emotion, with
     anger.
"Don't be angry with me," he repeated. "If my suspicion, my fear, is unfounded, I beg your
     pardon with all my heart."
Sylvia got up and touched the driver on the shoulder. "Please slow down," she said in French,
     "we are going faster than I like."
Then she sank back in her seat. "Yes, Bill! What is it you wish to ask me? I couldn't hear
     you properly. We were going too fast."
"Is it possible, is it conceivable, that you are thinking of marrying this Frenchman?"
"No," said Sylvia, very quietly, "I am not thinking of marrying the Comte de Virieu. But he
     is my friend. I—I like and respect him. No, Bill, you need not fear that the Comte de Virieu
     will ever ask me to become his wife."
"But if he did?" asked Chester, hoarsely.
"You have no right to ask me such a question," she answered, passionately; and then, after a
     pause, she added, in a low voice: "But if he did, I should say no, Bill."
Her eyes were full of tears. As for Chester, he felt a variety of conflicting emotions, of
     which perhaps the strongest was a determination that if he could not get her no one else should
     do so. This—this damned French gambler had touched Sylvia's kind heart. Surely she couldn't
     care for a man she had only known a month, and such an affected, dandified fellow, too?
It was with relief that they both became aware a few moments later that they were on the
     outskirts of Lacville.
"Here is the Châlet des Muguets!" exclaimed Sylvia. "Isn't it a funny little place?"
The English lawyer stared at the bright pink building; with curiosity and amusement. It was
     indeed a funny little place, this brick-built bungalow, so fantastically and, to his British
     eyes, so ridiculously decorated with blue china lozenges, on which were painted giant lilies of
     the valley.
But he had not long to look, for as the car drew up before the white gate Madame Wachner's
     short, broad figure came hurrying down the path.
She opened the gate, and with boisterous heartiness welcomed Chester and Sylvia into the
     neglected garden.
Chester looked round him with an involuntary surprise. The Wachners' home was entirely unlike
     what he had expected to find it. He had thought to see one of those trim, neat little villas
     surrounded by gay, exquisitely tended little gardens which are the pride of the Parisian
     suburban dweller.
Madame Wachner caught his glance, and the thought crossed her mind uncomfortably that she had
     perhaps made a mistake, a serious mistake, in asking this priggish-looking Englishman to come
     to the Châlet des Muguets. He evidently did not like the look of the place.
"You wonder to see our garden so untidy," she exclaimed, regretfully. "Well, it is the
     owner's fault, not ours! You would not believe such a thing of a Frenchman, but 'e actually
     made us promise that we would do nothing—no, nothing at all, to 'is garden. 'E spoke of sending
     a man once a week to see after it, but no, 'e never did so."
"I have often wondered," broke in Sylvia frankly, "why you allowed your garden to get into
     such a state, but now, of course, I understand. What a very odd person your landlord must be,
     Madame Wachner! It might be such a delightful place if kept in good order. But I'm glad you
     have had the grass cut. I remember the first time I came here the grass was tremendously high,
     both in front and behind the house. Yesterday I saw that you have had it cut."
"Yes," said Madame Wachner, glancing at her, "yes, we had the grass cut a few days ago. Fritz
     insisted on it."
"If it had been as high as it was the first time I came here, I could never have made my way
     through it to the delightful little wood that lies over there, behind the châlet," went on
     Sylvia. "I don't think I told you that I went over there yesterday and waited a while, hoping
     that you would come back."
"You went into the wood!" echoed Madame Wachner in a startled tone. "You should not have done
     that," she shook her head gravely. "We are forbidden to go into the wood. We 'ave never gone
     into the wood."
L'Ami Fritz stood waiting for his visitors in the narrow doorway. He looked more
     good-tempered than usual, and as they walked in he chatted pleasantly to Chester.
"This way," he said, importantly. "Do not trouble to go into the salon, Madame! We shall have
     tea here, of course."
And Sylvia Bailey was amused, as well as rather touched, to see the preparations which had
     been made in the little dining-room for the entertainment of Bill Chester and of herself.
In the middle of the round table which had looked so bare yesterday was a bowl of white
     roses—roses that had never grown in the untidy garden outside. Two dessert dishes were heaped
     up with delicious cakes—the cakes for which French pastrycooks are justly famed. There was also
     a basin full of the Alpine strawberries which Sylvia loved, and of which she always ordered a
     goodly supply at the Villa du Lac. Madame Wachner had even remembered to provide the thick
     cream, which, to a foreign taste, spoils the delicate flavour of strawberries.
They were really very kind people, these Wachners!
Looking round the funny little dining-room, Sylvia could not help remembering how
     uncomfortable she had felt when sitting there alone the day before. It was hard now to believe
     that she should have had that queer, eerie feeling of discomfort and disquietude in such a
     commonplace, cheerful room. She told herself that there probably had been some little creature
     hidden there—some shy, wild thing, which maybe had crept in out of the wood.
"And now I will go and make the tea," said Madame Wachner pleasantly, and Sylvia gaily
     insisted on accompanying her hostess into the kitchen.
"We shall 'ave a nicer tea than that first time we made tea 'ere together," said Madame
     Wachner jovially.
The young Englishwoman shook her head, smiling.
"I had a very good time that afternoon!" she cried. "And I shall always feel grateful for
     your kindness to me and to poor Anna, Madame Wachner. I do so often wonder what Anna is doing
     with herself, and where she is staying in Paris." She looked wistfully at her companion.
Madame Wachner was in the act of pouring the boiling water into her china teapot.
"Ah, well," she said, bending over it, "we shall never know that. Your friend was a strange
     person, what I call a solitaire. She did not like gambling when there were people whom
     she knew in the Baccarat Room with her. As to what she is doing now—" she shrugged her
     shoulders, expressively.
"You know she telegraphed for her luggage yesterday?" said Sylvia slowly.
"In that case—if it has had time to arrive—Madame Wolsky is probably on her way to Aix,
     perhaps even to Monte Carlo. She did not seem to mind whether it was hot or cold if she could
     get what she wanted—that is, Play—"
Madame Wachner had now made the tea. She turned and stood with arms akimbo, staring out of
     the little window which gave on the sun-baked lawn bounded by the chestnut wood.
"No," she said slowly, "I do not for a moment suppose that you will ever see Madame Wolsky
     again. It would surprise me very much if you were to do so. For one thing, she must be—well,
     rather ashamed of the way she treated you—you who were so kind to her, Sylvie!"
"She was far kinder to me than I was to her," said Sylvia in a low voice.
"Ah, my dear"—Madame Wachner put her fat hand on Sylvia's shoulder—"you have such a kind,
     warm, generous heart—that is the truth! No, no, Anna Wolsky was not able to appreciate such a
     friend as you are! But now the tea is made, made strong to the English taste, we must not leave
     L'Ami Fritz and Mr. Chester alone together. Gentleman are dull without ladies."
Carrying the teapot she led the way into the dining-room, and they sat down round the
     table.
The little tea-party went off fairly well, but Chester could not forget his strange
     conversation with Sylvia in the motor. Somehow, he and she had never come so really near to one
     another as they had done that afternoon. And yet, on the other hand, he felt that she was quite
     unlike what he had thought her to be. It was as if he had come across a new Sylvia.
Madame Wachner, looking at his grave, absorbed face, felt uneasy. Was it possible that this
     Englishman intended to take pretty Mrs. Bailey away from Lacville? That would be a pity—a very
     great pity!
She glanced apprehensively at her husband. L'Ami Fritz would make himself very unpleasant if
     Sylvia left Lacville just now. He would certainly taunt his wife with all the money they had
     spent on her entertainment—it was money which they both intended should bear a very high rate
     of interest.
</div></body></text></TEI>