<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Shadow-Line, by Joseph Conrad</title><author>Conrad, Joseph (1857-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1917</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
II
He shook hands with me: “Well, there you are, on your own, appointed officially under my
      responsibility.”
He was actually walking with me to the door. What a distance off it seemed! I moved like a
      man in bonds. But we reached it at last. I opened it with the sensation of dealing with mere
      dream-stuff, and then at the last moment the fellowship of seamen asserted itself, stronger
      than the difference of age and station. It asserted itself in Captain Ellis’ voice.
“Good-bye—and good luck to you,” he said so heartily that I could only give him a grateful
      glance. Then I turned and went out, never to see him again in my life. I had not made three
      steps into the outer office when I heard behind my back a gruff, loud, authoritative voice,
      the voice of our deputy-Neptune.
It was addressing the head Shipping-Master who, having let me in, had, apparently, remained
      hovering in the middle distance ever since. “Mr. R., let the harbour launch have steam up to
      take the captain here on board the Melita at half-past nine to-night.”
I was amazed at the startled alacrity of R’s “Yes, sir.” He ran before me out on the
      landing. My new dignity sat yet so lightly on me that I was not aware that it was I, the
      Captain, the object of this last graciousness. It seemed as if all of a sudden a pair of wings
      had grown on my shoulders. I merely skimmed along the polished floor.
But R. was impressed.
“I say!” he exclaimed on the landing, while the Malay crew of the steam-launch standing by
      looked stonily at the man for whom they were going to be kept on duty so late, away from their
      gambling, from their girls, or their pure domestic joys. “I say! His own launch. What have you
      done to him?”
His stare was full of respectful curiosity. I was quite confounded.
“Was it for me? I hadn’t the slightest notion,” I stammered out.
He nodded many times. “Yes. And the last person who had it before you was a Duke. So,
      there!”
I think he expected me to faint on the spot. But I was in too much of a hurry for emotional
      displays. My feelings were already in such a whirl that this staggering information did not
      seem to make the slightest difference. It merely fell into the seething cauldron of my brain,
      and I carried it off with me after a short but effusive passage of leave-taking with R.
The favour of the great throws an aureole round the fortunate object of its selection. That
      excellent man enquired whether he could do anything for me. He had known me only by sight, and
      he was well aware he would never see me again; I was, in common with the other seamen of the
      port, merely a subject for official writing, filling up of forms with all the artificial
      superiority of a man of pen and ink to the men who grapple with realities outside the
      consecrated walls of official buildings. What ghosts we must have been to him! Mere symbols to
      juggle with in books and heavy registers, without brains and muscles and perplexities;
      something hardly useful and decidedly inferior.
And he—the office hours being over—wanted to know if he could be of any use to me!
I ought—properly speaking—I ought to have been moved to tears. But I did not even think of
      it. It was merely another miraculous manifestation of that day of miracles. I parted from him
      as if he were a mere symbol. I floated down the staircase. I floated out of the official and
      imposing portal. I went on floating along.
I use that word rather than the word “flew,” because I have a distinct impression that,
      though uplifted by my aroused youth, my movements were deliberate enough. To that mixed white,
      brown, and yellow portion of mankind, out abroad on their own affairs, I presented the
      appearance of a man walking rather sedately. And nothing in the way of abstraction could have
      equalled my deep detachment from the forms and colours of this world. It was, as it were,
      final.
And yet, suddenly, I recognized Hamilton. I recognized him without effort, without a shock,
      without a start. There he was, strolling toward the Harbour Office with his stiff, arrogant
      dignity. His red face made him noticeable at a distance. It flamed, over there, on the shady
      side of the street.
He had perceived me, too. Something (unconscious exuberance of spirits perhaps) moved me to
      wave my hand to him elaborately. This lapse from good taste happened before I was aware that I
      was capable of it.
The impact of my impudence stopped him short, much as a bullet might have done. I verily
      believe he staggered, though as far as I could see he didn’t actually fall. I had gone past in
      a moment and did not turn my head. I had forgotten his existence.
The next ten minutes might have been ten seconds or ten centuries for all my consciousness
      had to do with it. People might have been falling dead around me, houses crumbling, guns
      firing, I wouldn’t have known. I was thinking: “By Jove! I have got it.” It being the
      command. It had come about in a way utterly unforeseen in my modest day-dreams.
I perceived that my imagination had been running in conventional channels and that my hopes
      had always been drab stuff. I had envisaged a command as a result of a slow course of
      promotion in the employ of some highly respectable firm. The reward of faithful service. Well,
      faithful service was all right. One would naturally give that for one’s own sake, for the sake
      of the ship, for the love of the life of one’s choice; not for the sake of the reward.
There is something distasteful in the notion of a reward.
And now here I had my command, absolutely in my pocket, in a way undeniable indeed, but most
      unexpected; beyond my imaginings, outside all reasonable expectations, and even
      notwithstanding the existence of some sort of obscure intrigue to keep it away from me. It is
      true that the intrigue was feeble, but it helped the feeling of wonder—as if I had been
      specially destined for that ship I did not know, by some power higher than the prosaic
      agencies of the commercial world.
A strange sense of exultation began to creep into me. If I had worked for that command ten
      years or more there would have been nothing of the kind. I was a little frightened.
“Let us be calm,” I said to myself.
Outside the door of the Officers’ Home the wretched Steward seemed to be waiting for me.
      There was a broad flight of a few steps, and he ran to and fro on the top of it as if chained
      there. A distressed cur. He looked as though his throat were too dry for him to bark.
I regret to say I stopped before going in. There had been a revolution in my moral nature.
      He waited open-mouthed, breathless, while I looked at him for half a minute.
“And you thought you could keep me out of it,” I said scathingly.
“You said you were going home,” he squeaked miserably. “You said so. You said so.”
“I wonder what Captain Ellis will have to say to that excuse,” I uttered slowly with a
      sinister meaning.
His lower jaw had been trembling all the time and his voice was like the bleating of a sick
      goat. “You have given me away? You have done for me?”
Neither his distress nor yet the sheer absurdity of it was able to disarm me. It was the
      first instance of harm being attempted to be done to me—at any rate, the first I had ever
      found out. And I was still young enough, still too much on this side of the shadow line, not
      to be surprised and indignant at such things.
I gazed at him inflexibly. Let the beggar suffer. He slapped his forehead and I passed in,
      pursued, into the dining room, by his screech: “I always said you’d be the death of me.”
This clamour not only overtook me, but went ahead as it were on to the verandah and brought
      out Captain Giles.
He stood before me in the doorway in all the commonplace solidity of his wisdom. The gold
      chain glittered on his breast. He clutched a smouldering pipe.
I extended my hand to him warmly and he seemed surprised, but did respond heartily enough in
      the end, with a faint smile of superior knowledge which cut my thanks short as if with a
      knife. I don’t think that more than one word came out. And even for that one, judging by the
      temperature of my face, I had blushed as if for a bad action. Assuming a detached tone, I
      wondered how on earth he had managed to spot the little underhand game that had been going
      on.
He murmured complacently that there were but few things done in the town that he could not
      see the inside of. And as to this house, he had been using it off and on for nearly ten years.
      Nothing that went on in it could escape his great experience. It had been no trouble to him.
      No trouble at all.
Then in his quiet, thick tone he wanted to know if I had complained formally of the
      Steward’s action.
I said that I hadn’t—though, indeed, it was not for want of opportunity. Captain Ellis had
      gone for me bald-headed in a most ridiculous fashion for being out of the way when wanted.
“Funny old gentleman,” interjected Captain Giles. “What did you say to that?”
“I said simply that I came along the very moment I heard of his message. Nothing more. I
      didn’t want to hurt the Steward. I would scorn to harm such an object. No. I made no
      complaint, but I believe he thinks I’ve done so. Let him think. He’s got a fright he won’t
      forget in a hurry, for Captain Ellis would kick him out into the middle of Asia. . . .”
“Wait a moment,” said Captain Giles, leaving me suddenly. I sat down feeling very tired,
      mostly in my head. Before I could start a train of thought he stood again before me, murmuring
      the excuse that he had to go and put the fellow’s mind at ease.
I looked up with surprise. But in reality I was indifferent. He explained that he had found
      the Steward lying face downward on the horsehair sofa. He was all right now.
“He would not have died of fright,” I said contemptuously.
“No. But he might have taken an overdose out of one of them little bottles he keeps in his
      room,” Captain Giles argued seriously. “The confounded fool has tried to poison himself once—a
      few years ago.”
“Really,” I said without emotion. “He doesn’t seem very fit to live, anyhow.”
“As to that, it may be said of a good many.”
“Don’t exaggerate like this!” I protested, laughing irritably. “But I wonder what this part
      of the world would do if you were to leave off looking after it, Captain Giles? Here you have
      got me a command and saved the Steward’s life in one afternoon. Though why you should have
      taken all that interest in either of us is more than I can understand.”
Captain Giles remained silent for a minute. Then gravely:
“He’s not a bad steward really. He can find a good cook, at any rate. And, what’s more, he
      can keep him when found. I remember the cooks we had here before his time! . . .”
I must have made a movement of impatience, because he interrupted himself with an apology
      for keeping me yarning there, while no doubt I needed all my time to get ready.
What I really needed was to be alone for a bit. I seized this opening hastily. My bedroom
      was a quiet refuge in an apparently uninhabited wing of the building. Having absolutely
      nothing to do (for I had not unpacked my things), I sat down on the bed and abandoned myself
      to the influences of the hour. To the unexpected influences. . . .
And first I wondered at my state of mind. Why was I not more surprised? Why? Here I was,
      invested with a command in the twinkling of an eye, not in the common course of human affairs,
      but more as if by enchantment. I ought to have been lost in astonishment. But I wasn’t. I was
      very much like people in fairy tales. Nothing ever astonishes them. When a fully appointed
      gala coach is produced out of a pumpkin to take her to a ball, Cinderella does not exclaim.
      She gets in quietly and drives away to her high fortune.
Captain Ellis (a fierce sort of fairy) had produced a command out of a drawer almost as
      unexpectedly as in a fairy tale. But a command is an abstract idea, and it seemed a sort of
      “lesser marvel” till it flashed upon me that it involved the concrete existence of a ship.
A ship! My ship! She was mine, more absolutely mine for possession and care than anything in
      the world; an object of responsibility and devotion. She was there waiting for me,
      spell-bound, unable to move, to live, to get out into the world (till I came), like an
      enchanted princess. Her call had come to me as if from the clouds. I had never suspected her
      existence. I didn’t know how she looked, I had barely heard her name, and yet we were
      indissolubly united for a certain portion of our future, to sink or swim together!
A sudden passion of anxious impatience rushed through my veins, gave me such a sense of the
      intensity of existence as I have never felt before or since. I discovered how much of a seaman
      I was, in heart, in mind, and, as it were, physically—a man exclusively of sea and ships; the
      sea the only world that counted, and the ships, the test of manliness, of temperament, of
      courage and fidelity—and of love.
I had an exquisite moment. It was unique also. Jumping up from my seat, I paced up and down
      my room for a long time. But when I came downstairs I behaved with sufficient composure. Only
      I couldn’t eat anything at dinner.
Having declared my intention not to drive but to walk down to the quay, I must render the
      wretched Steward justice that he bestirred himself to find me some coolies for the luggage.
      They departed, carrying all my worldly possessions (except a little money I had in my pocket)
      slung from a long pole. Captain Giles volunteered to walk down with me.
We followed the sombre, shaded alley across the Esplanade. It was moderately cool there
      under the trees. Captain Giles remarked, with a sudden laugh: “I know who’s jolly thankful at
      having seen the last of you.”
I guessed that he meant the Steward. The fellow had borne himself to me in a sulkily
      frightened manner at the last. I expressed my wonder that he should have tried to do me a bad
      turn for no reason at all.
“Don’t you see that what he wanted was to get rid of our friend Hamilton by dodging him in
      front of you for that job? That would have removed him for good. See?”
“Heavens!” I exclaimed, feeling humiliated somehow. “Can it be possible? What a fool he must
      be! That overbearing, impudent loafer! Why! He couldn’t. . . . And yet he’s nearly done it, I
      believe; for the Harbour Office was bound to send somebody.”
“Aye. A fool like our Steward can be dangerous sometimes,” declared Captain Giles
      sententiously. “Just because he is a fool,” he added, imparting further instruction in his
      complacent low tones. “For,” he continued in the manner of a set demonstration, “no sensible
      person would risk being kicked out of the only berth between himself and starvation just to
      get rid of a simple annoyance—a small worry. Would he now?”
“Well, no,” I conceded, restraining a desire to laugh at that something mysteriously earnest
      in delivering the conclusions of his wisdom as though it were the product of prohibited
      operations. “But that fellow looks as if he were rather crazy. He must be.”
“As to that, I believe everybody in the world is a little mad,” he announced quietly.
“You make no exceptions?” I inquired, just to hear his manner.
“Why! Kent says that even of you.”
“Does he?” I retorted, extremely embittered all at once against my former captain. “There’s
      nothing of that in the written character from him which I’ve got in my pocket. Has he given
      you any instances of my lunacy?”
Captain Giles explained in a conciliating tone that it had been only a friendly remark in
      reference to my abrupt leaving the ship for no apparent reason.
I muttered grumpily: “Oh! leaving his ship,” and mended my pace. He kept up by my side in
      the deep gloom of the avenue as if it were his conscientious duty to see me out of the colony
      as an undesirable character. He panted a little, which was rather pathetic in a way. But I was
      not moved. On the contrary. His discomfort gave me a sort of malicious pleasure.
Presently I relented, slowed down, and said:
“What I really wanted was to get a fresh grip. I felt it was time. Is that so very mad?”
He made no answer. We were issuing from the avenue. On the bridge over the canal a dark,
      irresolute figure seemed to be awaiting something or somebody.
It was a Malay policeman, barefooted, in his blue uniform. The silver band on his little
      round cap shone dimly in the light of the street lamp. He peered in our direction timidly.
Before we could come up to him he turned about and walked in front of us in the direction of
      the jetty. The distance was some hundred yards; and then I found my coolies squatting on their
      heels. They had kept the pole on their shoulders, and all my worldly goods, still tied to the
      pole, were resting on the ground between them. As far as the eye could reach along the quay
      there was not another soul abroad except the police peon, who saluted us.
It seems he had detained the coolies as suspicious characters, and had forbidden them the
      jetty. But at a sign from me he took off the embargo with alacrity. The two patient fellows,
      rising together with a faint grunt, trotted off along the planks, and I prepared to take my
      leave of Captain Giles, who stood there with an air as though his mission were drawing to a
      close. It could not be denied that he had done it all. And while I hesitated about an
      appropriate sentence he made himself heard:
“I expect you’ll have your hands pretty full of tangled-up business.”
I asked him what made him think so; and he answered that it was his general experience of
      the world. Ship a long time away from her port, owners inaccessible by cable, and the only man
      who could explain matters dead and buried.
“And you yourself new to the business in a way,” he concluded in a sort of unanswerable
      tone.
“Don’t insist,” I said. “I know it only too well. I only wish you could impart to me some
      small portion of your experience before I go. As it can’t be done in ten minutes I had better
      not begin to ask you. There’s that harbour launch waiting for me, too. But I won’t feel really
      at peace till I have that ship of mine out in the Indian Ocean.”
He remarked casually that from Bangkok to the Indian Ocean was a pretty long step. And this
      murmur, like a dim flash from a dark lantern, showed me for a moment the broad belt of islands
      and reefs between that unknown ship, which was mine, and the freedom of the great waters of
      the globe.
But I felt no apprehension. I was familiar enough with the Archipelago by that time. Extreme
      patience and extreme care would see me through the region of broken land, of faint airs, and
      of dead water to where I would feel at last my command swing on the great swell and list over
      to the great breath of regular winds, that would give her the feeling of a large, more intense
      life. The road would be long. All roads are long that lead toward one’s heart’s desire. But
      this road my mind’s eye could see on a chart, professionally, with all its complications and
      difficulties, yet simple enough in a way. One is a seaman or one is not. And I had no doubt of
      being one.
The only part I was a stranger to was the Gulf of Siam. And I mentioned this to Captain
      Giles. Not that I was concerned very much. It belonged to the same region the nature of which
      I knew, into whose very soul I seemed to have looked during the last months of that existence
      with which I had broken now, suddenly, as one parts with some enchanting company.
“The gulf . . . Ay! A funny piece of water—that,” said Captain Giles.
Funny, in this connection, was a vague word. The whole thing sounded like an opinion uttered
      by a cautious person mindful of actions for slander.
I didn’t inquire as to the nature of that funniness. There was really no time. But at the
      very last he volunteered a warning.
“Whatever you do keep to the east side of it. The west side is dangerous at this time of the
      year. Don’t let anything tempt you over. You’ll find nothing but trouble there.”
Though I could hardly imagine what could tempt me to involve my ship amongst the currents
      and reefs of the Malay shore, I thanked him for the advice.
He gripped my extended arm warmly, and the end of our acquaintance came suddenly in the
      words: “Good-night.”
That was all he said: “Good-night.” Nothing more. I don’t know what I intended to say, but
      surprise made me swallow it, whatever it was. I choked slightly, and then exclaimed with a
      sort of nervous haste: “Oh! Good-night, Captain Giles, good-night.”
His movements were always deliberate, but his back had receded some distance along the
      deserted quay before I collected myself enough to follow his example and made a half turn in
      the direction of the jetty.
Only my movements were not deliberate. I hurried down to the steps, and leaped into the
      launch. Before I had fairly landed in her sternsheets the slim little craft darted away from
      the jetty with a sudden swirl of her propeller and the hard, rapid puffing of the exhaust in
      her vaguely gleaming brass funnel amidships.
The misty churning at her stern was the only sound in the world. The shore lay plunged in
      the silence of the deeper slumber. I watched the town recede still and soundless in the hot
      night, till the abrupt hail, “Steam-launch, ahoy!” made me spin round face forward. We were
      close to a white ghostly steamer. Lights shone on her decks, in her portholes. And the same
      voice shouted from her:
“Is that our passenger?”
“It is,” I yelled.
Her crew had been obviously on the jump. I could hear them running about. The modern spirit
      of haste was loudly vocal in the orders to “Heave away on the cable”—to “Lower the
      sideladder,” and in urgent requests to me to “Come along, sir! We have been delayed three
      hours for you. . . . Our time is seven o’clock, you know!”
I stepped on the deck. I said “No! I don’t know.” The spirit of modern hurry was embodied in
      a thin, long-armed, long-legged man, with a closely clipped gray beard. His meagre hand was
      hot and dry. He declared feverishly:
“I am hanged if I would have waited another five minutes Harbour-Master or no
      Harbour-Master.”
“That’s your own business,” I said. “I didn’t ask you to wait for me.”
“I hope you don’t expect any supper,” he burst out. “This isn’t a boarding-house afloat. You
      are the first passenger I ever had in my life and I hope to goodness you will be the
      last.”
I made no answer to this hospitable communication; and, indeed, he didn’t wait for any,
      bolting away on to his bridge to get his ship under way.
The three days he had me on board he did not depart from that half-hostile attitude. His
      ship having been delayed three hours on my account he couldn’t forgive me for not being a more
      distinguished person. He was not exactly outspoken about it, but that feeling of annoyed
      wonder was peeping out perpetually in his talk.
He was absurd.
He was also a man of much experience, which he liked to trot out; but no greater contrast
      with Captain Giles could have been imagined. He would have amused me if I had wanted to be
      amused. But I did not want to be amused. I was like a lover looking forward to a meeting.
      Human hostility was nothing to me. I thought of my unknown ship. It was amusement enough,
      torment enough, occupation enough.
He perceived my state, for his wits were sufficiently sharp for that, and he poked sly fun
      at my preoccupation in the manner some nasty, cynical old men assume toward the dreams and
      illusions of youth. I, on my side, refrained from questioning him as to the appearance of my
      ship, though I knew that being in Bangkok every fortnight or so he must have known her by
      sight. I was not going to expose the ship, my ship! to some slighting reference.
He was the first really unsympathetic man I had ever come in contact with. My education was
      far from being finished, though I didn’t know it. No! I didn’t know it.
All I knew was that he disliked me and had some contempt for my person. Why? Apparently
      because his ship had been delayed three hours on my account. Who was I to have such a thing
      done for me? Such a thing had never been done for him. It was a sort of jealous
      indignation.
My expectation, mingled with fear, was wrought to its highest pitch. How slow had been the
      days of the passage and how soon they were over. One morning, early, we crossed the bar, and
      while the sun was rising splendidly over the flat spaces of the land we steamed up the
      innumerable bends, passed under the shadow of the great gilt pagoda, and reached the outskirts
      of the town.
There it was, spread largely on both banks, the Oriental capital which had as yet suffered
      no white conqueror; an expanse of brown houses of bamboo, of mats, of leaves, of a
      vegetable-matter style of architecture, sprung out of the brown soil on the banks of the muddy
      river. It was amazing to think that in those miles of human habitations there was not probably
      half a dozen pounds of nails. Some of those houses of sticks and grass, like the nests of an
      aquatic race, clung to the low shores. Others seemed to grow out of the water; others again
      floated in long anchored rows in the very middle of the stream. Here and there in the
      distance, above the crowded mob of low, brown roof ridges, towered great piles of masonry,
      King’s Palace, temples, gorgeous and dilapidated, crumbling under the vertical sunlight,
      tremendous, overpowering, almost palpable, which seemed to enter one’s breast with the breath
      of one’s nostrils and soak into one’s limbs through every pore of one’s skin.
The ridiculous victim of jealousy had for some reason or other to stop his engines just
      then. The steamer drifted slowly up with the tide. Oblivious of my new surroundings I walked
      the deck, in anxious, deadened abstraction, a commingling of romantic reverie with a very
      practical survey of my qualifications. For the time was approaching for me to behold my
      command and to prove my worth in the ultimate test of my profession.
Suddenly I heard myself called by that imbecile. He was beckoning me to come up on his
      bridge.
I didn’t care very much for that, but as it seemed that he had something particular to say I
      went up the ladder.
He laid his hand on my shoulder and gave me a slight turn, pointing with his other arm at
      the same time.
“There! That’s your ship, Captain,” he said.
I felt a thump in my breast—only one, as if my heart had then ceased to beat. There were ten
      or more ships moored along the bank, and the one he meant was partly hidden away from my sight
      by her next astern. He said: “We’ll drift abreast her in a moment.”
What was his tone? Mocking? Threatening? Or only indifferent? I could not tell. I suspected
      some malice in this unexpected manifestation of interest.
He left me, and I leaned over the rail of the bridge looking over the side. I dared not
      raise my eyes. Yet it had to be done—and, indeed, I could not have helped myself. I believe I
      trembled.
But directly my eyes had rested on my ship all my fear vanished. It went off swiftly, like a
      bad dream. Only that a dream leaves no shame behind it, and that I felt a momentary shame at
      my unworthy suspicions.
Yes, there she was. Her hull, her rigging filled my eye with a great content. That feeling
      of life-emptiness which had made me so restless for the last few months lost its bitter
      plausibility, its evil influence, dissolved in a flow of joyous emotion.
At first glance I saw that she was a high-class vessel, a harmonious creature in the lines
      of her fine body, in the proportioned tallness of her spars. Whatever her age and her history,
      she had preserved the stamp of her origin. She was one of those craft that, in virtue of their
      design and complete finish, will never look old. Amongst her companions moored to the bank,
      and all bigger than herself, she looked like a creature of high breed—an Arab steed in a
      string of cart-horses.
A voice behind me said in a nasty equivocal tone: “I hope you are satisfied with her,
      Captain.” I did not even turn my head. It was the master of the steamer, and whatever he
      meant, whatever he thought of her, I knew that, like some rare women, she was one of those
      creatures whose mere existence is enough to awaken an unselfish delight. One feels that it is
      good to be in the world in which she has her being.
That illusion of life and character which charms one in men’s finest handiwork radiated from
      her. An enormous bulk of teak-wood timber swung over her hatchway; lifeless matter, looking
      heavier and bigger than anything aboard of her. When they started lowering it the surge of the
      tackle sent a quiver through her from water-line to the trucks up the fine nerves of her
      rigging, as though she had shuddered at the weight. It seemed cruel to load her so. . . .
Half an hour later, putting my foot on her deck for the first time, I received the feeling
      of deep physical satisfaction. Nothing could equal the fullness of that moment, the ideal
      completeness of that emotional experience which had come to me without the preliminary toil
      and disenchantments of an obscure career.
My rapid glance ran over her, enveloped, appropriated the form concreting the abstract
      sentiment of my command. A lot of details perceptible to a seaman struck my eye, vividly in
      that instant. For the rest, I saw her disengaged from the material conditions of her being.
      The shore to which she was moored was as if it did not exist. What were to me all the
      countries of the globe? In all the parts of the world washed by navigable waters our relation
      to each other would be the same—and more intimate than there are words to express in the
      language. Apart from that, every scene and episode would be a mere passing show. The very gang
      of yellow coolies busy about the main hatch was less substantial than the stuff dreams are
      made of. For who on earth would dream of Chinamen? . . .
I went aft, ascended the poop, where, under the awning, gleamed the brasses of the
      yacht-like fittings, the polished surfaces of the rails, the glass of the skylights. Right aft
      two seamen, busy cleaning the steering gear, with the reflected ripples of light running
      playfully up their bent backs, went on with their work, unaware of me and of the almost
      affectionate glance I threw at them in passing toward the companion-way of the cabin.
The doors stood wide open, the slide was pushed right back. The half-turn of the staircase
      cut off the view of the lobby. A low humming ascended from below, but it stopped abruptly at
      the sound of my descending footsteps.

</div></body></text></TEI>