<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Tarr</title><author>Lewis, Percy Wyndham (1882-1957)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="40">
CHAPTER VI
Five days after this, in the morning, Otto Kreisler mounted the steps of the police-station
      of a small town near the German frontier. He was going to give himself up.
Bitzenko had pictured his principal, in the event of his succeeding against Soltyk, seeking
      rapidly by train the German frontier, disguised in some extraordinary manner. Had the case
      been suggested to him of a man in this position without sufficient money in his pocket to buy
      a ticket, he would then have imagined a melodramatic figure hurrying through France, dodging
      and dogged by the police, defying a thousand perils. Whether Kreisler were still under the
      spell of the Russian or not, this was the course, more or less, he took. He could be trusted
      not to go near Paris. That city dominated all his maledictions.
The police disturbing the last act of his sanguinary farce was a similar contretemps to
      Soltyk’s fingers in his throat. At the last moment everything had begun to go wrong. He had
      not prepared for it, because, as though from cunning, the world had shown no tendency up till
      then to interfere.
Soltyk had died when his back was turned, so to speak. He got the contrary of comfort out of
      the thought that he could claim to have done the deed.. The police had rushed in and broken
      things off short, swept everything away, ended the banquet in a brutal raid. A deep sore, a
      shocked and dislocated feeling remained in Kreisler’s mind. He had been hurried so much! He
      had never needed leisure, breathing space, so much. The disaster of Soltyk’s death was raw on
      him ! Had he been given time —  only a little time — he might have put that to rights. (This
      sinister regret could only imply a possible mutilation of the corpse.)
A dead man has no feeling. He can be treated as an object and hustled away. But a living man
      needs time ! — time!
Does not a living man need so much time to develop his movements, to lord
      it with his thoughtful body, to unroll his will ? Time is what he needs !
As a tramp being hustled away from a cafe protests, at each jerk the waiter gives him, that
      he is a human being, probably a free human being — yes, probably free; so
      Kreisler complained to his fate that he was a living man, that he required time —
      that above all it was time he needed — to settle his affairs and withdraw from life.
      But his fate was a harsh Prussian gendarme. He whined and blustered to no effect.
He was superstitious as well in the usual way about this decease. In his spiritless and
      brooding tramp he questioned if it were not he that had died and not Soltyk, and if it were
      not his ghost that was now wandering off nowhere in particular.
One franc and a great many coppers remained to him. As he jumped from field to road and road
      to field again, in his flight, they rose and fell in a little leaden wave in his pocket,
      breaking dully on his thigh. This little wave rose and fell many times, till he began to wait
      for it, and its monotonous grace. It was like a sigh. It heaved and clashed down in a foiled
      way.
He spent the money that evening on a meal in a village. The night was dry and was passed in
      an empty barge. Next day, at four in the afternoon, he arrived at Meaux. Here he exchanged his
      entire wardrobe for a very shabby workman’s outfit, gaining seven francs and fifty centimes on
      the exchange. He caught the early train for Rheims, travelling thirty-five kilometres of his
      journey at a sou a kilometre, got a meal near the station, and took another ticket to Verdun.
      Believing himself nearer the frontier than he actually was, he set out on foot. At the
      next large town, Pontlieux, he had too hearty a meal. He had exhausted his stock of money long
      before the frontier was reached. For two days he had eaten hardly anything; and tramped on in
      a dogged and careless spirit.
The nearness of the German frontier began to rise
      like a wall in front of him. This question had to be answered : Did he want to
      cross it after all ?
His answer was to mount the steps of the local gendarmerie.
His Prussian severity of countenance, now that he was dressed in every point like a
      vagabond, without hat and his hair disordered, five days’ beard on his chin — this sternness
      of the German warrior gave him the appearance of a scowling ruffian. The agent
      on duty, who barred his passage brutally before the door of the inner office, scowling too,
      classed him as a depraved cut-throat vagabond, and considered his voluntary entrance into the
      police-station as an act not only highly suspicious and unaccountable in itself, but of the
      last insolence.
“Qu’est-ce qu’il te faut ?”
“Foir le Commissaire,” returned Kreisler.
“Tu ne peux pas le voir. Il n’y est pas.”
A few more laconic sentences followed, the agent reiterating sulkily that the
      magistrate was not there. But he was eyeing Kreisler doubtfully and turning something over in
      his mind.
The day before, two Germans had been arrested in the neighbourhood as spies, and were now
      locked up in this building until further evidence should be collected on the affair. It is
      extremely imprudent for a German to loiter on the frontier on entering France. It is much
      wiser for him to push on at once — neither looking to right nor left — pretending especially
      not to notice hills, unnatural military looking protuberances, ramparts, etc. — to hurry on as
      rapidly as possible to the interior. But the two men in question were carpenters by
      profession, and both carried huge foot-rules in their pockets. The local authorities on this
      discovery were in a state of the deepest consternation. They shut them up, with their
      implements, in the most inaccessible depths of the local police-station. And it was in
      the doorway of this building — all the intermittent inhabitants of which were in a state of
      hysterical speculation, that Kreisler had presented himself.
The agent, who had recognized a German by his accent and manner, at last turned and
      disappeared through the door, telling him to wait. He reappeared with several superiors. All
      of them crowded in the doorway and surveyed Kreisler blankly. One asked in a voice of
      triumphant suspicion :
“And what are you doing there, my good fellow ?”
“I had tuel, and killed the man ; I have walked for more days—”
“Yes, we know all about that!”
“So you had a duel, eh ?” asked another, and they all laughed with nervous suddenness at
      the picture of this vagabond defending his honour at twenty paces.
“Well, is that all you have to say ?”
“I would eat.”
“Yes! your two friends inside also have big appetites. But come to the point. Have
      you anything to tell us about your compatriots inside there ?”
Since his throttling by Soltyk, Kreisler had changed. He knew he was beaten. There was
      nothing to do but to die. His body ran to the German frontier as a chicken’s does down a yard,
      headless, from the block.
Kreisler did not understand the official. He muttered that he was hungry. He could
      hardly stand. Leaning his shoulder against the wall, he stood with his eyes on the ground. He
      was making himself at home !  “What a nerve !”
“Va t’en ! If you don’t want to tell us anything, clear out. Be quick about it! A pretty
      lot of trouble you cursed Germans are giving us. You’ll none of you speak when it comes to the
      point. You all stand staring like boobies. But that won’t pay here. Off you go !”
They all turned back into the office, and slammed the door. The agent stood before
      it again, looking truculently at Kreisler, He said:
“Passez votre chemin! Don’t stand gaping there!”                     .
Then, giving him a shake, he hustled him to the
        top of the steps. A parting shove sent him staggering down into the road.
Kreisler walked on for a little. Eventually, in a quiet square, near the entrance to the
      town, he fell on a bench, drew his legs up and went to sleep.
At ten o’clock, the town lethargically retiring, all its legs moving slowly, like a spent
      insect, heavily boarding itself in, an agent came gradually along the square.
      Kreisler’s visit to the police-station was not known to this one. He stopped opposite the
      sleeping Kreisler, surveying him with lawful indignation.
“En voila un joli gigolo !” He swayed energetically up to him.
“Eh ! le copain ! Tu voudrais coucher a la belle étoile ?”
He shook him.
“Oh, la ! Tu ne peux pas dormir ici! Houp ! Dépêches-toi. Mets-toi debout !”
Kreisler responded only by a tired movement as though to bury his skull in the bench. A
      more violent jerk rolled him on the ground.
He woke up and protested in German, with a sort of dull asperity. He got on to his feet.
At the sound of the familiar gutturals of the neighbouring Empire, the agent became
      differently angry. Kreisler stood there, muttering partly in German and partly in French ; he
      was very tired. He was telling bitterly of his attempt to get into the police-station, and of
      his inhospitable reception. The agent understood several words of German — notably “
      ja” and “lager beer” and “essen.” The consequence was that he always thought he understood
      more than was really said in that language. However much might be actually intended on any
      given occasion by the words of that profound and teeming tongue, it could never equal in
      scope, intensity, and meaning what he heard.
So he was convinced that Kreisler was threatening an invasion, and scoffed loudly in reply.
      He understood Kreisler to assert that the town in which they stood would soon belong to
      Germany, and that he 
        would then sleep, not on a bench, but in the best bed their dirty little hole
      of a village could offer. He approached him threateningly. And eventually the functionary
      distinctly heard himself apostrophized as a “sneaking ‘ flic ’,” a “dirty peeler.” At
      that he laid his hand on Kreisler’s collar, and threw him in the direction of the
      police-station. He had miscalculated the distance. Kreisler, weak for want of food, fell at
      his feet; but, getting up, scuffled a short time. Then, it occurring to him that here was
      an unhoped for way of getting a dinner, and being lodged after all in the bureau de
       police, he suddenly became passive and complaisant.
Arrived at the police-station — with several revolts against the brutal handling to which he
      was subjected  — he was met at the door by the same inhospitable man. Exasperated beyond
      measure at this unwelcome guest turning up again, the man sent his comrade into the office to
      report, while he held Kreisler. He held him as a restive horse is held, and jerked him several
      times against the wall, as if he had been showing signs of resistance.
Two men, one that he had formerly seen, came and looked at him. No effort was made to
      discover if he were really at fault or not. By this time they were quite convinced that he was
      a desperate character, and if not a spy, then anyway a murderer, although they were inclined
      to regard him as a criminal mystery. At all events they no longer could question his right to
      a night’s lodging.
Kreisler was led to a cell, given some bread and water at his urgent request, and left
      alone.
On the following morning he was taken up before the commissaire de police. When
      Kreisler was brought in, this gentleman had just finished cross-examining for the fifteenth
      time the two German carpenters who were retained as spies. They were not let alone for an
      instant. They would be dragged out of their cells three times in the course of an afternoon,
      as often as a new and brilliant idea should strike one of the numerous staff of the
      police-station. 
      

They would be confronted with their foot-rules, and watched in breathless silence; or be
      keenly cross-questioned, confused and contradicted as to the exact hour at which they had
      lunched the day before their arrest. The commissaire was perspiring all over with the
      intensity of his last effort to detect something. Kreisler was led in, and prevented
      from finishing any sentence or of becoming in any way intelligible during a quarter of an hour
      by the furious interruptions of the enraged officer. At last he succeeded in asserting that he
      was quite unacquainted with the two carpenters; moreover, that all he needed was food ; that
      he had decided to give himself up and await the decision of the Paris authorities as regards
      the deed. If they were not going to take any action, he would return to Paris — at least, as
      soon as he had received a certain letter; and he gave his address. The commissaire
      considered him with exhausted animosity and he was sent back to his cell.
He slept the greater part of the day, but the next he spent nervous and awake. In the
      afternoon a full confirmation of his story reached the authorities. It was likely that the
      following morning he would be sent to Paris. It meant, then, that he was going to be tried as
      a kind of murderer. He could not allege complete accident. The thought of Paris,
      the vociferous courts, the ennuis of a criminal case about this affair, so thoroughly ended
      and boringly out of date, disturbed him extremely. Then the Russian —  he would have to see
      him again. Kreisler felt that he was being terribly worried once more. Sorrow for himself
      bowed him down. This journey to Paris resembled his crossing of the German frontier. He had
      felt that it was impossible to see his father. That represented an effort he would do anything
      to avoid. Resentment against his parent had vanished. It was this that made a meeting so
      difficult. It was a stranger, with an ill will that had survived his own, awaiting him. Noise,
      piercing noise, effort, awaited him revengefully. He knew exactly what his father 
       would do and say. If there had been a single item that he could not forecast! —
      But there was not the least item. Paris was the same. The energy and obstinacy of the rest of
      the world, the world that would question him and drag him about, these frightened him as
      something mad. Bitzenko appealed most to this new-born timidity. Bitzenko was like some
      favourite dish a man has one day eaten too much of, and will never be able again to enjoy, or
      even support.
On the other hand, he became quite used to his cell. His mind was sick, and this room had a
      clinical severity. It had all the economical elements of a place in which a human operation
      might be performed. He became fond of it as patients get an appetite for the leanness of
      convalescent life. He lay on his bed. He turned over the shell of many empty and depressing
      hours he had lived. He took particular pleasure in these listless concave shapes. His “good
      times” were avoided. Days spent with his present stepmother, before his father knew her, gave
      him a particularly numbing and nondescript feeling.
He sat up, listening to the noises from the neighbouring rooms and corridors. It began to
      sound to him like one steady preparation for his removal. Steps bustled about getting this
      ready and getting that ready.
The police-station had cost him some trouble to enter. But they had been attracted to each
      other from the start. Something in the form of an illicit attachment now existed between them.
      Buildings are female. There is no such thing as a male building. This practical and
      pretentious small modern edifice was having its romance. Otto Kreisler was its romance.
It was now warning him. It echoed sharply and insistently the feet of its policemen.
After his evening meal he took up his bed in his arms and placed it on the opposite side of
      the cell, under the window. He sat there for some time as 
       though resting after this effort. The muttering of two children on a doorstep in
      the street below came to him on the evening light with melodramatic stops and emptiness. It
      bore with it an image, like an old picture, bituminous and with a graceful, queer formality.
      It fixed itself before him like a mirage. He watched it muttering.
He began slowly drawing off his boots. He took out the laces, and tied them together for
      greater strength. Then he tore several strips off his shirt, and made a short cord of them. He
      went through these actions deliberately and deftly, as though it were a routine and daily
      happening. He measured the drop from the bar of the ventilator, calculating the necessary
      length of cord, like a boy preparing the accessories of some game. It was only a game, too. He
      realized what these proceedings meant, but shunned the idea that it was serious. Just as
      an unmoral man with a disinclination to write a necessary letter takes up the pen, resolving
      to begin it merely and writes more and more until it is, in fact, completed, so Kreisler
      proceeded with his task.
Standing on his bed, he attached the cord to the ventilator. He tested its strength by
      holding it some inches from the top, and then, his shoulders hunched, swaying his whole weight
      languidly on it for a moment.
Adjusting the noose, he smoothed his hair back after he had slipped it over his head. He
      made as though to kick the bed away, playfully, then stood still, staring in front of him. The
      last moment must be one of realization. He was not a coward. His caution was due to his
      mistrust of some streaks of him, the sex streak the powerfullest.
A sort of heavy confusion burst up as he withdrew the restraint. It reminded him of Soltyk’s
      hands on this throat. The same throttling feeling returned. The blood bulged in his head. He
      felt dizzy; it was the Soltyk struggle over again. But, as with Soltyk, he did not resist. He
      gently worked the bed outwards from under him, giving it a last steady shove.

He hung, gradually choking, the last thing he was conscious of, his tongue.
The discovery of his body caused a deep-felt indignation among the staff at the
      police-station. They remembered the persistence with which this unprincipled and equivocal
      vagrant (as which they still regarded him) had attempted to get into the building. And it was
      clear to their minds that his sole purpose had been to hang himself on their premises. He
      had mystified them from the first. Now their vague suspicions were bitterly confirmed, and had
      taken an unpardonable form. Each man felt that this corpse had personally insulted and made a
      fool of him. They thrust it savagely into the earth, with vexed and disgusted faces.
Herr Kreisler paid without comment what was claimed by the landlord in Paris for his son’s
      room ; and writing to the authorities at the frontier town about the burial, paid exactly the
      sum demanded by this town for disposing of the body.
</div></body></text></TEI>