<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Tarr</title><author>Lewis, Percy Wyndham (1882-1957)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER I
Some days later, in the evening, Tarr was to be found in a strange place. Decidedly his
      hosts could not have explained how he got there. He displayed no consciousness of the
      anomaly.
He had introduced himself — now for the second time — into Fraulein Lipmann’s aesthetic
      saloon, after dining with her and her following at Flobert’s Restaurant. As inexplicable as
      Kreisler’s former visits, these ones that Tarr began to make were not so perfectly unwelcome.
      There was a glimmering of meaning in them for Bertha’s women friends. He had just walked in
      two nights before, as though he were an old and established visitor there, shaken hands and
      sat down. He then listened to their music, drank their coffee and went away
      apparently satisfied. Did he consider that his so close connexion with Bertha entitled him to
      this ? It was at all events a prerogative he had never before availed himself of, except on
      one or two occasions at first, in her company.
The women’s explanation of this eccentric sudden frequentation was that Tarr was in despair.
      His separation from Bertha (or her conduct with Kreisler) had hit him hard. He wished for
      consolation or mediation.
Neither of these guesses was right. It was really
       something absurder than that that had brought him there.
Only a week or ten days away from his love affair with Bertha, Tarr was now coming back to
      the old haunts and precincts of his infatuation. He was living it all over again in memory,
      the central and all the accessory figures still in exactly the same place. Suddenly,
      everything to do with “those days,” as he thought of a week or two before (or what had ended
      officially then) had become very pleasing. Bertha’s women friends were delightful
      landmarks. Tarr could not understand how it was he had not taken an interest in them before.
      They had so much of the German savour of that life lived with Bertha about them !
But not only with them, but with Bertha herself he was likewise carrying on this
      mysterious retrospective life. He was so delighted, as a fact, to be free of Bertha that he
      poetized herself and all her belongings.
On this particular second visit to Fraulein Lipmann's he met Anastasya Vasek. She, at least,
      was nothing to do with his souvenirs. Yet, not realizing her as an absolute new-comer at once,
      he accepted her as another proof of how delightful these people in truth were.
He had been a very silent guest so far. They were curious to hear what this enigma should
      eventually say, when it decided to speak.
“How is Bertha ?” they had asked him.
“She has got a cold,” he had answered. It was a fact that she had caught a summer cold
      several days before. — “How strange!” they thought. — “So he sees her still!”
“She hasn’t been to Flobert’s lately,” Renée Lipmann said. “I’ve been so busy, or I’d have
      gone round to see her. She’s not in bed, is she ?”
“Oh, no, she’s just got a slight cold. She’s very well otherwise,” Tarr answered.
Bertha disappears. Tarr turns up tranquilly in her place. Was he a substitute ? What could
      all this 
        mean ? Their first flutter over, their traditional hostility for him
      reawakened. He had always been an arrogant, eccentric, and unpleasant person: “Homme egoiste!
      Homme sensuel!” in Van Bencke’s famous words.
On seeing him talking with new liveliness, not displayed with them, to Anastasya, suspicions
      began to germinate. Even such shrewd intuition, a development from the reality, as this :
       “Perhaps getting to like Germans, and losing his first, he had come here to find
       another.” Comfortable in his liberty, he was still enjoying, by proxy or otherwise, the
      satisfaction of slavery.
The arrogance implied by his infatuation for the commonplace was taboo. He must be more
      humble, he felt, and take an interest in his equals.
He had been “Homme egoiste” so far, but “Homme sensuel” was an exaggeration. His
      concupiscence had been undeveloped. His Bertha, if she had not been a joke, would not have
      satisfied him. She did not succeed in waking his senses, although she had attracted them.
      There was no more reality in their sex relations than in their other relations.
He now had a closer explanation of his attachment to stupidity than he had been able to give
      Lowndes. It was that his artist’s asceticism could not support anything more serious than such
      an elementary rival, and, when sex was in the ascendant, it turned his eyes away from the
      highest beauty and dulled the extremities of his senses, so that he had nothing
      but rudimentary inclinations left.
But in the interests of his animalism he was turning to betray the artist in him. For he had
      been saying to himself lately that a more suitable lady-companion must be found ;
      one, that is, he need not be ashamed of. He felt that the time had arrived for Life to come in
      for some of the benefits of Consciousness.
Anastasya’s beauty, bangles, and good sense were the very thing.
Despite himself, Sorbert was dragged out of his luxury of reminiscence without knowing it,
      and 
       began discriminating between the Bertha enjoyment felt through the pungent
      German medium of her friends, and this novel sensation. Yet this sensation was an intruder. It
      was as though a man having wandered sentimentally along an abandoned route, a tactless and
      gushing acquaintance had been discovered in unlikely possession.
Tarr asked her from what part of Germany she came.
“My parents are Russian. I was born in Berlin and brought up in America. We live in
      Dresden,” she answered.
This accounted for her jarring on his maudlin German reveries.
“Lots of Russian families have settled latterly in Germany, haven’t they ?” he asked.
“Russians are still rather savage. The more bourgeois a place or thing is the more it
      attracts them. German watering places, musical centres and so on, they like about as well as
      anything. They often settle there.”
“Do you regard yourself as a Russian — or a German ?”
“Oh, a Russian. I——”
“I’m glad of that,” said Tarr, quite forgetting where he was, and forgetting the nature of
      his occupation.
“Don’t you like Germans then ?”
“Well, now you remind me of it, I do : — very much, in fact,” He shook himself with
      self-reproach and gazed round benignantly and comfortably at his hosts. “Else I shouldn’t be
      here ! They’re such a nice, modest, assimilative race, with an admirable sense of duty. They
      are born servants; excellent mercenary troops, I understand. They should always be used as
      such.”
“I see you know them à fond.” She laughed in the direction of the Lipmann.
He made a deprecating gesture.
“Not much. But they are an accessible and friendly people.”

“You are English ?”
“Yes.”
He treated his hosts with a warm benignity which sought, perhaps, to make up for past
      affronts. It appeared only to gratify partially. He was treating them like part and parcel of
      Bertha. They were not ready to accept this valuation, that of chattels of her world.
The two Kinderbachs came over and made an affectionate demonstration around and upon
      Anastasya. She got up, scattering them abruptly, and went over to the piano.
“What a big brute !” Tarr thought. “She would be just as good as Bertha to kiss. And you
      get a respectable human being into the bargain !” He was not intimately convinced that she
      would be as satisfactory. Let us see how it would be ; he considered. This larger machine of
      repressed, moping senses did attract. To take it to pieces, bit by bit, and penetrate to its
      intimacy, might give a similar pleasure to undressing Bertha!
Possessed of such an intense life as Anastasya, women always appeared on the verge of a
      dark spasm of unconsciousness. With their organism of fierce mechanical reactions, their
      self-possession was rather bluff. So much more accomplished socially than men, yet they were
      not the social creatures, but men. Surrender to a woman was a sort of suicide for an artist.
      Nature, who never forgives an artist, would never allow her to forgive. With any “
      superior” woman he had ever met, this feeling of being with a parvenu never left him.
      Anastasya was not an exception.
On leaving, Tarr no longer felt that he would come back to enjoy a diffused form of Bertha
      there. The prolongations of his Bertha period had passed a climax.
On leaving Renée Lipmann’s, nevertheless, Tarr went to the café de l’Aigle, some distance
      away, but with an object. To make his present frequentation quite complete, it only needed
      Kreisler. Otto was 
        there, very much on his present visiting list. He visited him regularly at the
      Café de l’Aigle, where he was constantly to be found.
This is how Tarr had got to know him.
</div></body></text></TEI>