<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Tarr</title><author>Lewis, Percy Wyndham (1882-1957)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER III
Bertha went on turning the bread over in the pan, taking the butter from its paper and
      dropping it into its dish : rinsing and wiping a knife or two, regulating the gas. Frequent
      truculent exclamations spluttered out if anything went wrong. “Verdammtes Streichholz !”  “
      Donnerwetter !” She used the oaths of Goethe. One eyebrow was raised in humorous reflective
      irritation. She would flatten the letter out and bend down to examine a sentence, stopping
      her cooking for a moment.
“Sâlot!” she exclaimed, after having read the letter all through again, putting it down.
      She turned with coquettish contemptuousness to her frying-pan. “Sâlot” was, with her, a
      favourite epithet. Clara’s door opened, and Bertha crumpled the letter into her pocket. Clara
      entered sleepy-eyed and affecting ill-humour. Her fat body was a softly distributed burden,
      which she carried with the aplomb and indifference of habit. She had a gracefully
      bumpy forehead, a nice whistling mouth, soft, good and discreet orbs. Her days were passed in
      the library of the Place Saint Sulpice.
“Ach, lasse ! lass mich doch! Get on with your cooking!” she exclaimed as Bertha began
      her customary sociable and playful greeting. Bertha always was conscious of her noise, of
      shallowness and worldliness, with this shrewd, indifferent, slow, and monosyllabic bookworm.
      She wanted to caper round it, inviting it to cumbrous play, like a small lively dog around a
      heavy one. She was much more femme as she said, but aware that Clara did not regard
      this as an attainment. Being femme had taken up so much of her energy and life that
      she could not expect to be so complete in other ways as Clara. With this other woman, who was
      much less “woman” than she, she always felt impelled to ultra-feminine behaviour. She was
      childish to the top of her bent. This was insulting to the other : it showed too clearly
      Bertha’s 
       way of regarding her as not so much femme as herself. Clara felt this
      and would occasionally show impatience at Bertha’s skittishness: a gruff manlike impatience
      entering grimly but imperturbably into the man-part, but claiming at the same time
      its prerogatives.
Clara had had no known love affairs. She regarded Bertha, sometimes, with much curiosity.
      This “woman’s temperament,” so complacently displayed, soothed and tickled her.
“Clara, Soler has told me to send a picture to the Salon d’Automne.”
“Oh !” Clara was not impressed by “success.” She was preparing her own breakfast and
      jostled Bertha, usurping more than half the table. Bertha, delighted, retorted with trills of
      shrill indignation and by recapturing the positions lost by her plates. Her breakfast ready
      she carried it into her room, pretending to be offended with Clara.
Breakfast over she wrote to Tarr. The letter was written quite easily and directly. She was
      so sure in the convention of her passion that there was no scratching out or hesitation. “I
      feel so far away from you.” There was nothing more to be said ; as it had been said often
      before, it came easily and promptly with the pen. All the feeling that could find expression
      was fluent, large and assured, like the handwriting, and went at once into these
      conventional forms.
“Let Englishmen thank their stars — the good stars of the Northmen and early seamen — that
      they have such stammering tongues and such a fierce horror of grandiloquence. They are still
      primitive and true in their passions, because they are afraid of them, like children. The
      shocks go on underneath ; they trust their unconsciousness. The odious facility of
      the South, whether it be their, at bottom, very shrewdly regulated anger (l'art de
       s’engueuler) or their picture post card perfection of amorous expressiveness; such
      things those Island mutterers and mutes have escaped. But worst of all is the cult of the
       ‘ Temperament,’ all the accent on that poor last syllable, whose home
      is that dubious middle Empire, so incorrigibly banal. The lacerating and tireless pricking and
      pushing of this hapless ‘ temperament ’ is a more harrowing spectacle than the use of dogs in
      Belgium or women in England.”
This passage, from an article in the English Review, Tarr had shown to Bertha with
      great pleasure Bertha had a good share of impoverished and overworked temperament,
      but in a very genial fashion. It had not, with her, grown crooked and vicious with this
      constant ill-treatment. It was strenuous but friendly. It served in any case a mistress
      surprisingly disinterested and gentle.
On the receipt of Tarr’s letter she had felt, to begin with, very indignant and depressed at
      his having had the strength to go away without coming to see her. So her letter began on that
      complaint. He had at last, this was certain, gone away, with the first likelihood of
      permanence since they had known each other. Despite her long preparation for this, and
      her being even deliberately the cause of it, she was mortified and at the same time unhappy at
      the sight of her success.
The Kreisler business had been more for herself than anything, for her own private
      edification. She would free Sorbert by an act, in a sort of impalpable way. It was not
      destined as yet for publicity. The fact of the women surprising Kreisler and her on
      the boulevard had put everything at once out of perspective, damaged her illusion of
      sacrifice. Compelled  at once to be practical again, find excuses, repudiate immediately what
      she had done before she had been able to enjoy or digest it, was like a man being snatched
      away from table, the last mouthful hardly swallowed She was the person surprised before
      some work doing is completed — it still in a rudimentary unshowable state. For once Tarr was
      not only in the right, but, to her irritation, he had proofs, splendid ocular proofs, a cloud
      of witnesses.
To end nobly, on her own initiative, had been her

idea; to make a last sacrifice to Sorbert in leaving him irrevocably, as she had sacrificed
      her feelings all along in allowing their engagement to drag suspiciously on, in making her
      position slightly uncomfortable with her friends (and these social things meant so much to her
      in addition). And now, instead, everything had been turned into questionable meanness and
      ridicule; when she had intended to behave with the maximum of swagger, she suddenly found
      herself relegated to a skulking and unfortunate plane.
Considerations about Fate beset her. Everything was hopelessly unreliable. The best thing to
      do was to do nothing. She was not her usual energetic too spiritually bustling self. She wrote
      her letter quite easily and as usual, but she did not (very unusually) believe in its
      efficacy. She even wrote it a trifle more easily than usual for that reason.
It was only a momentary rebellion against the ease with which this protest was done. Perhaps
      had it not been for the fascination of habit, then some more adequate words would have been
      written. His letter had come. Empty and futile she had done her task, answered as she must do;
      “As we all must do!” she would have thought, with an exclamation mark after it. She sealed
      up her letter and addressed it.
In the drawer where she was putting Sorbert’s latest letter away were some old ones. A
      letter of the year before she took out and read. With its two sentences it was more cruel and
      had more meaning than the one she had just received: “Put off that little Darmstadt woman.
      Let’s be alone.”
It was a note she had received on the eve of an expedition to a village near Paris. She had
      promised to take a girl down with them, to show her the place, its hotel and other
      possibilities — she had stayed there once or twice herself. The Darmstadt girl had not been
      taken. Sorbert and she had spent the night at an inn on the outskirts of the forest. They had
      come back in the train next day without speaking, having 
       quarrelled somehow or other in the inn. Chagrin and regret for him struck her a
      series of sharp blows. She started crying again suddenly, quickly, and vehemently as though
      surprised by some thought.
The whole morning her work worried her, dusting and arranging. She experienced a revolt
      against her ceaseless orderliness, a very grave thing in such an exemplary prisoner. At four
      o’clock in the afternoon, as often happened, she was still dawdling about in her dressing-gown
      and had not yet had lunch.
The femme de menage came at about eight in the morning, doing Clara’s rooms first.
      Bertha was in the habit of discussing politics with Madame Vannier. Sorbert too was
      discussed.
“Mademoiselle est triste ?” this good woman said, noticing her dejection. “C’est encore
      Monsieur Sorbert qui vous a fait du chagrin ?”
“Oui madame, c’est un Sâlot!” Bertha replied, half crying.
“Oh, il ne faut pas dire §a, mademoiselle. Comment, il est un Sâlot ?” Madame Vannier
      worked silently with soft quiet thud of felt slippers. She appeared to regard work as not
      without dignity. Bertha was playing at life. She admired and liked her as an emblem of
      Fortune; she respected herself as an emblem of Misfortune. Madame Vannier was given the letter
      to post at two.
</div></body></text></TEI>