<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Tarr</title><author>Lewis, Percy Wyndham (1882-1957)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER II
One certain thing amongst many uncertainties about the English club, the Bonnington Club,
      was that it had not yet found itself quite. Its central room (and that was all there was of it
      — a shell of a house) reminded you of a public swimming-bath when it was used as a ballroom,
      and when used as a studio you thought of a concert-hall. But one had a respect for it. It had
      cost a good deal to build. It was quite phenomenally handsome as seen from the street, and was
      grateful. It made a cheerful show, with pink, red, and pale blue paper-chains and
      Chinese lanterns, one week for some festivity ; and the next, sparely robed in dark red
      curtains, would settle its 
        walls gravely to receive some houseless quartet. In this manner it paid its
      way. Some phlegmatic but obstinate power had brought it into existence. “Found a club, found
      a club !” it had reiterated in the depths of certain anonymous minds, with sleepy tenacity.
      Some one sighed, got up and went round to another, and said perhaps a club had better
      be founded. The other assented and subscribed something, to get rid of the other. In the
      course of time a young French architect had been entrusted with the job. A club. Yes. What
      sort of a club ? The architect could not find out. Something to be used for drawing-classes,
      social functions, a reading-room, etc. He saw he was on the wrong tack. He went away and made
      his arrangements accordingly. He produced a design of an impressive and to all appearance
      finished house. It was a sincerely ironic masterpiece, but with a perfect gravity, and even
      stateliness, of appearance. It was the most non-committing façade, the most absolutely unfinal
      interior, the most tentative set of doors, ever seen: a monster of reservation.
Not only had it been put to every conceivable use itself, but it dragged the club with it,
      as it were. The club changed and metamorphosed itself with its changes. The club
      became athletic or sedentary according to the shifts and exigencies of the
      building’s existence. The members turned out in dress-clothes or gymnasium get-ups as the
      building’s destiny prompted, to back it up. One month they would have to prove that it
       was a gymnasium, the next that it was a drawing-school.
The inviting of the German contingent was a business move. They might be enticed into
      membership, and would in any event spread the fame of the club, getting and subsequently
      giving some conception of the resources of the club-house building. The salle was
      arranged very prettily. The adjoining rooms were hung with the drawings and paintings of
      the club members.
Kreisler ever since the scene on the boulevard had

felt a reckless gaiety and irresponsibility, which he did not conceal.
With his abashed English hostess he carried on a strange conversation full of indirect
      references to the “stately edifice in the Hue de Rennes.” He had spoken of it to Bertha : “
      That stately edifice in the Rue de Rennes — but of course you don’t know it!”
With smiling German ceremoniousness, with ingenious circumlocutions, he bent down to his
      hostess’s nervously smiling face and poured into her startled ear symbols and images of
      pawnshops, usury, three gold balls, “pious mountains,” “smokkin” or “frac” suits, etc.,
      which he seemed a little to confuse, overwhelmed her with a serious terminology, all in a
      dialect calculated to bewilder the most acute philologist.
“Yes, it is interesting,” she said with strained conviction.
“Isn’t it ?” Kreisler replied. It was a comparative estimate of the facilities for the
      disposing of a watch in Germany and France.
“I’m going to introduce you, Herr Kreisler, to a friend of mine — Mrs. Bevelage.”
She wanted to give the German guests a particularly cordial reception. Kreisler did not
      seem, superficially, a great acquisition to any club, but he was with the others. As a means
      of concluding this very painful interview — he was getting nearer every minute to the word
      that he yet solemnly forbade himself the use of — she led him to a self-controlled remnant of
      beautiful womanhood who had a reputation with her for worldliness. Mrs. Bevelage could listen
      to all this, and would be able to cope with a certain disquieting element she recognized in
      the German.
He saw the reason of this measure; and, looking with ostentatious regret at a long-legged
      flapper seated next door, cast a reproachful glance at his hostess.
Left alone with the widow, he surveyed her ample and worldly form.
“Get thee to a nunnery!” he said dejectedly.
“I beg your pardon ?”
“Yes. You have omitted ‘ my lord.’”

Mrs. Bevelage looked pleased and puzzled. Possibly he was a count or baron.
“Do you know that stingy but magnificent edifice
“Yes
“That handsome home of precarious ‘ fracs ’ in the Rue de Rennes
“I’m afraid I don’t quite understand —” The widow had not got used to his composite
      tongue. She liked Kreisler, however.
“Shall we dance ?” he said, getting up quickly.
He clasped her firmly in the small of the back and they got ponderously in motion, he
      stamping a little bit, as though he mistook the waltz for a more primitive music.
He took her twice, with ever-increasing velocity, round the large hall, and at the third
      round, at breakneck speed, spun with her in the direction of the front door.
The impetus was so great that she, although seeing her peril, could not act sufficiently as
      a break on her impetuous companion to avert the disaster. Another moment and they would have
      been in the street, amongst the traffic, a disturbing meteor, whizzing out of sight, had they
      not met the alarmed resistance of a considerable English family entering the front door as
      Kreisler bore down upon it. It was one of those large, featureless, human groups built up by a
      frigid and melancholy pair, uncannily fecund, during interminable years of blankness.
      They received this violent couple in their midst. The rush took Kreisler and his partner
      half-way through, and there they stood embedded and unconscious for many seconds. The English
      family then, with great dignity, disgorged them and moved on.
The widow had come somewhat under the fascination of Kreisler’s mood. She was really his
      woman, had he known it. She felt wrapt in the midst of a simoon — she had not two connected
      thoughts. All her worldliness and measured management of her fat had vanished. Her face had
      become coarsened in a

few minutes. But she buzzed back again into the dance and began a second, mad, but this time
      merely circular career.
Kreisler was very careful, whatever he did, to find a reason for it. “He was abominably
      short-sighted ; he had mistaken the front door for one leading into the third room, merely.”
      His burden, not in the best condition, was becoming more and more puffed, and heavier every
      moment. When satisfied with this part of his work he led Mrs. Bevelage into a sort of
      improvised conservatory and talked about pawnshops for ten minutes or so — in a mixture
      of French, English, and German. He then reconducted her, more dead than alive, to her seat,
      and strode off from her with great sweeps of his tall figure.
He had during this incident regained complete impassivity. He stalked away to the
      conservatory.
Bertha had soon been called on to dance vigorously . without much intermission. In the
      convolutions of the valse, however, she matured a bold and new plan. She whirled and trotted
      with a preoccupied air.
Would Tarr hear of all this ? She was alarmed, now it was done. Also she was cowed and sorry
      for her action at the thought of Lipmann and Van Bencke’s attitude towards the Kreisler
      kissing. She undoubtedly must secure herself. The plan she hit on offered a “noble” rôle
      that she could not, in any circumstances, have resisted.
Her scheme was plain and clever. She would simply “tell the truth.”
“She had recognized something distracting in Kreisler’s life, the presence of crisis.
       On an impulse, she had offered him her sympathy. He had taken up her offer
      immediately in an astonishing and brutal manner. (One against him: two for her!) Such direct
      and lurid sympathy he claimed.”
So she jogged out her strategies in exhilaration of the waltzes.
At this point of her story she would hint, by ambiguous hesitation, that she, in truth, had
      been 
       ready even for this sacrifice: had made it, if her hearers wished! She would
      imply rather that from modesty — not wanting to appear too “ noble” — she refrained
      from telling them.
It is true that for such a confession she had many precedents. Only a week ago Fraulein Van
      Bencke herself, inflating proudly her stout handsome person, had told them that while in
      Berlin she had allowed a young painter to kiss her : she believed “that the caresses of a
      pure woman would be helpful to him at that juncture of his life.” But this had not been, it
      was to be supposed, in the middle of the street. No one had ever seen, or ever would see, the
      young painter in question, or the kiss.
Busy with these plans, Bertha had not much time to notice Kreisler’s further deportment. She
      came across him occasionally, and keyed her solid face into an intimate flush and such mask as
      results from any sickly physical straining. “Poor mensch !”
Soltyk surprised one Anglo-Saxon partner after another with his wonderful English —
      unnecessarily like the real thing. He went about surprising people in a cold, tireless way,
      exhibiting no signs of pleasure, except as much as was testified to by his action, merely.
Kreisler saw him with Anastasya only twice. On those occasions he could not, on the strength
      of Soltyk’s attitude, pin him down as a rival. Yet he was thirsting for conventional figures.
      His endless dissatisfaction and depression could only be satisfied by active things,
       unlike itself. Soltyk’s self-possessed and masterly signs of distinguished
      camaraderie depressed Kreisler very much. The Russian had been there once at the
      critical moment, and was, more distantly, an attribute of Volker. He did not like him. How it
      would satisfy him to dig his fingers into that flesh, and tear it like thick cloth ! He
      was “for it” ; he was going out. He was being helped off by things. Why did he not
       shout? He longed to act: the rusty machine had a thirst for action. His
      energies were repudiating their master.
Soltyk’s analogies with Kreisler worked in the dark to some end of mutual destruction.
      The nuance of possibility Soltyk liked his friendships with women to have, was a different
      affair to Kreisler’s heady and thorough-going intrigues. But he liked his soul to be marked
      with little delicate wounds and wistfulnesses. He liked an understanding, a little melancholy,
      with a woman. They would just divine in each other possibilities of passion, that was yet too
       lasse and sad to rise to the winding of Love’s horns that were heard, nevertheless,
      in a décor Versaillesque and Polonais. They were people who looked forward as others
      look back. They would say farewell to the future as most men gaze at the past. At the most
      they played the slight dawning and disappearing of passion, cutting, fastidiously, all
      the rest of the piece. So he was often found with women. Life had no lethargic intervals as
      with Kreisler. It at all times needed “expression” of such sort.
For Anastasya, Soltyk was one of her many impresarios, who helped her on to and off the
      scene of Life. He bored her usually, but they had something equivalent to pleasant business
      relations. She appreciated him as an Impresario.
These things arraying themselves in reality after this ordinary unexciting fashion,
      conventional figures of drama lacked. Kreisler was in the wrong company. But he conformed for
      the sake of the Invisible Audience haunting life. He emulated the matter-of-factness and
      aplomb that impressed him in the others à outrance. So much was this so that
      the Audience took some time to notice him, the vein of scandal running through the
      performance.
In the conservatory he established his headquarters.
From there he issued forth on various errands. All his errands showed the gusto of the logic
      of his personality, and not despair. He might have been enjoying himself. He invented outrage
      that was 
       natural to him, and enjoyed slightly the licence and scope of his
      indifference.
He, for instance, at the first sortie, noticed a rather congested, hot, and spectacled young
      woman, rather constantly fluttered over her womanhood, but overworked by her conscience, her
      features set by duty. He succeeded in getting her for a partner, and soon won her confidence
      by his scrupulous German politeness. He then, while marking time in a crush, disengaged his
      hand, and appeared to wish to alter the he of her bosom, very apologetically.
“Excuse me ! It’s awkward. More to the left — so ! Clumsy things and women are so proud of
      them ! (No : I’m sure you’re not!) No. Let it hang to the left!” The young lady, very red,
      and snorting almost in his face, left him brusquely.
Several young women, and notably a flapper, radiant with heavy inexperience and loaded
      with bristling bronze curls, he lured into the conservatory. They all came out with scarlet
      faces.
For the first hour he paid no attention to Anastasya, but prosecuted his antics as though he
      had forgotten ah about her. He knew she was there and left her alone, even in thought, in a
      grim spirit. He hid coquettishly behind his solemn laughter-in-action, the pleasant veil of
      his hysteria.
He had become generally noticed in the room, although there were a great many people
      present. Fraulein Lipmann hesitated. She thought at length that he was mad. In speaking to him
      and getting him removed, she feared a scandalous scene.
As he appeared on the threshold of the conservatory an expectant or anxious tremor invaded
      several backs. But he just stalked round this time on a tour of inspection, as though to see
      that all was going along as it should. He stared heavily and significantly at those young
      ladies who had been his partners, when he came across them. One he stopped in front of and
      gazed at severely. He then returned to the conservatory.
In his deck chair, his head stretched back, glasses horizontal and facing the ceiling, he
      considered the graceless Hamlet that he was.
“Go to a nunnery, Widow !”
He should have been saying that to his Ophelia.
Why did he not go to her ? Contact was the essential thing, but so difficult to
      bring about.
He must make her angry, insult her: that would bare her soul. Then he would spit on it. Then
      he really could insult her. But Soltyk offered a conventional target for violence. Soltyk was
      evading him with his contempt. Soltyk ! What should be done with him ? Why (a prolonged and
      stormily rising “why”), there was no difficulty about that. He got up from his
      chair, and walked deliberately and quickly into the central room. But Soltyk was nowhere to be
      seen.
The dancers were circling rapidly past with athletic elation, talking in the way people talk
      when they are working. Their intelligences floated and flew above the waves of the valse, but
      with frequent drenchings, as it were, and cessations. The natural strangeness for him of all
      these English people together did not arrest his mind or lead him to observation, but yet got
      a little in the way. Couple followed couple, the noise of their feet, or dress, for a moment
      queerly distinct and near above the rest, as though a yard or two of quiet surrounded
      Kreisler. They came into this area for a moment, everything distinct and clear cut, and then
      went out again. Each new pair of dancers seemed coming straight for him. Their voices were
      loud for a moment. A hole was cut out of the general noise, as it were opening a passage
      into it. Each new face was a hallucination of separate energy, seeming very distant, laughs,
      words, movements. They were like trunk-less, living heads rolling and bobbing past, a sea of
      them. The two or three instruments behind the screen of palms produced the necessary measures
      to keep this throng of people careering, like a spoon stirring in a saucepan.
It stirred and stirred and they jerked and huddled insipidly round and round.
Kreisler was drawn up at the first door for a minute. He was just taking a step forward to
      work his way round to the next, when he caught sight of Anastasya dancing with (he supposed)
      some Englishman.
He stopped, paralysed by her appearance. This reality intercepted the course of his
      imaginary life (of which his pursuit of Soltyk was a portion). He stood like somebody
      surprised in a questionable act. He had not reckoned on being met by her before his present
      errand was finished. The next moment he was furious at this interference; at her having the
      power to draw him up. This imaginary life should grow. Hell and Heaven ! he was not
      going to stop there looking at her. She and her partner had drawn up for a moment just in his
      way, being stopped by other couples marking time. She had not seen him. He took her partner
      roughly by the arm, pushing him against her, hustling him, fixing him with his eye. He passed
      beyond them then, through the passage he had made. His blood was flooding him, and making him
      expand and sink like a Russian dancer. The young man handled in this manner, shy and unprompt,
      stared after Kreisler with a “What the devil!” People are seldom so rude in England.
      Preparation for outbursts of potential rudeness form a part of the training of a German.
      Kreisler also, without apology, but as if waiting for more vigorous expostulation, was
      also looking back, while he stepped slowly along the wall towards a door beyond, the one
      leading to the refreshment-room .
Anastasya freed herself at once from her partner and pale and frowning (but as though
      waiting) was looking after Kreisler curiously. She would have liked him to stop. He had done
      something strange and was as suddenly going away. That was unsatisfactory. They looked at each
      other blankly. He showed no sign of stopping : she just stared. Suddenly it was comic. She
      burst out laughing. But 
        they had clashed, like people in the dance, and were both disappearing from
      each other again, the shock hardly over. The contact had been brought about. He was
      still as surprised at his action, which had been done “in a moment,” as she was. Anastasya
      felt, too, in what way this had been contact. She felt his hand on her arm as though
      it had been she he had seized. This rough figure disappeared in the doorway, as incapable of
      explaining anything. She shivered nervously as she grasped her partner’s arm again, at this
      merely physical contact. “What’s the matter with that chap ?” her partner asked,
      conscious of a lameness, but of something queer going on. This question had been asked a few
      minutes before elsewhere. “Herr Kreisler is behaving very strangely. Do you think he’s been
      drinking ?” Fraulein Lipmann had asked Eckhart.
Eckhart was a little drunk himself. He took a very decided view of Kreisler’s case.
“Comme toute la Pologne! As drunk as the whole of Poland!” he affirmed. But he only
      gave it as an opinion, adding no sign of particular indignation. He was beaming with greedy
      generosity at his great Amoureuse.
“Ah ! here he comes again !” said Fraulein Lipmann at the door. (It was when Kreisler had
      started up in search of Soltyk).
So Kreisler disappeared in the doorway. He passed through the refreshment-room. In a
      small room beyond he sat down by an open window.
Anastasya had at last got into fine with him. She had been startled, awakened, and had also
      laughed. This was an exact and complete response to Kreisler at the present. Something
      difficult to understand and which should have been alarming for a woman, the feel of the first
      tugs of the maelstrom he was producing and conducting all on his own, and which required her
      for its heart: and then laughter, necessarily, once one was in that atmosphere, like
      laughing gas, with its gusty tickling.
But this was not how Kreisler felt about it. He

was boiling and raging. That laugh had driven him foaming, fugitive and confused, into the
      nearest chair. He could not turn round and retaliate at the time. The door being in front of
      him, he vanished as Mephistopheles might sink with suddenness into the floor, at the receipt
      of some affront, to some sulphurous regions beneath, in a second; come to a stop alone,
      upright; stick his fingers in his mouth, nearly biting them in two, his eyes staring : so
      stand stock still, breathless and haggard for some minutes : then shoot up again, head
      foremost, in some other direction, like some darting and skulking fish, to the face of the
      earth. He did not even realize that the famous contact was established, so furious
      was he. He would go and strike her across the mouth, spit in her face, kiss her in the middle
      of the dance, where the laugh had been ! Yet he didn’t move, but sat on staring in front of
      him, quite forgetful where he was and how long he had sat there, in the midst of a hot riot of
      thoughts.
He suddenly sat up and looked round, like a man who has been asleep and for whom work is
      waiting; got up with certain hesitation, and again made for the door. Well, life and work
       (Ms business) must be proceeded with all the same. He glanced reflectively and
      solemnly about, and perceived the Widow talking to a little reddish Englishman.
“May I take the Widow away for a little ?” he asked her companion.
He always addressed her as “Widow” : he began all his discourses with a solemn “Widow !”
      occasionally alternating it with “Derelict!” But this, all uttered in a jumbled
      tongue, lost some of its significance.
The little Englishman on being addressed gave the English equivalent of a jump — a sudden
      moving of his body and shuffling of his feet, still looking at the floor, where he had cast
      his eyes as Kreisler approached.
“What ? I——”
“Widow ! permit me——” said Kreisler.

Manipulating her with a leisurely gusto, he circled into the dance.
The band was playing the “Merry Widow” valse.
“Merry Widow!” he said smilingly to his partner. “Yes, Merry Widow !”
      shaking his head at her.
The music seemed fumbling in a confused mass of memory, but finding nothing definite. All it
      managed to bring to fight was a small cheap photograph, taken at a Bauern Bal, with a flat
      German student’s cap. The man remained just his photograph. Their hostess also was dancing.
      Kreisler noted her with a wink of recognition. Dancing very slowly, almost mournfully, he and
      his partner bumped into her each time as they passed. The Widow felt the impact, but it was
      only at the third round that she perceived the method and intention inducing these bumps. She
      realized they were going to collide with the other lady. The collision could not be avoided.
      But she shrank away, made herself as small and soft as possible, bumped gently and apologized
      over her shoulder, with a smile and screwing up of the eyes, full of meaning. At the fourth
      turn of the room, however, Kreisler having increased her speed sensibly, she was on her guard,
      and in fact already suggesting that she should be taken back to her seat. He pretended to be
      giving their hostess a wide berth this time, but suddenly and gently swerved, and bore
      down upon her. The Widow veered frantically, took a false step, tripped on her dress, tearing
      it, and fell to the ground. They caused a circular undulating commotion throughout the
      neighbouring dancers like a stone falling in a pond. Several people bent , down to help Mrs.
      Bevelage — Kreisler’s assistance was angrily rejected. His partner scrambled to her feet and
      went to the nearest chair, followed by one or two people.
“Who is he ?”
“He’s drunk.”
“What happened ?”
“He ought to be turned out!” people said who had seen the accident.

Kreisler regained the conservatory with great dignity.
But now Fraulein Lippmann, alone, appeared before him as he lay stretched in his chair, and
      said in a tight, breaking voice :
“I think, Herr Kreisler, you would do well now, as you have done nothing all the evening
      but render yourself objectionable, to relieve us of your company. I don’t know whether you’re
      drunk. I hope you are, for——”
“You hope I’m drunk, Fraulein ?” he asked in an astonished voice.
He remained lolling at full length.
“A lady I was dancing with fell over, owing entirely to her own clumsiness and
      intractability —  but perhaps she was drunk ; I didn’t think of that.”
“So you’re not going ?”
“Certainly, Fraulein — when you go ! We’ll go together.”
“Schensal!” Hurling hotly this epithet at him — her breath had risen many degrees in
      temperature at its passage, and her breast heaved in dashing it out (as though, in fact, the
      word “schensal” had been the living thing, and she were emptying her breast of it
      violently), she left the room. His last exploit had been accomplished in a half
      disillusioned state. He merely went on farcing because he could think of nothing else to do.
      Anastasya’s laughter had upset and ended everything of his “imaginary life.” He told himself
      now that he hated her. “Ich hasse dich! Ich hasse dich!” he hissed over to himself,
      enjoying the wind of the “hasse” in his moustaches. But (there was no doubt about it)
      the laugh had crushed him. Ridiculous and hateful had been his goal. But now that he had
      succeeded he thought chiefly in the latter affair, he was overwhelmed. His vanity was wounded
      terribly. In laughing at him she had puffed out and transformed in an extraordinary
      way, also, his infatuation. For the first time since he had first set eyes on her he realized
      her sex. His sensuality had been directly 
       stirred. He wanted to kiss her now. He must get his mouth on hers — he
      must revel in the laugh, where it grew ! She was néfaste. She was in fact
       evidently the devil.
So his idée fixe having suddenly taken body and acquired flesh, now allied to his
      senses, the vibration became more definitely alarming. He began thinking about her with a slow
      moistening of the lips. “I shall possess her!” he said to himself, seeing himself
      in the role of the old Berserker warrior, ravening and irresistible. The use of the word
       shall in that way was enough.
But this infernal dance! With the advent of the real feeling all the
      artificial ones flew or diminished at once. He was no longer romantically “desperate,” but
      bored with his useless position there. All his attention was now concentrated on a practical
      issue, that of the “possession” of Anastasya.
He was tired as though he had been dancing the whole evening. He got up and threw his
      cigarette away ; he even dusted his coat a little with his hand. He then, not being able to
      get at the white patch on the shoulder, took it off and shook it. A large grey handkerchief
      was used to flick his boots with.
“So!” he grunted, smartly shooting on his coat.
The central room, when he got into it, appeared a different place. People were standing
      about and waiting for the next tune. It had been completely changed by his novel and material
      feeling for Anastasya. Everything, for a second time, was quite ordinary, but not
      electrically ordinary, almost hushed, this time. He had become a practical man, surrounded by
      facts. But he was much more worried ' and tired than at the beginning of the evening.
To get away was his immediate thought. But he felt hungry. He went into the
      refreshment-room. On the same side as the door, a couple of feet to the right, was a couch.
      The trestle-bar with the refreshments ran the length of the opposite wall. The room was quiet
      and almost empty. Out of the tail of his eye, as he entered, he became conscious of 
        something. He turned towards the couch. Soltyk and Anastasya were sitting
      there, and looking at him with the abrupt embarrassment people show when an absentee under
      discussion suddenly appears. He flushed and was about to turn back to the door. But he flushed
      still more next moment, at thought of his hesitation. This humiliating full-stop beneath their
      eyes must be wiped out, anyhow. He walked on steadily to the bar.
A shy consciousness of his physique beset him. He felt again an outcast — of an inferior
      class, socially. He must not show this. He must be leisurely.
He was leisurely. He thought when he stretched his hand out to take his cup of
      coffee that it would never reach it. Reduced to posing nude for Anastasya and the Russian was
      the result of the evening ! Scores of little sensations, like troublesome imps, herded airily
      behind him. They tickled him with impalpable fingers.
He munched sandwiches without the faintest sense of their taste. Anastasya’s eyes were
      scourging him. He felt like a martyr. Suddenly conscious of an awkwardness in his legs, he
      changed his position. His arms were ludicrously disabled. The sensation of standing neck deep
      in horrid filth beset him. Compelled to remain in soaking wet clothes and unable to change
      them, his body gradually drying them, would have been a similar discomfort. The noise of the
      dancing began again, filled the room. This purified things somewhat. He got red in the face as
      though with a gigantic effort, but went on staring in front of him.
His anger kept rising. He stood there deliberately longer ; in fact on and on, almost in the
      same position. She should wait his pleasure till he liked to turn round, and — then. He
      allowed her laughter to accumulate on his back, like a coat of mud. In his illogical vision he
      felt her there behind him laughing and laughing interminably. Had he gone straight up to her,
      in a moment of passion, both disembodied as it were, anything in the shape of objective
        observation disappearing, he could have avoided this scrutiny. He had preferred
      to plank himself there in front of her, inevitably ridiculous, a mark for that laugh of hers.
      Soltyk was sharing it. More and more his laughter became intolerable. The traditional
      solution again suggested itself. Laugh ! Laugh ! He would stand there letting the debt grow,
      letting them gorge themselves on his back. The attendant behind the bar began observing him
      with severe curiosity. He had stood in almost the same position for five minutes and kept
      staring darkly past her, very red in the face. Then suddenly a laugh burst out behind him — a
      blow, full of insult, in his ears —  and he nearly jumped off the ground. After his
      long immobility the jump was of the last drollery. His fists clenched, his face emptied of
      every drop of colour, in the mere action he had almost knocked a man, standing beside him,
      over. The laugh, for him, had risen with tropic suddenness, a simoom of intolerable offence.
      It had carried him off his legs, or whirled him round rather, in a second. A young English
      girl, already terrified at Kreisler’s appearance, and a man, almost as much so, stood
      open-mouthed in front of him. As to Anastasya and Soltyk, they had very completely
      disappeared, long before, in all probability.
To find that he had been struggling and perspiring in the grasp of a shadow was a fresh
      offence, merely, for the count of the absentees. Obviously, shadow or not, there or not there,
      it was they. He felt this a little; but they had disappeared into the Ewigkeit for
      the moment. He had been again beating the air. This should have been a climax, of blows,
      words, definite things. But things remained vague. The turmoil of the evening remained his,
      the solid part of it, unshared by anybody else. He smiled, rather hideously and menacingly, at
      the two English people near him, and walked away. He was not going in search of Anastasya.
      They would be met somewhere or other, no doubt. All he wanted now was to get away from the
      English club as soon as possible.
While he was making towards the vestibule he was confronted again with Fraulein Lipmann. “
      Herr Kreisler, I wish to speak to you,” he heard her say.
“Go to the devil!” he answered without hesitation or softness.
“Besotted fool! if you don’t go at once, I’ll get——”
Turning on her like lightning, with exasperation perfectly meeting hers, his right hand
      threatening, quickly raised towards his left shoulder, he shouted :
“Lass mich doch — gemeine alte Sau !”
The hissing, thunderous explosion was the last thing in vocal virulence. The muscles all
      seemed gathered up at his ears like reins, and the flesh tightened and white round his
      mouth.
Fraulein Lipmann took several steps back. Kreisler with equal quickness turned away, rapped
      on the counter, while the attendant looked for his hat, and left the Club. Fraulein Lippmann
      was left with the heavy, unforgettable word “sow” deposited in her boiling spirit,
      that, boil as it might, would hardly reduce this word to tenderness or digestibility.
</div></body></text></TEI>