<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Living Alone, by Stella
      Benson.</title><author>Benson, Stella (1892-1933)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1919</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">

CHAPTER IV
THE FORBIDDEN SANDWICH


While Sarah Brown's unenviable leisure was spent in acting as slave to committees,
     she had at the same time a half-time profession which, when she was well enough to follow it,
     brought twenty shillings a week to her pocket. She was in the habit of sitting every morning in
     a small office, collecting evidence from charitable spies about the Naughty Poor, and, after
     wrapping the evidence in mysterious ciphers, writing it down very beautifully upon little
     cards, so that the next spy might have the benefit of all his forerunners' experience. Sarah
     Brown never thought about the theory of this work, because the different coloured inks and the
     beautiful writing pleased her so.
There are people to whom a ream of virgin paper is an inspiration, who find the first
     sharpening of a pencil the most lovable
     of all labours, who see something almost holy in the dedication of green and red
     penholders to their appropriate inks, in whose ears and before whose eyes the alphabet is like
     a poem or a prayer. Touch on stationery and you touched an insane spot in Sarah Brown's mind.
     Her dream of a perfect old age was staged in a stationer's shop in a quiet brown street; there
     she would spend twilit days in stroking thick blotting-paper, in drawing dogs — all looking one
     way — with new pen-nibs, in giving advice in a hushed voice to connoisseur customers, who
     should come to buy a diary or a book-plate or a fountain-pen with the same reverence as they
     now show who come to buy old wine.
Therefore Sarah Brown's hand had found ideal employment on a charity register. As for her
     mind, it usually shut its eye during office hours. Her Dog David liked the work too, as the
     hearth-rug was a comfortable one, and Charity, though it may suffer long in other directions,
     is rather particular about its firing.
On the Monday after her change of
     home, Sarah Brown found that the glory had gone out of the varied inks, and even a
     new consignment of index-cards, exquisitely unspotted from the world, failed to arouse her
     enthusiasm. This was partly because the first name in the index that she looked up was that of
     Watkins, Thelma Bennett, single, machinist. The ciphers informed the initiated that Watkins had
     called on the War Association, to ask for Help and Advice, See Full Report. Sarah Brown felt
     sad and clumsy, and made two blots, one in green on the Watkins card, and the other in ordinary
     Stephens-colour on the card of one Tonk, chocolate-box-maker, single, to whom a certain charity
     was obstinately giving a half-pint of milk daily, regardless of the fact that last month she
     had received a shilling's-worth of groceries from the Parish.
The air of that office rang with the name of Tonk that morning. Hardly had the industrious
     Sarah Brown finished turning the blot upon her card into the silhouette of a dromedary by a few
     ingenious strokes of the pen, when the lady representing the
     obstinate charity came in, her lips shaped to the word Tonk.
"Tonk," she said. "Late of Mud Street. She has changed her address. I am the Guild of Happy
     Hearts. She still comes to fetch her half-pint of milk daily, and only yesterday I learnt from
     a neighbour that she had left Mud Street three weeks ago. It really is disgraceful the way
     these poor people conceal important facts from us. Have you her new address?"
"Our last address for Tonk was 12 Mud Street," answered Sarah Brown coldly. "But we have
     already notified you three times that the woman is not entitled to milk from the Happy Hearts,
     as she has been having parish relief, as well as an allotment."
"Tonk is — hm — hm," said the Happy Heart delicately in an undertone, so that the blushing
     masculine ear of the Dog David might be spared. "After Baby Week, you know, we feel bound to
     help all hm — hm women as far as we can, regardless of other considerations — "
"Really you oughtn't to. Tonk is
     posing as a single chocolate-box-maker." Sarah Brown was rapidly becoming
     exasperated with everybody concerned, but not least with the evidently camouflaging Tonk.
"She has a soldier at the Front," said the Happy Heart. "I am sorry to say that she will not
     promise to marry him, even if he does come home. But even so — "
Sarah Brown wrote down on Miss Tonk's card the small purple cipher that stood for hm — hm. "I
     will make enquiries about her address," she said.
But that was not the last of Tonk. Presently the red face of the Relieving Officer loomed
     over the index.
"In the case of Plummett — " he began loudly.
"In the case of Tonk — " interrupted Sarah Brown, to whom, in her present mood, Plummett
     could only have been a last straw. She hated the Relieving Officer unjustly, because he knew
     she was deaf and raised his voice, with the best intentions, to such a degree that the case
     papers on the index were occasionally blown away. "We have already notified you three times
     that Tonk
     is having a half-pint of milk daily from the Happy Hearts, as well as an allotment
     from a soldier."
"We stopped the groceries," roared the Relieving Officer. "But in the case of Plummett —
     "
"In the case of Tonk — " persisted Sarah Brown. "She has moved from Mud Street, can you tell
     me her last address?"
"She is living in a sort of private charitable institution, somewhere on the outskirts of the
     district — Mitten Island, I fancy. I don't know the exact address, because we have stopped the
     groceries, she paying no rent now. In the case of Plummett, I thought you might be interested
     to know that she got a month this morning for assaulting the Sanitary Inspector — pulling his
     nose, I hear. She told the magistrate it struck her as being a useless nose if it didn't notice
     anything wrong with her drains. The children came into the House this morning."
"What is Tonk's Christian name?" asked Sarah Brown, who had been a changed woman since Mitten
     Island was mentioned.
     
"I forget. Some flower name, I think. Probably Lily or Ivy. In the case of M'Clubbin, the
     woman is said to have fallen through a hole in the floor of the room she and her three children
     slept in. She was admitted into the Infirmary last night, and her furniture will be sold to pay
     her rent — "
"It begins with P," said Sarah Brown. "P. Tonk, unmarried wife, of Mitten Island...."
The Relieving Officer went away, for it was dinner-time. Sarah Brown absently unwrapped the
     little dinner which she had brought hanging by a thin string from a strangled finger. Mustard
     sandwiches with just a flavouring of ham, and a painfully orthodox 1918-model bun, made of
     stubble. Sarah Brown almost always forgot the necessity of food until she was irrevocably in
     the 'bus on her way to work. But this morning, as she had taken her seat with David in the
     bouncing ferry-boat, there had been a panting rustling noise behind her, and Harold the
     Broomstick had swept a little packet of sandwiches into her lap. He had disappeared before she
     had been
     able to do more than turn over in her mind the question whether or no broomsticks
     ever expect to be tipped.
Now I could not say with certainty whether the witch, in making up this packet of sandwiches,
     had included the contents of one of her own little packets of magic. Sarah Brown would have
     been very susceptible to such a drug; her mind was always on the brink of innocent
     intoxication. Perhaps she was only half a woman, so that half a joy could make her heart reel
     and sing, and half a sorrow break it. She was defenceless against impressions, and too many
     impressions make the heart very tired. Therefore, I think, she was a predestined victim of
     magic, and it seems unlikely that the witch should have missed such an opportunity to dispense
     spells.
After the first bite at the first sandwich, Sarah Brown was conscious of a Joke somewhere.
     This feeling in itself was akin to delirium, for there are no two facts so remote as a Joke and
     a Charity Society. The office table confronted Sarah Brown, and she wondered that she could
     ever have seen
     it as anything but a butt. She wondered how she had been able to sit daily in front
     of that stout and earnest index without poking it in the ribs and making a fool of it. The
     office clock, alone among clocks, had never played a practical joke. The sad fire below it,
     conscious of a Mission, was overloaded with coal and responsibility.
The second bite, ten minutes later, caused Sarah Brown to be tired and distrustful of a room
     that had no smile. Her eyes turned to seek the hidden Joke beyond the limits of that lamentable
     room. There was a spring-coloured tree in the school-ground opposite, and above the tree a
     rough blue and silver sky contradicted all the doctrines preached in offices. There was in the
     wind something of the old raw simplicity and mirth that always haunts the sea, and penetrates
     inland only on rare spring days. The high white clouds crossed the sky like galleons, like old
     stories out of the innocent Eden-like past of the sea, before she learnt the ways of steam and
     secret killing. Old names of ships came to Sarah Brown's mind ... Castle-of-Comfort ...
     Cloud-i'-the-Sun....
     
"I am doing wrong," said Sarah Brown. She took a third bite.
And then she felt the spirit of the Naughty Poor in the room; there was laughter, as of the
     registered, in the ears of the Registrar. It is not really permissible for the Naughty Poor to
     invade offices which exist to do them good. The way of charity lies through suspicion, but the
     suspicion of course must be all on one side. We have to judge the criminal unheard; if we
     called him as a witness in his case we might become sentimental. The Charity Society may be
     imagined as keeping two lists of crimes, a short one for Registrars and Workers, and a very
     long one for the registered. High on the list of crimes possible to Registrars and Workers is
     Sentimentality. It is sentimental to feel personal affection for a Case, or to give a child of
     the Naughty Poor a penny without full enquiry, or to say "A-goo" to a grey pensive baby eating
     dirt on the pavement, or to acknowledge the right of a Case to ask questions sometimes instead
     of answering them, or to disapprove of spying and tale-bearing,
     or to believe any statement made by any one without an assured income, or to quote
     any part of the New Testament, or in fact to confuse in any way the ideas of charity and love.
     Christ, who, by the way, unfortunately omitted to join any reputable philanthropic society,
     commanded seekers of salvation to be poor and to despise themselves. But this was sentimental,
     and the Charity Society decrees that only the prosperous and the self-respectful shall deserve
     a hearing.
"I am sentimental," said Sarah Brown to her Dog David in a broken voice. She turned again to
     her enchanted sandwich.
There was increased laughter in the air, and through it she heard the hoarse and happy
     shouting of the sparrows in the spring-coloured tree opposite. Sparrows are the ideal Naughty
     Poor, the begging friars, the gypsies of the air, they claim alms as a right and as a seal of
     friendship; with their mouths full of your crumbs they share with you their innocent and vulgar
     wit, they give you in return no I.O.U., and no particulars for your case-paper. When they have
     got from you all that you will give, they wink
     and giggle and shake the dust of your window-sill from off their feet.
Sarah Brown opened the office window, and the air of the office began at once to dance with
     life and the noise of children and birds. She thought perhaps these were magic noises, for she
     heard them so clearly. She broke her second sandwich upon the window-sill, and the sparrows
     crossed the street and stood on the area railing in a row below her, all speaking at once in an
     effort to convey to her the fact that a retreat on her part would be tactful.
The sparrow obviously buys all his clothes ready-made, probably at Jumble Sales, and he
     always seems to choose clothes made for a stouter bird. There is no reason why he should never
     look chic; he has a slimmer figure than the bullfinch, for instance, who always manages to look
     so well-tailored. It is just arrogance, pure Londonism, on the part of the sparrow, just that
     impudent socialistic spirit that makes it so difficult for us to reform the Naughty Poor.
Sarah Brown retreated one step. "I'm not going farther away. Either you eat
     that sandwich with me looking on, or you leave it."
The sparrows whispered together for a moment, saying to each other, "You go first." They
     obviously knew that it was a charity window-sill, and were afraid Sarah Brown might intend to
     rebuke them for not shutting their beaks while chewing, or for neglecting to put any crumbs
     into the Savings Bank. But after a minute one sparrow moistened his beak and came.... He ate,
     they all ate, and did not seek to escape as the door of the office opened and the witch came
     in. She went straight to the window and picked up from among the stooping sparrows a piece of
     the broken sandwich, and ate it. The Dog David was making sure that there was no surviving
     crumb on the floor to tell the tale of his mother's sentimental weakness. Almost instantly,
     therefore, that sandwich was but a memory, a fading taste in about twenty beaks and two mouths.
     But still the window stood open, and the air danced, and the white reflections of the ship-like
     clouds lay on the oilcloth floor.
     
Sarah Brown in the meanwhile, disregarding the witch, had returned to the index, and had
     taken from its drawer a notification form. In the space given for Name of Case she had written
     in her irreproachable printing hand:
"CHARITY, Cautionary Case, 12 Pan Street, Brown Borough. With reference to the above case, I
     have to report that it seems unsatisfactory. There are indeed grave suspicions that the above
     name is only an alias, the address being also probably false, for the genuine Charity's place
     of origin is said to be the home rather than the office. The present registrar is at a loss to
     identify with certainty this case. It would seem to be one of the Habits that haunt the world,
     collecting Kudos under assumed names...."
"It puzzles me," said the witch, looking out of the window, "why one never sees two birds
     collide. If there were as many witches in the air as there are birds, I bet you twopence there
     would be constant accidents. Do you think they have any sort of a rule of the road, or do they
     indicate with their beaks — "
     
"Witch," said Sarah Brown, "I have got to say something."
"Oh, have you?" said the witch, a little disappointed at being interrupted. "Oh, well, I can
     sympathise, I know what that feels like. Get on and say it."
The Dog David, who was really a good and attentive son to Sarah Brown, came and laid his
     chin, with an exaggerated look of interest, on her knee-cap.
"Is it any use," said Sarah Brown, "fighting against the Habits in the world, there are so
     many. Who set these strange and senseless deceivers at large? Religion which has forgotten
     ecstasy.... Law which has forgotten justice.... Charity which has forgotten love.... Surely
     magic has suffered at the stake for saner ideals than these?"
"Why, of course," said the witch impatiently. "Magic generally suffered because it
     was so sane. I thought everybody knew that."
"All habits. All habits," chanted Sarah Brown. "What is this Charity, this clinking of money
     between strangers, and when did
      Charity cease to be a comforting and secret thing between one friend and another?
     Does Love make her voice heard through a committee, does Love employ an almoner to convey her
     message to her neighbour?"
"Not that I know of," sighed the witch. "Sarah Brown, how long do you want me to keep quiet,
     while you say things that everybody surely knows?"
But Sarah Brown went on. "The real Love knows her neighbour face to face, and laughs with him
     and weeps with him, and eats and drinks with him, so that at last, when his black day dawns,
     she may share with him, not what she can spare, but all that she has."
The Dog David grunted a little, by way of rather dubious applause. Sarah Brown, with her own
     voice printed loud and stark upon the retina of her hearing, felt a little abashed. But
     presently she added in a whisper: "Listen. I am a spy. I am a lover of specially recommended
     neighbours only. I am here to help to give the black cloud Tyranny a rather dirty silver
     lining. I am the False Steward, in the interest of
     the Superfluously Comfortable. My Masters sit upon the King's Highway, taking toll
     in bitterness and humiliation from every traveller along that road. For surely comfort is every
     man's heritage, surely the happy years should come to every man — not doled out, not meanly
     dependent on his moral orthodoxy, but as his right. The fat philanthropist is a debtor, but he
     behaves like a creditor; he distributes obligations with his gold, yet he has no right to the
     gold he gives. He makes his brother beg upon his knees for the life and the health and the dear
     opportunity that should have been that brother's birthright."
"You are possessed, dear Sarah Brown," said the witch. "Don't be frightened, it will soon
     pass off. I knew a girl who had an attack very much like this; while she was under its
     influence she made up a psalm pretty nearly as good as one of David's. Her mother was much
     alarmed about her. But she recovered quite quickly, except that she left her job as typist in a
     mind-improving institute and went to sea as a stewardess."
Sarah Brown talked on, louder and louder.
      "Too long I have been a servant in the house of this stranger, this greedy
     Charity; too long have I sat — a silly proxy for the Too-Fortunate — in this narrow
     stiff-backed judgement-seat from ten till three daily. There is Love and April outside the
     window, there is too much wind and laughter outside to allow of the forming of Habits. I have
     seen Love and the Spring only through the glass of a charity office window, the rude voices of
     children and sparrows and other inheritors of opportunity have been dulled for me by grey
     panes. The white ships ... Castle-of-Comfort ... Cloud-i'-the-Sun have sailed into port from
     the open sky without a cargo for me...."
"Good God!" said Sarah Brown, pushing David from her. "What has happened to me? I have become
     sentimental."
The room seemed to her wild imagination to be full of the spirits of parsons and social
     workers with flaming swords, pointing at the door.
"Well, that's the end of that job," said the witch. "I'll tell you what, let's go and sit on
     the Swing-leg Seat on the
      Heath. The air there and the look of Harrow church steeple'll do you good."
"I am damned. I am a Cautionary Case," cried Sarah Brown, and she slunk behind the witch
     through the frowning gate of her Eden of fair inks and smooth white surfaces. She had shared
     with David the remains of her Sandwich of Knowledge; she had left on the table her puny paper
     defiance. David, except that he had required but little temptation, had played Adam's part very
     creditably in the affair. For him Eden had been a soft warm place, and he was anxious to blame
     somebody — the woman for choice — for the loss of his comfort. He followed her out into the
     cold, to become, as you shall hear, like Adam, a tiller of the soil.
     

</div></body></text></TEI>