<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>William — an Englishman</title><author>Hamilton, Cicely (1872-1952)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1919</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER XIV
Edith Haynes knew her way about Paris; and the little hotel in a quiet side-street, where a
     taxi deposited herself and her companion, was one that had sheltered her in days less eventful
     and strenuous, and where Madame, in consequence, was compassionate and not contemptuous at
     being asked to shelter two late arrivals in the last stage of dirt and untidiness. William,
     before he sat down to eat, had exchanged his torn garments for the suit of an absent son,
     called up on the first day of mobilization; and for all his ache and dull stupor of sorrow, he
     knew something of the blessing of bodily relief when he washed in hot water and was clean. He
     had had no real sleep since the night before Griselda died; now the need for it came down on
     him like a heavy cloud and, great as was also his need for food, he could hardly keep his eyes
     open through supper. When he woke next morning it was nearing midday and he had more than slept
     the clock round.
He pressed the bell as he had been told to do when he woke; and with the coffee and rolls
     that arrived at the summons came a pencilled note from his mentor. She had gone out to look up
     her relatives, and also to inquire about the time and manner of the journey from Paris to
     London; she wrote that she might not be back at the hotel for some hours, but the envelope that
     enclosed her communication enclosed likewise a tactfully proffered loan for the immediate needs
     of her fellow-traveller's wardrobe. But for the reminder it would have hardly occurred to him
     that his wardrobe was in need of renewal; he had grown so accustomed in the last long days to
     being ordered, guided, or driven that he had lost the habit of directing his own doings. As it
     was, he breakfasted, dressed himself again in the suit of Madame's absent son, and was
     instructed by Madame herself where to find a barber for an overdue shave and an outfitter
     capable of English. Thither he went, made his purchases mechanically and returned to the hotel
     with his new suit of black in a parcel. It seemed to him, as he walked the Paris streets, as he
     bought and paid and spoke of things that did not matter, that his sense of loss and his longing
     for Griselda was stronger even than in the first hours after her death. It was accentuated by
     his contact with the civilized, the normal; by the sights and sounds of the everyday world to
     which Griselda belonged. She had had no place in the strange French village where she died, no
     place in the misery and dirt of the crowded truck; but here where life, to all seeming, was as
     usual, where the streets were like enough to English streets to produce, after country solitude
     and the savagery of bloodshed, the illusion of dear familiarity: here she should have walked
     with her arm in his. Here she would have chatted, have gazed in shop windows and bargained ...
     and long years faced him with their deadly never as he went his way without her.
Later, when he had returned to the hotel and changed into his new black suit, a wild fit of
     useless rage came over him—and alone in his third-floor bedroom he cursed the devils who had
     killed his wife, the devils who had made the war. Under his breath, lest he should be heard in
     the corridor, he called down the vengeance of God on their evil heads, breaking inevitably, as
     his own store of invective gave out into lyrical reminiscence of that Biblical lore with which
     his mother had imbued him through Sunday after Sunday of his childhood; believing in the God
     whose existence he had usually ignored (and often doubted) because of his need of an avenger
     and a present help in his trouble. In that moment the God whom he sought—and it may be
     found—was the Lord God of Hosts, the Mighty One of Israel, Who was wont to strike the wicked
     and spare not; and the desire of his shaken and rebellious soul was even as the desire of him
     who sang out his hatred by the alien waters of Babylon. The hotel chambermaid put an end to his
     whispered prayer and anathema by tapping on the door to inform him that lunch was waiting on
     the table.
Edith Haynes, when she returned in the late afternoon with news that the journey could be
     made on the following day by way of Dieppe and Folkestone, found him clad in his new-bought
     mourning for Griselda and poring over English newspapers. His eyes were still haggard and moved
     her to pity, but she took it as a good sign that his stupor of grief had passed and that he had
     begun (as his first question told her) to feel a need for more information which might bridge
     the month's gap in his knowledge of the outer world. She gave him, with such detail as she had
     in her possession, the story of the outbreak of war and the causes thereof: and from her he
     learned for the first time of the ultimatum to Servia, and the tension thereby created; of the
     political consequences of the invasion of Belgium, and the feverish days of hesitation in
     England that had ended, on the Fourth of August, with the formal declaration of war. He
     listened, sometimes puzzled but always intent, from time to time putting a question that
     revealed his blank ignorance of the network of European politics; to which she replied as
     clearly as she could, showing him maps and talking on in the hope of distracting him from the
     thoughts behind his haggard eyes. By degrees she gleaned, from his hesitating queries and
     disconnected comments, some understanding not only of his profound ignorance of the forces that
     had brought about the war, but of the upheaval of his mind and soul which was the direct and
     inevitable consequence of the loss of his former faith. Once or twice as they talked he quoted
     her scraps and jerks of anti-militarist propaganda—from Faraday, from orators of the Trades
     Union Congress, from a speech of Philip Snowden's in Parliament urging the reduction of the
     Navy—and she saw that he was trying to justify to himself his attitude and creed of yesterday.
     In the midst of a quotation from Faraday on the general strike as a certain preventive of war,
     he broke off suddenly to appeal to her with: "Every one thought he was right. He seemed so
     sure. I didn't see how he could be wrong!"
She noticed that, wherever their talk might stray, he came back, time and again, to his
     central fact—that the blankly impossible had happened and the jest was a brutal truth. That, in
     the beginning, was all his mind had laid hold of; now, the first stage of amazement over, he
     was groping instinctively, and perhaps unconsciously, after rights and wrongs of quarrel, and
     striving to understand how the impossible had come into existence. Edith Haynes had not passed
     her life in the atmosphere of Internationalism, and would have been more than human had she
     been an impartial guide to him where the causes of war were concerned—just as he would have
     been more than human had he been capable of impartial guidance. What he lacked in patriotism he
     made up in personal suffering; he hated the German because he had been robbed of his wife, and
     it added but little to the fire of his hatred to learn of faith broken with Belgium. If he
     listened intently when she told of it, if he pored over newspaper paragraphs dealing with
     German cruelty to the conquered, it was because they fitted with his mood and justified the
     loathing in his soul.
It was his persistent poring over English newspapers that brought him in the end the
     salvation of a definite purpose. An article in The Daily Chronicle—some days
     old—described the beginning of the recruiting campaign for the raising of Kitchener's Army; he
     read it as he read everything else that explained or described the war. At first the article
     was nothing but news to him, a mere statement of facts; but as he read further a meaning flamed
     into the news. Bereft as he was of guidance, his mind swinging rudderless in chaos, he was
     waiting unconsciously for the man or the impulse that could seize on his helpless emotion and
     give purpose and direction to his life; thus the journalist's vigorous appeal to the nation's
     patriotism was driven home by the force of his own experience and became an appeal to himself.
     The writer had illustrated his argument in the obvious manner, by reference to the condition of
     invaded Belgium and the suffering of her people under the hand and heel of the enemy; he wrote
     of women outraged, of hostages killed, of cities laid waste, and of houses fired with
     intention. He was spurred by indignation, by pity and a natural patriotism, and had laid on his
     colours—to all but William—with a vivid and forcible pen. To William, as he read, the result
     seemed lame and pitiful, an inadequate babbling of the living horrors that had burned
     themselves into his soul; but for all its weakness—perhaps because of it—the article gave him
     the impulse for which he had been waiting in torment. It may have been his very sense of the
     inadequacy with which it described what he had known that set his imagination to work, that
     drove home its purport and made of it a lead to his blind and whirling emotions. He read and
     re-read while he quivered with impatience at its failure; if the man had seen what he had seen,
     if the man had lost what he had lost, he could not have argued so tamely. His pen would have
     been dipped in fire; he would have written so that all men reading him would have rushed to
     arms. The paper dropped from his hands to the table and he sat staring at a picture of his own
     making—of a crowd bitter and determined, moved by the tale of wrongdoing to a righteous and
     terrible wrath. He saw it setting forth to execute justice and avenge innocent blood ... and
     himself one of it, spurring and urging it on. So he first visualized himself as a soldier—an
     unscientific combatant of the Homeric pattern, but nevertheless a soldier. The vision thrilled
     and inspired him, and out of the deep waters of his impotent misery he clutched at the
     knowledge that he could act, resent, resist; that, ceasing to suffer as the slave suffers, he
     could give back blow for blow.
There was enough of the old leaven in him to bring him up suddenly, and with something like a
     round turn, as he realized that the act of striking blow for blow against the German would
     involve the further act of enlistment and the wearing of the King's uniform. His first mental
     vision of his warrior crowd had been vague as well as Homeric; he had only seen faces uplifted
     by courage, not the khaki and buttons below them—seeing himself rather as an avenger of
     Griselda than as a soldier of the British Empire. But it was only for a moment that he shied
     Like a nervous horse at the bogey of the "hired assassin." The prophets from whom he had
     learned his one-time contempt for the soldier were no longer prophets to him, and his
     conversion was the more thorough from his ingrained and extremist conviction that the opposite
     of wrong must be right. Conversion, in the sense in which the word is employed by the
     religious, describes most clearly the process through which he had passed: conviction of
     ignorance, the burden of Christian; a sense of blind longing and humiliated confusion—and now,
     at the end, light flashed on him suddenly, salvation figured by the sword.... It was, so to
     speak, but a partial salvation. He had lost his capacity for absolute faith, for the rapture
     that comes of infallibility; but he was of all men the last who could live without guidance,
     and his new creed had at least this merit—it was supported by his own experience. Its articles,
     had he formulated them, would have been negative rather than assertive—I have ceased to believe
     in the old, rather than I believe in the new; but it gave him that working hypothesis without
     which Life to him was impossible.
When he took his seat, next morning, in the train bound for Dieppe, his mind was made up—made
     up fiercely and definitely—on his future course of action; and as a result something that was
     by comparison peace had succeeded to the chaos and dazed rebellion of his first few hours of
     loss. His companion noticed the change in his manner and bearing; it was not that he seemed
     more resigned, but that he had ceased to drift—his eyes were as haggard as yesterday, but not
     so vague and purposeless. So far during their brief but close acquaintance she had treated him
     perforce as she would have treated a child—providing for his bodily and mental needs and giving
     him kindly orders; now, ignorant and obedient as he still was in the matter of foreign travel,
     he was once more a reasonable being. He was still for the most part sunk in his own thoughts,
     but not helplessly and endlessly so; he was capable of being roused and at intervals he roused
     himself. Once when they halted she was struck by the intentness with which he gazed at a
     trainload of soldiers in khaki—new come from England and moving up from Havre to the front.
     They crossed at a wayside station, and the two trains stood side by side for some minutes while
     William craned out of the window to stare at the brown young faces that were thrust from the
     opposite carriages. The sight moved him, if not in the same fashion as it moved his companion;
     he felt no tightening of the throat and no pride in the men themselves. What kept his head at
     the window till the train moved off was chiefly the thought that soon he would be even as these
     sunbrowned men of war, the personal desire to know what manner of men they were, how they lived
     and moved and had their daily military being. Hitherto a soldier of the home-grown variety had
     been to him nothing more definite than an impression of uniform, khaki and occasionally red;
     now, with the eyes of his newborn interest, he became aware of detail that had formerly escaped
     him, and compared him in figure, in face and garment, with Heinz and Heinz's companions. These
     hot-faced lads smoking pipes and calling jests would be his own comrades in days to come; thus
     he studied their features, their dress, their manner, as a small boy scans and studies the
     bearing of his future schoolfellows. If he did not thrill at the sight of young men about to
     die, he sent with them (remembering Griselda) his strong desire for their great and terrible
     victory.
Those were the days just before Mons was fought, when France (and others with her) was
     hopeful of a war that would end at her frontier and beyond it; when, whatever her wiser
     soldiers may have known, her people in general had no premonition of the coming retreat of the
     Allied Armies and the coming peril of the capital. There were still some ignorant and
     optimistic days to live before France as a whole would be stunned by the curt official
     admission that the enemy was well within her borders—since his battle-line stretched across the
     country from the Vosges mountains to the Somme. As for railway communication on the western
     lines, the rush of returning tourists that had followed on the outbreak of war was over, and
     the rush from Paris that began with the new threat of Kluck's advance was as yet a thing of the
     future. Thus William and his companion, though they travelled slowly and with lengthy halts,
     travelled in comparative comfort—finding in unpunctuality and a measure of overcrowding but
     little to grumble at after their journey by cattle-truck to Paris.
Rouen kept them waiting an hour or two, and there was another long, purposeless halt on the
     boat in Dieppe Harbour; so that it was nigh upon sundown when they slipped into the Channel and
     headed north-westward for Folkestone. The day, very calm with the stillness of perfect summer,
     was even as that day but a month ago when William and his little bride had steamed away from
     Dover, sitting deck-chair to deck-chair, touching hands when they thought no one saw them. And
     remembering the fading of those other white cliffs, William's heart cried out against God.
It was well past midnight when they slid into Folkestone Harbour where again there were long
     delays; so long that morning was red over France when the train drew away from the pier. It was
     during the two-hour journey to Charing Cross that William first spoke to his friend of his
     purpose of becoming a soldier; they were not by themselves in the carriage, but the other
     occupants nodded off to sleep soon after the train had left Folkestone, and for all practical
     purposes he and Edith Haynes were alone. She was surprised by the announcement, more surprised
     perhaps than she should have been—less on account of his previous record than because his
     appearance and manner were so utterly unmilitary. The British soldier of pre-war days was a
     type, a man of a class apart; it was a type and class to which William Tully was far from
     approximating, and she found it impossible to picture his essentially civilian countenance
     between a khaki collar and cap. Her surprise must have shown in her manner, for he began to
     explain in jerks.
"It seems the only thing to do," he said. "You can't sit down and let it go on; when you've
     seen what I've seen, you've got to do what you can. And they want men—they're asking for them.
     The papers say they want all the men they can get ... it's got to be stopped—that
     devilry—somehow or another ... and there doesn't seem any other way..."
His voice tailed off and he turned his eyes away—to the flying fields where the dew was still
     wet and the shadows still long upon the grass. When, a few minutes later, he told her suddenly,
     "It was just as pretty as this—where it happened," she knew that he was mentally transforming
     the peace and greenery of a Kentish landscape into the background of such an imitation of hell
     as he had lived through in the Forest of Arden.
It was not till they were well on the London side of Tonbridge that he turned again to his
     companion. Something that she had said in appreciation of his decision—a kindly meant phrase
     that commended his courage—had seemingly been held in his mind.
"I don't want you to think it's courage, and I don't want you to think I'm making any
     sacrifice—I'm not. I'm enlisting because I want to enlist—and there isn't anything else for me
     to do. Everything's gone now—I haven't anything to go back to. No duties or ... I don't see how
     you can call it a sacrifice."
He swallowed and halted again and she could only nod in silence. She knew enough of him by
     this time to know that what he said was truth, having learned in the course of their days of
     acquaintanceship that he had lost even more than his newly made wife, his hopes of a home and
     children. In very deed he had nothing to go back to, neither home nor daily occupation; in
     losing his cocksure, infallible creed he had lost the interests wherewith his days had been
     filled. His meetings, his busy committees, the whole paraphernalia of his agitator's life, were
     with yesterday's seven thousand years. Even if Griselda had not died he, knowing what he knew,
     would have had to begin life again.
Near Chislehurst, reminded of the nearness of London, he put an apologetic question.
"You'll think me very ignorant," he said, "but you see I've never had anything to do with
     soldiers. Have you any idea how you set about joining the Army?"
She explained that he had only to offer himself, and turned up an English newspaper bought
     the day before at Dieppe to point out a paragraph giving the situation of the various London
     recruiting stations. He studied it with interest and showed her that the nearest to Charing
     Cross was a station on the Horse Guards Parade. She had not understood that his intention was
     to enlist at the moment of arrival in London, and suggested a delay of a day or two for rest if
     not for reflection: the life before him was a hard one physically, and he had been passing
     through a week of exhaustion both physical and mental. To her arguments he shook his head,
     stubbornly impatient; he was so urgent to translate his new convictions into immediate action
     that it was with difficulty she prevailed on him to delay at Charing Cross for breakfast, and
     only manoeuvred him into the hotel by assuring him—whether rightly or wrongly she knew not—that
     it was as yet far too early in the day for any recruiting official to be at his post. On that
     assurance he yielded, and they took their last meal together.
She had contracted an odd species of affection for the little bereft and destitute man whom
     chance had thrown on her hands in his hour of need; it was difficult for her to rid herself of
     a sense of responsibility for him and his doings: and as they disposed of their eggs and bacon
     she found herself wondering, with tears in her throat, how he could come through the discipline
     and hardship for which his soft life had done so little to prepare him. It was pathetic and
     even ridiculous to think of him as a soldier, this wisp of a town-bred talker; to think of him
     marching and bearing arms in defence of such as herself—who topped him by a good two inches and
     had treated him almost as a child. She coaxed him to eat a good breakfast, dawdling over her
     own that he should sit and rest the longer; and when he suddenly remembered to ask her how much
     he owed her for the expenses of the last few days, she gave him, with the hastily invented
     amount, her address in Somerset and made him promise to write and keep her informed of his
     doings. He, on his part, shrinking instinctively from those who had shared his errors in the
     old life, clung to her as the one person who understood the new world into which he had so
     lately entered—understood it because she was part of it; thus neither was unmoved when they
     shook hands as friends and parted at the door of the hotel. She entered a taxi for Paddington
     and he turned his face to Whitehall and the tent on the Horse Guards Parade.
As he walked down Whitehall his heart thudded loudly on his ribs. He remembered, with a
     sudden tremor of rage, how Heinz had boasted of his Kaiser at Westminster and a German entry
     into London. The very thought made London dearer and finer to him, and he had a vision of
     himself driving Heinz before him—Heinz and that other, the round-faced young man with black
     eyebrows who had worked his will on Griselda. He saw himself striking and stabbing at the
     round-faced young man—beating him down while he prayed in terror for a mercy that was not
     granted. His lips were a hard white line and his fingers clenched and unclenched. London! by
     God, it should be not London but Berlin!
He had never dreamed of rejection; he knew vaguely that recruits were required to pass some
     sort of medical examination, but the idea that his proffered services might be refused had
     never entered his head. Edith Haynes, like himself, had seen few English newspapers for weeks;
     thus he did not know till he came to enlist that the standard of measurement for recruits had
     been raised since the outbreak of war, and that he, standing under five foot five, was not up
     to the Army's requirements in the matter of breadth and inches. The knowledge took him like a
     blow between the eyes, and he stood with dropped jaw, incredulous—it was inhuman, it was
     monstrous that they should take from him his right to strike back. For a moment he had no
     words; he dressed mechanically, stupid with the shock—while the round-faced man grinned
     damnably over Griselda dead by the roadside.... And when, in the end, his speech came back and
     he tried to stammer an appeal, some one patted him good-naturedly on the shoulder, put his hat
     into his hand, and turned him loose into a world that had no meaning for him.
</div></body></text></TEI>