<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Living Alone, by Stella
      Benson.</title><author>Benson, Stella (1892-1933)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1919</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
CHAPTER V
AN AIR RAID SEEN FROM BELOW


Magic is a disconcerting travelling companion. While seldom actually conspicuous,
     it seems to have a mysterious and varying effect on the surrounding public. I have met
     travellers by Tube who tell of strange doings in those regions, when the conductor of one
     compartment fell suddenly in love with the conductress of the next, and they ran to each other
     and met in the middle of the car. As nobody opened the gates or rang the bells, the bewildered
     train stood for hours at Mornington Crescent before any member of the watching public could
     find the heart to interrupt the pretty scene. It is patent that a magic person must have been
     the more or less deliberate cause of this episode. Then again, there is the story of the 'bus
     that went mad, just as it was leaving its burrow at Dalston. It got the idea that the kindly
     public was its enemy.
      You should have seen the astonishment of Liverpool Street and the Bank as it
     rushed by them. Old ladies about to ask it whether it went to Clapham — its label said it was
     bound for Barnes — stood aghast, and their questions died on their lips. Policemen put up their
     hands against it, — it ran over them. It even learned the trick of avoiding the nimble business
     man by a cunning little skid just as he thought he had caught it. You will hardly believe me,
     but that 'bus ran seven times round Trafalgar Square, until the lions' tails twisted for
     giddiness, and Nelson reeled where he stood. I don't know where it went to that day, certainly
     not to Barnes, but late in the evening it burst into another 'bus's burrow at Tooting, its
     sides heaving, its tyres worn to the quick, its windows streaming with perspiration, and a
     great bruise on its forehead where a chance bomb had struck it. I believe the poor thing had to
     be put out of its misery in the end. And what was the reason of all this? It was found that a
     wizard, called Innocent, of Stoke Newington, had been asleep on the top all the time, having
     forgotten to alight
     the night before, on his return from the City.
Sarah Brown, on the night of Lady Arabel's supper party, was unaware of the risk she ran in
     entering a public conveyance in company with a witch. But she was spared to a merciful extent,
     for nothing happened on any of the 'buses they boarded, except that, as they crossed the Canal,
     a cloud of sea-gulls swooped and swirled into the 'bus, resting awhile on the passengers'
     willing shoulders before disappearing again. Also the passengers on the Baker Street stretch
     sang part-songs, all the way down to Selfridge's. The conductor turned out to have rather a
     pleasing tenor voice.
The witch and Sarah Brown knocked at the Higgins' door five minutes before supper-time. Lady
     Arabel herself opened it.
"My dears, isn't it too dretful. All our servants are gone. It's an extraordinary thing, they
     never can stand Rrchud and his ways."
The tactful Sarah Brown nudged the witch. "Better not stay," she murmured.
"Of course we'll stay," replied the witch
     loudly. "I'm horribly hungry, and there's sure to be some supper."
"Certainly there is," added Lady Arabel. "I cooked it myself. Do you know, I've never seen a
     cookery book before, and the little pictures of animals with the names of joints written all
     over them shocked me dretfully. I feel I could have a too deliciously intimate conversation
     with a bullock now."
The house of Higgins had an enormous hall to which a large number of high windows gave the
     impression of a squint. I should think two small Zeppelins could have danced a minuet under its
     dome. Sarah Brown and the witch put on their cathedral look at once, by mistake, and propping
     their chins upon their umbrellas gazed reverently upward.
"Too dretful, a house of this size without servants," said Lady Arabel. "The fourth footman
     was the last to go. He said even the Army would be better than this. He liked spooks, he said,
     at second hand, but not otherwise. Too funny how people take dear Rrchud seriously. I'm glad to
     say
     the orchestra has stayed with us. Come into Rrchud's study, won't you, while I
     just go and help the first violin to dish up the soup."
Sarah Brown and the witch were left in a small room that opened on to the great hall. It was
     furnished rather like a lodging-house parlour. There was a thermometer elaborately disguised as
     a model of the Eddystone Lighthouse on the mantelpiece, flanked on each side by a china boot in
     pink, with real bootlaces, and a pig looking out of the top of each. There were pictures on the
     walls, mostly representing young ladies, more or less obviously in love, supported by rustic
     properties. I have noticed that the girl's first love is the monopoly of the Victorian painter,
     whereas the boy's is that of the novelist, but I do not know the reason of this.
There was a slight clap of thunder and Richard entered. He would have been very obviously a
     wizard even without the thunder, and seemed much less innocent about his magic than the witch.
     He had pale hair, a pale face, and eyes that did not
     open wide without a certain effort on the part of the brows.
"You are despising my ornaments," he said to Sarah Brown. "I admire them awfully. I don't
     like really clever art. Do you know, it makes me sneeze."
Directly he spoke, one saw that he was making the usual effort of magic to appear real.
     Witches and wizards lead difficult lives because they have no ancestry working within them to
     prompt them in the little details. Whenever you see a person being unusually grown-up, suspect
     them of magic. You can always notice witches and wizards, for instance, after eight o'clock at
     night, pretending that they are not proud of sitting up late. It is all nonsense about witches
     being night birds; they often fly about at night, indeed, but only because they are like
     permanent children gloriously escaped for ever from their Nanas.
"This picture," added Richard, "seems to me very beautiful." The picture might have cost a
     shilling originally, framed, or it might have been attached to a calendar once. It was a
     landscape so thick in
     colouring and so lightless that it failed to give an outdoor impression at all.
     There was a river and waterfall like well-combed hair in the middle, and a dozen leaden
     mountains lying about with — apparently — pocket-handkerchiefs on their tops, and a
     dropsical-looking stag drinking. "I can't imagine," insisted Richard, "that there could be a
     more beautiful picture than that, but perhaps it appeals to me specially because father and
     mother and I so often talk about the place together — the place like that, near to the mountain
     where I was born. That was in the Rockies, you know, and just below our mountain I am sure
     there was a canyon like that — I dream of it — with milky-green water running under and over
     and round the most extraordinary shapes of ice, and cactuses like green hedgehogs in the
     crevices of the rocks, and great untidy pine-trees clinging to an ounce of earth on an inch of
     flat surface. And the rocks are a most splendid rose-red, and lie in steep layers, and break
     out into shapes that are so deliberate, they look as if they must mean something. Indeed they
     do...."
     
A stave played by a 'cello called them to supper, and, as they returned to the hall, a burst
     of earnest music from the whole orchestra partially drowned the clap of thunder that again
     marked Richard's passage through the door. Sarah Brown felt sure that Lady Arabel arranged this
     on purpose. The wizard's mother obviously had great difficulty in not noticing the phenomena
     connected with her son, and she wore a striving smile and a look of glassy and well-bred
     unconsciousness whenever anything magic happened.
At the end of the hall the orchestra, arranged neatly in a crescent, was busily employing its
     violins in a unanimous melody of so rude and destructive a nature that it seemed as if every
     string must be broken. This mania spread until even the outlying bassoons, triangles, and
     celestas were infected. A piercing note of command, however, from a clarinet caused a
     devastating dumbness to fall suddenly on every instrument except the piano, which continued
     self-consciously alone. The pianist looked at the ceiling mostly, but one note seemed
     to be an especial favourite with him, and whenever he played it he looked closely
     and paternally at it, almost indeed applying his nose to it. All at once, just as Sarah Brown
     was beginning to imagine that she could catch the tune and the time, the music ceased,
     apparently in the middle of a bar. Richard sneezed once or twice. That unsophisticated wizard
     was evidently enjoying himself in the practice of his art. One felt that magic was not
     encouraged in the Army, and that the supernatural orgy in which he was now indulging was the
     accumulated reaction after long self-control. Strange noises of unnatural laughter, for
     instance, proceeded from distant corners of the hall, and each of the electric lights in turn
     winked facetiously. The string of the double bass broke loudly, and the new string which its
     devotee laboriously inserted also broke at once. The performer looked appealingly at Lady
     Arabel, but she refrained from meeting his eye. A blizzard of butterflies enveloped the table.
     This was evidently rather a difficult trick, for the spell collapsed repeatedly, and from one
     second to another Sarah Brown was never quite sure whether there were really
     Purple Admirals drowning in her soup or not.
"You are so lucky," sighed the witch, "plenty of room and every facility. I myself am so
     dreadfully cramped and hampered. I often have to boil my incantations over a spirit lamp, and
     even that is becoming difficult — no methylated."
"Not really lucky," said Richard. "In France the smallest pinch of magic seems to make the
     N.C.O. sick, and that's why I never got my stripe. To keep my hand in, I once did a little
     stunt with the sergeant's cigarette: it grew suddenly longer as he struck a match to light it,
     and went on growing till he had to ask me to light it for him, and then it shrank up and burnt
     his nose. Of course he couldn't really bring the thing home to me, but somehow — well, as I
     say, I never got my stripe."
To this discussion, and indeed to all the enchantments, Lady Arabel paid no attention, but
     continued to talk a little nervously on very insipid subjects. Her eyes had the pathetic look
     often seen in
     stupid people's eyes, the "Don't-listen-to-me" look, "I am not saying what I
     should like to say. The real Me is better than this."
Finally Richard indulged in a trick that was evidently a stock joke among magic people, for
     the witch laughed directly it began. Just as the hostess, with poised fork and spoon, was about
     to distribute the whitebait, the round table began to spin, and the whitebait were whisked away
     from her. The table continued to spin for a moment, with a deep thrilling organ sound, and when
     it stopped, the whitebait were found to have assembled opposite to Richard's place. He
     distributed them gravely. Lady Arabel turned scarlet, and murmured to Sarah Brown: "So
     dretfully ingenious, and so merry."
Sarah Brown took pity on her, and began talking at random. The orchestra was busy again, and
     to the tune of a loud elusive rag-time, she shouted: "Do you know, I gave my job the sack this
     morning. I shall be on the brink of starvation in three and a half days' time. That's counting
     a box
     of Oxo Cubes I have by me. You don't happen to know of a suitable job. I can't
     cook, and if I sew a button on it comes off quicker than if I hadn't. But I once learnt to play
     the big drum."
"My dear," said Lady Arabel, instantly motherly. "How too dretful. I wish I knew of something
     suitable. But — war-time you know, — I'm afraid I shan't be justified in keeping on the
     orchestra, certainly not in adding to it. Besides, of course, although women are simply too
     splendid nowadays, don't you think the big drum — just a wee bit unwomanly, my dear. However —
     — "
"Are you clever?" asked Richard.
"Yes, she is," said the witch proudly. "She writes Minor Poetry. I saw a bit by her in a
     magazine that had no pictures, — the bit of poetry was between an article on Tariff Reform and
     a statement of the Coal Situation, and it began 'Oh my beloved....' I thought it was a very
     beautiful bit of Minor Poetry, but somehow I couldn't make it fit in with the two articles.
     That worried me a little."
"If you'd try your best not to be clever
      I'd give you a job," said Richard, who with a rather tiresome persistence was now
     levitating the chicken, so that, invisibly suspended at a height of eighteen inches above the
     middle of the table, it dripped gravy into a bowl of daffodils. "In fact I will give you a job.
     I have a farm called Higgins Farm, just about half-way between sea-level and sky-level. You can
     be a Hand, if you like, at sixpence an hour. You can get there from Mitten Island every day
     quite easily, and I'll tell you how. It's just the other side of the Parish of Faery, on your
     right as you reach the mainland from Mitten Island. You follow the Green Ride through the
     Enchanted Forest, until you come to the Castle where the Youngest Prince — who rescued one of
     the Fetherstonhaugh girls from a giant and married her — used to live. The Castle's to let now;
     she is an ambulance driver in Salonika, and he a gunner — just got his battery, I believe.
     Below the outer wall of the Castle you will see the Daisified Path, and that leads you straight
     to the gate of Higgins Farm, under a clipped box archway."
     
"I haven't got a land outfit," said Sarah Brown. "But I saw a pair called Mesopotamian
     Officer's Model, with laces and real white buckskin collision mats between the knees, that
     would fit me, and I can pawn my — — "
At that moment there was a loud report. Every one looked at the double bass, but all his
     strings were for the moment intact.
"A maroon," said the witch.
"My dears," exclaimed Lady Arabel, much relieved to hear that this new sensation was not
     supernatural. "How too dretfully tahsome with the sweet and the savoury still to come. Do you
     know, I promised Pinehurst — my husband — never to remain in this house during an air-raid. It
     was his own fault, the dear thing; he had a craze for windows; this house has more glass space
     than wall, I think, and Pinehurst, in his spare time, used always to be making plans for
     squeezing in more windows. Our room is like a conservatory — so dretfully embarrassing. So I
     always take my knitting across the road to the crypt of St. Sebastian's, and I'm sure you won't
     mind coming too.
      You might have brought a box of spellicans, or a set of table croquet, but I'm
     afraid the Vicar wouldn't like it. A nice man but dretfully particular. We must wait for the
     end of this piece, the first violin is so touchy."
They all waited patiently while the piece continued. It was a plain uneventful piece,
     composed by a Higgins relative and therefore admired in the household.
"A thing that puzzles me," said the witch, taking advantage of an emotional pause while one
     violin was wheezing a very long small note by itself, "is why only ugly songs are really
     persistent. Haven't you noticed, for instance, that a peacock, or a cat on the wall, or a baby
     with a tin trumpet, will give their services most generously for hours on end, while a robin on
     a snowy tree, or a nightingale, or a fairy — — "
She was interrupted by a scuffling sound in the umbrella-stand, and Harold the Broomstick,
     after a moment's rather embarrassing entanglement with a butterfly net, approached,
     panting.
"I must go," said the witch. "I bet you twopence we shall have some fun
     to-night. Sarah Brown, I'll come back and fetch you when it's all over."
Lady Arabel and Sarah Brown crossed the road to the church, Richard following a few yards
     behind.
"I'm afraid my little dinner-party wasn't a great success," said Lady Arabel confidentially.
     "Rrchud and Angela didn't get that good talk on occult subjects as Meta Ford said they would.
     Of course Rrchud, as you noticed, was dretfully restless and lighthearted; all boys are like
     that for the first few hours of their leave. He is naturally of a quiet disposition, though you
     wouldn't think it from to-night."
There was a distant blot of gunfire on the air, just as they reached the door of the crypt.
     The very stout dog of the Vicar (are not all reverend dogs fat?) was waiting there with a bored
     look.
"The Vicar allows no animals inside the crypt. So hard on Mrs. Perry's canary which has fits.
     I was here once when the Vicar's youngest son brought in a rabbit under his coat. A dretful
     scene, my dear."
That district of London happened to be
     rather a courageous one. The inhabitants felt that if the War had to be brought
     home to them, common politeness dictated that it should find them at home. There were not more
     than a dozen people in the crypt therefore. Most of them were old ladies from the district's
     less respectable quarter, knitting. The Vicar was trying to press comfort upon them, but
     without much success, for they were all quite content, discussing the deaths in their
     families.
The noise of gunfire was coming nearer, shaking the ground like the uneven tread of a drunken
     giant. Sarah Brown concentrated on an evening newspaper, busily reading again and again one of
     those columns of confidential man-to-man advertisement, which everybody reads with avidity
     while determining the more never to buy the article advertised. But presently the fidgeting
     hands of Richard caught her eye, and she looked at him. He was sitting next to his mother on a
     stone step. He seemed to be in a quieter mood and attempted no manifestation. Sarah Brown
     thought he was suppressing excitement, however, and indeed
     he presently said: "I say, won't it be fun lying about all this to posterity and
     Americans, and other defenceless innocents."
Opposite to them, on two campstools, sat a young bridling mother of fifty, with her old hard
     daughter of sixteen or so. Hard was that daughter in every way; you would have counted her age
     in winters, not in summers, so obviously untender were her years. An iron plait of hair lay for
     about six inches down her spine; her feet and ankles made the campstool on which she sat,
     looking pathetically ethereal. Of such stuff as this is the backbone of England made, which is
     perhaps why the backbone of England sometimes seems so sadly inflexible.
There was a screeching noise outside, followed by an incredible crash. It seemed to cleave a
     bottomless abyss between one second and the next, so that one seemed to be conscious for the
     first time in an astonished and astonishing world.
Lady Arabel said: "Boys will be boys, of course I know, but really this is going a little too
     far. Pinehurst's one hobby was his windows."
     
The campstooled mother gave a luxurious little shriek as soon as the crash was safely over.
     "The villains," she said kittenishly. "Aiming at places of worship as usual. I am absolutely
     paralysed with terror. Mary, darling, I don't believe you turned a hair."
"Pas un cheval," replied her firm daughter, in not unnatural error. One could easily see that
     she was beloved at home, and one wondered why.
The sound of the guns seemed only a negative form of sound after the bomb, and clearly above
     the firing could be heard a howl. The Vicar's dog, still howling, ran into the crypt.
"RUPERT!" said the Vicar, in a terrible voice, interrupting himself in the middle of a
     cheering platitude. But he had no time to say anything more, for behind Rupert came a
     procession of perhaps a dozen people, all dressed in sheets. Everybody saw at one pitiful
     glance that these were unfortunate householders, so suddenly roused from oblivion as to forget
     all their ordinary suburban dignity, probably barely escaping from ruined homes with their
     lives and a
     sheet each. There was a very old man, a middle-aged spinster, and then an enormous
     group of children of ages varying from two months to twenty years, followed by their parents,
     teachers, or guardians.
A nearer gun began to fire, and one of the old ladies on the other side of the crypt suddenly
     threw down her knitting and began confessing her sins. "Ow, I shall go to 'ell," she shouted
     dramatically. "I bin sich a wicked ol' woman. I nearly done in me first ol' man by biffin' the
     chopper at 'is nob, and Lawd, the lies I bin an' tol' me second only yesterday."
"This is indeed a solemn moment," said the sheeted spinster sitting down beside Lady Arabel.
     "I hope I am meeting it in a proper spirit, but of course one is still only human, and
     naturally nervous. I have learned my statement by heart."
"What statement?" asked Lady Arabel, who was rather deeply engrossed in turning the heel of
     the sock she was knitting.
"The statement I shall make when the sheep are divided from the goats."
"Oh, come, come," said kind Lady
      Arabel. "Things are not so bad as that, surely. You must not be so dretfully
     pessimistic."
"You mistake me," said the sheeted lady, bridling. "There is, I am confident, no cause
     whatever for pessimism on my part. I have no misgivings as to the verdict. But not being used
     to courts of law, I thought it best to learn my statement, as I say, by heart."
The old knitter had been rather annoyed to find her confession interrupted. "A wicked ol'
     woman I may be," she said with more dignity. "But I'll never regret givin' that bloody speshul
     a bit o' me mind this mornin' when 'e turned saucy to the sugar queue. I ses to 'im — — "
"We all have our faults," Lady Arabel's neighbour broke in. "But I think, at this solemn
     moment, I may feel thankful that hastiness of recrimination was never one of mine. All my life
     I have made it an unalterable rule never to make a statement without first asking myself: Is it
      TRUE? Is it JUST? Is it KIND?"
"You may well say so," replied Lady Arabel pleasantly. "I only wish the younger
     generation would follow your example. Nowadays it is much more likely to be: Is it
     true? No. Is it just? No. Is it kind? No. Is it FUNNY? Yes. And out it comes."
"Be that as it may," said the ladylike creature. (One could see she was a Real Lady even
     through the sheet. Obviously she read the Morning Post daily.) "Be that as it may,
     perhaps you can help me in one little matter which is intriguing me slightly even at this
     solemn moment. Do you suppose the sheep will be allowed to hear the trial of the goats, or will
     the court be cleared? I must say I should be so interested to hear the defence of the late
     churchwarden who eloped with — — "
"Ah, please, please," said Lady Arabel, "don't talk in that dretful way. Don't let your mind
     dwell on the worst. I assure you that you will be all right."
"Of course I shall be all right, as you put it," said the elderly lady, coldly drawing
     herself up. "Everybody can be my witness that I have kept my candle burning in my small corner
     — — "
     
"Good gracious," shrieked the kittenish mother. "A candle burning to-night. And probably
     unshaded. Don't you know that those fiends in the sky are always on the watch for the slightest
     illumination?"
"Fiends in the sky!" exclaimed the sheeted lady. "Do you mean to say they are abroad even at
     this solemn moment?"
"Oh, don't talk such rot," implored the hard flapper. "Who the dickens do you suppose was
     responsible for that crash?"
"Responsible for the crash!" said the other, whose tones were becoming more and more alive
     with exclamation marks. "Is then the solemn work of summoning us entrusted to the minions of
     the Evil One?"
A series of crashes interrupted her, the work of the adjacent gun. The earth shook, and each
     report was followed by the curious ethereal wail of shells on their way.
"What, again?" exclaimed Lady Arabel's sheeted neighbour. "I should have thought one would
     have been ample. But still, one cannot be too careful, and some people are heavy sleepers. I
     heard the first myself without any possibility of mistake, and rose
     at once, though the slab lay heavy on my chest — — "
"Most unwise," said Lady Arabel, "to touch that sort of thing late at night. I always have a
     little Benger myself."
Sarah Brown happened to look at Richard. His eyes were shut, but he was smiling very broadly
     with tight lips, and his face was turned towards the ceiling. His fingers were very tense and
     busy on his lap, as though he were still fidgeting with magic. But her study of him was
     interrupted by the loud denouncing voice of the very venerable man who had led the procession
     of late-comers.
"A dog in this hallowed place," he said, pointing at the deeply disconcerted Rupert who was
     weaving himself nervously in and out of his master's legs. "Never in all the forty years of my
     ministration here have I allowed such an outrage — — "
"Gently, gently, my dear sir," protested the Vicar, a little roused. "I am the minister of
     this church, and the dog is mine. I was indeed about to turn it out when you entered, after
     which I lost sight of it for a moment. Rupert, go home."
     
Rupert howled again, and lay down as if about to faint.
"Forty years have I been Vicar of this parish," said the veteran, "and never — — "
"What?" interrupted the Vicar, "Forty years Vicar of this parish. Then you must be Canon
     Burstley-Ripp. How very extraordinary, I always understood that he passed away quite ten years
     ago."
He approached the old man and strove to button-hole him. The sheet at first foiled him in
     this intention, but he presently contented himself with seizing a little corner of it, by which
     he led his aged brother vicar into a corner. There they could be heard for some time
     misunderstanding each other in low earnest tones.
"Ow, what a wicked ol' woman I bin an' bin," suddenly burst forth again the repentant
     knitter. "I bin an' stole 'arf a pound o' sugar off of the Eelite 'Atshop where I does a bit o'
     cleanin'. Ef I get out o' this alive, I swear I'll repay it an 'undredfold — that is ef I can
     get that much awf me sugar card...."
Sarah Brown was becoming sleepy. A
     blankness was invading her mind, and the talk in the crypt seemed to lose its
     meaning, and to consist chiefly of S's. She pondered idly on the family of children with their
     elders, all of whom were now studying each other with a certain look of disillusionment. It was
     a group whose relationships were difficult to make out, the ages of many of the children being
     unnaturally approximate. There seemed to be at least seven children under three years old, and
     yet they all bore a strong and regrettable family likeness. Several of the babies would hardly
     have been given credit for having reached walking age, yet none had been carried in. The woman
     who seemed to imagine herself the mother of this rabble was distributing what looked like
     hurried final words of advice. The father with a pensive eye was obviously trying to remember
     their names, and at intervals whispering to a man apparently twenty years his senior, whom he
     addressed as Sonny. It was all very confusing.
A long dim stretch of time seemed to have passed when suddenly the note of a
     bugle sprang out across space. Somehow the air at once felt cooler and more
     wholesome, the sound of the All-clear had something akin to the sight of the sun after a
     thunderstorm, lighting up a crouching whipped world.
"The Trump at last," said Lady Arabel's garrulous neighbour, rising with alacrity, and
     twitching her sheet into more becoming folds. "I was just wondering — — "
But at that moment the two Vicars approached, and the elder one, including both the spinster
     and the mysterious family in one glance, spoke in a clerical yet embarrassed voice.
"Dear friends, a slight but inconvenient mistake has occurred, and I am afraid I must ask you
     to submit blindly to my guidance in a matter strangely difficult to explain, even as I — myself
     in much confusion — bow to the advice of my reverend friend here. It would be out of place — —
     "
The spinster interrupted, and, by the way she did it, one saw that she was Chapel. "Excuse
     me, Canon," she said acidly, "but is not all discussion out of place at this solemn moment?"
     
"Believe me, madam," replied the aged Burstley-Ripp. "You overrate the solemnity of the
     moment. I must earnestly ask you all to return with me to the places whence — labouring under
     an extraordinary error — we came to-night. I see that Mrs. Parachute trusts me, and is prepared
     to lead her little flock to rest again. You, madam — — "
"Where Mrs. Parachute leads, far be it from me to seem behindhand," said the other, much
     ruffled, as she gathered her sheet about her. By the way she said it, one saw that she and Mrs.
     Parachute did not call. She bowed to Lady Arabel, and became satirical, even arch. "Good
     afternoon, Mrs. — er — , I am assured that the moment is not solemn, and therefore solemn it
     shall not be. To turn to lighter subjects, I hope I shall have the pleasure of meeting you and
     your delightful son and daughter again at no distant date, the moment then being genuinely
     solemn. I fear I have no visiting card on me, but — er — perhaps my slab just outside — very
     superior granite — would do as a substitute...."
     
The pale party filed out of the crypt and disappeared. The remaining Vicar smote his brow,
     and addressed the now calm Rupert in a low voice, but with such unaccountable warmth that that
     harassed animal disappeared precipitately in the direction of his home.
Lady Arabel, Sarah Brown, and Richard crossed the churchyard together.
"Oh, my dears, look," said Lady Arabel. "How too too dretful, that bomb fell quite close to
     us. Do look how it has disturbed the graves...."
     

</div></body></text></TEI>