<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>William — an Englishman</title><author>Hamilton, Cicely (1872-1952)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1919</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III
After the usual hesitations and excursions they had settled on their future home—a tiny flat
     in Bloomsbury, central and handy for the perpetual getting about to meetings which was so
     integral a part of their well-filled, bustling lives. They furnished it lovingly and with what
     they considered good taste; Griselda brought in her friends to admire, and engaged a
     respectable woman who was to "do" for them and have all in readiness when they returned from
     their four weeks' honeymoon—and they were as foolishly happy over their nest as any other
     loving little couple.
They were married towards the end of July—to be exact, on the twenty-third day of the month.
     The wedding took place in Balham from the house of Griselda's aunt; the ceremony was performed
     by an enlightened vicar who had consented to omit the ignoble vow of obedience; and the church
     was thronged to its doors with comrades and ardent sympathizers. The advanced Press spread
     itself over the description of the ceremony and—in view of the fact that the bridesmaids, six
     in number, had all done time for assault—even the Press that was not advanced considered the
     event worth a paragraph. The pair were snapshotted on leaving the church with the customary
     direful results, and the modest residence of Griselda's aunt could hardly accommodate the flood
     of progressive guests. There was rice and slipper-throwing and a whirl of good wishes—and
     Griselda, flushed, looked pretty, and in William's eyes quite lovely.
They left by an afternoon train for Dover and crossed the next day to Ostend.
Their selection of the Belgian Ardennes for a honeymoon was due to Griselda's long-standing
     acquaintance with a cosmopolitan female revolutionist understood to be of Russian Polish
     extraction. Owing, it was further understood, to her pronounced opinions and pronounced manner
     of expressing them, she had long ceased to be welcome in the land that gave her birth; at any
     rate, she avoided it studiously and existed chiefly at a series of epoch-making revolutionary
     meetings which she addressed by turns in bad German, worse French, and worst English. She wrote
     vehement pamphlets in all these languages and prided herself on the fact that, on the Continent
     at least, they were frequently suppressed by the police; wore tartan blouses, a perennial
     smile, and a hat that was always askew. For some reason or another she was the possessor of a
     cottage in the heart of the Belgian Ardennes—which she visited on the rare occasions when she
     was not plying her epoch-making activities in London, Vienna, or New York. A week once a year
     was about all the use she made of it—reappearing after her seven days' seclusion with a brace
     of new pamphlets burning for the Press, and like a giant refreshed for the fight. This
     estimable woman was as good-natured as she was revolutionary, and hearing that Griselda was
     thinking of a rural honeymoon, she hastened to offer the happy couple the loan of her Belgian
     property, which was as secluded as heart could desire. Griselda, since her fortnight at
     Interlaken, had hankered for another stay abroad; she jumped at the offer, and William—whose
     acquaintance with foreign parts was limited to an International Socialist Congress in
     Holland—-jumped gladly in unison with her. Madame Amberg beamed with joy at their delighted
     acceptance of her offer; she kissed Griselda, shook hands with William and promised to make all
     the necessary arrangements for their stay—to write to the old woman who looked after the
     cottage and tell her when to expect them. She babbled rhapsodically of honeymoons and the joys
     of the Forest of Arden—forgetting how bored she was in the Forest of Arden at the end of a
     seven-days' stay there—and further directed them how to reach it, looked out trains and
     suggested hotels.
Heaven smiled on the opening of their married life; Dover was a receding beauty in the
     distance and the Channel a good-natured lake. As their boat chunked between the long piers of
     Ostend they held and squeezed each other's hands ecstatically, the crowd collecting on the
     gangway side enabling them to do so unnoticed. The consciousness of their total ignorance of
     the language of the country gave them an agitated moment as they set foot on foreign soil—but,
     taken in tow by a polyglot porter, they were safely transferred from the quay to a second-class
     carriage, with instructions to change at Brussels; and, having changed obediently, were in due
     course set down at Namur. Madame Amberg had advised them to lodge with economy at the Hotel de
     Hollande near the station; but another specimen of the polyglot porter pounced down and annexed
     them firmly for his own more distant establishment, and after a feeble resistance they followed
     him meekly and were thrust with their bags into the omnibus lying in wait for them. They felt
     it their duty as the vehicle rattled them along to make a few depreciatory and high-principled
     remarks on the subject of the towering fortifications; but having thus satisfied their
     consciences they relapsed into mere enjoyment of rest, novelty, a good dinner, and a view of
     the lazy Meuse. After dinner, when the fortress above them was fading into the soft blackness
     of a warm summer night, they walked arm-in-arm by the river and were quite unutterably
     happy.
They rose early in the morning to catch the little river boat for Dinant; caught it with the
     aid of their guardian, the porter, and camped side by side on its deck to enjoy the sauntering
     trip. They enjoyed it so much and engrossingly that for the space of a morning they forgot
     their high principles, they forgot even Woman and Democracy; they were tourists only, agape and
     delighted, with their green Cook's tickets in their pockets. Yet, after all, they were
     something more than tourists; they were young man and woman who loved each other tenderly and
     whose happy lives were in tune with the happy landscape. Often they forgot to look at the happy
     landscape for the joy of gazing into each other's dear blue eyes.
The boat puffed finally to Dinant, where they stayed the night as planned; where they stared
     at the cupola'd church and the cliffs, walked to the split rock on the road to Anseremme, and
     bought some of the gingerbread their guide-book had told them to buy. They ate it next day,
     with no particular approval, on the final stage of their journey, in a train that puffed and
     pottered between heights and orchards in the winding company of a stream. It puffed and
     pottered them at last to their wayside destination—where a smiling and loutish country boy
     slouched up to take possession of them and their modest baggage. They understood not a word of
     his thick-throated patois, but knew from information imparted beforehand by Madame Amberg that
     this was their housekeeper's grandson and deputed to serve as their guide. He gripped a bag
     easily in either hand, and led the way past the few small houses ranged neatly as a miniature
     village alongside the miniature station—and so by the white road that kept the river company.
     After a mile or thereabout they left the white road, turning sharply to the right at a cleft in
     the riverside cliff and striking a cart-track, scarcely more than a path, into a valley twisted
     back among the hills.
It was a valley the like of which they had never seen, which the world seemed to have
     forgotten; a cool green vision of summer and solitary peace. Water had cleft in the table-land
     above them a passage that time had made leafy and gracious and laid aside for their finding.
     Through the flat, lush pastures that divided the bold slopes there looped and tangled a tiny
     brook on its way to the Meuse and the sea, a winding ribbon of shadow, of shimmer and
     reflection. Up the slopes rising steeply from the pastures there clustered tree above tree—so
     thickly set that where the valley dwindled in the distance they might have been moss on the
     hill-side. There was no one in sight and no sound but their footsteps and the birds; it was all
     a green prettiness given over to birds and themselves.
"Isn't it wonderful?" Griselda said, not knowing that her voice had dropped and lost its
     shrillness. "I never thought there could be such a place."
She spoke the truth, if in hackneyed and unthinking phrase; in her busy and crowded little
     mind, the reflection of her busy little life, there had been no room for visions of a deep and
     solitary peace. Involuntarily, as they walked they drew nearer together and went closely side
     by side; the sweet aloofness of the valley not only amazed them, it awed them; they were dimly
     conscious of being in contact with something which in its silent, gracious way was disquieting
     as well as beautiful. Their theory and practice of life, so far, was the theory and practice of
     their purely urban environment, of crowds, committees and grievances and cocksure little people
     like themselves—and lo, out of an atmosphere of cocksureness and hustle they had stepped, as it
     seemed without warning, into one of mystery and the endless patience of the earth. Out here, in
     this strange overpowering peace, it was difficult to be conscious of grievances political or
     ethical; instead came a new, undefined and uneasy sense of personal inadequacy and shrinkage, a
     sense of the unknown and hitherto unallowed-for, a fear of something undreamed of in their
     rabid and second-hand philosophy.... Not that they reasoned after this fashion, or were capable
     of analysing the source of the tremor that mingled with their physical pleasure, their sheer
     delight of the eye; but before they had been in the valley many hours they sympathized in
     secret (they did not know why) with Madame Amberg's consistent avoidance of its loveliness, saw
     hazily and without comprehension why, for all her praise of its beauties, she was so loth to
     dwell there. The place, though they knew it not, was a New Idea to them—and therefore a shadow
     of terror to their patterned and settled convictions. As such their organized and regulated
     minds shrank from it at once and instinctively—cautiously apprehensive lest the New Idea should
     tamper with accepted beliefs, disturb established views and call generally for the exercise of
     faculties hitherto unused. They had an uneasy foreboding—never mentioned aloud by either,
     though troublous to both—that long contact with solitude and beauty might end by confusing
     issues that once were plain, and so unfitting them for the work of Progress and Humanity—for
     committees, agitations, the absorbing of pamphlets and the general duty of rearranging the
     universe.
There was something, probably, in the frame of mind in which they approached the valley; they
     came of a migratory, holiday race, and had seen green beauty before, if only fleetingly and at
     intervals. What they had lacked before was the insight into beauty born of their own hearts'
     content, the wonder created by their own most happy love.... They followed their guide for the
     most part in silence, relieved that he had ceased his well-meaning attempts to make them
     understand his jargon, and speaking, when they spoke at all, in voices lowered almost to a
     whisper.
"What's that?" Griselda queried, still under her breath. "That" was a flash of blue fire
     ahead of them darting slantwise over the stream. Later they learned to understand that a flash
     of blue fire meant kingfisher; but for the moment William shook his head, nonplussed, and
     hazarded only, "It's a bird."
For half-an-hour or so it was only the birds and themselves; then at a turn in the narrowing
     valley they came in sight of cows nuzzling the pastures. Several cows, parti-coloured black and
     white like the cows of a Noah's Ark; and, further on, a tiny farm house standing close up to
     the trees in its patch of vegetable garden. They knew from Madame Amberg of the existence of
     the tiny farmhouse; it was an old woman living there who would "do" for them during their stay
     at the neighbouring cottage—cook and clean and make tidy in return for a moderate wage. The
     barking of a kennelled nondescript brought the old woman shuffling to the door—to welcome them
     (presumably) in her native tongue and to take their measure from head to heel with a pair of
     shrewd, sunken eyes. Of her verbal greetings they understood nothing but the mention of Madame
     Amberg; but, having looked them up and down enough, the old lady shuffled back into her kitchen
     for the key of the revolutionist's property. She reappeared with the key in one hand and a
     copper stewpan in the other—wherewith she waved the signal to advance, and shuffled off in
     guidance, ahead of her grandson and the visitors. A quarter of an hour's more walking on a
     dwindling path brought them in sight of their sylvan honeymoon abode; it had originally been
     built for the use of a woodman, and was a four-roomed cottage on the edge of the wood
     overlooking the stream and the pasture of the black-and-white cows. Madame Peys (they knew at
     least her name) unlocked the door and ushered them into the kitchen, where the boy deposited
     their bags.
</div></body></text></TEI>