<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>William — an Englishman</title><author>Hamilton, Cicely (1872-1952)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1919</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
CHAPTER XIII
At the gate of the cemetery they parted from the priest, who had charged himself with the
     immediate return of the haycart which he had borrowed from a neighbouring farm; he shook hands
     with them, nodded kindly to the Englishwoman's thanks, climbed into the cart and drove off
     along the dusty road. They saw him no more and often wondered what became of him when the wave
     of Teutonic invasion swept over his parish and himself. Their own way lay in the opposite
     direction—first back to the village inn, where the Englishwoman picked up her bag and a package
     of provisions for the journey, and then on to the station to await the arrival of the train.
     William followed her incuriously, without question or comment; and when she broke silence to
     explain what they were doing he assented, speaking with an effort and hardly knowing to what he
     assented.
The train to Paris had been announced by the station authorities for an early hour in the
     morning, but morning dragged on and became afternoon before it put in an appearance. They
     waited through long and shadeless hours—till two o'clock and after—at the most insignificant of
     railway stations with a crowd of would-be passengers; a crowd that swelled as the hours crawled
     on until it flowed from the platform far along the line, and it seemed doubtful if any train,
     however capacious, could absorb its swarming multitude. It sat in families about the platform
     and camped and shifted as an untidy fringe to the track; it was querulous, weeping,
     apathetic—it was also, in patches, malodorous. At midday it picknicked, squalidly enough, out
     of bottles and bulging handkerchiefs, finding momentary distraction in the process; for the
     rest it had nothing to do but exchange its miseries, stare at the curve which the train must
     round, listen uneasily to the echo of artillery and assail the station-master with complaining
     queries whenever he dared to show his face. For the most part that hapless and harried
     official—whose subordinates had been reft from him by mobilization and who was only too
     conscious that his time-table was a snare and a mockery—lay low in his miniature office; whence
     he peered out now and again to make anxious estimate of the numbers that blackened and
     overflowed his platform. As time went on and the throng grew denser, he gave up his attempts to
     reconcile the extent of the crowd with the cubic capacity of a highly problematical train, and
     retiring to his sanctum, in despair and for good, locked the door on intrusion and
     complaint.
Whenever—as happened not once, but often—an engine was sighted rounding the curve to the
     northward, there was instant bustle and expectation on the part of the waiting multitude.
     Makeshift luggage was collected and clutched at, mothers screamed to their straying young
     families and herded them together in anxious preparation for the formidable struggle ahead; but
     not once but often the alarm was a false one, the preparations in vain, as the train sped by
     without halt. The first to run past was a Red Cross train with bandaged men showing at the
     windows; as it slid between the platforms the crowd buzzed its disappointment and then—with the
     exception of some few determined souls who vented their annoyance in raps on the
     station-master's door—settled down in dejection to continue its weary waiting. Another
     half-hour of sweltering impatience and again the mothers screamed and rounded up their
     families, with the same result as before; this time the relentless and undelaying train was
     packed, not with wounded soldiers, but with refugees from higher up the line—like unto
     themselves but more fortunate. It was packed to the doors and beyond the doors—since men were
     hanging on the footboards.
For many reasons William and his guardian avoided the platform where the crowd was thickest
     and sat under the hedge by the line. During the first hour or two of their weary sojourn she
     judged him past rousing and left him to his own thoughts; and he sat by her side with his hands
     hugging his knees and seemingly unconscious of her presence. Later, about midday, when she fed
     him from the store of provisions she had brought for the journey, she essayed to rouse him by
     telling him how she had come there and who she was. Her name was Haynes, Edith Haynes; she had
     been some weeks in the neighbourhood, staying in the country house of some distant French
     cousins. They had been warned, soon after hostilities broke out, that proximity to the frontier
     might be dangerous, but had been unable to leave owing to the illness of one of the family.
     Yesterday the invalid, partially recovered, had been got off with her mother in a car procured
     with difficulty; as it had other occupants and could not carry the whole party, she—Miss
     Haynes—had volunteered to remain behind and follow to Paris by rail. William listened,
     occasionally nodding to show that he listened; in a way he was grateful for her presence, but
     nothing seemed to matter ... and, seeing that it was as yet too early to help him to other
     thoughts, she left him again to his silence.
It was after two when a nearing train slowed down as it reached the station—slowed down and
     came to a standstill to a tumult of pushing and shouting. It was a train of more than ordinary
     dimensions—a couple of engines to an interminable line of third-class carriages and vans—but
     long as it was, it was none too long for the needs of the would-be passengers. Vans and
     carriages alike were already well stocked with humanity; but the other humanity on the
     platform, rendered desperate by its waiting, hurled itself at the doors and pressed and fought
     a way in. The sight was not pleasant—there was trampling, expostulation, threats. The angry,
     frightened crowd was past minding its manners, and at times the rush for the doors was carried
     on almost with savagery; women were buffeted—and buffeted back—and children swept away in the
     press. William and his friend—she was the sturdier as well as the taller of the two—clambered
     up the steps of a covered truck and were thrust through its opening by the weight of those
     pressing behind them. The truck, when they gained it, was close, evil-smelling and crowded; so
     crowded that many had to keep their feet for lack of the floor space to sit. When the struggle
     for places was over—and it was not over quickly—the train was packed end to end with sweating
     and exhausted travellers.
There followed a journey that to those who endured it seemed endless, a crawl punctuated with
     halts. The halts were lengthy as well as frequent; sometimes in sidings where refugees perforce
     gave place to troop trains, sometimes in junctions where they pulled up indefinitely at a
     platform and where worn-out officials could give no information as to when a fresh start would
     be made. The waits, wearisome as they were, were by far more endurable than the wretched stages
     in between; which were stages of sweating heat and smells, of stifling and cramped discomfort.
     On the platform, at least, it was possible to stretch and breathe; in the vans it was aching
     backs and bones and a foulness that thickened with the miles. Children wept and sickened as the
     hours crawled by and all through the darkness their crying was never stilled; as wretched
     little wailing or angry howl, it mingled always with the throb and clank of the train.
The delicate chill of morning was as nectar after the stench of the crowded night. By special
     mercy, just as dawn broke they drew up in a siding with fields to the right and left of them;
     neither William nor his friend was asleep when the train stopped, and, crawling over recumbent
     bodies on the floor of the van, they dropped down stiffly from their pen and stood breathing in
     the clean, cool wind. With their damp clothes sticking to their heated bodies, they sucked the
     air into their lungs—even William, blind with his misery, conscious of the calm loveliness of
     morning on stretches of green after the reek of the lantern-lit van. His companion, shuddering
     at the sight of her hands, went in search of water and discovered a tap on the platform;
     whereat William, in his turn, drank thirstily and soused hands and face before they settled
     down in a field at the side of the line. There, on the good green turf, they shared the last
     remnants of their package of food, some bread and an apple apiece. for all the hours they had
     spent on the train they had accomplished only some half of the distance to Paris; and as
     refreshment rooms—closed or cleared out by the troops—could no longer be counted on to supply
     the needs of the traveller, they had little prospect of further sustenance till they reached
     their journey's end. They ate their small meal sitting as far as they deemed safe from the
     train and the crowd it had disgorged—ate it in silence, for William had not yet found speech.
     His world, for the time being, was formless and void, and, as such, incapable of
     expression.
All day they travelled, as they had travelled on the day before: in jolted crowds, in
     squalor, in heat, to the sound of the misery of children. They ached, they wearied, they
     sweated, they thirsted—they halted and lurched on again; too wearied even for impatience, they
     endured without complaint until even the children were past crying. The sun was low on the
     horizon when William, drowsily stupid, raised his head from his knees as his friend touched him
     on the arm. He looked up stupidly—the train was plodding through forest; he had ceased to hope
     for the journey's end and sat for the most part with his head on his knees in a dull,
     half-dozing resignation.
"If we don't stop again," she told him, "we ought to be in fairly soon. I think that's
     Chantilly we've run through. We're only half an hour from Paris—in ordinary times, that's to
     say."
The times were not ordinary and they took more than half an hour—very much more—to get over
     the twenty odd miles. They slowed to a crawl for the last stretch of the journey, and outside
     Paris, between Paris and St. Denis, they halted and waited till well after night had fallen.
     But at long last the interminable wait was ended and they creaked and crept forward to a
     platform of the Gare du Nord—where William for the first time set foot in the capital of
     France. As he did so he remembered a fact that had hitherto slipped his memory—that Heinz and
     his companions, when they took his pocket-book, had left him without a penny. So far the loss
     of his purse had not troubled him; he had lived as the beasts live and been cared for even as
     they; but Paris was civilization where money would be needed for a lodging. He had no resource
     but his companion, and, as they drifted along with the slow-moving mass on the platform, he
     appealed perforce to her.
"I'm afraid," he stammered, "I've got no money. They took it away from me—the Germans."
She reassured him briskly with: "Don't worry about that—I've got plenty. I'll settle the
     hotel and the journey—you can pay me when we get back to London. Stick close to me, whatever
     you do; if I once lose you in this crowd I shall never find you again."
He replied with a mutter of thanks, and, obeying her injunction to stick close, was crushed,
     in her wake, past the barrier at the end of the platform, past the heated officials who were
     striving to deal with the needs of the influx of refugees, and finally out of the station.
     There, in the open space before the Gare du Nord, he stepped back suddenly from the world of
     nightmare into the world as he had always known it. The wide, lit street in front of the
     station was filled with a moving and everyday crowd, in his ears were the buzz of the taxi and
     the warning clang of the tram. The change from the horrible to normal surroundings—from
     brutality and foulness to the order of a great town—was so sudden and complete that it took
     away his breath like a swift plunge into cold water; and as the life of the city enwrapped him
     and claimed him for its own, for one crazy moment it seemed to him that the last few days were
     impossible. Their fantastic cruelty was something that could not have been ... and he almost
     looked round for Griselda.
</div></body></text></TEI>