<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Women in Love, by D. H.
      Lawrence </title><author>Lawrence, David Herbert (1885-1930)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1920</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
 CHAPTER XIX. 
 MOONY 
 After his illness Birkin went to the south of France for a time. He did not write, nobody
     heard anything of him. Ursula, left alone, felt as if everything were lapsing out. There seemed
     to be no hope in the world. One was a tiny little rock with the tide of nothingness rising
     higher and higher She herself was real, and only herself—just like a rock in a wash of
     flood-water. The rest was all nothingness. She was hard and indifferent, isolated in herself. 
 There was nothing for it now, but contemptuous, resistant indifference. All the world was
     lapsing into a grey wish-wash of nothingness, she had no contact and no connection anywhere.
     She despised and detested the whole show. From the bottom of her heart, from the bottom of her
     soul, she despised and detested people, adult people. She loved only children and animals:
     children she loved passionately, but coldly. They made her want to hug them, to protect them,
     to give them life. But this very love, based on pity and despair, was only a bondage and a pain
     to her. She loved best of all the animals, that were single and unsocial as she herself was.
     She loved the horses and cows in the field. Each was single and to itself, magical. It was not
     referred away to some detestable social principle. It was incapable of soulfulness and tragedy,
     which she detested so profoundly. 
 She could be very pleasant and flattering, almost subservient, to people she met. But no one
     was taken in. Instinctively each felt her contemptuous mockery of the human being in himself,
     or herself. She had a profound grudge against the human being. That which the word “human”
     stood for was despicable and repugnant to her. 
 Mostly her heart was closed in this hidden, unconscious strain of contemptuous ridicule. She
     thought she loved, she thought she was full of love. This was her idea of herself. But the
     strange brightness of her presence, a marvellous radiance of intrinsic vitality, was a
     luminousness of supreme repudiation, nothing but repudiation. 
 Yet, at moments, she yielded and softened, she wanted pure love, only pure love. This other,
     this state of constant unfailing repudiation, was a strain, a suffering also. A terrible desire
     for pure love overcame her again. 
 She went out one evening, numbed by this constant essential suffering. Those who are timed
     for destruction must die now. The knowledge of this reached a finality, a finishing in her. And
     the finality released her. If fate would carry off in death or downfall all those who were
     timed to go, why need she trouble, why repudiate any further. She was free of it all, she could
     seek a new union elsewhere. 
 Ursula set off to Willey Green, towards the mill. She came to Willey Water. It was almost
     full again, after its period of emptiness. Then she turned off through the woods. The night had
     fallen, it was dark. But she forgot to be afraid, she who had such great sources of fear. Among
     the trees, far from any human beings, there was a sort of magic peace. The more one could find
     a pure loneliness, with no taint of people, the better one felt. She was in reality terrified,
     horrified in her apprehension of people. 
 She started, noticing something on her right hand, between the tree trunks. It was like a
     great presence, watching her, dodging her. She started violently. It was only the moon, risen
     through the thin trees. But it seemed so mysterious, with its white and deathly smile. And
     there was no avoiding it. Night or day, one could not escape the sinister face, triumphant and
     radiant like this moon, with a high smile. She hurried on, cowering from the white planet. She
     would just see the pond at the mill before she went home. 
 Not wanting to go through the yard, because of the dogs, she turned off along the hill-side
     to descend on the pond from above. The moon was transcendent over the bare, open space, she
     suffered from being exposed to it. There was a glimmer of nightly rabbits across the ground.
     The night was as clear as crystal, and very still. She could hear a distant coughing of a
     sheep. 
 So she swerved down to the steep, tree-hidden bank above the pond, where the alders twisted
     their roots. She was glad to pass into the shade out of the moon. There she stood, at the top
     of the fallen-away bank, her hand on the rough trunk of a tree, looking at the water, that was
     perfect in its stillness, floating the moon upon it. But for some reason she disliked it. It
     did not give her anything. She listened for the hoarse rustle of the sluice. And she wished for
     something else out of the night, she wanted another night, not this moon-brilliant hardness.
     She could feel her soul crying out in her, lamenting desolately. 
 She saw a shadow moving by the water. It would be Birkin. He had come back then, unawares.
     She accepted it without remark, nothing mattered to her. She sat down among the roots of the
     alder tree, dim and veiled, hearing the sound of the sluice like dew distilling audibly into
     the night. The islands were dark and half revealed, the reeds were dark also, only some of them
     had a little frail fire of reflection. A fish leaped secretly, revealing the light in the pond.
     This fire of the chill night breaking constantly on to the pure darkness, repelled her. She
     wished it were perfectly dark, perfectly, and noiseless and without motion. Birkin, small and
     dark also, his hair tinged with moonlight, wandered nearer. He was quite near, and yet he did
     not exist in her. He did not know she was there. Supposing he did something he would not wish
     to be seen doing, thinking he was quite private? But there, what did it matter? What did the
     small privacies matter? How could it matter, what he did? How can there be any secrets, we are
     all the same organisms? How can there be any secrecy, when everything is known to all of us? 
 He was touching unconsciously the dead husks of flowers as he passed by, and talking
     disconnectedly to himself. 
 “You can’t go away,” he was saying. “There is no away. You only withdraw upon
     yourself.” 
 He threw a dead flower-husk on to the water. 
 “An antiphony—they lie, and you sing back to them. There wouldn’t have to be any truth, if
     there weren’t any lies. Then one needn’t assert anything—” 
 He stood still, looking at the water, and throwing upon it the husks of the flowers. 
 “Cybele—curse her! The accursed Syria Dea! Does one begrudge it her? What else is there—?” 
 Ursula wanted to laugh loudly and hysterically, hearing his isolated voice speaking out. It
     was so ridiculous. 
 He stood staring at the water. Then he stooped and picked up a stone, which he threw sharply
     at the pond. Ursula was aware of the bright moon leaping and swaying, all distorted, in her
     eyes. It seemed to shoot out arms of fire like a cuttle-fish, like a luminous polyp,
     palpitating strongly before her. 
 And his shadow on the border of the pond, was watching for a few moments, then he stooped
     and groped on the ground. Then again there was a burst of sound, and a burst of brilliant
     light, the moon had exploded on the water, and was flying asunder in flakes of white and
     dangerous fire. Rapidly, like white birds, the fires all broken rose across the pond, fleeing
     in clamorous confusion, battling with the flock of dark waves that were forcing their way in.
     The furthest waves of light, fleeing out, seemed to be clamouring against the shore for escape,
     the waves of darkness came in heavily, running under towards the centre. But at the centre, the
     heart of all, was still a vivid, incandescent quivering of a white moon not quite destroyed, a
     white body of fire writhing and striving and not even now broken open, not yet violated. It
     seemed to be drawing itself together with strange, violent pangs, in blind effort. It was
     getting stronger, it was re-asserting itself, the inviolable moon. And the rays were hastening
     in in thin lines of light, to return to the strengthened moon, that shook upon the water in
     triumphant reassumption. 
 Birkin stood and watched, motionless, till the pond was almost calm, the moon was almost
     serene. Then, satisfied of so much, he looked for more stones. She felt his invisible tenacity.
     And in a moment again, the broken lights scattered in explosion over her face, dazzling her;
     and then, almost immediately, came the second shot. The moon leapt up white and burst through
     the air. Darts of bright light shot asunder, darkness swept over the centre. There was no moon,
     only a battlefield of broken lights and shadows, running close together. Shadows, dark and
     heavy, struck again and again across the place where the heart of the moon had been,
     obliterating it altogether. The white fragments pulsed up and down, and could not find where to
     go, apart and brilliant on the water like the petals of a rose that a wind has blown far and
     wide. 
 Yet again, they were flickering their way to the centre, finding the path blindly,
     enviously. And again, all was still, as Birkin and Ursula watched. The waters were loud on the
     shore. He saw the moon regathering itself insidiously, saw the heart of the rose intertwining
     vigorously and blindly, calling back the scattered fragments, winning home the fragments, in a
     pulse and in effort of return. 
 And he was not satisfied. Like a madness, he must go on. He got large stones, and threw
     them, one after the other, at the white-burning centre of the moon, till there was nothing but
     a rocking of hollow noise, and a pond surged up, no moon any more, only a few broken flakes
     tangled and glittering broadcast in the darkness, without aim or meaning, a darkened confusion,
     like a black and white kaleidoscope tossed at random. The hollow night was rocking and crashing
     with noise, and from the sluice came sharp, regular flashes of sound. Flakes of light appeared
     here and there, glittering tormented among the shadows, far off, in strange places; among the
     dripping shadow of the willow on the island. Birkin stood and listened and was satisfied. 
 Ursula was dazed, her mind was all gone. She felt she had fallen to the ground and was
     spilled out, like water on the earth. Motionless and spent she remained in the gloom. Though
     even now she was aware, unseeing, that in the darkness was a little tumult of ebbing flakes of
     light, a cluster dancing secretly in a round, twining and coming steadily together. They were
     gathering a heart again, they were coming once more into being. Gradually the fragments caught
     together re-united, heaving, rocking, dancing, falling back as in panic, but working their way
     home again persistently, making semblance of fleeing away when they had advanced, but always
     flickering nearer, a little closer to the mark, the cluster growing mysteriously larger and
     brighter, as gleam after gleam fell in with the whole, until a ragged rose, a distorted, frayed
     moon was shaking upon the waters again, re-asserted, renewed, trying to recover from its
     convulsion, to get over the disfigurement and the agitation, to be whole and composed, at
     peace. 
 Birkin lingered vaguely by the water. Ursula was afraid that he would stone the moon again.
     She slipped from her seat and went down to him, saying: 
 “You won’t throw stones at it any more, will you?” 
 “How long have you been there?” 
 “All the time. You won’t throw any more stones, will you?” 
 “I wanted to see if I could make it be quite gone off the pond,” he said. 
 “Yes, it was horrible, really. Why should you hate the moon? It hasn’t done you any harm,
     has it?” 
 “Was it hate?” he said. 
 And they were silent for a few minutes. 
 “When did you come back?” she said. 
 “Today.” 
 “Why did you never write?” 
 “I could find nothing to say.” 
 “Why was there nothing to say?” 
 “I don’t know. Why are there no daffodils now?” 
 “No.” 
 Again there was a space of silence. Ursula looked at the moon. It had gathered itself
     together, and was quivering slightly. 
 “Was it good for you, to be alone?” she asked. 
 “Perhaps. Not that I know much. But I got over a good deal. Did you do anything important?” 
 “No. I looked at England, and thought I’d done with it.” 
 “Why England?” he asked in surprise. 
 “I don’t know, it came like that.” 
 “It isn’t a question of nations,” he said. “France is far worse.” 
 “Yes, I know. I felt I’d done with it all.” 
 They went and sat down on the roots of the trees, in the shadow. And being silent, he
     remembered the beauty of her eyes, which were sometimes filled with light, like spring,
     suffused with wonderful promise. So he said to her, slowly, with difficulty: 
 “There is a golden light in you, which I wish you would give me.” It was as if he had been
     thinking of this for some time. 
 She was startled, she seemed to leap clear of him. Yet also she was pleased. 
 “What kind of a light,” she asked. 
 But he was shy, and did not say any more. So the moment passed for this time. And gradually
     a feeling of sorrow came over her. 
 “My life is unfulfilled,” she said. 
 “Yes,” he answered briefly, not wanting to hear this. 
 “And I feel as if nobody could ever really love me,” she said. 
 But he did not answer. 
 “You think, don’t you,” she said slowly, “that I only want physical things? It isn’t true. I
     want you to serve my spirit.” 
 “I know you do. I know you don’t want physical things by themselves. But, I want you to give
     me—to give your spirit to me—that golden light which is you—which you don’t know—give it me—” 
 After a moment’s silence she replied: 
 “But how can I, you don’t love me! You only want your own ends. You don’t want to serve
      me, and yet you want me to serve you. It is so one-sided!” 
 It was a great effort to him to maintain this conversation, and to press for the thing he
     wanted from her, the surrender of her spirit. 
 “It is different,” he said. “The two kinds of service are so different. I serve you in
     another way—not through yourself—somewhere else. But I want us to be together without
     bothering about ourselves—to be really together because we are together, as if it were
     a phenomenon, not a not a thing we have to maintain by our own effort.” 
 “No,” she said, pondering. “You are just egocentric. You never have any enthusiasm, you
     never come out with any spark towards me. You want yourself, really, and your own affairs. And
     you want me just to be there, to serve you.” 
 But this only made him shut off from her. 
 “Ah well,” he said, “words make no matter, any way. The thing is between us, or it
     isn’t.” 
 “You don’t even love me,” she cried. 
 “I do,” he said angrily. “But I want—” His mind saw again the lovely golden light of spring
     transfused through her eyes, as through some wonderful window. And he wanted her to be with him
     there, in this world of proud indifference. But what was the good of telling her he wanted this
     company in proud indifference. What was the good of talking, any way? It must happen beyond the
     sound of words. It was merely ruinous to try to work her by conviction. This was a paradisal
     bird that could never be netted, it must fly by itself to the heart. 
 “I always think I am going to be loved—and then I am let down. You don’t love me,
     you know. You don’t want to serve me. You only want yourself.” 
 A shiver of rage went over his veins, at this repeated: “You don’t want to serve me.” All
     the paradisal disappeared from him. 
 “No,” he said, irritated, “I don’t want to serve you, because there is nothing there to
     serve. What you want me to serve, is nothing, mere nothing. It isn’t even you, it is your mere
     female quality. And I wouldn’t give a straw for your female ego—it’s a rag doll.” 
 “Ha!” she laughed in mockery. “That’s all you think of me, is it? And then you have the
     impudence to say you love me.” 
 She rose in anger, to go home. 
 You want the paradisal unknowing,” she said, turning round on him as he still sat
     half-visible in the shadow. “I know what that means, thank you. You want me to be your thing,
     never to criticise you or to have anything to say for myself. You want me to be a mere
      thing for you! No thank you! If you want that, there are plenty of women who
     will give it to you. There are plenty of women who will lie down for you to walk over
      them—go to them then, if that’s what you want—go to them.” 
 “No,” he said, outspoken with anger. “I want you to drop your assertive will, your
     frightened apprehensive self-insistence, that is what I want. I want you to trust yourself so
     implicitly, that you can let yourself go.” 
 “Let myself go!” she re-echoed in mockery. “I can let myself go, easily enough. It is you
     who can’t let yourself go, it is you who hang on to yourself as if it were your only treasure.
      You—you are the Sunday school teacher—You—you preacher.” 
 The amount of truth that was in this made him stiff and unheeding of her. 
 “I don’t mean let yourself go in the Dionysic ecstatic way,” he said. “I know you can do
     that. But I hate ecstasy, Dionysic or any other. It’s like going round in a squirrel cage. I
     want you not to care about yourself, just to be there and not to care about yourself, not to
     insist—be glad and sure and indifferent.” 
 “Who insists?” she mocked. “Who is it that keeps on insisting? It isn’t me!” 
 There was a weary, mocking bitterness in her voice. He was silent for some time. 
 “I know,” he said. “While ever either of us insists to the other, we are all wrong. But
     there we are, the accord doesn’t come.” 
 They sat in stillness under the shadow of the trees by the bank. The night was white around
     them, they were in the darkness, barely conscious. 
 Gradually, the stillness and peace came over them. She put her hand tentatively on his.
     Their hands clasped softly and silently, in peace. 
 “Do you really love me?” she said. 
 He laughed. 
 “I call that your war-cry,” he replied, amused. 
 “Why!” she cried, amused and really wondering. 
 “Your insistence—Your war-cry—“A Brangwen, A Brangwen”—an old battle-cry. Yours is, ‘Do you
     love me? Yield knave, or die.’” 
 “No,” she said, pleading, “not like that. Not like that. But I must know that you love me,
     mustn’t I?” 
 “Well then, know it and have done with it.” 
 “But do you?” 
 “Yes, I do. I love you, and I know it’s final. It is final, so why say any more about it.” 
 She was silent for some moments, in delight and doubt. 
 “Are you sure?” she said, nestling happily near to him. 
 “Quite sure—so now have done—accept it and have done.” 
 She was nestled quite close to him. 
 “Have done with what?” she murmured, happily. 
 “With bothering,” he said. 
 She clung nearer to him. He held her close, and kissed her softly, gently. It was such peace
     and heavenly freedom, just to fold her and kiss her gently, and not to have any thoughts or any
     desires or any will, just to be still with her, to be perfectly still and together, in a peace
     that was not sleep, but content in bliss. To be content in bliss, without desire or insistence
     anywhere, this was heaven: to be together in happy stillness. 
 For a long time she nestled to him, and he kissed her softly, her hair, her face, her ears,
     gently, softly, like dew falling. But this warm breath on her ears disturbed her again, kindled
     the old destructive fires. She cleaved to him, and he could feel his blood changing like
     quicksilver. 
 “But we’ll be still, shall we?” he said. 
 “Yes,” she said, as if submissively. 
 And she continued to nestle against him. 
 But in a little while she drew away and looked at him. 
 “I must be going home,” she said. 
 “Must you—how sad,” he replied. 
 She leaned forward and put up her mouth to be kissed. 
 “Are you really sad?” she murmured, smiling. 
 “Yes,” he said, “I wish we could stay as we were, always.” 
 “Always! Do you?” she murmured, as he kissed her. And then, out of a full throat, she
     crooned “Kiss me! Kiss me!” And she cleaved close to him. He kissed her many times. But he too
     had his idea and his will. He wanted only gentle communion, no other, no passion now. So that
     soon she drew away, put on her hat and went home. 
 The next day however, he felt wistful and yearning. He thought he had been wrong, perhaps.
     Perhaps he had been wrong to go to her with an idea of what he wanted. Was it really only an
     idea, or was it the interpretation of a profound yearning? If the latter, how was it he was
     always talking about sensual fulfilment? The two did not agree very well. 
 Suddenly he found himself face to face with a situation. It was as simple as this: fatally
     simple. On the one hand, he knew he did not want a further sensual experience—something deeper,
     darker, than ordinary life could give. He remembered the African fetishes he had seen at
     Halliday’s so often. There came back to him one, a statuette about two feet high, a tall, slim,
     elegant figure from West Africa, in dark wood, glossy and suave. It was a woman, with hair
     dressed high, like a melon-shaped dome. He remembered her vividly: she was one of his soul’s
     intimates. Her body was long and elegant, her face was crushed tiny like a beetle’s, she had
     rows of round heavy collars, like a column of quoits, on her neck. He remembered her: her
     astonishing cultured elegance, her diminished, beetle face, the astounding long elegant body,
     on short, ugly legs, with such protuberant buttocks, so weighty and unexpected below her slim
     long loins. She knew what he himself did not know. She had thousands of years of purely
     sensual, purely unspiritual knowledge behind her. It must have been thousands of years since
     her race had died, mystically: that is, since the relation between the senses and the outspoken
     mind had broken, leaving the experience all in one sort, mystically sensual. Thousands of years
     ago, that which was imminent in himself must have taken place in these Africans: the goodness,
     the holiness, the desire for creation and productive happiness must have lapsed, leaving the
     single impulse for knowledge in one sort, mindless progressive knowledge through the senses,
     knowledge arrested and ending in the senses, mystic knowledge in disintegration and
     dissolution, knowledge such as the beetles have, which live purely within the world of
     corruption and cold dissolution. This was why her face looked like a beetle’s: this was why the
     Egyptians worshipped the ball-rolling scarab: because of the principle of knowledge in
     dissolution and corruption. 
 There is a long way we can travel, after the death-break: after that point when the soul in
     intense suffering breaks, breaks away from its organic hold like a leaf that falls. We fall
     from the connection with life and hope, we lapse from pure integral being, from creation and
     liberty, and we fall into the long, long African process of purely sensual understanding,
     knowledge in the mystery of dissolution. 
 He realised now that this is a long process—thousands of years it takes, after the death of
     the creative spirit. He realised that there were great mysteries to be unsealed, sensual,
     mindless, dreadful mysteries, far beyond the phallic cult. How far, in their inverted culture,
     had these West Africans gone beyond phallic knowledge? Very, very far. Birkin recalled again
     the female figure: the elongated, long, long body, the curious unexpected heavy buttocks, the
     long, imprisoned neck, the face with tiny features like a beetle’s. This was far beyond any
     phallic knowledge, sensual subtle realities far beyond the scope of phallic investigation. 
 There remained this way, this awful African process, to be fulfilled. It would be done
     differently by the white races. The white races, having the arctic north behind them, the vast
     abstraction of ice and snow, would fulfil a mystery of ice-destructive knowledge, snow-abstract
     annihilation. Whereas the West Africans, controlled by the burning death-abstraction of the
     Sahara, had been fulfilled in sun-destruction, the putrescent mystery of sun-rays. 
 Was this then all that remained? Was there left now nothing but to break off from the happy
     creative being, was the time up? Is our day of creative life finished? Does there remain to us
     only the strange, awful afterwards of the knowledge in dissolution, the African knowledge, but
     different in us, who are blond and blue-eyed from the north? 
 Birkin thought of Gerald. He was one of these strange white wonderful demons from the north,
     fulfilled in the destructive frost mystery. And was he fated to pass away in this knowledge,
     this one process of frost-knowledge, death by perfect cold? Was he a messenger, an omen of the
     universal dissolution into whiteness and snow? 
 Birkin was frightened. He was tired too, when he had reached this length of speculation.
     Suddenly his strange, strained attention gave way, he could not attend to these mysteries any
     more. There was another way, the way of freedom. There was the paradisal entry into pure,
     single being, the individual soul taking precedence over love and desire for union, stronger
     than any pangs of emotion, a lovely state of free proud singleness, which accepted the
     obligation of the permanent connection with others, and with the other, submits to the yoke and
     leash of love, but never forfeits its own proud individual singleness, even while it loves and
     yields. 
 There was the other way, the remaining way. And he must run to follow it. He thought of
     Ursula, how sensitive and delicate she really was, her skin so over-fine, as if one skin were
     wanting. She was really so marvellously gentle and sensitive. Why did he ever forget it? He
     must go to her at once. He must ask her to marry him. They must marry at once, and so make a
     definite pledge, enter into a definite communion. He must set out at once and ask her, this
     moment. There was no moment to spare. 
 He drifted on swiftly to Beldover, half-unconscious of his own movement. He saw the town on
     the slope of the hill, not straggling, but as if walled-in with the straight, final streets of
     miners’ dwellings, making a great square, and it looked like Jerusalem to his fancy. The world
     was all strange and transcendent. 
 Rosalind opened the door to him. She started slightly, as a young girl will, and said: 
 “Oh, I’ll tell father.” 
 With which she disappeared, leaving Birkin in the hall, looking at some reproductions from
     Picasso, lately introduced by Gudrun. He was admiring the almost wizard, sensuous apprehension
     of the earth, when Will Brangwen appeared, rolling down his shirt sleeves. 
 “Well,” said Brangwen, “I’ll get a coat.” And he too disappeared for a moment. Then he
     returned, and opened the door of the drawing-room, saying: 
 “You must excuse me, I was just doing a bit of work in the shed. Come inside, will you.” 
 Birkin entered and sat down. He looked at the bright, reddish face of the other man, at the
     narrow brow and the very bright eyes, and at the rather sensual lips that unrolled wide and
     expansive under the black cropped moustache. How curious it was that this was a human being!
     What Brangwen thought himself to be, how meaningless it was, confronted with the reality of
     him. Birkin could see only a strange, inexplicable, almost patternless collection of passions
     and desires and suppressions and traditions and mechanical ideas, all cast unfused and
     disunited into this slender, bright-faced man of nearly fifty, who was as unresolved now as he
     was at twenty, and as uncreated. How could he be the parent of Ursula, when he was not created
     himself. He was not a parent. A slip of living flesh had been transmitted through him, but the
     spirit had not come from him. The spirit had not come from any ancestor, it had come out of the
     unknown. A child is the child of the mystery, or it is uncreated. 
 “The weather’s not so bad as it has been,” said Brangwen, after waiting a moment. There was
     no connection between the two men. 
 “No,” said Birkin. “It was full moon two days ago.” 
 “Oh! You believe in the moon then, affecting the weather?” 
 “No, I don’t think I do. I don’t really know enough about it.” 
 “You know what they say? The moon and the weather may change together, but the change of the
     moon won’t change the weather.” 
 “Is that it?” said Birkin. “I hadn’t heard it.” 
 There was a pause. Then Birkin said: 
 “Am I hindering you? I called to see Ursula, really. Is she at home?” 
 “I don’t believe she is. I believe she’s gone to the library. I’ll just see.” 
 Birkin could hear him enquiring in the dining-room. 
 “No,” he said, coming back. “But she won’t be long. You wanted to speak to her?” 
 Birkin looked across at the other man with curious calm, clear eyes. 
 “As a matter of fact,” he said, “I wanted to ask her to marry me.” 
 A point of light came on the golden-brown eyes of the elder man. 
 “O-oh?” he said, looking at Birkin, then dropping his eyes before the calm, steadily
     watching look of the other: “Was she expecting you then?” 
 “No,” said Birkin. 
 “No? I didn’t know anything of this sort was on foot—” Brangwen smiled awkwardly. 
 Birkin looked back at him, and said to himself: “I wonder why it should be ‘on foot’!” Aloud
     he said: 
 “No, it’s perhaps rather sudden.” At which, thinking of his relationship with Ursula, he
     added—“but I don’t know—” 
 “Quite sudden, is it? Oh!” said Brangwen, rather baffled and annoyed. 
 “In one way,” replied Birkin, “—not in another.” 
 There was a moment’s pause, after which Brangwen said: 
 “Well, she pleases herself—” 
 “Oh yes!” said Birkin, calmly. 
 A vibration came into Brangwen’s strong voice, as he replied: 
 “Though I shouldn’t want her to be in too big a hurry, either. It’s no good looking round
     afterwards, when it’s too late.” 
 “Oh, it need never be too late,” said Birkin, “as far as that goes.” 
 “How do you mean?” asked the father. 
 “If one repents being married, the marriage is at an end,” said Birkin. 
 “You think so?” 
 “Yes.” 
 “Ay, well that may be your way of looking at it.” 
 Birkin, in silence, thought to himself: “So it may. As for your way of looking at
     it, William Brangwen, it needs a little explaining.” 
 “I suppose,” said Brangwen, “you know what sort of people we are? What sort of a bringing-up
     she’s had?” 
 “‘She’,” thought Birkin to himself, remembering his childhood’s corrections, “is the cat’s
     mother.” 
 “Do I know what sort of a bringing-up she’s had?” he said aloud. 
 He seemed to annoy Brangwen intentionally. 
 “Well,” he said, “she’s had everything that’s right for a girl to have—as far as possible,
     as far as we could give it her.” 
 “I’m sure she has,” said Birkin, which caused a perilous full-stop. The father was becoming
     exasperated. There was something naturally irritant to him in Birkin’s mere presence. 
 “And I don’t want to see her going back on it all,” he said, in a clanging voice. 
 “Why?” said Birkin. 
 This monosyllable exploded in Brangwen’s brain like a shot. 
 “Why! I don’t believe in your new-fangled ways and new-fangled ideas—in and out
     like a frog in a gallipot. It would never do for me.” 
 Birkin watched him with steady emotionless eyes. The radical antagnoism in the two men was
     rousing. 
 “Yes, but are my ways and ideas new-fangled?” asked Birkin. 
 “Are they?” Brangwen caught himself up. “I’m not speaking of you in particular,” he said.
     “What I mean is that my children have been brought up to think and do according to the religion
     I was brought up in myself, and I don’t want to see them going away from that.” 
 There was a dangerous pause. 
 “And beyond that—?” asked Birkin. 
 The father hesitated, he was in a nasty position. 
 “Eh? What do you mean? All I want to say is that my daughter”—he tailed off into silence,
     overcome by futility. He knew that in some way he was off the track. 
 “Of course,” said Birkin, “I don’t want to hurt anybody or influence anybody. Ursula does
     exactly as she pleases.” 
 There was a complete silence, because of the utter failure in mutual understanding. Birkin
     felt bored. Her father was not a coherent human being, he was a roomful of old echoes. The eyes
     of the younger man rested on the face of the elder. Brangwen looked up, and saw Birkin looking
     at him. His face was covered with inarticulate anger and humiliation and sense of inferiority
     in strength. 
 “And as for beliefs, that’s one thing,” he said. “But I’d rather see my daughters dead
     tomorrow than that they should be at the beck and call of the first man that likes to come and
     whistle for them.” 
 A queer painful light came into Birkin’s eyes. 
 “As to that,” he said, “I only know that it’s much more likely that it’s I who am at the
     beck and call of the woman, than she at mine.” 
 Again there was a pause. The father was somewhat bewildered. 
 “I know,” he said, “she’ll please herself—she always has done. I’ve done my best for them,
     but that doesn’t matter. They’ve got themselves to please, and if they can help it they’ll
     please nobody but themselves. But she’s a right to consider her mother, and me as
     well—” 
 Brangwen was thinking his own thoughts. 
 “And I tell you this much, I would rather bury them, than see them getting into a lot of
     loose ways such as you see everywhere nowadays. I’d rather bury them—” 
 “Yes but, you see,” said Birkin slowly, rather wearily, bored again by this new turn, “they
     won’t give either you or me the chance to bury them, because they’re not to be buried.” 
 Brangwen looked at him in a sudden flare of impotent anger. 
 “Now, Mr Birkin,” he said, “I don’t know what you’ve come here for, and I don’t know what
     you’re asking for. But my daughters are my daughters—and it’s my business to look after them
     while I can.” 
 Birkin’s brows knitted suddenly, his eyes concentrated in mockery. But he remained perfectly
     stiff and still. There was a pause. 
 “I’ve nothing against your marrying Ursula,” Brangwen began at length. “It’s got nothing to
     do with me, she’ll do as she likes, me or no me.” 
 Birkin turned away, looking out of the window and letting go his consciousness. After all,
     what good was this? It was hopeless to keep it up. He would sit on till Ursula came home, then
     speak to her, then go away. He would not accept trouble at the hands of her father. It was all
     unnecessary, and he himself need not have provoked it. 
 The two men sat in complete silence, Birkin almost unconscious of his own whereabouts. He
     had come to ask her to marry him—well then, he would wait on, and ask her. As for what she
     said, whether she accepted or not, he did not think about it. He would say what he had come to
     say, and that was all he was conscious of. He accepted the complete insignificance of this
     household, for him. But everything now was as if fated. He could see one thing ahead, and no
     more. From the rest, he was absolved entirely for the time being. It had to be left to fate and
     chance to resolve the issues. 
 At length they heard the gate. They saw her coming up the steps with a bundle of books under
     her arm. Her face was bright and abstracted as usual, with the abstraction, that look of being
     not quite there, not quite present to the facts of reality, that galled her father so
     much. She had a maddening faculty of assuming a light of her own, which excluded the reality,
     and within which she looked radiant as if in sunshine. 
 They heard her go into the dining-room, and drop her armful of books on the table. 
 “Did you bring me that Girl’s Own?” cried Rosalind. 
 “Yes, I brought it. But I forgot which one it was you wanted.” 
 “You would,” cried Rosalind angrily. “It’s right for a wonder.” 
 Then they heard her say something in a lowered tone. 
 “Where?” cried Ursula. 
 Again her sister’s voice was muffled. 
 Brangwen opened the door, and called, in his strong, brazen voice: 
 “Ursula.” 
 She appeared in a moment, wearing her hat. 
 “Oh how do you do!” she cried, seeing Birkin, and all dazzled as if taken by surprise. He
     wondered at her, knowing she was aware of his presence. She had her queer, radiant, breathless
     manner, as if confused by the actual world, unreal to it, having a complete bright world of her
     self alone. 
 “Have I interrupted a conversation?” she asked. 
 “No, only a complete silence,” said Birkin. 
 “Oh,” said Ursula, vaguely, absent. Their presence was not vital to her, she was withheld,
     she did not take them in. It was a subtle insult that never failed to exasperate her father. 
 “Mr Birkin came to speak to you, not to me,” said her father. 
 “Oh, did he!” she exclaimed vaguely, as if it did not concern her. Then, recollecting
     herself, she turned to him rather radiantly, but still quite superficially, and said: “Was it
     anything special?” 
 “I hope so,” he said, ironically. 
 “—To propose to you, according to all accounts,” said her father. 
 “Oh,” said Ursula. 
 “Oh,” mocked her father, imitating her. “Have you nothing more to say?” 
 She winced as if violated. 
 “Did you really come to propose to me?” she asked of Birkin, as if it were a joke. 
 “Yes,” he said. “I suppose I came to propose.” He seemed to fight shy of the last word. 
 “Did you?” she cried, with her vague radiance. He might have been saying anything
     whatsoever. She seemed pleased. 
 “Yes,” he answered. “I wanted to—I wanted you to agree to marry me.” 
 She looked at him. His eyes were flickering with mixed lights, wanting something of her, yet
     not wanting it. She shrank a little, as if she were exposed to his eyes, and as if it were a
     pain to her. She darkened, her soul clouded over, she turned aside. She had been driven out of
     her own radiant, single world. And she dreaded contact, it was almost unnatural to her at these
     times. 
 “Yes,” she said vaguely, in a doubting, absent voice. 
 Birkin’s heart contracted swiftly, in a sudden fire of bitterness. It all meant nothing to
     her. He had been mistaken again. She was in some self-satisfied world of her own. He and his
     hopes were accidentals, violations to her. It drove her father to a pitch of mad exasperation.
     He had had to put up with this all his life, from her. 
 “Well, what do you say?” he cried. 
 She winced. Then she glanced down at her father, half-frightened, and she said: 
 “I didn’t speak, did I?” as if she were afraid she might have committed herself. 
 “No,” said her father, exasperated. “But you needn’t look like an idiot. You’ve got your
     wits, haven’t you?” 
 She ebbed away in silent hostility. 
 “I’ve got my wits, what does that mean?” she repeated, in a sullen voice of antagonism. 
 “You heard what was asked you, didn’t you?” cried her father in anger. 
 “Of course I heard.” 
 “Well then, can’t you answer?” thundered her father. 
 “Why should I?” 
 At the impertinence of this retort, he went stiff. But he said nothing. 
 “No,” said Birkin, to help out the occasion, “there’s no need to answer at once. You can say
     when you like.” 
 Her eyes flashed with a powerful light. 
 “Why should I say anything?” she cried. “You do this off your own bat, it has
     nothing to do with me. Why do you both want to bully me?” 
 “Bully you! Bully you!” cried her father, in bitter, rancorous anger. “Bully you! Why, it’s
     a pity you can’t be bullied into some sense and decency. Bully you! You’ll see to
     that, you self-willed creature.” 
 She stood suspended in the middle of the room, her face glimmering and dangerous. She was
     set in satisfied defiance. Birkin looked up at her. He too was angry. 
 “But none is bullying you,” he said, in a very soft dangerous voice also. 
 “Oh yes,” she cried. “You both want to force me into something.” 
 “That is an illusion of yours,” he said ironically. 
 “Illusion!” cried her father. “A self-opinionated fool, that’s what she is.” 
 Birkin rose, saying: 
 “However, we’ll leave it for the time being.” 
 And without another word, he walked out of the house. 
 “You fool! You fool!” her father cried to her, with extreme bitterness. She left the room,
     and went upstairs, singing to herself. But she was terribly fluttered, as after some dreadful
     fight. From her window, she could see Birkin going up the road. He went in such a blithe drift
     of rage, that her mind wondered over him. He was ridiculous, but she was afraid of him. She was
     as if escaped from some danger. 
 Her father sat below, powerless in humiliation and chagrin. It was as if he were possessed
     with all the devils, after one of these unaccountable conflicts with Ursula. He hated her as if
     his only reality were in hating her to the last degree. He had all hell in his heart. But he
     went away, to escape himself. He knew he must despair, yield, give in to despair, and have
     done. 
 Ursula’s face closed, she completed herself against them all. Recoiling upon herself, she
     became hard and self-completed, like a jewel. She was bright and invulnerable, quite free and
     happy, perfectly liberated in her self-possession. Her father had to learn not to see her
     blithe obliviousness, or it would have sent him mad. She was so radiant with all things, in her
     possession of perfect hostility. 
 She would go on now for days like this, in this bright frank state of seemingly pure
     spontaneity, so essentially oblivious of the existence of anything but herself, but so ready
     and facile in her interest. Ah it was a bitter thing for a man to be near her, and her father
     cursed his fatherhood. But he must learn not to see her, not to know. 
 She was perfectly stable in resistance when she was in this state: so bright and radiant and
     attractive in her pure opposition, so very pure, and yet mistrusted by everybody, disliked on
     every hand. It was her voice, curiously clear and repellent, that gave her away. Only Gudrun
     was in accord with her. It was at these times that the intimacy between the two sisters was
     most complete, as if their intelligence were one. They felt a strong, bright bond of
     understanding between them, surpassing everything else. And during all these days of blind
     bright abstraction and intimacy of his two daughters, the father seemed to breathe an air of
     death, as if he were destroyed in his very being. He was irritable to madness, he could not
     rest, his daughters seemed to be destroying him. But he was inarticulate and helpless against
     them. He was forced to breathe the air of his own death. He cursed them in his soul, and only
     wanted, that they should be removed from him. 
 They continued radiant in their easy female transcendancy, beautiful to look at. They
     exchanged confidences, they were intimate in their revelations to the last degree, giving each
     other at last every secret. They withheld nothing, they told everything, till they were over
     the border of evil. And they armed each other with knowledge, they extracted the subtlest
     flavours from the apple of knowledge. It was curious how their knowledge was complementary,
     that of each to that of the other. 
 Ursula saw her men as sons, pitied their yearning and admired their courage, and wondered
     over them as a mother wonders over her child, with a certain delight in their novelty. But to
     Gudrun, they were the opposite camp. She feared them and despised them, and respected their
     activities even overmuch. 
 “Of course,” she said easily, “there is a quality of life in Birkin which is quite
     remarkable. There is an extraordinary rich spring of life in him, really amazing, the way he
     can give himself to things. But there are so many things in life that he simply doesn’t know.
     Either he is not aware of their existence at all, or he dismisses them as merely
     negligible—things which are vital to the other person. In a way, he is not clever enough, he is
     too intense in spots.” 
 “Yes,” cried Ursula, “too much of a preacher. He is really a priest.” 
 “Exactly! He can’t hear what anybody else has to say—he simply cannot hear. His own voice is
     so loud.” 
 “Yes. He cries you down.” 
 “He cries you down,” repeated Gudrun. “And by mere force of violence. And of course it is
     hopeless. Nobody is convinced by violence. It makes talking to him impossible—and living with
     him I should think would be more than impossible.” 
 “You don’t think one could live with him’ asked Ursula. 
 “I think it would be too wearing, too exhausting. One would be shouted down every time, and
     rushed into his way without any choice. He would want to control you entirely. He cannot allow
     that there is any other mind than his own. And then the real clumsiness of his mind is its lack
     of self-criticism. No, I think it would be perfectly intolerable.” 
 “Yes,” assented Ursula vaguely. She only half agreed with Gudrun. “The nuisance is,” she
     said, “that one would find almost any man intolerable after a fortnight.” 
 “It’s perfectly dreadful,” said Gudrun. “But Birkin—he is too positive. He couldn’t bear it
     if you called your soul your own. Of him that is strictly true.” 
 “Yes,” said Ursula. “You must have his soul.” 
 “Exactly! And what can you conceive more deadly?” This was all so true, that Ursula felt
     jarred to the bottom of her soul with ugly distaste. 
 She went on, with the discord jarring and jolting through her, in the most barren of misery. 
 Then there started a revulsion from Gudrun. She finished life off so thoroughly, she made
     things so ugly and so final. As a matter of fact, even if it were as Gudrun said, about Birkin,
     other things were true as well. But Gudrun would draw two lines under him and cross him out
     like an account that is settled. There he was, summed up, paid for, settled, done with. And it
     was such a lie. This finality of Gudrun’s, this dispatching of people and things in a sentence,
     it was all such a lie. Ursula began to revolt from her sister. 
 One day as they were walking along the lane, they saw a robin sitting on the top twig of a
     bush, singing shrilly. The sisters stood to look at him. An ironical smile flickered on
     Gudrun’s face. 
 “Doesn’t he feel important?” smiled Gudrun. 
 “Doesn’t he!” exclaimed Ursula, with a little ironical grimace. “Isn’t he a little Lloyd
     George of the air!” 
 “Isn’t he! Little Lloyd George of the air! That’s just what they are,” cried Gudrun in
     delight. Then for days, Ursula saw the persistent, obtrusive birds as stout, short politicians
     lifting up their voices from the platform, little men who must make themselves heard at any
     cost. 
 But even from this there came the revulsion. Some yellowhammers suddenly shot along the road
     in front of her. And they looked to her so uncanny and inhuman, like flaring yellow barbs
     shooting through the air on some weird, living errand, that she said to herself: “After all, it
     is impudence to call them little Lloyd Georges. They are really unknown to us, they are the
     unknown forces. It is impudence to look at them as if they were the same as human beings. They
     are of another world. How stupid anthropomorphism is! Gudrun is really impudent, insolent,
     making herself the measure of everything, making everything come down to human standards.
     Rupert is quite right, human beings are boring, painting the universe with their own image. The
     universe is non-human, thank God.” It seemed to her irreverence, destructive of all true life,
     to make little Lloyd Georges of the birds. It was such a lie towards the robins, and such a
     defamation. Yet she had done it herself. But under Gudrun’s influence: so she exonerated
     herself. 
 So she withdrew away from Gudrun and from that which she stood for, she turned in spirit
     towards Birkin again. She had not seen him since the fiasco of his proposal. She did not want
     to, because she did not want the question of her acceptance thrust upon her. She knew what
     Birkin meant when he asked her to marry him; vaguely, without putting it into speech, she knew.
     She knew what kind of love, what kind of surrender he wanted. And she was not at all sure that
     this was the kind of love that she herself wanted. She was not at all sure that it was this
     mutual unison in separateness that she wanted. She wanted unspeakable intimacies. She wanted to
     have him, utterly, finally to have him as her own, oh, so unspeakably, in intimacy. To drink
     him down—ah, like a life-draught. She made great professions, to herself, of her willingness to
     warm his foot-soles between her breasts, after the fashion of the nauseous Meredith poem. But
     only on condition that he, her lover, loved her absolutely, with complete self-abandon. And
     subtly enough, she knew he would never abandon himself finally to her. He did not
     believe in final self-abandonment. He said it openly. It was his challenge. She was prepared to
     fight him for it. For she believed in an absolute surrender to love. She believed that love far
     surpassed the individual. He said the individual was more than love, or than any
     relationship. For him, the bright, single soul accepted love as one of its conditions, a
     condition of its own equilibrium. She believed that love was everything. Man must
     render himself up to her. He must be quaffed to the dregs by her. Let him be her man
     utterly, and she in return would be his humble slave—whether she wanted it or not. 
</div></body></text></TEI>