<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The London Venture, by Michael
      Arlen. </title><author>Arlen, Michael [pseud.] (1895-1956)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1920</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">

I
MY watch has needed winding only twice since I left London, and already, as I sit here in the
     strange library of a strange house, whose
     only purpose in having a library seems to be to keep visitors like myself quiet and
     out of harm's way, I find myself looking back to those past months in which I was for ever
     complaining of the necessity that kept me in London. How I would deliver myself to a congenial
     friend about what men are pleased to call "the artificial necessity of living"—a cocktail, that
     courtesan of drinks, lent some artificiality! With what sincerity I would agree with another's
     complaint of the "monotonous routine of politeness," without indulging which men cannot live
     decently; how I
      would mutter to myself of streets and theatres full of men and women and
     ugliness! Even as a cab hurried me through the Tottenham Court Road to Euston the smile which I
     turned to the never-ending windows of furniture shops was at the thought that I should not see
     them again for many days, and I could not imagine myself ever being pleased to come back to
     this world of plain women and bowler hats and bawdily coloured cinema posters, whose duty it is
     to attract and insult with the crude portrayal of the indecent passions of tiresome people. If
     there be a studio in purgatory for indiscreet aesthetics, Rhadamanthus could do no better than
     paper its walls with illustrations of "The Blindness of Love," or "Is Love Lust?" For it is now
     a London of coloured drawings of men about to murder or be murdered, women about to be seduced
     or divorced. One has to see a crowd of people surging into a cinema, by whose doors is a poster
     showing a particularly vapid servant-girl, a harlot of the "dark-eyed, sinister" type, and a
     drunken, fair-haired young man who has not yet realised that discretion is
      the better part of an indiscretion, before one can understand "the lure of the
     screen."
And even the entrance of Euston, rebuilt and newly painted, gave my eyes only the pleasure of
     foreseeing that the new yellow paint would soon be dingy, and that the eyes of porters would
     soon no longer be offended with upstart colours which quarrelled with the greyness of their
     experience. And in the carriage I leant back and closed my eyes, and was glad that I was
     leaving London.
But the train had scarce left the station, and was whirling through the northern suburbs
     which should so fervently have confirmed my gladness, when I felt suddenly as though some
     little thing was being born inside me, as though some little speck of dust had come in through
     the open window, and fixed itself upon my pleasure at leaving London; and very soon I realised
     that this was the first grain of regret, and that I should not spend so many months away from
     London as my late depression had imagined. Then up will start the strong-minded man, and pish
     and pshaw me for not knowing my own mind. And if he does, how right he
      will be! For little do I care whether this mood be as the last, so they both fill
     up the present moment with fitting thoughts, and pain, and pleasure!
Now, I was already thinking of how I would return to London next year in the spring. What I
     would do then, the things I would write, the men I would talk to, and the women I would lunch
     with, so filled my mind, and pleasantly whirled my thoughts from this to that, that Rugby was
     long passed before even I had come to think of the pleasures that London in early summer has in
     store for all who care to take. When the days were growing long, it would be pleasant to take a
     table by the windows of the Savoy, and dine there with some woman with whom it would be no
     effort to talk or be silent.
Such a woman at once comes to my mind, with dark hair and grey-blue eyes, the corners of
     whose mouth I am continually watching because it is only there I find the meaning of her eyes,
     for she is a sphinx, and I do not yet know if what she hides is a secret or a sense of humour.
     You will say that that means nothing, and that she is quite invisible
      to you; but you do not know her, and I do—at least, I know that much of her. And
     with her it seems to me that I could dine only at that table by the windows where I could turn
     from her eyes to the slow-moving English river, and the specks of men and trams, which are all
     that the leaves of trees will let me see of the Embankment. Perhaps I would tell her of that
     novel which I once began to write, but could never finish nor have any heart to try again; for
     it began just here at this table where we are now sitting, but the man was alone, and if he
     ever lived outside my halting pages and had the finishing of my novel, he would put himself
     here again at the end, with you sitting in front of him. For that is the whole purpose of the
     novel, which I never realised till this moment, that once a young man was sitting here alone
     and wondering why that should be and what he should do, and in the end he was sitting here
     again with a woman for whom his passion had died, but whose eyes still made him talk so that he
     could not see the slow darkening of the river, or hear the emptying of the restaurant, until at
     last she laughed, and he
      had to stop because of the waiters who hovered round the table to relay it for
     the bored people who would come in from the theatres for supper. But all this I had never
     realised till I told you of it, and perhaps now I shall one day finish it, and call it
     "Nadine," for that is your name in the novel.
Thinking of the young man of my unfinished novel who had sat there so alone sent my thoughts
     back to the day not many years past when I first came to live in London. I am bitter about
     those first months, and will not easily forgive London for them; and if any young person shall
     begin to tell me how splendid were his first lonely days in the wilderness of people, how much
     he enjoyed the aimless wandering about the streets, how he liked to watch the faces of the
     people as they passed, laughing, or talking, or hungry, while he could do or be none of these
     for lack of company and convenience of means, then I will turn on him and curse him for a fool
     or a knave, and rend the affected conceit of his self-contained pleasure with my own experience
     and that of many others whom I know of. But then for a
      young Englishman—how pleasant it is to write of "young Englishmen," as though one
     were really a foreigner!—the circumstances are a little different, and he need never taste that
     first absolute loneliness, which, as the weeks go by and the words are not spoken, seems to
     open out a vista of solitude for all the days of life; nor need he be conscious that it is on
     himself—how, while it exaggerates, loneliness stifles self!—he must rely for every
     acquaintance, for every word spoken in his life. But for him there are aunts who live in
     Chester Square, and cousins who come up to stay a month or so at the Hyde Park Hotel, and
     uncles who live somewhere about Bruton Street, and have such a fund of
      risqué anecdotes that the length of Bond Street and Piccadilly will not see
     the end of them; and, perhaps, there are age-long friends of the family who have houses in
     Kensington and Hampstead, and "nice" parquet floors on which you can dance to a gramophone;
     while for an Armenian, who soon realises that his nationality is considered as something of a
      faux pas, there are none of these things, and he is
      entirely lost in the wilderness, for there is no solid background to his
     existence in another's country; and, as the days lengthen out and he grows tired of walking in
     the Green Park, he comes to wonder why his fathers ever left Hayastan; for it seems to me much
     better to be a murdered prince in Hayastan than a living vagabond in London. So I wandered
     about, moved my chambers gradually from Earl's Court to the heart of St. James's and read
     "Manon Lescaut," and sat in front of Gainsborough's "Musidora" until I found that she had three
     legs, and could never look at it again.
Then, somehow, came acquaintance, first of the world, then of literature and its parasites;
     came teas at Golder's Green and Hampstead, and queerly serious discussions about
     sub-consciousness; "rags" at Chelsea, and "dalliance with grubbiness," and women. Through this
     early maze of ribaldry and discussion, the first of which bored me because of its
     self-consciousness, and because I do not like lying on the dirty floors of studios with candle
     grease dripping on me, and the latter which affected my years miserably and
      almost entirely perverted my natural amiability into a morbid distaste for living
     (which still breaks out at odd moments, and has branded me among many people as a depressing
     and damnably superior young person); through this maze of smoke and talk I can only still see
     the occasional personality of Mr. D. H. Lawrence, as his clear, grey eyes—there is no
     equivalent to spirituel in English—flashed from face to face, smiling
     sometimes, often but a vehicle for those bitter thoughts (and thoughts are so often conclusions
     with men of arrogant genius like Lawrence) which find such strange and emphatic expression in
     his books. I would need the pen of a De Quincey to describe my impression of that man, and I am
     candid enough to admit that I lack the ability, rather than the malice, which caused the little
     opium-eater to be so justly hated by such a man as Bob Southey. There is a bitterness which can
     find no expression, is inarticulate, and from that we turn away as from a very pitiful thing;
     and there is that bitterness which is as clear-cut as a diamond, shining with definitions,
     hardened with the use of
      a subtle reasoning which is impenetrable but penetrating, "the outcome of a
     fecund imagination," as Lawrence himself might describe it; a bitterness so concisely and
     philosophically articulate, that, under the guise of "truth," it will penetrate into the
     receptive mind, and leave there some indelible impressions of a strange and dominating mind. I
     have found that in the books and person of Mr. D. H. Lawrence. He seems to lack humility
     definitely, as a man would lack bread to eat, and a note of arrogance, as splendid as it is
     shameless, runs through his written words; and the very words seem conscious that they are
     pearls flung before swine. He will pile them one on top of the other, as though to impregnate
     each with his own egotism, to describe the sexual passions of this man or that woman, words so
     full of his meaning, so pregnant with his passions, that at the end
     of such a page you feel that a much greater and more human Ruskin is hurling his dogmas at your
     teeth, that there is nothing you can say or think outside that pile of feeling which is massed
     before you, that you must accept and swallow without
      cavil and without chewing. With what relief one turns over a page and finds that
     here is no touch of the flesh, but that Mr. Lawrence is writing of earth! Let him sink into
     earth as deep as he may, he can find and show there more beauty and more truth than in all his
     arrogant and passionate fumblings in the mire of sex, in all his bitter striving after that, so
     to speak, sexual millennium, that ultimate psychology of the body and mind, which seems so to
     obsess him that in his writings he has buried his mind, as, in his own unpleasant phrase, a
     lover buried his head, in the "terrible softness of a woman's belly." Who has not read "Sons
     and Lovers," and laid it down as the work of a strange and great man, of the company of
     Coleridge, Stendhal, and Balzac? And who, as he read it, has not been shocked by a total lack
     of that sweetness which must alloy all strength to make it acceptable? "That strange
     interfusion of strength and sweetness," which Pater so admiringly found in Blake and Hugo,
     cannot be found in Mr. D. H. Lawrence; there is a mass of passionate strength, that of an angry
     man straining
      with his nerves because he despises his hands; there is a gentleness in his
     writing of children which could never be capable of such melodrama as that in Mr. Hardy's "Jude
     the Obscure," but in his men and women, in their day and night, there is no drop of sweetness.
     And I do not think he wishes it otherwise.
As the train flew through the Derbyshire countryside, whose hillsides and vales, covered with
     the brilliant sheen of the autumn sun, met the eye pleasantly with a rising and falling of pale
     yellowish green, with here and there a dark green patch of woodland, and made me want to stop
     the hurrying train and breathe the air of the place, my thoughts slipped back to the spring and
     the summer just before the war; and, with my eyes on the quickly passing sunshine on the low
     hills, I found that, after all, those last few months of peace had passed, perhaps, too
     lightly, too carelessly; but it was pleasant to think back to those days when lunches and
     dinners and week-ends took up so much of one's time. I was glad now that I had not spent the
     three summer months in Yorkshire
      on the moors, where I should have been uncomfortable; and had to be for ever
     sending postcards to Hatchard's to post me this or that book, which would come when my mood for
     it had passed.
And how dreadful it is to want to read suddenly "Love in the Valley," and have to be content
     with Tennyson, to long for a chapter of Dostoieffsky, and be met with complete editions of
     Trollope and Surtees! So I see that my middle age will be crabbed and made solitary by my
     books, and that I shall never have the heart to leave them and go to the East to see the land
     of my father Haik, or to walk about the lake upon which the great Queen Semiramis (who was the
     first in the world to discover that men could be conveniently changed into eunuchs) built the
     city Semiramakert, which is now called Van, and where later, when she was pursued by the
     swordsmen of her son, she threw a magic bracelet into the lake and turned herself into a rock,
     which still stands there covered with the triumphant script of the Assyrians.



</div></body></text></TEI>