
HIS PEOPLE
 It so happened that his people in Leicestershire were thinking of him. They had been talking
     about him at the very time of the boy's inconceivable meanderings in Hyde Park. And two of them
     were at it still. 
 On a terrace outside lighted windows a powerful young fellow, in a butterfly collar and a
     corded smoking jacket, was walking up and down with a tall girl not unlike him in the face; but
     their faces were only to be seen in glimpses as they passed the drawing-room windows, and at
     not less regular intervals when a red light in the sky, the source of which was concealed by
     the garden foliage, became positively brilliant. The air was sweet with the scent of
     honeysuckle and musk-roses and mown grass; midges fretted in and out of the open windows. But
     for the lurid lighting of the sky, with its Cyclopean suggestion of some mammoth forge, you
     were in the heart of England undefiled. 
 “It's no use our talking about Tony,” the tall girl said. “I think you're frightfully down
     on him; we shall never agree.” 
 “Not as long as you make a fool of the fellow,” said the blunt young man. 

 “Tony's no fool,” remarked Lettice Upton, irrelevantly enough. 
 “You know what I mean,” snapped her brother Horace. “He's being absolutely spoilt, and
     you're at the bottom of it.” 
 “I didn't give him asthma!” 
 “Don't be childish, Letty.” 
 “But that's what's spoiling his life.” 
 “I wasn't talking about his life. I don't believe it, either.” 
 “You think he enjoys his bad nights?” 
 “I think he scores by them. He'd tell you himself that he never even thinks of getting up to
     first school now.” 
 “Would you if you'd been sitting up half the night with asthma?” 
 “Perhaps not; but I don't believe that happens so often as you think.” 
 “It happens often enough to justify him in making one good night pay for two or three bad
     ones.” 
 “I don't call that playing the game. I call it shamming.” 
 “Well, if it is, he makes up for it. They were doing Ancient Greek Geography in his form at
     early school last term. Tony tackled it in his spare time, and got most marks in the exam.” 
 “Beastly young swot!” quoth his elder
      brother. “I'm glad he didn't buck to me about that.” 
 “I don't think there's much danger of his bucking to you,” said Lettice, smiling in the red
     light. She did not add as her obvious reason that Horace, like many another athletic young man,
     was quite incapable of sympathising with the non-athletic type. But he guessed that she meant
     something of the sort, and having sensibilities of his own, and a good heart somewhere in his
     mesh of muscles, he felt hurt. “I looked after him all right,” said Horace, “the one term we
     were there together. So did Fred for the next year. But it's rather rough on Fred and myself,
     who were both something in the school at his age, to hear and see for ourselves that Tony's
     nobody even in the house!” 
 Lettice slipped a sly hand under the great biceps of her eldest brother. 
 “But don't you see, old boy, that it makes it the worse for Tony that you and Fred were what
     you were at school? They measure him by the standard you two set up; it's natural enough, but
     it isn't fair.” 
 “He needn't be a flyer at games,” said Horace, duly softened by a little flattery. “But he
     might be a tryer!” 
 “Wait till we get a little more breath into his body.” 

 “A bag of oxygen wouldn't make him a cricketer.” 
 “Yet he's so keen on cricket!” 
 “I wish he wasn't so keen; he thinks and talks more about it than Fred or I did when we were
     in the eleven, yet he never looked like making a player.” 
 “I should say he thinks and talks more about most things; it's his nature, just as it's
     Fred's and yours to be men of action.” 
 “Well, I'm glad he's not allowed to cumber the crease this season,” said Horace, bowling his
     cigarette-end into the darkness with a distinct swerve in the air. “To have him called our
     “pocket edition,” on the cricket-field of all places, is a bit too thick.” 
 Lettice withdrew her sympathetic hand. 
 “He's as good a sportsman as either of you, at heart,” she said warmly. “And I hope he may
     make you see it before this doctor's done with him!” 
 “This doctor!” jeered Horace, quick to echo her change of tone as well. “You mean the fool
     who wanted to send that kid round the world on his own?” 
 “He's no fool, Horace, and you know nothing whatever about him.” 
 “No; but I know something about our Tony! If he took the least care of himself at home,
     there
      might be something to be said for letting him go; but he's the most casual young
     hound I ever struck.” 
 “I know he's casual.” 
 Lettice made the admission with reluctance; next moment she was sorry her sense of fairness
     had so misled her. 
 “Besides,” said Horace, “he wouldn't be cured if he could. Think what he'd miss!” 
 “Oh, if you're coming back to that, there's no more to be said.” 
 And the girl halted at the lighted windows. 
 “But I do come back to it. Isn't he up in town at this moment under this very doctor of
     yours?” 
 “He's not my doctor.” 
 “But you first heard about him; you're the innovator of the family, Letty, so it's no use
     trying to score off me. Isn't Tony up in London to-night?” 
 “I believe he is.” 
 “Then I'll tell you what he's doing at this moment,” cried Horace, with egregious
     confidence, as he held his watch to the windows. “It's after eleven; he's in the act of
     struggling out of some theatre, where the atmosphere's so good for asthma!” Lettice left the
     gibe unanswered. It was founded on recent fact which she had been the first to deplore when
     Tony made no secret of it in the holidays; indeed, she was by no means blind to his many and
     obvious failings; but they interested
      her more than the equally obvious virtues of her other brothers, whose unmeasured
     objurgations drove her to the opposite extreme in special pleading. She tried to believe that
     there was more in her younger brother than in any of them, and would often speak up for him as
     though she had succeeded. It may have been merely a woman's weakness for the weak, but Lettice
     had taught herself to believe in Tony. And perhaps of all his people she was the only one who
     could have followed his vagaries of that night without thinking the worse of him. 
 But she had no more to say to Horace about the matter, and would have gone indoors without
     another word if Mr. Upton had not come out hastily at that moment. He had been looking for her
     everywhere, he declared with some asperity. Her mother could not sleep, and wished to see her;
     otherwise it was time they were all in bed, and what there was to talk about till all hours was
     more than he could fathom. So he saw the pair before him through the lighted rooms, a heavy man
     with a flaming neck and a smouldering eye. Horace would be heavy, too, when his bowling days
     were over. The girl was on finer lines; but she looked like a woman at her worst; tired,
     exasperated, and clearly older than her brother, but of other clay. 
 That young man smoked a last cigarette in his
      father's library, and unhesitatingly admitted the subject of dissension and
     dissent upon the terrace. 
 “I said he wasn't doing much good there,” he added, “and I don't think he is. Letty stood up
     for him, as she always does.” 
 “Do you mean that he's doing any harm?” asked Mr. Upton plainly. 
 “Not for a moment. I never said there was any harm in Tony. I—I sometimes wish there was
     more!” 
 “More manhood, I suppose you'd call it?” 
 Mr. Upton spoke with a disconcerting grimness. 
 “More go about him,” said Horace. He could not say as much to his father as he had to Letty.
     That was evident. But he was not the boy to bolt from his guns. 
 “Yet you know how much he has to take all that out of him?” continued Mr. Upton, with
     severity. 
 “I know,” said Horace hastily, “and of course that's really why he's doing no good; but I
     must say that doctor of his doesn't seem to be doing him any either.” 
 Mr. Upton got excitedly to his feet, and Horace made up his mind to the downright snub that
     he deserved. But by a lucky accident Horace had turned the wrath that had been gathering
     against himself into quite another quarter. 

 “I agree with you there!” cried his father vehemently. “I don't believe in the man myself;
     but he was recommended by the surgeon who has done so much for your poor mother, so what could
     one do but give him a trial? The lad wasn't having a fair chance at school. This looked like
     one. But I dislike his going up to town so often, and I dislike the letters the man writes me
     about him. He'd have me take him away from school altogether, and pack him off to Australia in
     a sailing ship. But what's to be done with a boy like that when we get him back again? He'd be
     too old to go to another school, and too young for the University: no use at the works, and
     only another worry to us all.” 
 Mr. Upton spoke from the full heart of an already worried man, not with intentional
     unkindness, but yet with that unimaginative want of sympathy which is often the instinctive
     attitude of the sound towards the unsound. He hated sickness, and seemed at present surrounded
     by it. His wife had taken ill the year before, had undergone a grave operation in the winter,
     and was still a great anxiety to him. But that was another and a far more serious matter; he
     had patience and sympathy enough with his wife. The case of the boy was very different. Himself
     a man of much bodily and mental vigour, Mr. Upton expected his own qualities of his own
     children;
      he had always resented their apparent absence in his youngest born. The others
     were good specimens; why should Tony be a weakling? Was he such a weakling as was made out? Mr.
     Upton was often sceptical on the point; but then he had always heard more about the asthma than
     he had seen for himself. If the boy was not down to breakfast in the holidays, he was supposed
     to have had a bad night; yet later in the day he would be as bright as anybody, at times indeed
     the brightest of the party. That, however, was usually when Lettice drew him out in the absence
     of the two athletes; he was another creature then, excitable, hilarious, and more capable of
     taking the busy man out of himself than any of his other children. But Lettice overdid matters;
     she made far too much of the boy and his complaint, and was inclined to encourage him in random
     remedies. Cigarettes at his age, even if said to be cigarettes for asthma, suggested a juvenile
     pose to the man who had never studied that disorder. The specialist in London seemed another
     mistake on the part of that managing Lettice, who had quite assumed the family lead of late.
     And altogether Mr. Upton, though he saw the matter from a different point of view, was not far
     from agreeing with his eldest son about his youngest. 
 And what chance was there for a boy whose own father thought he posed, whose brothers
     considered
      him a bit of a malingerer, and his schoolfellows “a conscientious ass,” while his
     sister spoilt him for un enfant incompris? You may say it would have taken a
     miracle to make an ordinary decent fellow of him. Well, it was a night of strange happenings to
     the boy and his people; perhaps it was the one authentic type of miracle that capped all in the
     morning. 
 The father had gone to bed at midnight, after an extra allowance of whisky-and-water to take
     the extra worry off his mind; it did so for a few hours only to stretch him tragically awake in
     the early morning. The birds were singing down in Leicestershire as in Hyde Park. The morning
     sun was slanting over town and country, and the father's thoughts were with his tiresome son in
     town. Suddenly a shrill cry came from the adjoining room. 
 In a trice the wakeful man was at his sick wife's side, supporting her in bed as she sat up
     wildly staring, trembling in his arms. 
 “Tony!” she gasped. “My Tony!” 
 “I was just thinking of him!” he cried. “What about him, dear?” 
 “I saw him,” she quavered. “I saw him plainer than I see you now. And I'm almost positive I
     heard—a shot!” 
