
A LIKELY STORY
 At that moment help was as far away as it had been near the day before, when Eugene Thrush
     was closeted in the doctor's dining-room; for not only had Mr. Upton decamped for
     Leicestershire, without a word of warning to anybody, on the Saturday afternoon, but Thrush
     himself had followed by the only Sunday train. 
 A bell was ringing for evening service when he landed in a market town which reversed the
     natural order by dozing all summer and waking up for the hunting season. And now the famous
     grass country was lying in its beauty-sleep, under a gay counterpane of buttercups and daisies,
     and leafy coverts,
      with but one blot in the sky-line, in the shape of a permanent plume of sluggish
     smoke. But the works lay hidden, and the hall came first; and Thrush, having ascertained that
     this was it, abandoned the decrepit vessel he had boarded at the station, and entered the
     grounds on foot. 
 A tall girl, pacing the walks with a terribly anxious face, was encountered and accosted
     before he reached the house. 
 “I believe Mr. Upton lives here. Can you tell me if he's at home? I want to see him about
     something.” 
 Lettice flushed and shrank. 
 “I know who you are! Have you found my brother?” 
 “No; not yet,” said Thrush, after a pause. “But you take my breath away, my dear young lady!
     How could you be so sure of me? Is it no longer to be kept a secret, and is that why your
     father bolted out of town without a word?” 
 “It's still a secret,” whispered Lettice, as though the shrubs had ears, “only I'm in it.
     Nobody else is—nobody fresh—but I guessed, and my mother was beginning to suspect. My father
     never stays away a Sunday unless he's out of England altogether; she couldn't understand it,
     and was worrying so about him that I wired begging him to come back if only for the night. So
     it's all my
      fault, Mr. Thrush; and I know everything but what you've come down to tell us!” 
 “That's next to nothing,” he shrugged. “It's neither good nor bad. But if you can find your
     father I'll tell you both exactly what I have found out.” 
 In common with all his sex, he liked and trusted Lettice at sight, without bestowing on her
     a passing thought as a person capable of provoking any warmer feeling. She was the perfect
     sister—that he felt as instinctively as everybody else—and a woman to trust into the bargain.
     It would be cruel and quite unnecessary to hide anything from that fine and unselfish face. So
     he let her lead him to a little artificial cave, lined and pungent with pitch-pine, over
     against the rhododendrons, while she went to fetch her father quietly from the house. 
 The ironmaster amplified the excuses already made for him; he had rushed for the first train
     after getting his daughter's telegram, leaving but a line for Thrush with his telephone number,
     in the hopes that he would use it whether he had anything to report or not. 
 “As you didn't,” added Mr. Upton, in a still aggrieved voice, “I've been trying again and
     again to ring you up instead; but of course you were never there, nor your man Mullins either.
     I was
      coming back by the last train, however, and should have been with you late
     to-night.” 
 “Did you leave the motor behind?” 
 “Yes; it'll be there to meet me at St. Pancras.” 
 “It may have to do more than that,” said Thrush, spreading his full breadth on the
     pitch-pine seat. “I've found out something; how much or how little it's too soon to tell; but I
     wasn't going to discuss it through a dozen country exchanges as long as you wanted the thing a
     dead secret, Mr. Upton, and that's why I didn't ring you up. As for your last train, I'd have
     waited to meet it in town, only that wouldn't have given me time to say what I've got to say
     before one or other of us may have to rush off somewhere else by another last train.” 
 “Do for God's sake say what you've got to say!” cried Mr. Upton. 
 “Well, I've seen a man who thinks he may have seen the boy!” 
 “Alive?” 
 “And perfectly well—but for his asthma—on Thursday.” 
 The ironmaster thanked God in a dreadful voice; it was Lettice who calmed him, not he her.
     Her eyes only shone a little, but his were blinded by the first ray of light. 
 “Where was it?” he asked, when he could ask anything. 

 “I'll tell you in a minute. I want first to be convinced that it really was your son. Did
     the boy take any special interest in Australia?” 
 “Rather!” cried Lettice, the sister of three boys. 
 “What kind of interest?” 
 “He wanted to go out there. It had just been talked about.” She looked at her father. “I
     wouldn't let him go,” he said. “Why?” 
 “I want to know just how it came to be talked about.” 
 “A fool of a doctor in town recommended it.” 
 Lettice winced, but Thrush nodded as though that tallied. 
 “Did he recommend any particular vessel?” 
 “Yes, a sailing ship—the Seringapatam— an old East Indiaman they've turned into a
     kind of floating hospital. I wouldn't hear of the beastly tub.” 
 “Do you know when she was to sail?” 
 “I did know,” said Lettice. “I believe it was just about now.” 
 “She sailed yesterday,” said Thrush, impressively; “and your brother, if it was your
     brother, talked a good deal about her to this man. He told him all about your having always
     been in favour of it, Miss Upton, and his father not. I'm bound to say it sounds as though it
     may have been the boy.” 

 Thrush seemed to be keeping something back; but the prime and absorbing question of identity
     prevented the others from noticing this. 
 “It must have been!” cried Mr. Upton. “Who was the man, and where exactly did he see him?” 
 “First on Thursday morning, and last on Thursday night. But perhaps I'd better tell you
     about my informant, since we've only his word for Thursday, and only his suspicions as to what
     has happened since. In the first place he's a semi-public man, though I don't suppose you know
     his name. It's Baumgartner—Dr. Otto Baumgartner—a German scientist of some distinction.” 
 The ironmaster made a remark which did him little credit, and Thrush continued with some
     pride: “There was some luck in it, of course, for he was the very first man I struck who'd
     bought d'Auvergne Cigarettes since Wednesday; but I was on his doorstep well within twenty-four
     hours of hearing that your son was missing; and you may chalk that up to A. V. M.! I might have
     been with him some hours sooner still, but I preferred to spend them getting to know something
     about my man. I tried his nearest shops; perfect mines! One was a chemist, who didn't know him
     by sight, and had never heard of the cigarettes, but remembered being asked for them by an
     elderly gentleman last Thursday morning! That absolutely confirmed
      my first suspicion that Baumgartner himself was not the asthmatic; if he had
     been, the nearest chemist would have known all about him. Yet he had gone to the nearest
     chemist first!” 
 “The nearest butcher was next door; but he was so short about Baumgartner that I scented a
     true-green vegetarian. It was a false scent, Mr. Upton; not to mention the baker and the
     candlestick-maker, there's a little restaurant in the same row, which was about the fifth place
     where I began by asking if they knew where a Dr. Baumgartner lived in that neighbourhood. The
     little Italian boss was all over me on the spot! The worthy doctor proved to be his most
     regular customer, having all his meals sent in hot from the restaurant in quite the Italian
     manner. I don't suppose you see how very valuable this was to me. Germans love Italy, the
     little man explained; but I said that was the one point on which I should never yield to
     Germany—and I thought I was going to be kissed across the counter! It seems the good doctor
     lives alone with his niece (not always even her), and keeps no servants and never entertains.
     Yet on Friday, for the first time since the arrangement was made, the old chap went to the
     restaurant himself to complain of short commons; there had not been enough for them to eat on
     the Thursday night!” 

 “Had they been alone?” asked Mr. Upton, with a puzzled face. 
 “That's the whole point! My little Florentine understood they were, but I deduced one extra,
     and then conceived a course that may astonish you. It was the bold course; but it nearly always
     pays. I lunched at my leisure (an excellent Chianti my little friend keeps) and afterwards went
     round and saw the doctor himself. The niece opened the door—I wish I'd seen more of her—but she
     fetched her uncle at once and I begged for an interview on an urgent matter. He consented in a
     way that, I must say, impressed me very favourably; and the moment we were alone I said, “I
     want to know, Doctor, who you bought those asthma cigarettes for last Thursday!”” 
 “That took him aback, but not unduly; so then I added, “I'm an inquiry agent with a very
     delicate case in hand, and if you'll tell me it may solve at heart-breaking a mystery as I've
     ever handled.” Is was treating him like a gentleman, but I believe in that; there's no shorter
     cut to whether a man is one or not.” 
 “Well, his face had lit up, and a very fine face it is; it hadn't blackened for the fifth of
     a second; but I had a disappointment in store. “I'd tell you his name with all my heart,” he
     said, “only I don't really know it myself. He said it was
      John Green—but his handkerchiefs were marked “A. A. U.””” 
 “Tony's initials!” cried Tony's father. 
 “But it never was Tony under a false name,” his sister vowed. “That settles it for me, Mr.
     Thrush.” 
 “Not even if he'd got into some scrape or adventure, Miss Upton?” 
 “He would never give a name that wasn't his.” 
 “Suppose he felt he had disgraced his name?” 
 “My brother Tony wouldn't do it!” 
 “He might feel he had?” 
 “He might,” the father agreed, “even if he'd done no such thing; in fact, he's just the kind
     of boy who would take an exaggerated view of some things.” His mind went back to his last talk
     with Horace on the subject. 
 “Or he might feel he was about to do something, shall we say, unworthy of you all?” Thrush
     made the suggestion with much delicacy. 
 “Then I don't think he'd do it,” declared loyal Lettice. 
 “Let us hear what you think he did,” said Mr. Upton. 
 “It's not what I think; it's what this man Baumgartner thinks, and his story that you ought
     to hear.” 
 And that which they now heard at second-hand
      was in fact a wonderfully true version—up to a point—of poor Pocket's condition
     and adventures—with the sleep-walking and the shooting left out—from the early morning of his
     meeting with Baumgartner until the late afternoon of that day. 
 Baumgartner had actually described the boy's long sleep in his chair; it was with the
     conversation when he awoke that the creative work began in earnest. 
 “That's a good man!” said Mr. Upton, with unimaginable irony. “I'd like to take him by the
     hand—and those infernal Knaggses by the scruff of their dirty necks—and that old hag Harbottle
     by the hair!” 
 “I think of dear darling Tony,” said Lettice, in acute distress; “lying out all night with
     asthma—it was enough to kill him—or to send him out of his mind.” 
 “I wonder if it could have done that,” remarked Thrush, in a tone of serious speculation
     which he was instantly called upon to explain. 
 “What are you keeping back?” cried Lettice, the first to see that he had been keeping
     something all this time. 
 “Only something he'd kept back from them,” replied Thrush, with just a little less than his
     usual aplomb. “It was a surprise he sprang on them after waking; it will probably surprise you
     still
      more, Mr. Upton. You may not believe it. I'm not certain that I do myself. In the
     morning he had spoken of the Australian voyage as though you'd opposed it, but withdrawn your
     opposition—one moment, if you don't mind! In the evening he suddenly explained that he was
     actually sailing in the Seringapatam, that his baggage was already on board, and he must get
     aboard himself that night!” 
 “I don't believe it, Thrush.” 
 “No more do I, father, for a single instant. Tony, of all people!” 
 Thrush looked from one to the other with a somewhat disingenuous eye. “I don't say I
     altogether accept it myself; that's why I kept it to the end,” he explained. “But we must
     balance the possibilities against the improbabilities, never losing sight of the one
     incontestable fact that the boy has undoubtedly disappeared. And here's a man, a well-known
     man, who makes no secret of the fact that he found him wandering in the Park, in the early
     morning, breathless and dazed, and drove him home to his own house, where the boy spent the
     day; they took a hansom, the doctor tells me, than which no statement is more quickly and
     easily checked. Are we to believe this apparently unimpeachable and disinterested witness, or
     are we not? He was most explicit about everything,
      offering to show me exactly where he found the boy, and never the least bit vague
     or unsatisfactory in any way. If you are prepared to believe him, if only for the sake of
     argument, you may care to hear Dr. Baumgartner's theory as to what has happened.” 
 Lettice shook her head in scorn, but Mr. Upton observed, “Well, we may as well hear what the
     fellow had to say to you; we must be grateful to him for taking pity on our boy, and he was the
     last who saw him; he may have seen something that we shouldn't guess.” 
 “Exactly!” exclaimed Eugene Thrush; “he saw, or at any rate he now thinks he saw, enough to
     build up a pretty definite theory on the foundation of fact supplied by me. He didn't know the
     boy had come up to see a doctor and been refused a lodging for the night; he understood he had
     come up to join his ship, and suspected he had been on a sort of mild spree—if Miss Upton will
     forgive me!” And he turned deferential lenses on the indignant girl. 
 “I don't forgive the suggestion,” said she; “but it isn't yours, Mr. Thrush, so please go
     on.” 
 “It's an idea that Dr. Baumgartner continues to hold in spite of all I was able to tell him,
     and we mustn't forget, as Mr. Upton says, that he was the last to see your brother. Briefly, he
     believes
      the boy did meet with some misadventure that night in town; that he had been
     ill-treated or intimidated by some unscrupulous person or persons; perhaps threatened with
     blackmail; at any rate imbued with the conviction that he is not more sinned against than
     sinning. That, I think, is only what one expects of these very conscientious characters,
     particularly in youth; he was taking something or somebody a thousandfold more seriously than a
     grown man would have done. Afraid to go back to school for fear of expulsion, ashamed to show
     his face at home! What's to be done? He thinks of the ship about to sail, the ship he hoped to
     sail in, and in his desperation he determines to sail in her still—even if he has to stow
     away!” 
 “My God!” cried Mr. Upton, “he's just the one to think of it. His head was full of those
     trashy adventure stories!” 
 But Lettice shook hers quietly. 
 “To think of it, but not to do it,” said she, with a quiet conviction that rather nettled
     Mr. Thrush. 
 “But really, Miss Upton, he must have done something, you know! And he actually talked to
     Dr. Baumgartner about this; not of doing it himself, but of stowaways in general, à propos of
     his voyage; and how many pounds of biscuit and how many
      ounces of water would carry one alive into blue water. There's another thing, by
     the way! He told Baumgartner the ship touched nowhere between the East India Docks and
     Melbourne; he would be out of the world for three whole months.” 
 “And she only sailed yesterday?” cried Mr. Upton, coming furiously to his feet. “And you let
     her get through the Straits of Dover and out to sea while you came down here to tell me this by
     inches?” 
 Thrush blinked blandly through his port-hole glasses. 
 “I'm letting her go as far as Plymouth,” said he, “where one or both of us will board her
     tomorrow if she's up to time!” 
 “You said she didn't touch anywhere between the docks and Melbourne?” 
 “No; your son said that, Mr. Upton, and it was his one mistake. They don't usually touch,
     but a son of one of the owners happens to have gone round in the ship to Plymouth for the trip.
     I got it first from an old boatswain of the line who's caretaker at the office, and the only
     man there, of course, yesterday afternoon; but I've since bearded one of the partners at his
     place down the river, and had the statement confirmed and amplified. One or two pasengers are
     only going aboard at
      Plymouth, so she certainly won't sail again before to-morrow noon, even if she's
     there by then. You will be in ample time to board her—and I've got a sort of search-warrant
     from the partner I saw—if you go down by the 12.15 from Paddington to-night.” 
 The ironmaster asked no more questions; that was good enough for him, he said, and went off
     to tell a last lie to his wife, with the increasing confidence of one gradually mastering the
     difficulties of an uncongenial game. He felt also that a happy issue was in sight, and after
     that he could tell the truth and liberate his soul. He was pathetically sanguine of the
     solution vicariously propounded by Eugene Thrush, and prepared to rejoice in a discovery which
     would have filled him with dismay and chagrin if he had not been subconsciously prepared for
     something worse. It never occurred to Mr. Upton to question the man's own belief in the theory
     he had advanced; but Lettice did so the moment she had the visitor to herself in the
     smoking-room, where it fell to her to do certain honours vice Horace,
     luckily engaged at the works. “And do you believe this astounding theory, Mr. Thrush?” 
 Thrush eyed her over his tumbler's rim, but completed his draught before replying. 
 “It's not my province to believe or to disbelieve,
      Miss Upton; my job is to prove things one way or the other.” 
 “Then I'll tell you just one thing for your guidance: my brother is absolutely incapable of
     the conduct you ascribe to him between you.” 
 Thrush did not look as though he were being guided by anybody or anything, beyond the
     dictates of his own appetites, as he sat by the window of the restaurant car, guzzling new
     potatoes and such Burgundy as could be had in a train. But he was noticeably less garrulous
     than usual, and his companion also had very little to say until the train was held up
     inexplicably outside Willesden, when he began to fume. 
 “I never knew such a thing on this line before,” he complained; “it's all the harder luck,
     for I never was on such an errand before, and it'll just make the difference to me.” 
 “You'll have time,” said Thrush, consulting his watch as the train showed signs of life at
     last. 
 “Not for what I want to do,” said Mr. Upton firmly. “I want to shake that man's hand, and to
     hear from his own lips about my boy!” 
 “I'm not sure that you'll find him at home,” Thrush said, after a contemplative pause. 
 “I'll take my chance of that.” 
 “He said something about their both going out of town to-day—meaning niece and self. I heard
      her playing just before I left, and that seemed to remind him of it.” 
 “Well, Thrush, I mean to risk it.” 
 “And losing the train?” 
 “I can motor down to Plymouth; there's plenty of time. I might take him with me, as well as
     you?” 
 “Better,” said Thrush, after another slight pause. “I'd rather you didn't count on me for
     that trip, Mr. Upton.” 
 “Not count on you”? 
 “One of us will be quite enough.” 
 “Have you some other case to shove in front of mine, then?” cried the ironmaster, touched on
     the old raw spot. 
 “I shouldn't put it like that, Mr. Upton.” 
 “All right! I'll take your man Mullins instead; but I'll try my luck at that German doctor's
     first,” he growled, determined to have his own way in something. 
 “I'm afraid you can't have Mullins,” said Thrush, gently. 
 “Want him yourself do you?” 
 “I do; but I'm afraid neither of us can have him just now, Mr. Upton.” 
 “Why not? Where is he.” 
 Thrush leant across as they swam into the lighted terminus. 

 “In prison.” 
 “In prison! Your man Mullins?” 
 “Yes, Mr. Upton, he's the man they arrested yesterday on suspicion of complicity in this
     Hyde Park affair!” 
