

CHAPTER III.
IT was after this that we noticed a certain restlessness in Joshua. He seemed to
     feel the narrowness of his life down at such a place as Trevalga, where a man must work hard to
     keep body and soul together, and keep them very poorly when he has done his best; and where he
     cannot get forward save by his own thoughts. There is nothing for an energetic-minded young man
     to do there after his day's work is over. No lectures, no mechanics' institute, no library;
     only a few books to be borrowed here and there by chance. And Boscastle and Trevenna are
      no farther advanced; nor was even Camelford in those days.
     And then Camelford is full five miles away, across a wild whisht country that does not invite
     much night walking. To be sure there are the cliffs and the sea, the waterfall up at Knighton's
     Kieve, the rocks and the old ruins at Tintagel—King Arthur's Castle—which fill the imagination.
     But imagination does very well for extreme youth, as looking back does for old age: a man
     coming to his prime wants action.
An opening however came in time, and Joshua had an offer to go up to London to follow his
     trade at a large house in the City; which he accepted; and got me a job as well, that I might
     be alongside of him. For we were like brothers; he, the elder, the better, the leader; and I,
     the younger, the led. And
      neither was afraid of work; or, let me add, afraid for our
     work. We were skilled in our trade so far as we could be without first-rate teaching, having
     made it a point of duty and honour both, that we should never give folks occasion to talk of us
     as babbling saunterers, who took to the Bible because they could not manage the plane and the
     saw.
A few days before he went, Joshua happened to be coming out of his father's workshop just as
     Mr. Grand was passing, driving the neat pair-horse phaeton he had lately bought.
“Well, Joshua, and how are you doing?” said the parson, pulling up.
I dare say he was a good man when he was at home, but Mr. Grand was not fit to be a parish
     priest—at all events, not of such a place as Trevalga. He might have made
      a fine general officer, or a dignitary in a field where he
     had nothing to do with the poor; but among a lot of half-starving, uneducated creatures, such
     as you find in a by-kind of coast hamlet in Cornwall, he was worse than useless. He had no love
     for the poor, and no pity: he always called them “the common people,” and spoke of them
     disdainfully, as if they were different creatures from gentry. I question if he allowed us the
     same kind of souls; and I do know that he denied equality of condition after death, and quoted
     the text of “many mansions” in proof of his theory of exclusion. He was a man of good family
     himself, and his wife was the daughter of a bishop; he was rich too, and looked to be made dean
     or bishop himself by time. So you see, Trevalga was only a stopping-place with him, where he
      just put off the time the best way he could till he saw his
     way to better things; and didn't care a rush for any one in the place.
However, he drew up at seeing Joshua, and asked him how he was; and then said: “And why have
     you not been to church lately, my man?” as if Joshua had been in the habit of going, and had
     failed only of late. This was Mr. Grand's way. He never knew anything about his people. That
     gave them to think, you see, that he held himself too high to notice what such poor wretches
     might be about. God forgive me if I misjudge him!
“Well, sir,” said Joshua, “I don't go to church, you know.”
“No? have you joined the chapel then? Is that your latest fad, Joshua?”

“No, sir; neither church nor chapel,” answered Joshua.
“What! a new light on your own account, hey?” and he laughed as if he mocked him.
“No sir, only a seeker.”
“The old paths not good enough for you?—the light that has lightened the Gentiles these
     eighteen hundred years and more not pure enough for an unwashed Cornish lad, planing wood at a
     carpenter's bench and not able to speak two consecutive words of good English?”
“I must answer for my conscience to God, sir,” said Joshua.
“And your clergyman, appointed by God and the State to be your guide, what of him? Has he no
     authority in his own parish?” cried Mr. Grand warmly. “Does
      it never strike you, my fine fellow, that in thinking for
     yourself, as you call it, you are flying in the face both of Divine ordinances and the laws of
     man, and that you are entering on the sin of schism on the one hand, and of rebellion on the
     other?”
“Look here, sir,” said Joshua with earnestness, but quite respectfully; “if I speak plainly,
     I mean it for no offence; but my heart burns within me and I must speak out. I deny your
     appointment as a God-given leader of souls. The Church is but the old priesthood as it existed
     in the days of our Lord, and is, as much as that was, the blind leading the blind. There are
     good and kind gentlemen among you, but not Christians according to Christ. I see no sacrifice
     of the world, no brotherhood with the poor—”

“The poor!” interrupted Mr. Grand disdainfully; “what would you have, you young fool? The
     poor have the laws of their country to protect them, and the Gospel preached to them for their
     salvation.”
“Yes, and in preaching that—that is, in giving two full services on Sundays, and reading the
     marriage-service and the burial-service and the like of that when you are wanted—you discharge
     your conscience of all other obligations towards them, and think you have done enough. You
     never seem to remember that when Christ preached the Gospel to the poor it was to make them
     equal with the rich. Why, sir, the poor of our day are the lepers of Christ's; and who among
     you, Christian priests, consorts with them? Who ranks the man above his station, or the soul
     above the man?”

“Now, we have come to it!” cried Mr. Grand. “I thought I should touch the secret spring at
     last! And you would like us to associate with you as equals?—Is that it, Joshua? Gentlemen and
     common men hob-and-nob together, and no distinctions made? You to ride in our carriages, and
     perhaps marry our daughters?”
He had his little girl of six or so in the phaeton with him; a pretty little maid that used
     to go about dressed in blue velvet and a white feather in her hat.
“That's just it, sir. You are gentlemen, as you say, but not the followers of Christ. If you
     were, you would have no carriages to ride in, and your daughters would be what Martha and Mary
     and Lydia and Dorcas were, women of no station, bent only on serving God and the saints, and
     their title
      to ladyhood founded on their degrees of goodness.”
“Going in for socialism, Joshua?” said Mr. Grand, continuing his bantering tone. “A little
     radicalism, a little methodism, and a great deal of self-assurance—that seems to me to be about
     where you are!”
“Going in for no isms at all, sir,” said Joshua. “Only for the truth as it is in Christ!”
“Shall I tell you what would be the very thing for you?” said Mr. Grand quite quietly.
“Yes, sir; what?” asked Joshua eagerly.
“This whip across your shoulders!—and, by George, if I were not a clergyman I would lay it
     there, with a will!” cried the parson, half rising from his seat.
No one had ever seen Joshua angry since
      he had grown up. His temper was proverbially sweet, and his
     self-control was a marvel. But this time he lost both. It was not so much as a man, because of
     the insult to himself; he would have borne that meekly enough; but it was the feeling that the
     Sacred Thing had been mocked in him which drove him into sudden anger: an anger so violent and
     so sudden as to take the clergyman fairly aback.
“God shall smite thee, thou whited wall!” he cried with vehemence. “Is this your boasted
     leadership of souls?—this your learned solving of difficulties?—this your fatherly guidance of
     your flock? ‘Feed my lambs’—with what? with stones for bread—with insult for sincerity—with the
     gentleman's disdain for the poor thought of the artisan—with class insolence for spiritual difficulties
      culties! Of a surety, Christ has to come again to repeat the
     work which you priests and churches have destroyed and made of no effect, and to strip you of
     your ill-used power. You are the gentleman, sir, and I am only a poor carpenter's son; but I
     stand against you now—man against man—soul against soul—and I spurn you with a deeper and more
     solemn scorn than you have spurned me!” He lifted his hand as he said this, with a strange and
     passionate gesture, then turned himself about and went in; and Mr. Grand drove off more his
     ill-wisher than before; as perhaps was only natural. And yet he rightly deserved all he had
     got.
This was one of the stories that got bruited abroad to Joshua's discredit. Some said he had
     struck the parson—some that he
      had been monstrously and unjustifiably impertinent; and the
     tale got bandied about as a kind of dramatic scarecrow—a kind of logical warning to young men
     given to think for themselves, as to what would become of them if they shook themselves free of
     authority. “You'll be as bad as Joshua to Parson Grand,” was a phrase I myself heard more than
     once. But here is the story just as it happened; and I put it to my readers—was Joshua so very
     much to blame, all things considered—motives, feelings, spiritual disappointment, and that
     inner dignity of Man which overpowers all social differences when the fit moment comes? I can
     only say that never, to the last, could he be got to see that he had done wrong, and never, to
     the last, could I say it or see it either.
“No,” he used to say, “some kinds of
      anger are righteous; and this was of them.”
But Mr. Grand made old Davidson, Joshua's father, suffer for his son; for he took away his
     own custom from him, and did him what harm in the neighbourhood a gentleman's ill-word can do a
     working man. It was a bad thing for the old man. The Trevalga schools were being built, and St.
     Juliot's church was under repair, and Davidson, as the best workman thereabouts, would have
     been sure to have been head man at both jobs. But Mr. Grand, he put his spoke in that wheel;
     and one day when I took courage to speak and plead, all I got was a recommendation to mind my
     own business, and not interfere where I was not wanted. And then as if in consideration—a kind
     of condescending consideration—for
      my being a “canter,” Mr. Grand wound up with saying that I
     must see he was justified according to the law of God.
When I challenged him hotly, I daresay intemperately, I daresay even impertinently, for his
     proof—for you see I was but a poor uneducated artisan, and he was a gentleman and a scholar—he
     laughed, and said he did not argue with carpenters' lads; and when I answered back, he ordered
     me out of the house, saying I was as pestilent a fellow as my friend;—I replying angrily that I
     did not think the pestilence rested with Joshua. Which ended the interview; not without loss of
     temper and dignity on both sides, and no good done to anyone.
The night before we left for London Joshua had a kind of vision or waking dream, which he
     told me as we were on our
      way to Launceston, walking up the hill from Boscastle, while
     the omnibus toiled after us. He was on the cliff by Long Island, when suddenly he seemed to be
     caught away to a wide plain, where many men were gathered. In the centre of the plain was a
     hill, like Brown Willy out there by Camelford, and on this hill sat two kingly figures who
     ruled over the swarming multitudes below. They sat together hand in hand, and he saw that they
     were in some mysterious manner inseparable. The one was dressed as a high priest, and was
     Ecclesiastical Christianity; the other as a king, and was Society; and both were stern,
     forbidding, and oppressive. The only persons to whom they showed favour were the well-dressed
     and the subservient—rich people dressed in gold and jewels, and
      the poor and undistinguished who were submissive and
     conforming; who accepted all that the high priest taught without questioning the truth of any
     part, and who obeyed what the king ordained without even so much as a wish to resist. These
     were called Believing Christians and Respectable Members of Society; and, in consideration of
     their obedience, both the high priest and the king smiled on them, and spoke them fair. Yet
     they were scarcely friendly to their adherents. The one surrounded them with the most monstrous
     shapes of demons cast by magic lanterns and in every way unreal, of which they were in
     continual fear—GOD, whom yet they labelled “Our Father,” and the “God of Love,” the most
     terrible looking demon of all; and the more they were afraid, and the more
      cruel they believed Our Father to be, the more Ecclesiastical
     Christianity was content. The other bound them round and round with chains and swathing bands,
     till they were scarcely able to move or breathe. And when they submitted to the stifling
     torture with a good grace—some of them even drawing the links tighter, and buckling up the
     thongs more home of their own accord, and all declaring the pattern of each particular bandage
     to have been sent down direct from heaven, and in no wise invented as an experiment by
     Society—then the king smiled on them kindly, and praised them with many flattering words; and
     the poor atrophied wretches were quite content with the barren honour of their reward.
At the feet of these two rulers lay three figures cruelly bound and tortured. They
      were Truth, bearing in her arms her young child Science,
     Freedom, and Humanity. All three were stretched on racks made in the form of a cross, which
     gave in the eyes of the multitude a kind of symbolic sanction to their torture. The two rulers
     were for ever trying to gag them, so that they should not speak; but they could not quite
     succeed; and every now and then they uttered words, loud and clear as the sound of a silver
     trumpet, that stirred the multitude below, and set men running hither and thither, some shaking
     themselves free of the bonds in which both Christianity and Society had bound them. And when
     they spoke, the high priest and the king and their worshippers, all the well-dressed little
     kings and poorer conformists, buffeted them; and would have killed them if they could.

Ill-treated as they were however, each tortured being had a small knot of adherents. Round
     Truth, bearing her young child, Science, gathered men of imposing aspect—men of authority, of
     large brains, of temperate nature, of clear and candid thought. There were some among them of
     such unquestionable grandeur, that even the mob of Believing Christians and Respectable Members
     of Society paid them a certain cold, deprecatory reverence as they passed; while Ecclesiastical
     Christianity tried to reconcile their statements with his own creed, hiding his magic lantern
     painted with demons and that all-devouring hell with which he terrified the multitudes, when he
     spoke to them saying, “See, there is no such great difference between us after all! I do not
     contradict you. Say what you will about the
      sun, and the age of the earth, the relations of the universe,
     and the gradual evolution of man, nothing that you advance disturbs me. I only supplement you,
     and add the divine grace of spiritual truth, which is beyond your analysis. You are right and I
     am right; let us be friends and brothers.”
Society was less concerned about these philosophers. They were for the most part swathed in
      his bands tight enough; some for pre-occupation with other matters, some for
     expediency, some for dread of the unknown, and some for conviction; and, for the rest, he let
     his twin-brother, the high priest, fight his battles as he best could.
Round the prostrate form of Freedom, scarred, gashed, bleeding, fettered, stood only a few.
     Even the men of science were
      afraid of this huge giant, this son of the old gods, whose
     might no one had been able to calculate should he once arise in his strength. All, save his own
     few lovers, chiefly of the poorest class, looked on him with dread, and prophesied evil days
     for the world should he ever get free of his bonds and the symbolic constraint of the cross.
     But his small band of lovers, themselves either martyrs or victims, worked incessantly at his
     deliverance; every now and then getting one link loosened here and another there, knowing that
     in time he would with their help shake himself free of all his chains, and stand up before the
     world, the great-hearted leader, the glad possession of every man and woman that breathes.
The third figure was the most deeply oppressed. The face was hidden, but it was
      a lovely form, vilely clad in disfiguring garments, and
     bespattered with dirt that had been flung at it by the high priest and Society in concert. On
     its nailed hands hung the weeping and the miserable; and no one was rejected or bidden back.
     The most miserable sinner that crawled—the thief, the murderer, the harlot—it gathered them all
     around it; its own bound hands doing their checked best to free them from their stains.
     Pleasure and pain and sin and virtue all rested equally on its large breast, and to all it gave
     full sympathy and understanding. It condemned no one; only it refused obedience to the high
     priest and the king. As the dreamer looked, it slowly turned its face to the sky: and Joshua
     recognised in the soiled and vilified face of Humanity—the face of Christ.

Suddenly standing side by side with the magnificently attired pontiff, this Ecclesiastical
     Christianity, oppressor of Truth, slanderer of Humanity, tyrant of Freedom, ruler of the
     churches, and through them of the consciences of men; side by side too, with his twin-brother
     Society, his fellow-tyrant and oppressor, was a man coarsely clad in rude garments, a man of
     uncultured speech, of unconventional manners, but of a noble aspect, whose face was the face of
     an enthusiast who believed in himself, and in whose self-reliance were his sole credentials.
     His companions were the same as those who had gathered round the crucified form of Humanity.
     All the poor and the miserable, the leprous, the sinners, the outcast, and those “sinless
     Cains” of history, those men who had lived to do good
      to their generation, and who had been stoned and crucified
     and blasphemed and cursed as their reward—they were all clustered closely round him. He had
     nothing to do with that regal Society, that mitred Christianity. He loudly proclaimed his
     antagonism to both, and drew to him only such as they spurned and rejected.
He pointed to the high priest: “Look,” he said to Joshua, “what they have made of me; of an
     unskilled artisan, no schoolman even of his day, and a vagrant preacher living by charity, they
     have made a king; of a man, a god; of a preacher of universal tolerance, the head of a
     persecuting religion; of a life, a dogma; of an example, a church. Here am I, Jesus the
     Nazarene, the son of Joseph and Mary, as I lived on earth; poor, unlearned, a plebeian, and a
     socialist, at war
      with the gentlemen and ladies of my society, the enemy of
     forms, of creeds, of the priestly class of respectabilities; and there you see my modern
     travesty, this jewelled, ornate, exclusive Ecclesiastical Christianity, who is the ancient
     Pharisee revived. To you, and to such as you, is given the task of bringing men back to the
     creed that I preached. And if in securing the essence of the creed you forget the Founder, and
     call my doctrine by another name than mine, so be it. The world wants the thing, not the label;
     and Christ-likeness, not Ecclesiastical Christianity, is the best Saviour of men.”
As he said this the whole vision seemed to fade away, and the voice of Peggy Bray, whining
     and drunk, with Mr. Grand's deep tones of angry disgust, broke the quiet
      evening stillness, and brought Joshua back to the realities
     of life.
“Something seemed to bid me,” he said, when he told me the story: “I ran off over the down as
     fast as I could, and caught Peggy on the Tintagel Road. She was drunk, dirty, and crying. I
     took her by the hand. ‘Peggy, woman,’ I said, ‘dry your eyes, and come along with me.’ I spoke
     so sudden, I startled her, and so a little sobered her. Then I took her by the arm and led her
     to mother's cottage. ‘Here, mother,’ I said; ‘here is a bit of Christ-work for you to do. Take
     this poor creature, in her dirt and vileness as she is, and cleanse her. You believe and know
     that God's love did that for the world: we are less pure than Christ, but we hold ourselves too
     fine to follow His example in that! Love her,
      mother; she is your sister—and maybe your love can heal her.’
     Poor mother! she didn't like the task. She cried over it, and said that I put a burden on her
     she could not bear; but I held to my point,” said Joshua, with a glowing face; “and she
     yielded. Peggy stayed in our house for over a month, and mother was ill-called for her work.
     Not that she much cared, I fancy. I don't know, however, whether she did or not; she never said
     much. And though Peggy broke out again and went to the bad as before, yet a month's experience
     of loving-kindness and cleanly living was something. At all events, it was practical
     Christianity; and if it did Peggy herself little or no good permanently, it was the right thing
     to do, and mother was so far benefited.”
