

CHAPTER VIII.
WE were sitting one evening at the night school which Joshua still kept up, the room
     full of men and women of what the world calls the worst kind, when the door was flung open with
     a clatter, and Joe Traill, shabbier and dirtier than ever, staggered in half-drunk. I do not
     know if I have said that Joshua had at last succeeded in getting him a situation, where he
     would have done well enough had he kept off drink; but he had not; and this was the upshot
     after about three months' fair sailing.
“It's no use, governor,” he said to Joshua,
      in his drunken way; “work and no lush too hard for me,
     governor! I'd got to fall soft!”
“Well Joe, my man, it seems that you have fallen soft enough this time; as soft as mud!” said
     Joshua. “However, sit down and make no noise. I will talk to you by-and-by.”
“Not a copper!” said Joe, turning his pockets inside out and holding on by the tips. “I've
     come back like the devil, worse than I went!”
“All right, friend, but not just now; let me go on with what I have in hand, and then I'll
     attend to you.”
But Joe was in that state when a man is either maudlin or quarrelsome. He was the latter; and
     partly because he had still sense enough to be ashamed of himself, and partly
      because he was pricking all over like a porcupine with the
     drink, and wanted to have it out with some one, he chose to try and fasten a quarrel on Joshua.
     So he set at him again; this time with some ribaldry I'll not lower myself to repeat. And again
     Joshua answered him mildly, but more authoritatively than before.
“Sit down,” he said; and I don't think I ever heard his voice sound so hard and stern.
     “You've made a sore enough job of it for one day; don't add to your disgrace by folly.”
Then the bad blood, the bad convict blood that never got quite clear away, boiled up in Joe,
     and he let out from his shoulder and struck Joshua on his head, at the side just above the ear.
     A dozen men rose at once; a dozen voices cursed and swore, some at
      Joe for the blow, some yahing at Joshua for not returning
     it; women shrieked; the forms were upset as the men scrambled forward; and the quiet
     night-school was turned into a roaring Babel of tumult and violence. One brawny fellow—he too
     was a burglar, a man who might at any time develop into a murderer; but he had more fibre in
     him than poor, loose, slippery Joe, more to go upon as it were, and so could be held in hand
     better if once you could master his brutality—he squared up to the drunken creature, on whom
     already half-a-dozen hands were fiercely laid. But Joshua, who had turned white and
     sick-looking with the blow, laid his left hand on Jim's big arm, while he held out his right to
     Joe Traill, saying; “Why Joe! strike at a man, and your friend, for nothing! You must be
      dreaming, my son, and a bad dream too! Give us your hand,
     and wake up out of it!”
I can tell nothing more. There was nothing, perhaps in the words, but there was that in the
     look of him, as he stood there so white and yet so kingly, with one hand keeping back Jim
     Graves, the other offered to Joe squirming in the grasp of those who held him, that acted like
     a spell on all the room. There were men there, and women too, who would have been ready to tear
     him in pieces themselves if they had suspected for an instant that his loving leniency was from
     cowardice; but it was no coward who confronted the drunkard that had struck him, who confronted
     that roaring, yelling, crowd of desperate men and women, and calmed them all by his own
     unutterable dignity. The same intense look that had come into
      his face when, a little lad, he had questioned the parson in
     the church, when, a youth, he had prayed for a miracle in the Rocky Valley, came into his face
     now. He was as if raised into something, more than man—so simple, so earnest as he was—so far
     above all common weaknesses, so near to God, so like to Christ!
Joe burst into tears, sobered and subdued many of the women cried too, even that big
     coarse-mouthed Betsy Lyon, one of the most abandoned women of the district; while the men slunk
     together as it were, and most of them said a few rough words of praise, which, well meant as
     they were, sounded very far amiss at such a time. And then the police, attracted by the tumult,
     came up into the room; and, glad of an opportunity they had been looking for—after having been
      knocked about a good deal, for all that Joshua and I did our
     best to protect them—marched us both off to the station-house where we were locked up for the
     night, no bail being at hand.
The magistrate understood nothing of Joshua's defence next day, when he made it, but put him
     down with a severe rebuke. And as we had to be punished, reason or none, we were both sent to
     prison for a couple of weeks as a caution to us to behave ourselves better in the future. To
     live according to Christ in modern Christendom was, as we found out, to be next thing to
     criminal, and at all events qualified for prison discipline. We don't understand anything about
     the Lazaruses and Simeons and Magdalenes of our own city. When we read of our Lord and Master
     going about among the bad
      people of His day, we say it was divine; when Joshua
     followed suit, he was locked up. Well, Christ was the criminal of His day; and Caiaphas the
     high priest, representing respectability and adhesion to the existing order of things, took Him
     in hand, and taught the multitude so well to feel how far He had erred against the morality of
     the day, that they asked for Barabbas rather than for him. And we have our Caiaphases in full
     vigour still.
We had not done with poor Joe. Mr. C.'s words came too true. The demon of drink had got
     possession of him, and he was no more his own master than if he had been a lunatic in Bedlam.
     During our fortnight's imprisonment he took everything he could lay his hands on—clothes,
     furniture, tools—every individual thing, he did!—and pawned
      them for drink; and when we were set at liberty, we found
     our place stripped.
I never had Joshua's patience, and I confess I was indignant. It did seem to me such wicked
     ingratitude, such lowness!
But when I flared up with sudden passion, and broke out against the thief for a rascal and a
     scoundrel, Joshua silenced me with a rebuke it was not in me to resist.
“Unto seventy times seven, John?“ he said, “I think we joined hands on that line?” Then he
     added: “We must look that poor fellow up. He has got on to the incline, and, if not stopped, he
     will go down to perdition.”
He took his hat and went out; and after many hours' search through all the worst haunts he
     knew of, brought Joe Traill back: and kept him.
I need not go over the whole after-history
      of this wretched castaway. It is enough to say that again
     and again he fell into bad courses, and again and again Joshua forgave him. No trial was too
     severe for his Christian forbearance, his angelic patience. “Not to the sinless, but to the
     sinners,” he used to say; and truly the sinners found it so!
This unwearied sweetness, this tenderness and hope that never failed, wrought their good work
     before too late; and the convicted thief, who but for Joshua would have ended his days at the
     hulks, if not at the gallows, died,—of the results of former poverty and vice, granted—so far
     at peace with the law as to die out of jail, and repeating softly, “God bless me and forgive
     me!”
These backslidings and failures were among the greatest difficulties of Joshua's work. Men
     and women, whom he had thought he had
      cleansed and set on a wholesome way of living, turned back
     again to the drink and the devilry of their lives. Excitement had become all in all to them;
     the monotony of virtue tired them, and they broke out into evil as a relief. But, fail as often
     and as badly as they might, they never chilled Joshua's heart, if they saddened him as indeed
     they did. He forgave them everything; whether their sins had been against himself or against
     the law; and took them up where they had left him. Sometimes they laughed at him for his
     patience with them; sometimes they swore at him and refused his friendship; sometimes they
     cried and clung about him with pathetic but short-lived gratitude; and sometimes, but not
     often, they took his better lessons to heart and reformed altogether. For the most part,
      they just fluctuated—now bad, now good, as the fit took them
     and temptation was stronger than resolution. But, bad or good, he was ever the same to them—in
     the first case trying to win over, in the second helping to keep straight, and thankful if he
     succeeded ever so little in his endeavours.
The different reasons given by the various sectarians who came along, when any of his
     failures were afloat, were what I have said before. The Evangelicals said it was because he did
     not teach the Gospel; the Church people, because he was consecrated to the task; the
     Unititarians asked him, in calm disdain, how he could expect to do good, if he made no
     difference between vice and virtue but treated both alike? while the Charity Organization
     people talked of prosecuting him for his encouragement of mendicity
      dicity, and spoke of him as the pest of the district and the
     cause of half the pauperism about, because he helped the poor in their need without enquiring
     into the merits of the case. And they all agreed that the weak spot in his system, and the
     cause of his failures, was just this—he was not a Christian.
In the midst of all Mary Prinsep came back on our hands. You may perhaps remember that her
     mistress had made a point of concealing her former life from every one; in which she was
     justified, and for Mary's sake as much as for her own. Things had gone very well so far, and
     Mary had satisfaction and worked hard to deserve it, when unfortunately that man who had known
     her only too well in the sorrowful days of her sin, came with his family to the house, on a
     visit of a day or two. All the
      servants were marshalled into prayers morning and evening;
     and naturally Mary with them; face to face with the guests. So there it was—on the one side a
     dignified, handsome, well-to-do gentleman, with respectable white hair and a gold eye-glass, a
     wife and a fine young family, a character to lose, and a reputation for piety; on the other, a
     poor ignorant girl, abandoned by society, driven by want into bad ways, but now doing her best
     to get out of them.
It was an awkward meeting for him, and he was afraid maybe of Mary's establishing a claim, or
     telling what she knew. There he was, a guest in her master's house, with his wife and eldest
     daughter, and under his own name which she had never known, and his private and official
     addresses both to be got at. It was an instinct of self-preservation
      tion, no doubt; but it was cowardly all the same; and, as
     usual, the weak one had to go to the wall. He made up an excellent story to explain how it was
     that he knew the girl's former life. It was a story to his credit as a Christian gentleman
     somehow, and he told it out of sheer regard for his good friends who had been so shamefully
     imposed on. And even when the lady confessed, as she did, that she had known the main fact of
     Mary's history, she was urged so strongly to get rid of her that she consented, partly in a
     vague kind of belief that she had been imposed on and that Mary was worse than she appeared and
     capable of all manners of unknown crimes, partly by the force of respectability and the need of
     keeping up blameless appearances. So, as the right thing to do considering her position and
      what she owed her family and her own character, this
     lady—good Christian as she was, going to church regularly twice on Sunday, and taking the
     sacrament once a month—turned the poor creature out of doors again and she, keeping the
     gentleman's secret loyally, came back to us, as the only friends she had.
She was something different to us from any other girl that Joshua had been the means of
     rescuing, and we both felt that she had a stronger claim somehow, on our exertions and
     affections. Other women came and went, and Joshua helped them and got them work, and did what
     he could for them, and always kept up a kindly interest in them, and the like of that; but they
     were unto us what Mary was; for she was like our own sister. So, when she came back, it was
     just a family sorrow somehow;
      but, to me at least, it was a bit of a joy too. But you see
     since we had got into that trouble about Joe, and had been locked up, we had been worse off
     than ever. Masters would not employ us; mates would not work with us—we were “jail birds” to
     them; and the Union turned us out. Joshua held on though, and we got day-jobs; but we were
     often hungry and often weary; yet Joshua never let me sink into despair, nor was he ever near
     it himself, and we managed to scrape along somehow. Still, our present poverty made poor Mary's
     return embarrassing, though she didn't see it all.
“It is of no use, Joshua,” she said, sitting on a chair and leaning her head on her hand
     disconsolately: “once lost, you are done for in this world! There is nothing for me but the old
     way; it is all I have left!”

I remember so well when she said this. The sun had come round to our window; for it was a
     summer's evening; and it came into the room, and fell on her, as she sat with her bonnet off,
     and her fair hair partly fallen about her face. She had very fine hair, and she knew it. I
     remember too that her dress was some kind of blue, and that she looked like a picture there is
     in the National Gallery; and I thought, if only some one who could save her really, and lift
     her up for ever out of the past, could but see her now!
“Courage, Mary, and patience,” said Joshua.
“Yes, I know all that; but the ways and means?” said Mary, raising her eyes to him. “What can
     I do, Joshua? To get my bread any way but the old way I must creep into a house under false
     pretences, and then be
      always afraid of being found out; and if I am found out I am
     sure to be turned off. No one will have me who knows about me, if I work ever so hard, or try
     to do my duty ever so faithfully.”
“One failure is not final,” said Joshua. “While we have a home, you have one too; you are our
     sister, remember. Only have faith, and as I said before courage and patience; and beware of the
     first step back!”
“Ah, Joshua!” said Mary, “you are an angel!”
“No,” he answered smiling, “I am only a man trying to live by principle.”
But if he was not an angel he was not far off being one.
It was difficult to know what to do for the best for Mary. We kept her for as long as we
     could, she doing our chores for
      us in the old way for her meat and room; and then Joshua
     raised funds—I can scarce understand how, but the poorest of the people helped, as well as the
     best off—and somehow, enough was got together to establish her in a small sweet-stuff shop in
     East-street close to Church-court. To help her with the rent we went to lodge with her; which
     suited both her and ourselves; for you see we had got accustomed to her, and she to us, and she
     knew our ways, and was always good and helpful. People talked, of course; but then people talk
     about anything, reason or none, that is out of the common by ever so small a line; and no man
     who has taken an independent path can escape the comment of the crowd accustomed to only one
     way. The old report that we were living with a woman of bad
      character crept about again, and got down to our dear
     Cornish homes. You may be sure it made our mothers bad enough when they heard it; but I don't
     think they quite believed it, though they thought it right to send us a warning, as if they
     did; and if they did, then they believed what was not true. As for ourselves, we had our own
     consciences and Mary's salvation to keep us up; and with these it mattered little what any one
     else chose to say. As Joshua said, we had not set out in our endeavour to realise Christ for
     the sake of gain, but for the sake of the right; and if we had to suffer, we must; but the
     right was not to be abandoned because of it.
