
Chapter 6
The Charles the Second Spaniel
It was about two o’clock, on a charming spring day, that a stout middle-aged man, accompanied
     by a young person of extraordinary beauty, took up his station in front of Langham Church. Just
     as the clock struck the hour, a young man issued at a quick pace from a cross-street, and came
     upon the couple before he was aware of it. He was evidently greatly embarrassed, and would have
     beaten a retreat, but that was impossible. His embarrassment was in some degree shared by the
     young lady; she blushed deeply, but could not conceal her satisfaction at the encounter. The
     elder individual, who did not appear to notice the confusion of either party, immediately
     extended his hand to the young man, and exclaimed:
“What! Mr. Darcy, is it you? Why, we thought we had lost you, sir! What took you off so
     suddenly? We have been expecting you these four days, and were now walking about to try and
     find you. My daughter has been terribly uneasy. Haven’t you, Ebba?”
The young lady made no answer to this appeal, but cast down her eyes.
“It was my intention to call, and give you an explanation of my strange conduct, to-day,”
     replied Auriol. “I hope you received my letter, stating that my sudden departure was
     unavoidable.”
“To be sure; and I also received the valuable snuffbox you were so good as to send me,”
     replied Mr. Thorneycroft. “But you neglected to tell me how to acknowledge the gift.”
“I could not give an address at the moment,” said Auriol.
“Well, I am glad to find you have got the use of your arm again,” observed the iron-merchant;
     “but I can’t say you look so well as when you left us. You seem paler—eh? what do you think,
     Ebba?”
“Mr. Darcy looks as if he were suffering from mental anxiety rather than from bodily
     ailment,” she replied timidly.
“I am so,” replied Auriol, regarding her fixedly. “A very disastrous circumstance has
     happened to me. But answer me one question: Has the mysterious person in the black cloak
     troubled you again?”
“What mysterious person?” demanded Mr. Thorneycroft, opening his eyes.
“Never mind, father,” replied Ebba. “I saw him last night,” she added to Auriol. “I was
     sitting in the back room alone, wondering what had become of you, when I heard a tap against
     the window, which was partly open, and, looking up, I beheld the tall stranger. It was nearly
     dark, but the light of the fire revealed his malignant countenance. I don’t exaggerate, when I
     say his eyes gleamed like those of a tiger. I was terribly frightened, but something prevented
     me from crying out. After gazing at me for a few moments, with a look that seemed to fascinate
     while it frightened me, he said—‘You desire to see Auriol Darcy. I have just quitted him. Go to
     Langham Place to-morrow, and, as the clock strikes two, you will behold him.’ Without waiting
     for any reply on my part, he disappeared.”
“Ah, you never told me this, you little rogue!” cried Mr. Thorneycroft. “You persuaded me to
     come out with you, in the hope of meeting Mr. Darcy; but you did not say you were sure to find
     him. So you sent this mysterious gentleman to her, eh?” he added to Auriol.
“No, I did not,” replied the other gloomily.
“Indeed!” exclaimed the iron-merchant, with a puzzled look.
“Oh, then I suppose he thought it might relieve her anxiety. However, since we have met, I
     hope you’ll walk home and dine with us.”
Auriol was about to decline the invitation, but Ebba glanced at him entreatingly.
“I have an engagement, but I will forego it,” he said, offering his arm to her.
And they walked along towards Oxford Street, while Mr. Thorneycroft followed, a few paces
     behind them.
“This is very kind of you, Mr. Darcy,” said Ebba. “Oh, I have been so wretched!”
“I grieve to hear it,” he rejoined. “I hoped you had forgotten me.”
“I am sure you did not think so,” she cried.
As she spoke, she felt a shudder pass through Auriol’s frame.
“What ails you?” she anxiously inquired.
“I would have shunned you, if I could, Ebba,” he replied; “but a fate, against which it is
     vain to contend, has brought us together again.”
“I am glad of it,” she replied; “because, ever since our last interview, I have been
     reflecting on what you then said to me, and am persuaded you are labouring under some strange
     delusion, occasioned by your recent accident.”
“Be not deceived, Ebba,” cried Auriol. “I am under a terrible influence. I need not remind
     you of the mysterious individual who tapped at your window last night.”
“What of him?” demanded Ebba, with a thrill of apprehension.
“He it is who controls my destiny,” replied Auriol.
“But what has he to do with me?” asked Ebba.
“Much, much,” he replied, with a perceptible shudder.
“You terrify me, Auriol,” she rejoined. “Tell me what you mean—in pity, tell me?”
Before Auriol could reply, Mr. Thorneycroft stepped forward, and turned the conversation into
     another channel.
Soon after this, they reached the Quadrant, and were passing beneath the eastern colonnade,
     when Ebba’s attention was attracted towards a man who was leading a couple of dogs by a string,
     while he had others under his arm, others again in his pocket, and another in his breast. It
     was Mr. Ginger.
“What a pretty little dog!” cried Ebba, remarking the Charles the Second spaniel.
“Allow me to present you with it?” said Auriol.
“You know I should value it, as coming from you,” she replied, blushing deeply; “but I cannot
     accept it; so I will not look at it again, for fear I should be tempted.”
The dog-fancier, however, noticing Ebba’s admiration, held forward the spaniel, and said, “Do
     jist look at the pretty little creater, miss. It han’t its equil for beauty. Don’t be afeerd on
     it, miss. It’s as gentle as a lamb.”
“Oh you little darling!” Ebba said, patting its sleek head and long silken ears, while it
     fixed its large black eyes upon her, as if entreating her to become its purchaser.
“Fairy seems to have taken quite a fancy to you, miss,” observed Ginger; “and she ain’t i’
     the habit o’ fallin’ i’ love at first sight. I don’t wonder at it, though, for my part. I
     should do jist the same, if I wos in her place. Vell, now, miss, as she seems to like you, and
     you seem to like her, I won’t copy the manners o’ them ’ere fathers as has stony ‘arts, and
     part two true lovyers. You shall have her a bargin.”
“What do you call a bargain, my good man?” inquired Ebba, smiling.
“I wish I could afford to give her to you, miss,” replied Ginger; “you should have her, and
     welcome. But I must airn a livelihood, and Fairy is the most wallerable part o’ my stock. I’ll
     tell you wot I give for her myself, and you shall have her at a trifle beyond it. I’d scorn to
     take adwantage o’ the likes o’ you.”
“I hope you didn’t give too much, then, friend,” replied Ebba.
“I didn’t give hayf her wally—not hayf,” said Ginger; “and if so be you don’t like her in a
     month’s time, I’ll buy her back again from you. You’ll alvays find me here—alvays. Everybody
     knows Mr. Ginger—that’s my name, miss. I’m the only honest man in the dog-fancyin’ line. Ask
     Mr. Bishop, the great gunmaker o’ Bond Street, about me—him as the nobs calls the Bishop o’
     Bond Street—an’ he’ll tell you.”
“But you haven’t answered the lady’s question,” said Auriol. “What do you ask for the
     dog?”
“Do you want it for yourself, sir, or for her?” inquired Ginger.
“What does it matter?” cried Auriol angrily.
“A great deal, sir,” replied Ginger; “it’ll make a mater’al difference in the price. To you
     she’ll be five-an’-twenty guineas. To the young lady, twenty.”
“But suppose I buy her for the young lady?” said Auriol.
“Oh, then, in coorse, you’ll get her at the lower figure!” replied Ginger.
“I hope you don’t mean to buy the dog?” interposed Mr. Thorneycroft. “The price is
     monstrous—preposterous.”
“It may appear so to you, sir,” said Ginger, “because you’re ignorant o’ the wally of sich a
     hanimal; but I can tell you, it’s cheap—dirt cheap. Vy, his Excellency the Prooshan Ambassador
     bought a Charley from me, t’other week, to present to a certain duchess of his acquaintance,
     and wot d’ye think he give for it?”
“I don’t know, and I don’t want to know,” replied Mr. Thorneycroft gruffly.
“Eighty guineas,” said Ginger. “Eighty guineas, as I’m a livin’ man, and made no bones about
     it neither. The dog I sold him warn’t to be compared wi’ Fairy.”
“Stuff—stuff!” cried Mr. Thorneycroft; “I ain’t to be gammoned in that way.”
“It’s no gammon,” said Ginger. “Look at them ears, miss—vy, they’re as long as your own
     ringlets—and them pads—an’ I’m sure you von’t say she’s dear at twenty pound.”
“She’s a lovely little creature, indeed,” returned Ebba, again patting the animal’s head.
While this was passing, two men of very suspicious mien, ensconced behind a pillar adjoining
     the group, were reconnoitring Auriol.
“It’s him!” whispered the taller and darker of the two to his companion—“it’s the young man
     ve’ve been lookin’ for—Auriol Darcy.”
“It seems like him,” said the other, edging round the pillar as far as he could without
     exposure. “I vish he’d turn his face a leetle more this vay.”
“It’s him, I tell you, Sandman,” said the Tinker. “Ve must give the signal to our
     comrade.”
“Vell, I’ll tell you wot it is, miss,” said Ginger coaxingly, “your sveet’art—I’m sure he’s
     your sveet’art—I can tell these things in a minnit—your sveet’art, I say, shall give me fifteen
     pound, and the dog’s yourn. I shall lose five pound by the transaction; but I don’t mind it for
     sich a customer as you. Fairy desarves a kind missus.”
Auriol, who had fallen into a fit of abstraction, here remarked:
“What’s that you are saying, fellow?”
“I vos a-sayin’, sir, the young lady shall have the dog for fifteen pound, and a precious
     bargin it is,” replied Ginger.
“Well, then, I close with you. Here’s the money,” said Auriol, taking out his purse.
“On no account, Auriol,” cried Ebba quickly. “It’s too much.”
“A great deal too much, Mr. Darcy,” said Thorneycroft.
“Auriol and Darcy!” muttered Ginger. “Can this be the gemman ve’re a-lookin’ for. Vere’s my
     two pals, I vonder? Oh, it’s all right!” he added, receiving a signal from behind the pillar.
     “They’re on the look-out, I see.”
“Give the lady the dog, and take the money, man,” said Auriol sharply.
“Beg pardon, sir,” said Ginger, “but hadn’t I better carry the dog home for the young lady?
     It might meet vith some accident in the vay.”
“Accident!—stuff and nonsense!” cried Mr. Thorneycroft. “The rascal only wants to follow you
     home, that he may know where you live, and steal the dog back again. Take my advice, Mr. Darcy,
     and don’t buy it.”
“The bargain’s concluded,” said Ginger, delivering the dog to Ebba, and taking the money from
     Auriol, which, having counted, he thrust into his capacious breeches pocket.
“How shall I thank you for this treasure, Auriol?” exclaimed Ebba, in an ecstasy of
     delight.
“By transferring to it all regard you may entertain for me,” he replied, in a low tone.
“That is impossible,” she answered.
“Well, I vote we drive away at once,” said Mr. Thorneycroft. “Halloa! jarvey!” he cried,
     hailing a coach that was passing; adding, as the vehicle stopped, “Now get in, Ebba. By this
     means we shall avoid being followed by the rascal.”
So saying, he got into the coach. As Auriol was about to follow him, he felt a slight touch
     on his arm, and, turning, beheld a tall and very forbidding man by his side.
“Beg pardin, sir,” said the fellow, touching his hat, “but ain’t your name Mr. Auriol
     Darcy?”
“It is,” replied Auriol, regarding him fixedly. “Why do you ask?”
“I vants a vord or two vith you in private—that’s all, sir,” replied the Tinker.
“Say what you have to say at once,” rejoined Auriol. “I know nothing of you.”
“You’ll know me better by-and-by, sir,” said the Tinker, in a significant tone. “I
      must speak to you, and alone.”
“If you don’t go about your business, fellow, instantly, I’ll give you in charge of the
     police,” cried Auriol.
“No, you von’t, sir—no, you von’t,” replied the Tinker, shaking his head. And then, lowering
     his voice, he added, “You’ll be glad to purchase my silence ven you larns wot secrets o’ yourn
     has come to my knowledge.”
“Won’t you get in, Mr. Darcy?” cried Thorneycroft, whose back was towards the Tinker.
“I must speak to this man,” replied Auriol. “I’ll come to you in the evening. Till then,
     farewell, Ebba.” And, as the coach drove away, he added to the Tinker, “Now, rascal, what have
     you to say?”
“Step this vay, sir,” replied the Tinker. “There’s two friends o’ mine as vishes to be
     present at our conference. Ve’d better valk into a back street.”
