
Chapter 1
The Ruined House in the Vauxhall Road
Late one night, in the spring of 1830, two men issued from a low, obscurely situated
     public-house, near Millbank, and shaped their course apparently in the direction of Vauxhall
     Bridge. Avoiding the footpath near the river, they moved stealthily along the farther side of
     the road, where the open ground offered them an easy means of flight, in case such a course
     should be found expedient. So far as it could be discerned by the glimpses of the moon, which
     occasionally shone forth from a rack of heavy clouds, the appearance of these personages was
     not much in their favour. Haggard features, stamped deeply with the characters of crime and
     debauchery; fierce, restless eyes; beards of several days’ growth; wild, unkempt heads of hair,
     formed their chief personal characteristics; while sordid and ragged clothes, shoes without
     soles, and old hats without crowns, constituted the sum of their apparel.
One of them was tall and gaunt, with large hands and feet; but despite his meagreness, he
     evidently possessed great strength: the other was considerably shorter, but broad-shouldered,
     bow-legged, long-armed, and altogether a most formidable ruffian. This fellow had high
     cheek-bones, a long aquiline nose, and a coarse mouth and chin, in which the animal greatly
     predominated. He had a stubby red beard, with sandy hair, white brows and eyelashes. The
     countenance of the other was dark and repulsive, and covered with blotches, the result of
     habitual intemperance. His eyes had a leering and malignant look. A handkerchief spotted with
     blood, and tied across his brow, contrasted strongly with his matted black hair, and increased
     his natural appearance of ferocity. The shorter ruffian carried a mallet upon his shoulder, and
     his companion concealed something beneath the breast of his coat, which afterwards proved to be
     a dark lantern.
Not a word passed between them; but keeping a vigilant look-out, they trudged on with quick,
     shambling steps. A few sounds arose from the banks of the river, and there was now and then a
     plash in the water, or a distant cry, betokening some passing craft; but generally all was
     profoundly still. The quaint, Dutch-looking structures on the opposite bank, the line of
     coal-barges and lighters moored to the strand, the great timber-yards and coal-yards, the
     brewhouses, gasworks, and waterworks, could only be imperfectly discerned; but the moonlight
     fell clear upon the ancient towers of Lambeth Palace, and on the neighbouring church. The same
     glimmer also ran like a silver belt across the stream, and revealed the great, stern,
     fortress-like pile of the Penitentiary—perhaps the most dismal-looking structure in the whole
     metropolis. The world of habitations beyond this melancholy prison was buried in darkness. The
     two men, however, thought nothing of these things, and saw nothing of them; but, on arriving
     within a couple of hundred yards of the bridge, suddenly, as if by previous concert, quitted
     the road, and, leaping a rail, ran across a field, and plunged into a hollow formed by a dried
     pit, where they came to a momentary halt.
“You ain’t a-been a-gammonin’ me in this matter, Tinker?” observed the shorter individual.
     “The cove’s sure to come?”
“Why, you can’t expect me to answer for another as I can for myself, Sandman,” replied the
     other; “but if his own word’s to be taken for it, he’s sartin to be there. I heerd him say, as
     plainly as I’m a speakin’ to you—‘I’ll be here to-morrow night—at the same hour——’”
“And that wos one o’clock?” said the Sandman.
“Thereabouts,” replied the other.
“And who did he say that to?” demanded the Sandman.
“To hisself, I s’pose,” answered the Tinker; “for, as I told you afore, I could see no one
     vith him.”
“Do you think he’s one of our perfession?” inquired the Sandman.
“Bless you! no—that he ain’t,” returned the Tinker. “He’s a reg’lar slap-up svell.”
“That’s no reason at all,” said the Sandman. “Many a first-rate svell practises in our line.
     But he can’t be in his right mind to come to such a ken as that, and go on as you
     mentions.”
“As to that I can’t say,” replied the Tinker; “and it don’t much matter, as far as ve’re
     consarned.”
“Devil a bit,” rejoined the Sandman, “except—you’re sure it worn’t a sperrit, Tinker. I’ve
     heerd say that this crib is haanted, and though I don’t fear no livin’ man, a ghost’s a
     different sort of customer.”
“Vell, you’ll find our svell raal flesh and blood, you may depend upon it,” replied the
     Tinker. “So come along, and don’t let’s be frightenin’ ourselves vith ould vimen’s tales.”
With this they emerged from the pit, crossed the lower part of the field, and entered a
     narrow thoroughfare, skirted by a few detached houses, which brought them into the Vauxhall
     Bridge Road.
Here they kept on the side of the street most in shadow, and crossed over whenever they came
     to a lamp. By-and-by, two watchmen were seen advancing from Belvoir Terrace, and, as the
     guardians of the night drew near, the ruffians crept into an alley to let them pass. As soon as
     the coast was clear, they ventured forth, and quickening their pace, came to a row of deserted
     and dilapidated houses. This was their destination.
The range of habitations in question, more than a dozen in number, were, in all probability,
     what is vulgarly called “in Chancery,” and shared the fate of most property similarly
     circumstanced. They were in a sad ruinous state—unroofed, without windows and floors. The bare
     walls were alone left standing, and these were in a very tumble-down condition. These neglected
     dwellings served as receptacles for old iron, blocks of stone and wood, and other ponderous
     matters. The aspect of the whole place was so dismal and suspicious, that it was generally
     avoided by passengers after nightfall.
Skulking along the blank and dreary walls, the Tinker, who was now a little in advance,
     stopped before a door, and pushing it open, entered the dwelling. His companion followed
     him.
The extraordinary and incongruous assemblage of objects which met the gaze of the Sandman,
     coupled with the deserted appearance of the place, produced an effect upon his hardy but
     superstitious nature.
Looking round, he beheld huge mill-stones, enormous water-wheels, boilers of steam-engines,
     iron vats, cylinders, cranes, iron pumps of the strangest fashion, a gigantic pair of wooden
     scales, old iron safes, old boilers, old gas-pipes, old water-pipes, cracked old bells, old
     bird-cages, old plates of iron, old pulleys, ropes, and rusty chains, huddled and heaped
     together in the most fantastic disorder. In the midst of the chaotic mass frowned the bearded
     and colossal head of Neptune, which had once decorated the forepart of a man-of-war. Above it,
     on a sort of framework, lay the prostrate statue of a nymph, together with a bust of Fox, the
     nose of the latter being partly demolished, and the eyes knocked in. Above these, three garden
     divinities laid their heads amicably together. On the left stood a tall Grecian warrior, minus
     the head and right hand. The whole was surmounted by an immense ventilator, stuck on the end of
     an iron rod, ascending, like a lightning-conductor, from the steam-engine pump.
Seen by the transient light of the moon, the various objects above enumerated produced a
     strange effect upon the beholder’s imagination. There was a mixture of the grotesque and
     terrible about them. Nor was the building itself devoid of a certain influence upon his mind.
     The ragged brickwork, overgrown with weeds, took with him the semblance of a human face, and
     seemed to keep a wary eye on what was going forward below.
A means of crossing from one side of the building to the other, without descending into the
     vault beneath, was afforded by a couple of planks; though as the wall on the farther side was
     some feet higher than that near at hand, and the planks were considerably bent, the passage
     appeared hazardous.
Glancing round for a moment, the Tinker leaped into the cellar, and, unmasking his lantern,
     showed a sort of hiding-place, between a bulk of timber and a boiler, to which he invited his
     companion.
The Sandman jumped down.
“The ale I drank at the ‘Two Fighting Cocks’ has made me feel drowsy, Tinker,” he remarked,
     stretching himself on the bulk; “I’ll just take a snooze. Vake me up if I snore—or ven our
     sperrit appears.”
The Tinker replied in the affirmative; and the other had just become lost to consciousness,
     when he received a nudge in the side, and his companion whispered—“He’s here!”
“Vhere—vhere?” demanded the Sandman, in some trepidation.
“Look up, and you’ll see him,” replied the other.
Slightly altering his position, the Sandman caught sight of a figure standing upon the planks
     above them. It was that of a young man. His hat was off, and his features, exposed to the full
     radiance of the moon, looked deathly pale, and though handsome, had a strange sinister
     expression. He was tall, slight, and well-proportioned; and the general cut of his attire, the
     tightly-buttoned, single-breasted coat, together with the moustache upon his lip, gave him a
     military air.
“He seems a-valkin’ in his sleep,” muttered the Sandman. “He’s a-speakin’ to some von
     unwisible.”
“Hush—hush!” whispered the other. “Let’s hear wot he’s a-sayin’.”
“Why have you brought me here?” cried the young man, in a voice so hollow that it thrilled
     his auditors. “What is to be done?”
“It makes my blood run cold to hear him,” whispered the Sandman. “Vot d’ye think he
     sees?”
“Why do you not speak to me?” cried the young man—“why do you beckon me forward? Well, I
     obey. I will follow you.”
And he moved slowly across the plank.
“See, he’s a-goin’ through that door,” cried the Tinker. “Let’s foller him.”
“I don’t half like it,” replied the Sandman, his teeth chattering with apprehension. “We
     shall see summat as’ll take avay our senses.”
“Tut!” cried the Tinker; “it’s only a sleepy-valker. Wot are you afeerd on?”
With this he vaulted upon the planks, and peeping cautiously out of the open door to which
     they led, saw the object of his scrutiny enter the adjoining house through a broken window.
Making a sign to the Sandman, who was close at his heels, the Tinker crept forward on all
     fours, and, on reaching the window, raised himself just sufficiently to command the interior of
     the dwelling. Unfortunately for him, the moon was at this moment obscured, and he could
     distinguish nothing except the dusky outline of the various objects with which the place was
     filled, and which were nearly of the same kind as those of the neighbouring habitation. He
     listened intently, but not the slightest sound reached his ears.
After some time spent in this way, he began to fear the young man must have departed, when
     all at once a piercing scream resounded through the dwelling. Some heavy matter was dislodged,
     with a thundering crash, and footsteps were heard approaching the window.
Hastily retreating to their former hiding-place, the Tinker and his companion had scarcely
     regained it, when the young man again appeared on the plank. His demeanour had undergone a
     fearful change. He staggered rather than walked, and his countenance was even paler than
     before. Having crossed the plank, he took his way along the top of the broken wall towards the
     door.
“Now, then, Sandman!” cried the Tinker; “now’s your time!”
The other nodded, and, grasping his mallet with a deadly and determined purpose, sprang
     noiselessly upon the wall, and overtook his intended victim just before he gained the door.
Hearing a sound behind him, the young man turned, and only just became conscious of the
     presence of the Sandman, when the mallet descended upon his head, and he fell crushed and
     senseless to the ground.

“The vork’s done!” cried the Sandman to his companion, who instantly came up with the dark
     lantern; “let’s take him below, and strip him.”
“Agreed,” replied the Tinker; “but first let’s see wot he has got in his pockets.”
“Vith all my ‘art,” replied the Sandman, searching the clothes of the victim. “A reader!—I
     hope it’s well lined. Ve’ll examine it below. The body ‘ud tell awkvard tales if any von should
     chance to peep in.”
“Shall we strip him here?” said the Tinker. “Now the darkey shines on ’em, you see what
     famous togs the cull has on.”
“Do you vant to have us scragged, fool?” cried the Sandman, springing into the vault. “Hoist
     him down here.”
With this, he placed the wounded man’s legs over his own shoulders, and, aided by his
     comrade, was in the act of heaving down the body, when the street-door suddenly flew open, and
     a stout individual, attended by a couple of watchmen, appeared at it.
“There the villains are!” shouted the new-comer. “They have been murderin’ a gentleman. Seize
     ’em—seize ’em!”
And, as he spoke, he discharged a pistol, the ball from which whistled past the ears of the
     Tinker.
Without waiting for another salute of the same kind, which might possibly be nearer its mark,
     the ruffian kicked the lantern into the vault, and sprang after the Sandman, who had already
     disappeared.
Acquainted with the intricacies of the place, the Tinker guided his companion through a hole
     into an adjoining vault, whence they scaled a wall, got into the next house, and passing
     through an open window, made good their retreat, while the watchmen were vainly searching for
     them under every bulk and piece of iron.
“Here, watchmen!” cried the stout individual, who had acted as leader; “never mind the
     villains just now, but help me to convey this poor young gentleman to my house, where proper
     assistance can be rendered him. He still breathes; but he has received a terrible blow on the
     head. I hope his skull ain’t broken.”
“It is to be hoped it ain’t, Mr. Thorneycroft,” replied the foremost watchman; “but them was
     two desperate characters as ever I see, and capable of any hatterosity.”
“What a frightful scream I heard to be sure!” cried Mr. Thorneycroft. “I was certain
     somethin’ dreadful was goin’ on. It was fortunate I wasn’t gone to bed; and still more
     fortunate you happened to be comin’ up at the time. But we mustn’t stand chatterin’ here. Bring
     the poor young gentleman along.”
Preceded by Mr. Thorneycroft, the watchmen carried the wounded man across the road towards a
     small house, the door of which was held open by a female servant, with a candle in her hand.
     The poor woman uttered a cry of horror as the body was brought in.
“Don’t be cryin’ out in that way, Peggy,” cried Mr. Thorneycroft, “but go and get me some
     brandy. Here, watchmen, lay the poor young gentleman down on the sofa—there, gently, gently.
     And now, one of you run to Wheeler Street, and fetch Mr. Howell, the surgeon. Less noise,
     Peggy—less noise, or you’ll waken Miss Ebba, and I wouldn’t have her disturbed for the
     world.”
With this, he snatched the bottle of brandy from the maid, filled a wine-glass with the
     spirit, and poured it down the throat of the wounded man. A stifling sound followed, and after
     struggling violently for respiration for a few seconds, the patient opened his eyes.
