
Chapter 12
The Chamber of Mystery
We shall now return to the night of Ebba’s seizure by the mysterious stranger. Though almost
     deprived of consciousness by terror, the poor girl could distinguish, from the movements of her
     captor, that she was borne down a flight of steps, or some steep descent, and then for a
     considerable distance along level ground. She was next placed in a carriage, which was driven
     with great swiftness, and though it was impossible to conjecture in what direction she was
     conveyed, it seemed to her terrified imagination as if she were hurried down a precipice, and
     she expected every moment to be dashed in pieces. At length the vehicle stopped, and she was
     lifted out of it, and carried along a winding passage; after which, the creaking of hinges
     announced that a door was opened. Having passed through it, she was deposited on a bench, when,
     fright overmastering her, her senses completely forsook her.
On recovering, she found herself seated on a fauteuil covered with black velvet, in the midst
     of a gloomy chamber of vast extent, while beside her, and supporting her from falling, stood
     the mysterious and terrible stranger. He held a large goblet filled with some potent liquid to
     her lips, and compelled her to swallow a portion of it. The powerful stimulant revived her,
     but, at the same time, produced a strange excitement, against which she struggled with all her
     power. Her persecutor again held the goblet towards her, while a sardonic smile played upon his
     features.
“Drink!” he cried; “it will restore you, and you have much to go through.”
Ebba mechanically took the cup, and raised it to her lips, but noticing the stranger’s glance
     of exultation, dashed it to the ground.
“You have acted foolishly,” he said sternly; “the potion would have done you good.”
Withdrawing her eyes from his gaze, which she felt exercised an irresistible influence over
     her, Ebba gazed fearfully round the chamber.
It was vast and gloomy, and seemed like the interior of a sepulchre—the walls and ceiling
     being formed of black marble, while the floor was paved with the same material. Not far from
     where she sat, on an estrade, approached by a couple of steps, stood a table covered with black
     velvet, on which was placed an immense lamp, fashioned like an imp supporting a caldron on his
     outstretched wings. In this lamp were several burners, which cast a lurid light throughout the
     chamber. Over it hung a cap equally fantastically fashioned. A dagger, with a richly wrought
     hilt, was stuck into the table; and beside it lay a strangely shaped mask, an open book, an
     antique inkstand, and a piece of parchment, on which some characters were inscribed. Opposite
     these stood a curiously carved ebony chair.
At the lower end of the room, which was slightly elevated above the rest, hung a large black
     curtain; and on the step, in the front of it, were placed two vases of jet.
“What is behind that curtain?” shudderingly demanded Ebba of her companion.
“You will see anon,” he replied. “Meanwhile, seat yourself on that chair, and glance at the
     writing on the scroll.”
Ebba did not move, but the stranger took her hand, and drew her to the seat.
“Read what is written on that paper,” he cried imperiously.
Ebba glanced at the document, and a shudder passed over her frame. “By this,” she cried, “I
     surrender myself, soul and body, to you?”
“You do,” replied the stranger.
“I have committed no crime that can place me within the power of the Fiend,” cried Ebba,
     falling upon her knees. “I call upon Heaven for protection! Avaunt!”
As the words were uttered, the cap suddenly fell upon the lamp, and the chamber was buried in
     profound darkness. Mocking laughter rang in her ears, succeeded by wailing cries inexpressibly
     dreadful to hear.
Ebba continued to pray fervently for her own deliverance, and for that of Auriol. In the
     midst of her supplications she was aroused by strains of music of the most exquisite sweetness,
     proceeding apparently from behind the curtain, and while listening to these sounds she was
     startled by a deafening crash as if a large gong had been stricken. The cover of the lamp was
     then slowly raised, and the burners blazed forth as before, while from the two vases in front
     of the curtain arose clouds of incense, filling the chamber with stupefying fragrance.
Again the gong was stricken, and Ebba looked round towards the curtain. Above each vase
     towered a gigantic figure, wrapped in a long black cloak, the lower part of which was concealed
     by the thick vapour. Hoods, like the cowls of monks, were drawn over the heads of these grim
     and motionless figures; mufflers enveloped their chins, and they wore masks, from the holes of
     which gleamed eyes of unearthly brightness. Their hands were crossed upon their breasts.
     Between them squatted two other spectral forms, similarly cloaked, hooded, and masked, with
     their gleaming eyes fixed upon her, and their skinny fingers pointed derisively at her.
Behind the curtain was placed a strong light, which showed a wide staircase of black marble,
     leading to some upper chamber, and at the same time threw the reflection of a gigantic figure
     upon the drapery, while a hand, the finger of which pointed towards her, was thrust from an
     opening between its folds.
Forcibly averting her gaze, Ebba covered her eyes with her hands, but looking up again after
     a brief space, beheld an ebon door at the side revolve upon its hinges, and give entrance to
     three female figures, robed in black, hooded and veiled, and having their hands folded, in a
     melancholy manner, across their breasts. Slowly and noiselessly advancing, they halted within a
     few paces of her.
“Who and what are ye?” she cried, wild with terror.
“The victims of Auriol!” replied the figure on the right. “As we are, such will you be ere
     long.”
“What crime have you committed?” demanded Ebba.
“We have loved him,” replied the second figure.

“Is that a crime?” cried Ebba. “If so, I am equally culpable with you.”
“You will share our doom,” replied the third figure.
“Heaven have mercy upon me!” exclaimed the agonised girl, dropping upon her knees.
At this moment a terrible voice from behind the curtain exclaimed, “Sign, or Auriol is lost
     for ever.”
“I cannot yield my soul, even to save him,” cried Ebba distractedly.
“Witness his chastisement, then,” cried the voice.
And as the words were uttered, a side door was opened on the opposite side, and Auriol was
     dragged forth from it by two masked personages, who looked like familiars of the
     Inquisition.
“Do not yield to the demands of this fiend, Ebba!” cried Auriol, gazing at her
     distractedly.
“Will you save him before he is cast, living, into the tomb?” cried the voice.
And at the words, a heavy slab of marble rose slowly from the floor near where Ebba sat, and
     disclosed a dark pit beneath.
Ebba gazed into the abyss with indescribable terror.
“There he will be immured, unless you sign,” cried the voice; “and, as he is immortal, he
     will endure an eternity of torture.”
“I cannot save him so, but I may precede him,” cried Ebba. And throwing her hands aloft, she
     flung herself into the pit.
A fearful cry resounded through the chamber. It broke from Auriol, who vainly strove to burst
     from those who held him, and precipitate himself after Ebba.
Soon after this, and while Auriol was gazing into the abyss, a tongue of blue flame arose
     from it, danced for a moment in the air, and then vanished. No sooner was it gone than a
     figure, shrouded in black habiliments, and hooded and muffled up like the three other female
     forms, slowly ascended from the vault, apparently without support, and remained motionless at
     its brink.
“Ebba!” exclaimed Auriol, in a voice of despair. “Is it you?”
The figure bowed its head, but spoke not.
“Sign!” thundered the voice. “Your attempt at self-destruction has placed you wholly in my
     power. Sign!”
At this injunction, the figure moved slowly towards the table, and to his unspeakable horror,
     Auriol beheld it take up the pen and write upon the parchment. He bent forward, and saw that
     the name inscribed thereon was Ebba Thorneycroft.
The groan to which he gave utterance was echoed by a roar of diabolical laughter.
The figure then moved slowly away, and ranged itself with the other veiled forms.
“All is accomplished,” cried the voice. “Away with him!”
On this, a terrible clangour was heard; the lights were extinguished; and Auriol was dragged
     through the doorway from which he had been brought forth.
