
CHAPTER XVII.
It is past seven o'clock by the time that the party breaks up at the door of the
      Anglo-Américain, and the dusk is gaining even upon the red west that, in the upper sky, is
      insensibly melted into that strange faint green that speaks, in so plain a language, of past
      and future fine weather.
"Are you coming to look in upon us to-night?" asks Amelia, with a rather wistful diffidence,
      as her lover holds out his hand in farewell to her.
He hesitates. In his own mind he had planned another disposition of his evening hours to
      that suggested by her.
"What do you advise?" he asks. "Shall you spend the evening in the usual way?"
"I suppose so," she answers. "I suppose we shall read aloud; you know father likes to make
      our evenings as like our home ones as possible, and Sybilla——"
"Then it is no use my coming," interrupts he hastily. "I should have no good of you;" then,
      seeing her face fall at his alacrity in seizing a pretence for escape, he adds, "but, of
      course, if you wish it, dear—if it would give you any satisfaction——"
"But it would not," cries she precipitately, anxious as usual to be, if possible, beforehand
      with his lightest wish; "when you are by, I always lose my place"—laughing tremulously—"and
      father scolds me! No, you had far better not come. I must not be greedy"—in a lower key. "I
      had quite half an hour, nearly three-quarters, of you this afternoon."
Without trusting herself to any further speech, she disappears, and he, with a sigh that is
      only half of relief, turns away from the hotel door, and, after a moment's hesitation, a
      moment's glance at the suave darkening sky, and another at his watch, begins to walk
      briskly—not in the direction of the Minerva. It is really not late, not much beyond canonical
      calling hours, and he is almost sure that they dine at eight. His face is set in the direction
      of the Piazza d'Azeglio, as he addresses these reassuring remarks to himself. This is no case
      of self-indulgence, or even of friendly civility. It is a question of common humanity. Why
      should he leave them to endure their suspense for a whole night longer than they need, merely
      to save himself the trouble of a walk beneath the darkly splendid sky-arch, through the
      cheerful streets, still full of leisurely foot-passengers, of the sound of cracking whips and
      rolling carriages?
He reaches No. 12 bis, and finds the porter's wife sitting at the door of her loge,
      and smiling at him with all her white teeth, as if she knew that he had come on some pleasant
      errand. He climbs the naked stone stairs, and rings the bell. It is answered by Annunziata,
      who, smiling too, as if she were saying something very agreeable, conveys to him that the
      signora and the signorina are out.
The intelligence baffles him, as he had not at all expected it. Probably his disconcertment
      is written not illegibly on his features, as Annunziata begins at once to inform him that the
      signore are gone to drive in the Cascine, and that she expects them back every moment. It is a
      good while before he quite masters her glib explanation, his Italian being still at that stage
      when, if the careful phrase-book question does not receive exactly the phrase-book answer, the
      questioner is at fault. But the smiling invitation of the amiable ugly face, and the
      hospitably open door—so different a reception from what the old bull-dog of an English nurse
      would have accorded him—need no interpreter. After a moment's hesitation he enters. He will
      wait for them.
It is not until he has been left alone for a quarter of an hour in the little salon
      that he has time to ask himself nervously whether the amount of his acquaintance with them, or
      the importance of the tidings he brings, justifies his thus thrusting himself upon their
      evening privacy. The table—since they have obviously but one sitting-room—is spread for their
      simple supper—a coarse white cloth, a wicker-covered bottle of rough Chian wine, and a copper
      pot full of delicately odorous Freesias. He wanders restlessly about the room, looking at the
      photographs.
Tom—can it be Tom?—with a moustache, Charles with a beard and a bowie-knife, Rose dandling
      her baby, Miriam hanging over her new husband—all his little playfellows! How far the wave of
      time has rolled them away from him! He strolls to the window whence, at sunset, the green
      shutters have been thrown back, and stares out at the Piazza garden, where the twilight is
      taking all the colour out of the Judas flowers, thence to the piano upon which Schubert's
      "Trockne Blumen" stands open. Absently he repeats aloud the song's joyous words:

"Der Lenz wird kommen, der Winter ist aus!"

Is her "Winter aus"? Judging by the look in her eyes, it has been a long and cruel one. If
      he wishes to put the question to her, she comes in just in time to answer it—enters laggingly,
      as one tired, blinking a little from the sudden crude lamplight after the soft feather-handed
      dusk. She is evidently unprepared to find anyone in the room, and gives a frightened jump when
      she sees a man's figure approaching her. Even when she recognises him the scared look lingers.
      It is clear that in her sad experience surprises have been always synonymous with bad news.
      The white apprehension written on her small face makes him so cordially repent of his
      intrusion, that his explanation of his presence is at first perfectly unintelligible.
"I hope you will excuse my taking such a liberty. I know that I had no business to come in
      when I was told you were out," he says incoherently, "but—I thought—I hoped—I had an idea—that
      you might be glad to hear——"
He stops, puzzled how to word his piece of intelligence, whether or not to name the person
      whose presence, whose very existence had yesterday seemed to inspire with such terror the
      woman before him. She has sunk down upon a chair, holding her hat, which she had taken off on
      entering the room, nervously clutched in her hands, the little waves of her hair, straightened
      out by the night wind, invading her forehead more than their wont and giving her an unfamiliar
      look.
"To hear what?" asks Mrs. Le Marchant, who, following her daughter more leisurely, has come
      in just in time to catch the last few words of Burgoyne's speech dissevered from their
      context. He begins that speech again, still more stammeringly than before.
"I thought you might be glad to hear that the—the inquiries you asked me—I mean that I
      promised to make—that the person relating to whom I—I made inquiries, leaves Florence
      to-morrow."
He hears a long sighing breath that may mean relief that may mean only distress at the
      introduction of the subject, from the chair beside him, while the elder woman says in a low
      abrupt voice:
"To-morrow? Are you sure? How do you know?"
"He said so himself to-day."
"Have you met him? Have you been talking to him?"
It seems to Jim as if there were a sharp apprehension mixed with the abruptness of her tone,
      as she puts the two last questions. He makes a gesture of eager denial.
"Heaven forbid! I have taken great care to avoid recalling myself to his memory. I have no
      desire to renew my acquaintance with him. I—I—hate the sight of him!"
To an uninterested bystander there would have been something ludicrous in the boyish
      virulence of the expression of hatred coming from so composed and mature a man's mouth as
      Jim's. But neither of the two persons who now hear it is in a position of mind to see anything
      ridiculous in it.
"Then how do you know that it is true?"
"He told an—an acquaintance of mine; he was complaining of the discomfort of his hotel, and,
      on her recommending him to change it, he answered that it was not worth while, as he was
      leaving Florence to-morrow."
Again from the chair beside him comes that long low sigh. This time there can be no question
      as to its quality. It is as of a spirit lifting itself from under a leaden load. For a few
      moments no other sound breaks the stillness. Then Mrs. Le Marchant speaks again in a
      constrained voice:
"We are extremely obliged to you for having taken so much trouble for us, and it must seem
      very strange to you that we should be so anxious to hear that this—this person has left
      Florence; but in so small a place one is sure to be always coming into collision with those
      whom one would rather avoid, and there are reasons which—which make it very—painful to us to
      meet him."
So saying, she tums away precipitately, and leaves the room hastily, by another door from
      that by which they both entered, and which evidently communicates with an adjoining bedroom.
      Elizabeth remains lying back in her chair, looking as white as the tablecloth. She is always
      white, but usually it is a creamy white, like meadow-sweet. Out of her eyes, however, has gone
      the distressed look of fear, and in them is dawning instead a little friendly smile.
"You must have thought us rather impostors when you saw us at the Accademia this morning,
      after leaving us apparently so shattered overnight," she says, with a somewhat deprecating
      air.
"I was very glad to find you so perfectly recovered," he replies, but he does not say it
      naturally. When a person, habitually truthful, slides into a speech not completely true, he
      does it in a bungling journeyman fashion; nor is Burgoyne any exception to this rule.
"I think we are a little like india-rubber balls, mammy and I," continues Elizabeth; "we
      have great recovering powers; if we had not" (stopped for a second by a small patient sigh) "I
      suppose that we should not be alive now."
He does not interrupt her. She must be a much less finely-strung instrument than he takes
      her for if she does not divine the sympathy of his silence, and sympathy so much in the dark
      as to what it sympathizes with as his, must needs walk gropingly, if it would escape gins and
      pitfalls.
"But we should not have gone out sight-seeing this morning—we were not at all in a junketing
      mood—if it had not been for Mr. Byng; he came in and took us both by storm. It is difficult,"
      her face dimpling and brightening with a much more confirmed smile than the tiny hovering one
      which is all that Jim has been able to call forth—"it is difficult to resist a person who
      brings so much sunshine with him—do not you find it so? He is so very sunshiny, your Mr. Byng.
      We like sunshine; we—we have not had a great deal of it."
It is on the very edge of his lip to tell her that when he had known her she had had and
      been nothing but sunshine. But he recollects in time her prohibition as to the past, and
      restrains himself.
"When you look so kind and interested," she cries impulsively, sitting up in her chair, with
      a transparent little hand on each arm of it, "I feel a fraud."
She stops.
"I look interested because I feel interested," returns he doggedly; "fraud or not—but" (in a
      distressed voice) "do not, even in joke, call yourself ugly names—fraud or not, you cannot
      hinder me."
"Do not be interested in me," says she, in her plaintive cooing voice; "we are very bad
      people to get interested in, we are not repaying people to be interested in. I think—that
      perhaps" (slowly and dreamily) "under other circumstances we might have been pleasant enough.
      Mammy has naturally excellent spirits, and so have I; it does not take much to make us happy,
      and even now I often feel like poor little Prince Arthur—

"'By my Christendom,
So I were out of prison and kept sheep,
I should be as merry as the day is long.'

But then," sighing profoundly, "the moment that we begin to feel a little cheerful,
      something comes and knocks us down again."
There is such a blank hopelessness in the tone with which she pronounces the last words,
      and, in his almost total ignorance of the origin of her despair, it is so impossible to put
      his compassion into fit words, that he can think of nothing better than to pull his chair two
      inches nearer her, to assure her by this dumb protest of how little inclined he is to accept
      her warning.
"Are you sure that he is really gone—going, I mean," she asks, in an excited low voice,
      "going to-morrow morning, as you say? Oh, I wish it were to-morrow morning! But perhaps when
      to-morrow morning comes, he will have changed his mind. Was he quite, quite sure about
      it?"
"He said he was going to-morrow morning," replies Jim, repeating Cecilia's quotation from
      her new friend's conversation with conscientious exactness; "that it was not worth while to
      change his hotel, as he was leaving Florence to-morrow morning."
"He will not go," she says, shaking her head with restless dejection; "nobody but would be
      loth to leave this heavenly place"—glancing out affectionately through the open window, even
      at the commonplace and now almost night-shaded Piazza garden—"we shall find that he is not
      gone after all."
"Nothing will be easier to ascertain than that fact," says Burgoyne, eagerly catching at so
      easy an opportunity for help and service; "now that I know which is his hotel, I can inquire
      there to-morrow morning, and bring you word at once."
"Could you, would you?" cries she, life and light springing back into her dejected eyes at
      his proposal; "but no," with an accent of remorse, "why should you? Why should we keep you
      running upon our errands? What right have we to take up your time?"
"My time," repeats he ironically. "I am like the German Prince mentioned by Heine,
      who spent his leisure hours—hours of which he had twenty-four every day—in——"
"But if we do not rob you," interrupts Elizabeth, looking at him in some surprise, "we rob
      Miss—Miss Wilson. What will she say to us?"
"She will be only too glad," replies he stiffly, a douche of cold water thrown on his
      foolish heart by the little hesitation which had preceded her pronunciation of Amelia's name,
      showing that her interest in him had not had keenness enough even to induce her to master his
      betrothed's appellation.
"Will she?" rejoins Elizabeth, quite ignorant of having given offence, and with her eyes
      fixed rather wistfully upon his. "How good of her! and how unlike most very happy people!
      Happy people are generally rather exacting; but she looks good. She has a dear face!"
He is silent. To hear the one woman's innocent and unconscious encomiums of the other fills
      him with an emotion that ties his never ready tongue. She mistakes the cause of his
      muteness.
"I am afraid I have vexed you," she says, sweetly and humbly. "I had no business to praise
      her to you; it was like praising a person to himself; but do not be angry with me—I did not
      mean to be impertinent!"
One small fragile hand is hanging over the arm of her hard lodging-house arm-chair, and
      before he has an idea of what his own intentions are, it is lying, without any asking of its
      consent, in his.
"I will not—I will not let you say such things," he says, trembling. "She is good:
      she has a dear face: and I love to hear you say so! May I—may I bring her to see
      you?"
As he makes this request, he feels the little fingers that are lying in his palm give a
      nervous start; and at once, quietly but determinedly, the captive hand is withdrawn. It and
      its fellow fly up to her face, and together quite cover it from his view. Though, as I have
      said, they are small, yet, it being small too to match them, they conceal it entirely.
"You will not say no?" he cries anxiously. "I am sure you will not say no. I shall feel very
      much snubbed if you do."
Still no answer. Still that shielded face, and the ominous silence behind it. He rises, a
      dark red spreading over his features.
"I must apologize for having made the suggestion. I can only beg you to forget that it was
      ever made. Good-bye!"
He has nearly reached the door, when he hears the frou-frou of her gown, and
      turning, sees that her unsteady feet have carried her after him, and that her face is changing
      from crimson to white and back again with startling rapidity.
"I thought you would have understood," she says faintly. "I thought that you were the one
      person who would not have misunderstood."
His conscience pricks him, but he is never very quick to be able to own himself in the
      wrong, and before he can bring himself to frame any sentence that smacks of apology and
      regret, she resumes, with a little more composure and in a conventional voice:
"You know—we told you—even at Genoa—that—that we are not going out, that we do not wish to
      make any new acquaintances!"
"I know," replies he, with some indignation, "that that is the hollow formal bulletin you
      issue to the world in general, but I thought—I hoped——"
"Do not bring her to see me," she interrupts, abandoning her effort for composure, and
      speaking in a broken voice, while her eyes swim in tears. "She—she might be sorry—she—she
      might not like it—afterwards!"
He looks back at her with an almost terrified air. Is the answer to her sad riddle coming to
      him thus? Has he had the brutality to force her into giving it?
"You have been so kind in not asking me any questions, you have even given up alluding to
      old times since you saw that it hurt me; but you must see—of course you do—that—that there is
      something—in me—not like other people; something that—that prevents—my—having any friends! I
      have not a friend in the world" (with a low sob) "except my mother—except mammy! Do you think"
      (breaking into a watery smile) "that it is very silly of me, at my age, to call her 'mammy'
      still?"
"I think," he says, "that I am one of the greatest brutes out, and that I should be thankful
      if someone would kick me downstairs."
And with this robust expression of self-depreciation, he takes his hat and departs.
