
CHAPTER THREE
THE TREGENZAS
Joan Tregenza lived in a white cottage already mentioned: that standing just beyond Newlyn
      upon a road above the sea. The cot was larger than it appeared from the road and extended
      backward into an orchard of plum and apple-trees. The kitchen which opened into this garden
      was stone-paved, cool, comfortable, sweet at all times with the scent of wood smoke, and
      frequently not innocent of varied fishy odors. But Newlyn folk suck in a smell of fish with
      their mothers' milk. 'Tis part of the atmosphere of home.
When Joan returned from her visit to Gorse Point, she found a hard-faced woman, thin of
      figure, with untidy hair, wrinkled brow and sharp features, engaged about a pile of washing in
      the garden at the kitchen-door. Mrs. Tregenza heard the girl arrive, and spoke without lifting
      her little gray eyes from the clothes. Her voice was hard and high and discontented, like that
      of one who has long bawled into a deaf man's ear and is weary of it.
"Drabbit you! Wheer you bin? Allus trapsing out when you'm wanted; allus caddlin' round
      doin' nothin' when you ban't. I s'pose you think breakfus' can be kep' on the table till
      dinner, washing-day or no?"
"I don't want no breakfus', then. I tuke some bread an' drippin' long with me. Wheer's Tom
      to?"
"Gone to schule this half-hour. 'Tis nine o'clock an' past. Wheer you bin, I sez? 'Tain't
      much in your way to rise afore me of a marnin'." 
"Out through Mouzle to Gorse P'int to see Joe's ship pass by; an' I seen en butivul."
"Thank the Lard he's gone. Now, I s'pose, theer'll be a bit peace in the house, an' you'll
      bide home an' work. My fingers is to the bone day an' night."
"He'll be gone a year purty nigh."
"Well, the harder you works, the quicker the time'll pass by. Theer's nuthin' to grizzle at.
      Sea-farin' fellers must be away most times. But he'm a good, straight man, an' you'm tokened
      to en, an' that's enough. Bide cheerful an' get the water for washin'. If they things of
      faither's bant dry come to-morrer, he'll knaw the reason why."
Joan accepted Mrs. Tregenza's comfort philosophically, though her sweetheart's departure had
      not really caused her any emotion. She visited the larder, drank a cup of milk, and then,
      fetching an iron hoop and buckets, went to a sunken barrel outside the cottage door, into
      which, from a pipe through the road-bank, tumbled a silver thread of spring water.
Of the Tregenza household a word must needs be spoken. Joan's own mother had died twelve
      years ago, and the anxious-natured woman who took her place proved herself a good step-parent
      enough. Despite a disposition prone to worry and to dwell upon the small tribulations of life,
      Thomasin Tregenza was not unhappy, for her husband enjoyed prosperity and a reputation for
      godliness unequaled in Newlyn. A great, weather-worn, gray, hairy man was he, with a big head
      and a furrowed cliff of a forehead that looked as though it had been carved by its Creator
      from Cornish granite. Tregenza indeed might have stood for a typical Cornish fisher—or a
      Breton. Like enough, indeed, he had old Armorican blood in his veins, for many hundreds of
      Britons betook themselves to ancient Brittany when the Saxon invasion swept the West, and many
      afterward returned, with foreign wives, to the homes of their fathers. Michael Tregenza had
      found religion, of a sort fiery and unlovely enough, but his convictions were definite, with
      iron-hard limitations, and he looked coldly and without pity on a damned world, himself saved.
      Gray Michael had no sympathy with sin and less with sinners. He found the devil in most
      unexpected quarters and was always dragging him out of surprising hiding-places and exhibiting
      him triumphantly, as a boy might show a bird's egg or butterfly. His devil dwelt at penny
      readings, at fairs and festivals, in the brushes of the artists, in a walk on a Sunday
      afternoon undertaken without a definite object, sometimes in a primrose given by a boy to a
      girl. Of all these bitter, self-righteous, censorious little sects which raise each its own
      ladder to the Throne of Grace at Newlyn, the Luke Gospelers was the most bitter, most
      self-righteous, most censorious. And of all those burning lights which reflected the primitive
      savagery of the Pentateuch from that fold, Gray Michael's beacon flamed the fiercest and most
      bloody red. There was not a Gospeler, including the pastor of the flock, but feared the
      austere fisherman while admiring him.
Concerning his creed, at the risk of wearying you, it must be permitted to speak here; for
      only by grasping its leading features and its vast unlikeness to the parent tree can a just
      estimate of Michael Tregenza be arrived at. Luke Gospeldom had mighty little to do with the
      Gospel of Luke. The sect numbered one hundred and thirty-four just persons, at war with
      principalities and powers. They were saturated with the spirit of Israel in the Wilderness, of
      Esau, when every man's hand was against him. At their chapel one heard much of Jehovah, the
      jealous God, of the burning lakes and the damnation reserved for mankind, as a whole. Every
      Luke Gospeler was a Jehovah in his own right. They walked hand in hand with God; they realized
      the dismay and indignation Newlyn must occasion in His breast; they sympathized heartily with
      the Everlasting and would have called down fire from Heaven themselves if they could. Many
      openly wondered that He delayed so long, for, from a Luke Gospeler's point of view, the place
      with its dozen other chapels—each held in error by the rest, and all at deadly war among
      themselves—its most vile ritualistic church of St. Peter, its public-houses, scandals, and
      strifes, was riper for destruction than Sodom. However, the hundred and thirty-four served to
      stave off celestial brimstone, as it seemed.
It is pitiable, in the face of the majestic work of John Wesley in Cornwall, to see the
      shattered ruins of it which remain. When the Wesleys achieved their notable revival and swept
      off the dust of a dead Anglicanism which covered religious Cornwall like a pall in the days of
      the Georges, the old Celtic spirit, though these heroes found it hard enough to rekindle,
      burst from its banked-up furnaces at last and blazed abroad once more. That spirit had been
      bred by the saint bishops of Brito-Celtic days, and Wesley's ultimate success was a grand
      repetition of history, as extant records of the ancient use of the Church in Cornwall prove.
      Its principle was that he who filled a bishop's office should, before all things, conduct and
      develop missionary enterprise; and the moral and physical courage of the Brito-Celtic bishops,
      having long slumbered, awoke again in John Wesley. He built on the old foundations, he gave to
      the laymen a power at that time blindly denied them by the Church—the power which Irish and
      Welsh and Breton missionary saints of old had vested in them. Wesley—himself a giant—made wise
      use of the strong where he found them, and if a man—tinker or tinner, fisher or jowster—could
      preach and grip an audience, that man might do so. Thus had the founders of the new creed
      developed it; thus does the Church to-day; but when John Wesley filled his empty belly with
      blackberries at St. Hilary, in 1743; when he thundered what he deemed eternal truth through
      Cornwall, year after year for half a century; when he faced a thousand perils by sea and land
      and spent his arduous days "in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fasting often, in
      cold and nakedness"; when, in fine, this stupendous man achieved the foundations of Methodism,
      the harvest was overripe, at any rate, in Cornwall. No Nonconformist was he, though few enough
      of his followers to-day remember that, if they ever knew it. He worked for his church; he was
      a link between it and his party; his last prayer was for church and king—a fact which might
      have greatly shocked the Luke Gospelers had such come to their ears. For John Wesley was their
      only saint, and they honestly believed that they alone of all Methodist communities were
      following in his footsteps. Poor souls! they lived as far from what Wesley taught as it is
      easily possible to conceive. As for Gray Michael, he was under the impression that he and his
      sect worthily held aloft the true light which Wesley brought in person to Newlyn, and he
      talked with authority upon the subject of his master and his master's doings. But he knew
      little about the founder of Methodism in reality, and still less about the history of the
      Methodist movement. Had he learned that John Wesley himself was once accused of Popish
      practices; had he known that not until some years after the great preacher's death did his
      party, in conference assembled, separate itself from the Church of England, he had doubtless
      been much amazed. Though saturated with religious feeling, the man was wholly ignorant of
      religious history in so far as it affected his own country. To him all saints not mentioned in
      Scripture were an abomination and invention of Rome. Had he been informed that the venerable
      missionary saints of his mother land were in no case Romish, another vast surprise must have
      awaited him.
Let it not for an instant be supposed that the Luke Gospelers represented right Methodism.
      But they fairly exemplified a sorry side of it; those little offshoots of which dozens have
      separated from the parent tree; and they exhibited most abundantly in themselves that
      canker-worm of Pharisaism which gnaws at the root of all Nonconformity. This offense, combined
      with such intolerance and profound ignorance as was to be found amid the Luke Gospelers,
      produced a community merely sad or comic to consider according to the point of view.
An instance of Michael Tregenza's attitude to the Church will illustrate better than
      analysis the lines of thought on which he served his Creator.
Once, when she was thirteen, Joan had gone to an evening service at St. Peter's, because a
      friend had dared her to do so. Her father was at sea and she believed the delinquency could by
      no possibility reach his ears. But a Luke Gospeler heard the dread tidings and Michael
      Tregenza was quickly informed of his daughter's lapse. He accused Joan quietly enough, and she
      confessed.
"Then you'm a damned maiden," he said, "'cause you sinned open-eyed."
He thought the matter over for a week, and finally an idea occurred to him.
"'Tis wi'in the power o' God to reach even you back," he declared to Joan, "an' He's put in
      my mind that chastenin' might do it. A sore body's saved many sowls 'fore now."
Whereupon he took his daughter into the little parlor, shut the door, and then flogged her
      as he would have flogged a boy—only using his hard hand instead of a stick. "Get thee behind
      her, Satan! Get thee behind her, Satan! Get thee behind her, Satan!" he groaned with every
      blow, while Joan grit her teeth and bore it as long as she could, then screamed and fainted.
      That was how the truth about heaven and hell came to her. She had never felt physical pain
      before, and eternal torment was merely an idea. From that day, however, she was frightened and
      listened to her father gladly and wept tears of thankfulness when, a month after her flogging,
      he explained that he had wrestled with the Lord for her soul and how it had been borne in upon
      him that she was saved alive. She had reached the age of seventeen now, and felt quite
      confident upon the subject of eternity as became a right Luke Gospeler. Unlike other women of
      the sect, however, and despite extreme ignorance on all subjects, the girl had a seed of humor
      in her nature only waiting circumstances to ripen. She felt pity, too, for the great damned
      world, and though religion turned life sad-colored, her own simple, healthy, animal nature and
      high spirits brought ample share of sunshine and delight. She was, in fact, her mother's child
      rather than her father's. His ancestors before him had fought the devil and lived honest lives
      under a cloud of fear; Michael's own brother had gone religious mad, when still a young man,
      and died in a lunatic asylum; indeed the awful difficulty of saving his soul had been in the
      blood of every true Tregenza for generations. But Joan's mother came of different stock. The
      Chirgwins were upland people. They dwelt at Drift and elsewhere, went to the nearest church,
      held simple views, and were content with orthodox religion. Mr. Tregenza said of them that
      they always wanted and expected God to do more than His share. But he married Joan Chirgwin,
      nevertheless; and now he saw her again, fair, trustful, light-hearted, in his daughter. The
      girl indeed had more of her mother in her than Gray Michael liked. She was superstitious, not
      after the manner of the Tregenzas, but in a direction that must have brought her father's
      loudest thunders upon her head if the matter had come to his ears. She loved the old stories
      of the saints and spirits, she gloried secretly in the splendid wealth of folklore and
      tradition her mother's people and those like them possessed at command. Her dead parent had
      whispered and sung these matters into Joan's baby ears until her father stopped it. She
      remembered how black he looked when she lisped about the piskeys; and though to-day she half
      believed in demon and fairy, goblin and giant, and quite believed in the saints and their
      miracles, she kept this side of her intelligence close locked when at home, and only nodded
      very gravely when her father roared against the blighting credulity of men's minds and the
      follies for which fishers and miners, and indeed the bulk of the human family in Cornwall,
      must some day burn.
People outside the fold said that the Luke Gospelers killed Tregenza's first wife. She, of
      course, accepted her husband's convictions, but it had never been in her tender heart to catch
      the true Luke Gospel spirit. She was too full of the milk of human kindness, too prone to
      forgive and forget, too tolerant and ready to see good in all men. The fiery sustenance of the
      new tenets withered her away like a scorched flower, and she died five years after her child
      was born. For a space of two years the widower remained one; then he married again, being at
      that time a hale man of forty, the owner of his own fishing-boat, and at once the strongest
      personality and handsomest person in Newlyn. Thomasin Strick, his second wife, was already a
      Luke Gospeler and needed no conversion. People laughed in secret at their wooing, and likened
      it to the rubbing of granite rocks or a miner's pick striking fire from tin ore. A boy
      presently came to them; and now he was ten and his mother forty. She passed rightly for a
      careful, money-loving soul, and a good wife, with the wit to be also a good Luke Gospeler. But
      her tongue was harder than her heart. Father and mother alike thought the wide world of their
      boy, though the child was brought up under an iron rod. Joan, too, loved her half-brother,
      Tom, very dearly, and took a pride only second to her stepmother's in the lad's progress and
      achievements. More than once, though only Joan and he knew it, she had saved his skin from
      punishment, and she worshiped him with a frank admiration which was bound to win Mrs.
      Tregenza's regard. Joan quite understood the careful and troubled matron, never attached undue
      importance to her sharp words, and was usually at her elbow with an ear for all grievances and
      even a sympathetic word if the same seemed called for. Mrs. Tregenza had to grumble to live,
      and Joan was the safety-valve, for when her husband came off the sea he would have none of
      it.
Life moved uniformly for these people, being varied only by the seasons of the year and the
      different harvests from the sea which each brought with it. Pollock, mackerel, pilchards,
      herrings—all had their appointed time, and the years rolled on, marked by events connected
      with the secular business of life on one hand and that greater matter of eternity upon the
      other. Thus mighty catches of fish held the memory with mighty catches of men. One year the
      take of mackerel had been beyond all previous recollection; on another occasion three entire
      families had joined the Luke Gospelers, and so promised to increase the scanty numbers of the
      chosen. There were black memories, too, and black years, casting gloomy shadows. Widows and
      orphans knew what it was to watch for brown sails that came into the harbor's sheltering arms
      no more; and spiritual death had overtaken more than one Luke Gospeler. Such turned their
      backs upon the light and exchanged Truth for the benighted parody of religion displayed by
      Bible Christians, by Plymouth Brethren or by the Church of England.
Six months before the day on which she saw his ship through Barron's glasses, Joan had been
      formally affianced to Joe Noy, with her father's permission and approval. The circumstances of
      the event demand a word, for Joe had already been engaged once before: to Mary Chirgwin, a
      young woman who was first cousin to Joan and a good deal older. She was an orphan and dwelt at
      Drift with Thomas Chirgwin, her uncle. The sailor had thereby brightened an unutterably lonely
      life and brought earthly joy to one who had never known it. Then Gray Michael got hold of the
      lad, who was naturally of a solid and religious temperament, and up to that time of the order
      of the Rechabites. As a result, Joe Noy joined the Luke Gospelers and called upon his
      sweetheart to do likewise. But she recollected her aunt, Joan's mother, and being made of
      stern stuff, stuck to the Church of England as she knew it, counting salvation a greater thing
      than even a home of her own. The struggle was sharp between them; neither would give way;
      their engagement was therefore broken, and the girl's solitary golden glimpse of happiness in
      this world shattered. She found it hard to forgive the Tregenzas, and when, six months
      afterward, the sleepy farm life at Drift was startled by news of Joan's love affair, Mary, in
      the first flush of her reawakened agony, spoke bitterly enough; and even that most
      mild-mannered of men, her uncle, said that Michael Tregenza had done an ugly act.
But the fisherman was at no time concerned with Mary or with Joan. The opportunity to get a
      soul into the fold had offered and been accepted. Any matter of earthly love-making counted
      little beside this. When Joe broke with Mary, his mentor declared the action inevitable, as
      the girl would not alter her opinions, and when, presently, young Noy fell in love with Joan,
      her father saw no objection, for the sailor was honest, already a stanch Luke Gospeler and a
      clean liver.
Perhaps at that moment there was hardly another eligible youth in Newlyn from Tregenza's
      point of view. He held Joan a girl to be put under stern marital rule as soon as possible, and
      Joe promised to make a godly husband with a strong will, while his convictions and view of
      life were altogether satisfactory, being modeled on Michael's own. The arrangement suited
      Joan. She believed she loved Joe very dearly, and she looked forward with satisfaction to
      marrying him in about a year's time, when he should have won a ship-master's certificate. But
      she viewed his departure without suffering and would not have willingly foregone her remaining
      year of freedom. She respected Joe very much and knew he would make a good partner and give
      her a position above the everyday wives of Newlyn; moreover, he was a fine figure of a man.
      But he lacked mental breadth, and that fact sometimes tickled her dormant sense of humor. He
      copied her father so exactly, and she, who lived with the real thunder, never could show
      sufficient gravity or conviction in the presence of the youthful and narrow-minded Noy's
      second-hand echoes. Mary Chirgwin was naturally a thousand times more religious-minded than
      Joan, and sometimes Joe wished the sober mind of his first love could be transported to the
      beautiful body of his second; but he kept this notion to himself, studied to please his future
      father-in-law, which he succeeded in doing handsomely, and contented himself, in so far as his
      lady was concerned, by reflecting that the necessary control over her somewhat light mind
      would be his in due season.
To return from this tedious but necessary glimpse at the position and belief of these people
      to Joan and the washing, it is to be noted that she quickly made up for lost time, and,
      without further mentioning the incidents of her morning's excursion, began to work. She pulled
      up her sleeves, dragged her dress about her waist, then started to cleanse the thick flannels
      her father wore at sea, his long-tailed shirts and woolen stockings. The Tregenzas were
      well-to-do folk, and did not need to use the open spaces of the village for drying of clothes.
      Joan presently set up a line among the plum-trees, and dawdled over the hanging out of wet
      garments, for it was now noon, sunny, mild, and fresh, with a cool salt breeze off the sea.
      The winter repose of the bee-butts had been broken at last, and the insects were busy with the
      plum-blossom and among the little green flowerets on the gooseberry bushes. Beyond,
      sun-streaked and bright, extended apple-trees with whitewashed stems and a twinkle of crimson
      on their boughs, where buds grew ripe for the blowing.
Joan yawned and blinked up at the sun to see if it was dinner time. Then she watched a
      kitten hunting the bees in the gooseberry bushes. Presently the little creature knocked one to
      the ground and began to pat it and pounce upon it. Then the bee, using Nature's weapon to
      preserve precious life, stung the kitten; and the kitten hopped into the air much amazed. It
      shook its paw, licked it, shook it again. Joan laughed, and two pigs at the bottom of the
      garden heard her and grunted and squealed as they thrust expectant noses through the palings
      of their sty. They connected the laugh with their dinner, but Joan's thoughts were all upon
      her own.
A few minutes later Thomasin Tregenza called her, and, as they sat down, Tom arrived from
      school. He was a brown-faced, dark-eyed, black-haired youngster, good-looking enough, but not
      at that moment.
"Aw! Jimmery! fightin' agin," said his mother, viewing two swollen lips, a bulged ear, and
      an eye half closed.
"I've downed Matthew Bent, Joan! Ten fair rounds, then he gived up."
"Fight, fight, fight—'tis all you think of," said his parent, while Joan poured
      congratulations on the conqueror.
"'Tweer bound to come arter the football, when he played foul, an' I tawld en so. Now, we'm
      friends."
"Be he bruised same as you?"
"A sight worse; he's a braave picksher, I tell 'e! I doubt he won't come to schule this
      arternoon. That'll shaw. I be gwaine, if I got to crawl theer."
"An' him a year older than what you be!" said Joan.
"Iss, Mat's 'leben year old. I'll have some vinegar an' brown paper to this here eye,
      mother."
"Ait your mayte, ait your mayte fust," she answered. "Plague 'pon your fightin'!"
"But that Bent bwoy's bin at en for months; an' a year older too," said Joan. 
"Iss, the bwoy's got no more'n what 'e desarved. For that matter, they Bents be all puffed
      up, though they'm so poor as rats, an' wi'out 'nough religion to save the sawl of a new-born
      babe 'mongst the lot of 'em."
Tom, with his mouth full of fish and potato pie, told the story of his victory, and the
      women made a big, hearty meal and listened.
"He cockled up to me, an' us beginned fightin' right away, an' in the third round I scat en
      on the mouth an' knocked wan 'is teeth out. An' in the fifth round he dropped me a
      whister-cuff 'pon the eye as made me blink proper."
"Us doan't want to knaw no more 'bout it," declared his mother after dinner was over.
      "You've laced en an' that's enough. You knaw what faither'll say. You did ought to fight no
      battle but the Lard's. Now clap this here over your eye for a bit, then be off with 'e."
Tom marched away to school earlier than usual that afternoon, while the women went to the
      door and watched him trudge off, both mightily proud of his performance and his battered brown
      face.
"He be a reg'lar lil apty-cock, [Footnote: Apty-cock—Brave, plucky youngster.] sure
      'nough!" said Joan.
Mrs. Tregenza answered with a nod and looked along the road after her son. There was a
      softer expression in her eyes as she watched him. Besides, she had eaten well and was
      comfortable. Now she picked her teeth with a pin, and snuffed the sea air, and gave a passing
      neighbor "good-afternoon" with greater warmth of manner than usual. Presently her mood
      changed; she noisily rated herself and her stepdaughter for standing idling; then both went
      back to their work.
