
 CHAPTER FOUR
BARRON BEGINS TO LEARN THE GORSE
Between four and five o'clock in the morning of the following day the master of the white
      cottage came home. His wife expected him and was getting breakfast when Michael tramped in—a
      very tall, square-built man, clad to the eye in tanned oilskin overalls, sou'wester, and
      jackboots. The fisherman returned to his family in high good temper; for the sea had yielded
      silvery thousands to his drift-nets, and the catch had already been sold in the harbor for a
      handsome figure. The brown sails of Tregenza's lugger flapped in the bay among a crowd of
      others, and every man was in a hurry to be off again at the earliest opportunity. Already the
      first boats home were putting to sea once more, making a wide tack across the mouth of the bay
      until nearly abreast of St. Michael's Mount, then tearing away like race horses with foam
      flying as they sailed before the eastern wind for the Scilly Islands and the mackerel.
Michael kissed his wife and Joan also, as she came to the kitchen sleepy-eyed in the soft
      light to welcome him. Then, while Mrs. Tregenza was busied with breakfast and the girl cleaned
      some fish, he went to his own small room off the kitchen and changed his clothes—all silvery,
      scale-spotted and blood-smeared—for the clean garments which were spread and waiting. First
      the man indulged in luxuries. He poured out a large tub of fresh water and washed himself; he
      even cleaned his nails and teeth—hyberbolic refinements that made the baser sort laugh at him
      behind his back.
At the meal which followed his toilet Tregenza talked to his wife and daughter upon various
      subjects. He spoke slowly and from the lungs with the deep echoing voice of one used to vocal
      exercise in the open air.
"I seed the 'Anna' yesterday, Joan," he said, "a proud ship, full-rigged wi' butivul lines.
      Her passed wi'in three mile of us or less off the islands."
Joan did not hint at her visit to Gorse Point of the previous day, but her stepmother
      mentioned it, and her father felt called upon to reprimand his daughter, though not very
      seriously.
"'Twas a empty, vain thing to do," he said.
"I promised Joe, faither."
"Why, then you was right to go, though a fulish thing to promise en. Wheer's Tom to?" 
Tom came down a minute later. The swelling of his lips was lessened, but his ear had not
      returned to a normal size and his eye was black.
"Fighting again?" Michael began, looking up from his saucer and fixing his eyes on his
      son.
"Please, faither, I—"
"Doan't say naught. You'm so fond of it that I judges you'd best begin fightin' the battle
      o' life right on end. 'Tain't no use keepin' you to schule no more. 'Tis time you comed
      aboard."
Tom crowed with satisfaction, and Mrs. Tregenza sighed and stopped eating. This event had
      been hanging over her head for many a long day now; but she had put the thing away, and
      secretly hoped that after all Tregenza would change his mind and apprentice the boy to a shore
      trade. However, Tom had made his choice, and his father meant him to abide by it. No other
      life appealed to the boy; heredity marked him for the sea, and he longed for the hard business
      to begin.
"I'll larn you something besides fisticuffs, my beauty. 'Tis all well-a-fine, this batterin'
      an' bruisin', but it awnly breeds the savage in 'e, same as raw meat do in a dog. No more
      fightin' 'cept wi' dirty weather an' high seas an' contrary winds, an' the world, the flaish
      an' the devil. I went to sea as a lugger-bwoy when I was eight year old, an' ain't bin off the
      water more'n a month to wance ever since. This day two week you come along wi' me. That'll
      give mother full time to see 'bout your kit."
Joan wept, Thomasin Tregenza whined, and Tom danced a break-down and rolled away to see some
      fisher-boy friends in the harbor before school began. Then Michael, calling his daughter to
      him, walked with her among his plum-trees, talked of God with some quotations, and looked at
      his pigs. Presently he busied himself and made ready for sea in a little outhouse where paint
      and ship's chandlery were stored; and finally, the hour then being half past seven, he
      returned to his labors. Joan walked with him to the harbor and listened while he talked of the
      goodness of God to the Luke Gospelers at sea; how the mackerel had been delivered to them in
      thousands, and how the Bible Christians and Primitive Methodists had fared by no means so
      happily. The tide was high, and Gray Michael's skiff waited for him at the pierhead beside the
      lighthouse. He soon climbed down into it, and the little boat, rowed by two strong pairs of
      hands, danced away to the fleet. Already the luggers were stretching off in a long line across
      the bay; and among them appeared a number of visitors: Lowestoft yawls come down to the West
      after the early mackerel. They were big, stout vessels, and many had steam-power aboard. Joan
      watched her father's lugger start and saw it overhaul not a few smaller ships before she
      turned from the busy harbor homeward. That morning she designed to work with a will, for the
      afternoon was to be spent on Gorse Point if all went well, and she already looked forward
      somewhat curiously to her next meeting with the singular man who had lent her his
      field-glass.
Mrs. Tregenza was in sorry, snappy case all day. The blow had fallen, and within a
      fort-night Tom would go to sea. This dismal fact depressed her not a little, and she snuffled
      over her ironing, and her voice grated worse than usual upon the ear.
"He's such a hot-headed twoad of a bwoy. I knaw he'll never get on 'pon the water. I doubt
      us'll hear he's bin knocked overboard or some sich thing some day; an' them two brothers, they
      Pritchards, as allus sails 'long wi' Tregenza, they'm that comical-tempered every one knaws.
      Oh, my God, why couldn' he let the bwoy larn a land trade—carpenterin' or sich like?"
"But, you see, faither's a rich man, an' some time Tom'll fill his shoes. Faither do awn his
      bwoat an' the nets tu, which is more'n most Newlyn men does."
"Iss, I should think 'twas," said Mrs. Tregenza, forgetting her present sorrow in the memory
      of such splendid circumstances. "Theer ban't wan feller as awns all like what faither do. The
      Lard helps His chosen, not but what Tregenza allus helped hisself an' set the example to
      Newlyn from his boyhood."
Mrs. Tregenza always licked her lips when she talked about money or religion, and she did so
      now.
Among Cornish drifters Gray Michael's position was undoubtedly unique, for under the rules
      of the Cornish fishery he enjoyed exceptional advantages owing to his personal possession both
      of boat and nets. The owner of a drift-boat takes one-eighth part of the gross proceeds of a
      catch, and the remaining seven-eighths are divided into two equal parts of which one part is
      subdivided among the crew of the boat, while the other goes to the owner or owners of the nets
      used on board. The number of nets to a boat is about fifty as a rule, and a man to possess his
      own boat and outfit must be unusually well-to-do.
But it was partly for this reason that Mrs. Tregenza refused to be comforted. She grudged
      every farthing spent on anything, and much disliked the notion of tramping to Penzance to
      expend the greater part of a five-pound note on Tom's sea outfit. In a better cause she would
      not have thought it ill to expend money upon him. His position pointed to something higher
      than a fisherman's life. He might have aspired to a shop in the future together with a measure
      of worldly prosperity and importance not to be expected for any mere seafarer. But Tom had
      settled the matter by deciding for himself, and his father had approved the ambition, so there
      the matter ended, save for grumbling and sighing. Joan, too, felt sore enough at heart when
      she heard that the long-dreaded event lay but a fortnight in the future. But she knew her
      father, and felt sure that the certainty of Tom's going to sea at the appointed time would now
      only be defeated by death or the Judgment Day. So she did not worry or fret. Nothing served to
      soothe her stepmother, however, and the girl was glad to slip off after dinner, leaving
      Thomasin with her troubles.
Joan made brisk way through Mousehole and in less than an hour stood out among the furzes in
      the little lonely theater above the cliffs. For a moment she saw nothing of John Barron, then
      she found him sitting on a camp-stool before a light easel which looked all legs with a mere
      little square patch of a picture perched upon them. Joan walked to within a few yards of the
      artist and waited for him to speak. But eye, hand, brain were all working together on the
      sketch before him, and if he saw the visitor at all, which was doubtful, he took no notice of
      her. Joan came a little closer, and still John Barron ignored her presence. Then she grew
      uncomfortable, and, feeling she must break the silence, spoke.
"I be come, sir, 'cordin' to what you said."
He added a touch and looked up with no recognition in his eyes. His forehead frowned with
      doubt apparently, then he seemed to remember. "Ah, the young woman who told me about the
      luggers." Suddenly he smiled at her, the first time she had seen him do so.
"You never mentioned your name, I think?"
"Joan Tregenza, sir."
"I promised you a little picture of that big ship, didn't I?"
"You was that kind, sir."
"Well, I haven't forgotten it. I finished the picture this morning and I think you may like
      it, but I had to leave it until to-morrow, because the paints take so long to dry."
"I'm sure I thank you kindly, sir."
"No need. To-morrow it will be quite ready for you, with a frame and all complete. You see
      I've begun to try and paint the gorse." He invited her by a gesture to view his work. She came
      closer, and as she bent he glanced up at her with his face for a moment close to hers. Then
      she drew back quickly, blushing.
"'Tis butivul—just like them fuzzes."
He had been working for two hours before she came, painting a small patch of the gorse. Old
      gnarled stems wound upward crookedly, and beneath them lay a dead carpet of gorse needles with
      a blade or two of grass shooting through. From the roots and bases of the main stems sprouted
      many a shoot of young gorse, their prickles tender as the claws of a new-born kitten, their
      shape, color, and foliage of thorns quite different to the mature plant above. There, in the
      main masses of the shrub, mossy brown buds in clumps foretold future splendor. But already
      much gold had burst the sheath and was ablaze, scenting the pure air, murmured over by many
      bees.
"You could a'most pick thicky theer flowers," declared Joan of the picture.
"Perhaps presently, when they are painted as I hope to paint them. This is only a rough bit
      of work to occupy my hand and eye while I am learning the gorse. Men who paint seriously have
      to learn trees and blossoms just as they have to learn faces. And we are never satisfied. When
      I have painted this gorse, with its thorns and buds, I shall sigh for more truth. I cannot
      paint the soul of each little yellow flower that opens to the sun; I cannot paint the sunny
      smell that is sweet in our nostrils now. God's gorse scents the air; mine will only smell of
      fat oil. What shall I do?"
"I dunnaw."
"No more does anybody. It can't be helped. But I must try my best and make it real—each
      spike, as I see it—the dead gray ones on the ground and the live green ones on the tree, and
      the baby ones and the old gray-pointed ones, which have seen their best days and will
      presently die and fall—I must paint them all, Joan."
She laughed.
"Don't laugh," he said, very seriously. "Only an artist would laugh at me, not you who love
      Nature. There lives a great painter, Joan, who paints pictures that nobody else in the wide
      world can paint. He is growing old, but he is not too old to take trouble still. Once, when he
      was a young man, he drew a lemon-tree far away in Italy. It was only a little lemon-tree, but
      the artist rose morning after morning and drew it leaf by leaf, twig by twig, until every leaf
      and bud and lemon and bough had appeared. It was not labored and false; it was grand because
      it was true: a joy forever; work Old Masters had loved; full of distinction and power and
      patience almost Oriental. A thing, Joan Tregenza, worth a wilderness of 'harmonies' and
      'impressions,' 'nocturnes' and 'notes,' smudges and audacities. But I suppose that is all
      gibberish to you?"
"Iss, so it be," she admitted.
"Learn to love everything that is beautiful, my good child. But I think you do,
      unconsciously perhaps."
"I don't take much 'count of things." "Yes, unconsciously. You have a cowslip there stuck in
      your frock, though where you got it from I can't imagine. The flower is a month too
      early."
"Iss, 'tis, I found en in a lew, sunshiny plaace. Us have got a frame for growin' things
      under glass, an' it had bin put down 'pon top this cowslip an' drawed 'en up."
"Will you give it to me?"
She did so, and he smelled it.
"D'you know that the green of the cowslip is the most beautiful green in all Nature, Joan?
      Here, I have a flower, too; we will exchange if you like."
He took a scrap of blackthorn bloom from his coat and held it out to her, but she shrank
      backward and he learned something.
"Please not that—truly 'tis the dreadfulest wicked flower. Doan't 'e arsk I to take en." 
"Unlucky?"
"Iss fay! Him or her as first brings blackthorn in the house dies afore it blows again.
      Truth—solemn—us all knaws it down in these paarts. 'Tis a bewitched thing—a wicked plant, an'
      you can see it grawin' all humpetty-backed an' bent an' crooked. Wance, when a man killed
      hisself, they did use to bury en wheer roads met an' put a blackthorn stake through en; an' it
      all us grawed arter; an' that's the worstest sort o' all."
"Dear, dear, I'm glad you told me, Joan; I will not wear it, nor shall you," he said, and
      flung it down and stamped on it very seriously.
The girl was gratified.
"I judge you'm a furriner, else you'd knawn 'bout the wickedness o' blackthorn."
"I am. Thank you very much. But for you I should have gone home wearing it. That puts me in
      your debt, Joan." 
"'Tain't nothin', awnly there's a many coorious Carnish things like that. An' coorious
      customs what some doan't hold with an' some does." 
She sat down near the cliff edge with her back to him, and he smiled to himself to find how
      quickly his mild manners and reserve had put the girl at her ease. She looked perfect that
      afternoon and he yearned to begin painting her; but his scheme of action demanded time for its
      perfect fulfillment and ultimate success. He let the little timorous chatterbox talk. Her
      voice was soft and musical as the cooing of a wood-dove, and the sweet full notes chimed in
      striking contrast to her uncouth speech. But Joan's diction gave pleasure to the listener. It
      had freedom and wildness, and was almost wholly innocent of any petrifying educational
      influences.
Joan, for her part, felt at ease. The man was so polite and so humble. He thanked her for
      her information so gratefully. Moreover, he evidently cared so little about her or her looks.
      She felt perfectly safe, for it was easy to see that he thought more of the gorse than
      anything.
"My faither's agin such things an' sayin's," she babbled on, "but I dunnaw. They seems truth
      to me, an' to many as is wiser than what I be. My mother b'lieved in 'em, an' Joe did, till
      faither turned en away from 'em. But when us plighted troth, I made en jine hands wi' me under
      a livin' spring o' water, though he said 'twas heathenish. Awnly, somehow, I knawed 'twas a
      proper thing to do."
"I should like to hear more about these old customs some day," he said, as though Joan and
      he were to meet often in the future, "and I should be obliged to you for telling me about
      them, because I always delight in such matters."
She was quicker of mind than he thought, and rose, taking his last remark as a hint that he
      wished to be alone.
"Don't go, Joan, unless you must. I'm a very lonely man, and it is a great pleasure to me to
      hear you talk. Look here."
She approached him, and he showed her a pencil sketch now perched on the easel—a drawing
      considerably larger than that upon which he had been working when she arrived.
"This is a rough idea of my picture. It is going to be much larger though, and I have sent
      all the way to London for a canvas on which to paint it."
'"Twill be a gert big picksher then?"
"So big that I think I must try and get something into it besides the gorse. I want
      something or other in the middle, just for a change. What could I paint there?"
"I dunnaw."
"No more do I. I wonder how that little white pony tethered yonder would do?"
Joan laughed.
"You'd never get the likes o' him to bide still for 'e."
"No, I'm afraid not; and I doubt if I'm clever enough to paint him either. You see, I'm only
      a beginner—not like these clever artists who can draw anything. Well, I must think: to-morrow
      is Sunday. I shall begin my big picture on Monday if the weather keeps kind. I shall paint
      here, in the open air. And I will bring your ship, too, if you care to take the trouble to
      come for it."
"Yes, an' thank 'e, sir."
"Not at all. I owe you thanks. Just think if I had gone home with that horrid
      blackthorn."
He turned to his work as though she were no longer present and the girl prepared to
      depart.
"I'll bid you good-arternoon now, sir," she said timidly.
He looked up with surprise.
"Haven't you gone, Joan? I thought you had started. Good-by until Monday. Remember, if it is
      cold or rainy I shall not be here." 
The girl trotted off; and when she had gone Barren drew her from memory in the center of his
      sketch. The golden glories of the gorse were destined to be no more than a frame for something
      fairer.
