
CHAPTER THREE
"THE LORD IS KING"
Michael Tregenza instantly observed Joan where she sat by the window, and, seeing her, stood
      still. The fish fell from his hand and dropped slithering in a heap on the stone floor. There
      was a silence so great that all could hear a patter of drops from the fisherman's oilskins as
      the water rolled to the ground. At the same moment gusts of rising wind shook the casement and
      bleared the glass in it with rain. Joan, as she rose and stood near Mr. Chirgwin, heard her
      heart thump and felt the blood leap. Then she nerved herself, came a little forward, and spoke
      before her father had time to do so. He had now turned his gaze from her and was looking at
      the farmer.
"Faither," she said very gently, "faither dearie, forgive me. I begs it so hard; 'tis the
      thing I wants most. I feared to see 'e, but you was sent off the waters that I might. I comed
      in tremblin' an' sorrer to see wheer I've lived most all my short days. I'm that differ'nt now
      to what I was. Uncle Thomas'll tell 'e. I know I'm a sinful, wicked wummon, an' I'm
      heart-broke day an' night for the shame I've brot 'pon my folks. I'll trouble 'e no more if 'e
      will awnly say the word. Please, please, faither, forgive."
She stood without moving, as did he. Uncle Chirgwin watched silently. Mrs. Tregenza made
      some stir at the fire to conceal her anxiety. No relenting glimmer softened either the steel
      of Gray Michael's eyes or one line in his great face. The furrows knotted between his eyebrows
      and at the corners of his eyes. His sou'wester still covered his head. At his mouth was a
      down-drawing, as of disgust before some offensive sight or smell, and the hand which had held
      the fish was clinched. He swallowed and found speech hard. Then Joan spoke again.
"Uncle's forgived me, an' Mary, an' Tom, an' mother here. Caan't 'e, caan't 'e, faither? My
      road's that hard."
Then he answered, his words bursting out of his lips sharply, painfully at first, rolling as
      usual in his mighty chest voice afterward. The man twisted Scripture to his narrow purposes
      according to Luke Gospel usage.
"'Forgive'? Who can forgive but the Lard, an' what is man that he should forgive them as the
      A'mighty's damned? 'Tis the sinners' bleat an' whine for forgiveness what's crackin' the ear
      o' God whensoever 'tis bent 'pon airth. Ain't your religion taught you that—you, Thomas
      Chirgwin? If not, 'tis a brawken reed, man. Get you gone, you fagot, you an' this here
      white-haired sawl, as is foolin' you an' holdin' converse wi' the outcast o' heaven. I ban't
      no faither o' yourn, thank God, as shawed me I weern't—never, never. Gaw! Gaw both of 'e. My
      God! the sight of 'e do sicken me as I stand in the same air. You—an auld man—touchin' her an'
      her devil-sent, filthy moneys. 'Twas a evil day, Thomas Chirgwin, when I fust seed them o'
      your blood—an ill hour, an' you drives it red-hot into my brain with your actions. Bad, bad
      you be—bad as that lyin', false, lost sinner theer—a-draggin' out your cant o' forgiveness an'
      foolin' a damned sawl wi' falsehoods. You knaws wheer she'm gwaine; an' your
      squeakin', time-servin' passon knaws; an' you both tells her differ'nt!"
"Out on 'e, you stone-hearted wretch o' a man!" began Uncle Chirgwin in a small voice,
      shaking with anger; but the fisherman had not said his last word, and roared the other down.
      Gray Michael's self-control was less than usual; his face had grown very red and surcharged
      veins showed black on the unwrinkled sides of his forehead.
"No more, not a word. Get you gone an' never agin set foot 'pon this here draxel. [Footnote:
       Draxel—Threshold.] Never—never none o' Chirgwin breed. Gaw! or auld as you be, I'll
      force 'e! God's on the side o' right!"
Hereupon Joan, not judging correctly of the black storm signs on her father's face or the
      force of the voice, now grating into a shriek as passion tumbled to flood, prayed yet again
      for that pardon which her parent was powerless to grant. The boon denied grew precious in her
      eyes. She wept and importuned, falling on her knees to him.
"God can do it, God can do it, faither. Please—please, for the sake o' the God as leads you,
      forgive. Oh, God in heaven, make en forgive me—'tis all I wants." 
But a religious delirium gripped Tregenza and poisoned the blood in him. His breast rose,
      his fists clinched, his mouth was dragged sidewise and his underlip shook. A damned soul,
      looking up with wild eyes into his, was all he saw—the very off scouring and filth of human
      nature—hell tinder, to touch which in kindness was to risk his own salvation.
"Gaw, gaw! Else the Lard'll make me His weapon. He's whisperin'—He's whisperin'!"
There was something horribly akin to genuine madness in the frenzy of this utterance. Mrs.
      Tregenza screamed; Joan struggled to her feet in some terror and her head swam. She turned to
      get her hat from the dresser-ledge, and, as she did so, the little blue plate, tied up in
      paper beside it, fell and broke, like the last link of a snapping chain. Gray Michael was
      making a snorting in his nostrils and his head seemed to grow lower on his shoulders. Then Mr.
      Chirgwin found his opportunity and spoke.
"I've heard you, an' it ban't human nachur to knuckle down dumb, so I be gwaine to speak,
      an' you can mind or not as you please."
He flung his old hat upon the ground and walked without fear close beside the fisherman who
      towered above him.
"God be with 'e, I sez, for you need En fine an' bad for sartain—worse'n that poor 'mazed
      lamb shakin' theer. You talk o' the ways o' God to men an' knaw no more 'bout 'em
      than the feesh what you draw from the sea! You'm choustin' yourself cruel wi' your
      self-righteousness—take it from me. You'm saved, be you? You be gwaine to
      heaven, are 'e? Who tawld 'e so, Michael Tregenza? Did God A'mighty send a flyin' angel to
      tell 'e a purpose? Look in your heart, man, an' see how much o' Christ be in it. Christ, I
      tell 'e, Christ—Christ—Jesus Christ. It's Him as'll smuggle us all into heaven, not
      your psalm-smitin', knock-me-down, ten-commandment, cussin' God. I'm grawin' very auld an' I
      knaw what I knaw. Your God's a devil, fisherman—a graspin', cruel devil; an' them the
      devil saves is damned. 'Tis Christ as you've turned your stiff back 'pon—Christ as'll let this
      poor lass into heaven afore ever you gets theer! You ban't in sight o' the gates o' pearl, not
      you, for all your cold prayers. You'm young in well-doin'; an' 'tis a 'ard road you'll fetch
      home by, I'll swear; an' 'tis more'n granite the Lard'll use to make your heart bleed. He'll
      break you, Tregenza—you, so bold, as looks dry-eyed 'pon the sun an' reckons your throne'll
      wan day be as bright. He'll break you, an' bring you to your knees, an' that 'fore your gray
      hairs be turned, as mine, to white. Oh, Christ Jesus, look you at this blind sawl an' give en
      somethin' better to lay hold 'pon than his poor bally-muck o' religion what's nort but a gert
      livin' lie!"
Thomas Chirgwin seemed mightily transfigured as he spoke. The words came without an effort,
      but he uttered them with pauses and in a loud voice not lacking solemnity. His head shook, yet
      he stood firm and motionless upon his feet; and he made his points with a gesture, often
      repeated, of his open right hand.
As for Tregenza, the man listened through all, though he heard but little. His head was full
      of blood; there was a weight on his tongue striking it silent and forcing his mouth open at
      the same moment. The world looked red as he saw it; his limbs were not bearing him stiffly.
      Thomasin had her eye upon him, for she was quite prepared to throw over her previous
      statements and support her husband against an attack so astounding and unexpected. And the
      more so that he had not himself hurled an immediate and crushing answer.
Meantime the old farmer's sudden fires died within him; he shrank to his true self, and the
      voice in which he now spoke seemed that of another man.
"Give heed to what I've said to 'e, Michael, an' be humble afore the Lard same as your
      darter be. Go in fear, as you be forever biddin' all flaish to go. Never say no sawl's lost
      while you give all power to the Maker o' sawls. Go in fear, I sez, else theer'll come a
      whirlwind o' God-sent sorrer to strike wheer your heart's desire be rooted. 'Tis allus
      so—allus—"
Tom entered upon these words, and Uncle Chirgwin's eyes dropping upon him as he spoke, his
      utterance sounded like a prophecy. So the boy's mother read it, and with a half sob, half
      shriek, she turned in all the frenzy of sudden maternal wrath. Her sharp tongue dropped mere
      vituperation, but did so with boundless vigor, and the woman's torrent of unbridled curses and
      threats swept that scene of storm to its close. Joan went first from the door, while Mr.
      Chirgwin, picking up his hat and buttoning his coat, retreated after her before the volume of
      Thomasin's virago attack. Tom stood open-mouthed and silent, dumfounded at the tremendous
      spectacle of his mother's rage and his father's stricken silence. Then, as Mrs. Tregenza
      slammed the door and wept, her husband sunk slowly down with something strangely like terror
      in his eyes. The man in truth had just passed through a physical crisis of alarming nature. He
      sat in his easy-chair now, removed his hat, and wiped the perspiration from his forehead with
      hands that shook. It was not what he had heard or beheld that woke alarm in a spirit which had
      never known it till then, but what he had felt: a horror which crowded down upon every sense,
      gripped his volition with unseen hands, blinded him, stopped his ears, held his limbs, stirred
      his brains into a whirling waste. He knew now that in his moment of passion he had stood upon
      the very brink of some terrific, shattering evil, possibly of death itself. Body or brain or
      both had passed through a great, unknown danger; and now, dazed and for the time much aged, he
      looked about him with slow eyes—mastered the situation, and realized the incident was
      ended.
"The Lard—'the Lard is King,'" he said, and stopped a moment. Then he slowly rose to his
      feet and with the old voice, though it shook and slurred somewhat upon his tongue, spoke that
      text which served him in all occasions of unusual stress and significance.
"'The Lard is King, be the people never so impatient; He sitteth between the cherubims, be
      the airth never so unquiet'!"
Then he sat again and long remained motionless with his face buried in his hands.
Meantime the old horse dragged Uncle Chirgwin and his niece away along the level road to
      Mousehole. Joan was wrapped in a tarpaulin and they proceeded silently a while under cold
      rains, which swept up from a leaden south over the sea. The wind blew strong, tore green
      leaves from the hedges, and chimed with the thoughts of the man and his niece.
"How did you come to speak so big an' braave, Uncle Thomas? I couldn' say no more to en, for
      the lights rose up in my throat an' choked me; but you swelled out somethin' grand to see, an'
      spawk as no man ever yet spawk to faither afore."
"'Twas put in me to say; I doan't knaw how ever I done it, but my tongue weern't my awn for
      the time. Pull that thing tighter about 'e. This rain would go through a barn door."
At the steep hill rising from Mousehole to Paul, Uncle Chirgwin got out and walked, while
      the horse, with his shoulders to the collar, plodded forward. Then, down the road came the
      laboring man, Billy Jago, mentioned aforetime as one who had worked for Mr. Chirgwin in the
      past. He touched his hat to his old master and greeted him with respect and regard. For a
      moment the farmer also stopped. No false sentiment tied Billy's tongue and he spoke of matters
      personal to those before him, having first mournfully described his own state of health.
"But theer, us gaws down to the tomb to make way for the new born. I do say, an' swear tu,
      that the butivulest things in all wild nachur be a ship in full sail an' a wummon in the
      fam'ly way. Ban't nothin' to beat 'em. An' I'll say it here, 'pon this spot, though the rain's
      bitin' into my bones like teeth. So long to 'e, maaster, an' good cheeldin' to 'e, miss!"
The man rolled with loutish gait down the hill; the darkness gathered; the wind whistled
      through high hedges on the left; farmer Chirgwin made sounds of encouragement to his horse,
      which moved onward; and Joan thought with curious interest of those things that Billy Jago had
      said.
"'Tis straange us met that poor, croony antic at sich a moment," mused Uncle Thomas; "the
      words of en jag sore 'pon a body's mind, comin' arter what's in our thots like."
"Maybe 'tis paart o' the queerness o' things as us should fall 'pon en now," answered
      Joan.
Then, through a stormy gloaming, they returned in sadness to the high lands of Drift.
