<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER TWELVE</head>
<head>THE SEEKING OF THE MAN</head>
<p>Thus the sailor, Noy, wholly imbued with one idea, absolutely convinced that to this end it
      had pleased Providence to give him life, went forth into the world that he might seek and slay
      the seducer of Joan. After leaving Drift he returned to Penzance, lay there that night, and
      upon the following morning began a methodical visitation of the Newlyn studios. Five he called
      at and to five artists he stated something of his case in general terms; but none of those who
      heard him were familiar with any of the facts, and none could offer him either information or
      assistance. Edmund Murdoch was not in Newlyn, Brady had gone to Brittany; but at the seventh
      studio which he visited, Joe Noy substantiated some of his facts. Paul Tarrant chanced to be
      at home and at work when he called; and the artist would have told Joe everything which he
      wished to learn, but that Noy was cautious and reserved, not guessing that he stood before one
      who knew his enemy and entertained no admiration for him.</p>
<p>"Axing pardon for taking up any of your time, sir," he began, "but theer'm a matter
      concerning a party in your business as painted a maiden here, by name o' Joan Tregenza. She
      weern't nobody—awnly a fisherman's darter, but the picksher was said to be done in these
      paarts, an' I thot, maybe, you'd knaw who drawed it."</p>
<p>Tarrant had not heard of Joan's death, and, indeed, possessed no information concerning her,
      save that Barron had prevailed upon the girl to sit for a portrait. The question, therefore,
      struck him as curious; and one which he put in return, merely to satisfy his own curiosity,
      impressed Joe in a similar way. His suspicious nature took fright and Tarrant's dark, bright
      eyes seemed to read his secret and search his soul.</p>
<p>"Yes, a portrait of Joan Tregenza was painted here last spring, but not by a Newlyn man. How
      does that interest you?"</p>
<p>"Awnly sideways. 'Tedn' nothin' to me. I knaws the parties an' wanted to see the picksher if
      theer weern't no objection."</p>
<p>"That's impossible, I fear, unless you go to London. I cannot help you further than to say
      the artist lives there and his picture is being exhibited at an art gallery. Somebody told me
      that much; but which it is I don't know."</p>
<p>This was enough for Noy. Ignorant of the metropolis or the vague import of the words "a
      picture gallery," he deemed these directions amply sufficient, and, being anxious to escape
      further questioning, now thanked Tarrant and speedily departed. Not until half way back again
      to Penzance did he realize how slight was the nature of this information and how
      ill-calculated to bring him to his object; the man he wanted lived in London and had a
      painting of Joan Tregenza in a picture gallery there.</p>
<p>Yet upon these directions Joe Noy resolved to begin his search, and as the train anon bore
      him away to the field of the great quest he weighed the chances and considered a course of
      action. Allowing the ample margin of ten picture galleries to London, and assuming that the
      portrait of Joan once found would be easily recognized by him, the sailor considered that a
      fortnight of work should bring him face to face with the picture. That done, he imagined that
      it would not be difficult to learn the name and address of the painter. He had indeed asked
      Tarrant this question pointblank, but the artist's accidental curiosity and Joe's own caution
      combined to prevent any extension of the interview, or a repetition of the question. A word
      had at least placed him in possession of John Barron's name, but Chance prevented it from
      being spoken, as Chance had burned Barron's letter and prevented his name appearing at the
      inquest. Now Noy viewed the task before him with equanimity. The end was already assured, for,
      in his own opinion, he walked God-guided; but the means lay with him, and he felt that it was
      his duty to spare no pains or labors and not to hesitate from the terrible action marked for
      him when he should reach the end of his journey. Mary's last words came to his ear like a
      whisper which mingled with the jolt and rattle of the railway train; but they held no power to
      upset his purpose or force to modify his rooted determination. Her image occupied his
      thoughts, however, for a lengthy period. Then, with some effort, he banished it and entered
      upon a calculation of ways and means, estimating the capabilities of his money.</p>
<p>Entering the great hive to accomplish that assassination as he supposed both planned and
      predestined for him before God made the sun, Noy set about his business in a deliberate and
      careful manner. He hired a bedroom in a mean street near Paddington, and, on the day after his
      arrival in London, purchased a large map and index of the city which gave ample particulars of
      public buildings and mentioned the names and positions of the great permanent homes of art. By
      the help of newspaper advertisements he also ascertained where to find some of the numerous
      private dealers' galleries and likewise learned what public annual exhibitions chanced to be
      at that time open. Whereupon, though the circumstance failed to quicken his pulse, he
      discovered that the extent of his labors would prove far greater than he at first imagined. He
      made careful lists of the places where pictures were to be seen, and the number quickly ran up
      to fifty, sixty, seventy exhibitions. That he would be able to visit all these Joe knew was
      impossible, but the fact caused him no disquiet. The picture he sought and the name of the man
      who painted it must be presented to him in due season. For him it only remained to toil
      systematically at the search and allow no clew to escape him. As for the issue, it was with
      the Lord.</p>
<p>London swept and surged about Joe Noy unheeded. He cared for nothing but canvases and the
      places where they might be seen. Day by day he worked and went early to rest, weary and worn
      by occupation of a nature so foreign to his experience. Nightly his last act was to delete one
      or sometimes two of the exhibitions figured upon his lists. Thus a week passed by and he had
      visited ten galleries and seen upward of five thousand pictures. Not one painting or drawing
      of them all was missed or hurried over; he compared each with its number in the catalogue,
      then studied it carefully to see if any hint or suggestion of Joan appeared in it. Her
      Christian name often met his scrutiny in titles, and those works thus designated he regarded
      with greater attention than any others; but the week passed fruitlessly, and Joe, making a
      calculation at the termination of it, discovered that, at his present rate of progression, it
      would be possible to inspect no more than half of the galleries set down before his funds were
      exhausted. The knowledge quickened his ingenuity and he discovered a means by which future
      labors might be vastly modified and much time saved. He already knew that the man responsible
      for Joan's destruction was called John; his mind now quickened with the recollection of this
      important fact, and henceforth he did a thing which any man less unintelligent had done from
      the first: he scanned his catalogues without troubling about the pictures, and only concerned
      himself with those canvases whose painters had "John" for their Christian names. He thanked
      God on his knees that the idea should have entered his mind, for his labors were thereby
      enormously lightened. Notwithstanding, through ignorance of his subject, Joe wasted a great
      deal of time and money. Thus he visited the National Gallery, the Old Masters at the Academy
      and various dealers' exhibitions where collections of the pictures of foreign men were at that
      season being displayed.</p>
<p>The brown sailor created some interest viewed in an environment so peculiar. His picturesque
      face might well have graced a frame and looked down upon the artistic throngs who swept among
      the pictures, but the living man, full of almost tragic interest in what he saw, laboring
      along catalogue in hand, dead to everything but the art around him, seemed wholly out of
      place. He looked what he was: the detached thread of some story from which the spectator only
      saw this chapter broken away and standing without its context. Nine persons out of ten
      dismissed him with a smile; but occasionally a thoughtful mind would view the man and occupy
      itself with the problem of his affairs. Such built up imaginary histories of him and his
      actions, which only resembled each other in the quality of remoteness from truth.</p>
<p>Once it happened that at a small gallery, off Bond Street, the sudden sight of precious
      things brought new emotions to Joe Noy—sentiments and sensations of a sort more human and more
      natural than those under which he was at present pursuing his purpose. Before this spectacle,
      suddenly presented in the quietness and loneliness of the little exhibition, that stern spirit
      of revenge which had actuated him since the knowledge of his loss, and which, gripping his
      mind like a frost from the outset, had congested the gentler emotions of sorrow for poor Joan
      and for himself—before this display of a familiar scene, hallowed beyond all others in memory,
      the man's relentless mood rose off his mind for a brief moment like a cloud, and he stood,
      with aching heartstrings, gazing at a great canvas. Sweet to him it was as the unexpected face
      of one dearly loved to the wanderer; and startling in a measure also, for, remembering his
      oath, to see Newlyn no more until his enemy was dead, it seemed as though the vow was broken
      by some miracle and that from the heart of the roaring city he had magically plunged through
      space to the threshold of the home of Joan.</p>
<p>Before him loomed a picture like a window opening upon Newlyn. The village lay there in all
      the flame and glory of sunset lights. The gray and black roofs clustered up the great dark
      hill and the gloaming fell out of a primrose sky over sea and land. The waters twinkled full
      of light to the very foreground of the canvas, and between the piers of the harbor a
      fisher-boy was sculling his boat. Between the masts of stone-schooners at the quay, Joe saw
      the white cottage of the Tregenzas, and there his survey stopped, for at this spectacle
      thought broke loose. No man ever paid a nobler tribute to a good picture. Very long he gazed
      motionless, then, with a great sigh, moved slowly forward, his eyes still turning back.</p>
<p>The day and the experience which it brought him marked a considerable flux of new
      impressions in Joe's mind—impressions which, without softening the rugged aspect of his
      determination, yet added other lines of reflection. Sorrow for what was lost fastened upon
      him, and an indignation burned his soul that such things could be in a world designed and
      ordered by the Almighty. Revenge, however, grew no less desirable in the light of sorrow. He
      looked to it more and more eagerly as the only food which could lead to peace of mind. His
      road probably embraced the circumstances of an ignominious death; but none the less peace
      would follow—a peace beyond the power of future life on earth to supply. Thus, at least, did
      his project then present itself to him. Thought of the meeting with his enemy grew to be a
      luxury which he feasted upon in the night watches after fruitless days and the investigation
      of endless miles of pictures. Then he would lie awake and imagine the inevitable climax. He
      saw himself standing before the man who had ruined two lives; he felt his hand close over a
      knife or a pistol, and wondered which it should be; he heard his own voice, slow and steady,
      pronounce sentence of death, and he saw terror light that other man's face as the blood fled
      from it. He rehearsed the words he should utter at that great juncture and speculated as to
      what manner of answer would come; then the last scene of all represented his enemy stretched
      dead at his feet and himself with his hands linked in iron. There yet remained the end of the
      tragedy for him—a spectacle horrible enough in the eyes of those still left to love him, but
      for himself empty of terror, innocent of power to alarm. Clean-living men would pity him,
      religious men would see in him an instrument used by God to strike at a sinner. His death
      would probably bring some wanderers to the fold; it must of a surety be long remembered as the
      greatest sermon lived and preached by a Luke Gospeler. Lulled by the humming woof and warp of
      such reflections, his mind nightly passed into the unconsciousness of sleep; and quickened by
      subsequent visions, the brain enacted these imaginings with an added gloom and that tremendous
      appearance of reality proper to the domain of dreams.</p>
<p>Thus the days sped and grew shorter as December waned. Then, at the end of the second week
      of his work, Noy chanced to read that an Exhibition at the Institute of Painters in Oils was
      about to close; and not yet having visited that collection he set out on the morning of the
      following day to do so.</p>
</div>