
CHAPTER FIVE
"COME TO ME!"
A space of time six weeks in duration may be hastily dismissed as producing no alteration in
      Joan's method of thought and life. It swept her swiftly through shortening days and the last
      of the summer weather to the climax of her fortunes. As the season waned she kept nearer home,
      going not much further than Tremathick Cross on the St. Just road or to that relic already
      mentioned as lying outside Sancreed churchyard. These, in time, she associated as much with
      her child as with herself. The baby had now taken its natural place in her mind, and she
      prayed every day that it might presently forgive her for bringing it into the world at all.
      Misty-eyed, not unhappy, with her beauty still a startling fact, Joan mused away long hours at
      the feet of her granite friends through the waning splendors of many an autumn noon. Then,
      within the brief space of two weeks, a period of weather almost unexampled in the memory of
      the oldest agriculturists drew to its close.
That mighty rains must surely come all knew, but none foretold their tremendous volume or
      foresaw the havoc, ruin and destruction to follow upon their outpouring. Meantime, with late
      September, the leaves began to hustle early to earth under great winds. Rain fell at times,
      but not heavily at first, and a thirsty world drank open-mouthed through deep sun-cracks in
      field and moor and dried-up marsh. But bedraggled autumn's robes were soon washed colorless;
      the heath turned pallid before it faded to sere brown; rotten banks of decaying leaves rose
      high under the hedges. There was no dry, crisp whirl of gold on the wind, but a sodden
      condition gradually overspread the land. The earth grew drunken with the later rains and could
      hold no more. October saw the last of the purple and crimson, the tawny browns and royal
      yellows. Only beeches, their wet leaves by many shades a darker auburn than is customary,
      still retained lower foliage. The trees put on their winter shapes unduly early. The world was
      dark and sweated fungus. Uncouth children of the earth, whose hour is that which sees the leaf
      fall, sprang into short-lived being. Black goblins and gray, white goblins and brown, spread
      weird life abroad. With fleshy gills, squat and lean, fat and thin, bursting through the grass
      in companies and circles, lurking livid, gigantic and alone on the trunks of forest trees,
      gemming the rotten bough with crimson, twinkling like topaz on the crooked stems of the furze,
      battening upon death, rising into transitory vigor from the rack and rot of a festering earth,
      they flourished. Heavy mists now stretched their draperies over the high lands; and
      exhalations from the corpse of the summer hung bluish under the rain in the valleys. One night
      a full moon shone clearly, and through the ambient light ominous sheets and splashes of silver
      glimmered in the low fields. Here they had slowly and silently spread into existence, their
      birth hidden under the mists, their significance marked by none but anxious farmers. All men
      hoped that the full moon would bring cessation of this rainfall; but another gray dawn faced
      them on the morrow and a thousand busy rills murmured and babbled down the lanes round Drift.
      Here and there unsuspected springs burst their hidden chambers and swept by steep courses over
      the green grass to join these main waters which now raced through the valley. The light of day
      was heavy and pressed upon the sight. It acted like a telescope in the intervals of no rain
      and brought distant objects into strange distinctness. The weather was much too warm even for
      "Western Cornwall. A few leaves still hung on the crown of the apple trees, and such scanty
      peach and nectarine foliage as yet remained was green. The red currants flaunted a gold leaf
      or two and the remaining leaves of the black currant were purple after his fashion. Joan
      marveled to see sundry of her favorites thrusting forth tokens of spring almost before autumn
      was ended. Lilac buds swelled to bursting; a peony pushed many pink points upward through the
      brown ruins of the past; bulbs were growing rapidly; Nature had forgotten winter for once,
      thought Joan. Thus the sodden, sunless, steaming days followed each on the last until farming
      folk began to grow grave before a steady increase of water on the land. Much hay stood in
      danger and some ricks had been already ruined. Many theories were rife, Uncle Chirgwin's
      being, upon the whole, the most fatuous.
"Tis a thunder-planet," he told his nieces, "an' till us get a rousin' storm o' crooked
      forks an' heavy thunder this rain'll go on fallin'. But not so much as a flap o' the collybran
      [Footnote: Collybran—Sheet lightning.] do us get for all the heat o' the air. I
      should knaw, if any, for I be out turnin' night into day an' markin' the water in the valley
      every evenin' long after dark now. I'm fearin' graave for the big stack; an' theer's three
      paarts o' last year's hay beside, an' two tidy lil mows of the aftermath. So sure's the waters
      do rise another foot and a half, 'tis 'good-by' to the whole boilin'. Not but 'twill be a
      miracle for the stream to get much higher. The moor's burstin' wi' rain, but the coffins
      [Footnote: Coffins—Ancient mining excavations.] do hold it up, I s'pose, an' keep it
      aloft. A penn'orth o' frost now would save a pound of produce from wan end o' Carnwall to
      t'other."
Joan spent many long days in the house at this time and practiced an unskillful needle,
      while her thoughts wandered far and near through the sullen weather to this old cross and
      that. Then came a night of rainless darkness through which past augmentations of water still
      thundered. Nature rested for some hours before her final, shattering deluge, but the brief
      peace was more tremendous than rain or wind, for a mighty foreboding permeated it, and all men
      felt the end was not yet, though none could say why they feared the silence more than
      storm.
It happened upon this black night that Joan was alone in the kitchen. Supper had been but a
      scrambling meal and her uncle with Amos Bartlett and all the men on the farm were now
      somewhere in the valley under the darkness fighting for the hay with rising water. Where Mary
      was just then, Joan did not know. Her thoughts were occupied with her own affairs, and in the
      oppressive silence she sat watching some little moving threadlike concerns which hung in a row
      through a crack below the mantelpiece above the open fire. They were the tails of mice which
      often here congregated nigh the warmth and sat in a row, themselves invisible. The tails
      moved, and Joan noted some shorter tails beside long ones, telling of infant vermin at their
      mothers' sides. In the silence she could hear the squeaking of them, and now and then she
      talked to them very softly.
"Thank God, you lil mice, as you abbun got no brains in your heads an' no call to look far
      in the future. I lay you'm happier than us, wi' nort to fear 'bout 'cept crumbs an' a lew snug
      spot to live in."
Thus she stumbled on the lowest note of pessimism: that conscious intelligence is a supreme
      mistake. But the significance of her idea she knew not.
Then Joan rose up, shivered with a sudden sense of chill, stamped her feet, and caused the
      row of tails below the mantel to vanish.
"Goose-flaish down the spine do mean as theer's feet walkin' 'pon my graave, I s'pose," she
      thought, as a heavy knock at the front door interrupted her reflections. Hastening to open it,
      Joan found the postman—a rare visitor at Drift. He handed her a letter and prepared to depart
      immediately.
"I'm grievous afeared o' Buryas Bridge tonight," he said; "when I comed over, two hour back,
      the water was above the arches, an', so like's not, I won't get 'cross 'tall if it's riz
      higher. An' somethin' cruel's comin', I'll lay my life, 'fore marnin'. This pitch-black
      silence be worse than the noise o' the rain."
He vanished down the hill, and, returning to the kitchen, Joan lighted a candle and examined
      the letter. A fit of trembling shook the girl to the hidden seat of her soul as she did so,
      for her own name greeted her, in neat printed letters akin to those on the superscription of
      another letter she had received in the past. From John Barron it was that this communication
      came, and the reception of it begot a wild chaos of mind which now carried Joan headlong
      backward. Images swept through her brain with the bewildering rapidity and brilliance of
      lightning flashes; she was whirled and tossed on a flood of thoughts; a single sad-eyed figure
      retained permanency and rose clear and separated itself from the phantasmagorial procession of
      personages and events wending through her mind, dissolving each into the other, stretching the
      circumstances of eight short months into an eternity, crowding the solemn aisles of time past
      with shadows of those emotions which had reigned over the dead spring time of the year and
      were themselves long dead. Thus she stood for a space of vast apparent duration, but in
      reality most brief. That trifling standpoint in time needed for a dream or for the
      brain-picture of his past which dominates the mind of the drowning was all that had sped with
      Joan. Then, shaking herself clear of thought, she found her candle, which burned dim when
      first lighted, was only now melting the wax and rising to its full flame. A mist of damp had
      long hung on the inner walls of the kitchen at Drift, begotten not of faulty building but by
      the peculiar condition of the atmosphere; and as the candle flickered up in a chamber dark
      save for its light and the subdued glow of a low fire, Joan noticed how the gathering moisture
      on the walls had coalesced, run into drops and fallen, streaking the misty gray with bright
      bars and networks, silvery' as the slime of snails.
With shaking hand, she set the candle upon a table, dropped into a chair beside it and
      opened her letter. For a moment the page with its large printed characters danced before her
      eyes, then they steadied and she was able to read. Like a message from one long dead came the
      words; and in truth, though the writer lived, he wrote upon the threshold of the grave. John
      Barren had put into force his project, which was, as may be remembered, to write to Joan when
      the end of his journey came in sight. The words were carefully chosen, for he remembered her
      sympathy with suffering and her extensive ignorance. He wrote in simple language, therefore,
      and dwelt on his own helpless condition, exaggerating it to some extent.
"No. 6 Melbury Gardens, London.
"My own dear love—What can I say to make you know what has kept me away from you? There is
      but one word and that is my poor sick and suffering body. I wrote to you and tore up what I
      wrote, for I loved you too much to ask you to come and share my sad life. It was very, very
      awful to be away and know you were waiting and waiting for Jan; yet I could not come, because
      Mother Nature was so hard. Then I went far away and hoped you had forgotten me. Doctors made
      me go to a place over the sea where tall palm trees grew up out of a dry yellow desert; but my
      poor lungs were too sick to get well again and I came home to die. Yes, sweetheart, you will
      forgive me for all when you know poor lonely Jan will soon be gone. He cannot live much
      longer, and he is so weak now that he has no more power to fight against the love of Joan.
"For your own good, dear one, I made myself keep away and hid myself from you. Now the
      little life left to me cries out by night and by day for you. Joan, my own true love, I cannot
      die until I have seen you again. Come to me, Joan, love, if you do not hate me. Come to me;
      come; and close my eyes and let poor Jan have the one face that he loves quite near him at the
      end. Even your picture has gone, for they came when I was away and took it and put it in a
      place with many others for people to see. And all men and women say it is the best picture. I
      shall be dead before they send it back to me. So now I have nothing but the thoughts of my
      Joan. Oh, come to me, my love, if you can. It will not be for long, and when Jan lies under
      the ground all that he has is yours. I have fought so hard to keep from you and from praying
      you to come to me, but I can fight no more. My home is named at the top of this letter. You
      have but to enter the train for London and stop in it until it gets to the end of its journey.
      My servant shall wait each day for your coming. I can write no more, I can only pray to the
      God we both love to bring you to me. And if you come or do not I shall have the same great
      true love for you. I will die alone rather than trouble you to come if you have forgotten me
      and not forgiven me for keeping silence. God bless you, my only love. JAN."
This feeble stuff rang like a clarion on the ear of the reader, for he who had written it
      knew how best to strike, how best to appeal with overwhelming force to Joan Tregenza. Her mind
      plunged straight into the struggle and the billows of the storm, sweeping aside lesser
      obstructions, were soon beating against the new-built ramparts of faith. The rush of thought
      which had coursed through her brains before reading the letter now made the task of deciding
      upon it easier. Indeed it can hardly be said that any real doubt from first to last assailed
      Joan's decision. Faith did not crumble, but, at a second glance, appeared to her wholly
      compatible with obedience to this demand. There was an electric force in every word of the
      letter. It proved Mister Jan's wondrous nobility of character, his unselfishness, his love. He
      had suffered, too, had longed eternally for her, had denied himself out of consideration for
      her future happiness, had struggled with his love, and only broken down and given way to it in
      the shadow of death. Grief shook Joan upon this thought, but joy was uppermost. The long
      months of weary suffering faded from her recollection as nocturnal mists vanish at the touch
      of the sun's first fire. She had no power to analyze the position or reflect upon the various
      courses of action the man might have taken to spare her so much agony. She accepted his bald
      utterance word for word, as he knew she would. Every inclination and desire swept her toward
      him now. His cry of suffering, his love, his loneliness, her duty, as it stood blazoned upon
      her mind ten minutes after reading his letter; the child to be born within two months—all
      these considerations united to establish Joan's mind at this juncture. "Come to me!" Those
      were the words echoing within her heart, and her soul cried upon Christ to shorten time that
      she might reach him the sooner. Before the world was next awake, she would be upon her way;
      before another night fell, Mister Jan's arms would be round her. The long, dreary nightmare
      had ended for her at last. Then came tears of bitter remorse, for she saw how his love had
      never left her, how he had been true as steel, while she, misled by appearances, had lost
      faith and lapsed into forgetfulness. A wild, unreasoning yearning superior to time and space
      and the service of railways got hold upon her. "Come to me," "Come to me," sounded in Joan's
      ears in the live voice she had loved and lost and found again. An hour's delay, a minute's, a
      moment's seemed a crime. Yet delay there must be, but the tension and terrific excitement of
      her whole being at this period demanded some immediate outlet in action. She wanted to talk to
      Uncle Chirgwin, and she desired instant information upon the subject of her journey. First she
      thought of seeking the farmer in the valley; then it struck her, the hour being not later than
      eight o'clock, that by going into Penzance she might learn at what time the morning train
      departed to London.
Out of doors it was inky black, very silent, very oppressive. Joan called Mary twice before
      departing, but received no answer. Indeed the house was empty, though she did not know it.
      Finally, thrusting the letter into her bosom, taking her hat and cloak from a nail in the
      kitchen and putting on a pair of walking shoes, the girl went abroad. Her present medley of
      thoughts begot a state of exceeding nervous excitation. For the letter touched the two poles
      of extreme happiness and utmost possible sorrow. "Mister Jan" was calling her to him indeed,
      but only calling her that she might see him die. Careless of her steps, soothed unconsciously
      by rapid motion, she walked from the farm, her mind full of joy and grief; and the night,
      silent no longer for her, was full of a voice crying "Come to me, Joan, love, come!"
