<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER THREE</head>
<head>THE ACT OF FAITH</head>
<p>So John Barren set forth, well content to believe that he would never again visit Cornwall,
      and Joan called at the Penzance post-office on the morning which followed his departure. Her
      geographical knowledge was scanty. Truro and Plymouth, in her belief, lay somewhere upon the
      edge of the world; and she scarcely imagined that London could be much more remote. But no
      letter awaited her, and life grew to be terribly empty. For a week she struggled with herself
      to keep from the post-office, and then, nothing doubting that her patience would now be well
      rewarded, Joan marched off with confidence for the treasure. But only a greater disappointment
      than the last resulted; and she went home very sorrowful, building up explanations of the
      silence, finding excuses for "Mister Jan." The prefix to his name, which had dropped during
      their latter intimacy, returned to her mind now the man was gone: as "Mister Jan" it was that
      she thought about him and prayed for him.</p>
<p>The days passed quickly, and when a fortnight stood between herself and the last glimpse of
      her lover, Joan began to grow very anxious. She wept through long nights now, and her father,
      finding the girl changed, guessed she had a secret and told his wife to find it out. But it
      was some time before Thomasin made any discovery, for Joan lied stoutly by day and prayed to
      God to pardon by night. She strove hard to follow the teaching of the artist, to find joy in
      flowers and leaves, in the spring music of birds, in the color of the sea. But now she dimly
      guessed that it was love of him which went so far to make all things beautiful, that it was
      the magic and wisdom of his words which had gilded the world with gold and thrown new light
      upon the old familiar objects of life. Nature's organ was dumb now that the hands which played
      upon it so skillfully had passed far away. But she was loyal to her teacher; she remembered
      many things which he had said and tried hard to feel as he felt, to put her hand in beautiful
      Mother Nature's and walk with her and be at peace. Mister Jan would soon return; the fortnight
      was already past; each day as she rose she felt he might come to claim her before the
      evening.</p>
<p>And, meanwhile, other concerns occupied her thoughts. The voice which spoke to her after she
      bid John Barren "good-by," had since then similarly sounded on the ear of her heart. Alike at
      high noon and in the silence of the night watches it addressed her; and the mystery of it,
      taken with her other sorrows, began to affect her physically. For the first time in her life
      the girl felt ill in body. Her appetite failed, dawn found her sick and weary; her glass told
      her of a white, unhappy face, of eyes that were lighted from within and shone with strange
      thoughts. She was always listening now—listening for the new voice, that she might hear the
      word it uttered. Her physical illness she hid with some cunning and put a bright face upon
      life as far as she could do so before those of her home; but the task grew daily more
      difficult. Then, with a period of greatly increased discomfort, Joan grew alarmed and turned
      to the kind God of "Mister Jan," and made great, tearful praying for a return of strength. Her
      petition was apparently granted, for the girl enjoyed some improvement of health and spirit.
      Whereupon she became fired with a notable thought, and determined to seek her patron saint
      where still she suspected his power held sway: at the little brook which tinkles along beside
      the ruins of St. Madron's chapel in a fair coomb below the Cornish moorlands. The precious
      water, as Joan remembered, had brought strength and health to her when a baby; and now the
      girl longed to try its virtues again, and a great conviction grew upon her that the ancient
      saint never forgot his own little ones. Opportunity presently offered, and through the first
      misty gray of a morning in early April, she set out upon her long tramp from Newlyn through
      Madron to the ruined baptistery.</p>
<p>St. Madron, or Padern, lived in the sixth century, somewhat earlier than Augustine. A Breton
      by birth, he labored chiefly in Wales, established a monastery on Brito-Celtic lines in
      Cardiganshire, and became its bishop when a see was established in that district. He traveled
      far, visited Mount's Bay and established the church of Madron, still sacred to his name, while
      doubtless the brook and chapel hard by were associated with him from the same period. In
      Scawen's time folk were wont to take their hurts thither on Corpus Christi evening, drink of
      the water, deposit an offering, and repose upon the chapel floor till dawn. Then, drinking
      again, they departed whole, if faith sufficiently mighty had supported them. Norden remarks of
      the water that "its fame was great for the supposed vertue of healinge, which St. Maderne had
      thereunto infused; and maine votaries made anuale pilgrimages unto it…." In connection with
      the custom of immersion here indicated, we find there obtained the equally venerable practice
      of hanging votive rags upon the thorn bushes round about the chapel. This conceit is ancient
      as Japan, and one not only in usage to this day among the Shintoists of that land, but
      likewise common throughout Northern Asia and, nearer home, in the Orkneys, in Scotland, in
      Ireland. Older far than Christianity are these customs; the megalithic monuments of the pagan
      witness similar practices in remote corners of the earth; rag-trees, burdened with the
      tattered offerings of the devout, yet stud the desert of Suez, and those who seek shall surely
      find some holy well or grave hard at hand in every case. To mark and examine the junction of
      these venerable fancies with Christian superstition is no part of our present purpose, but
      that ideas, pagan in their birth, have lent themselves with sufficient readiness to successive
      creeds and been knit into the dogmas of each in turn, is certain enough. Thus, through
      Cornwall, the imaginings of wizard and wonder-worker in hoary time come, centuries later, to
      be the glory and special power of a saint. Such fantastic lore was definitely interdicted in
      King Edgar's reign, when "stone worshipings, divinations, well worshipings and necromances"
      were proclaimed things heathen, and unhallowed; but with the advent of the Saint-Bishops from
      Wales, from Ireland, from Brittany, primitive superstitions were patched upon the new creed,
      and, to suit private purposes, the old giants of the Christian faith sanctified holy well and
      holy stone, posing by right divine as sure dispensers of the hidden virtue in stream and
      granite. But the roots of these fables burrow back to paganism. Hundreds of weakly infants
      were passed through Mên-an-tol—the stone with a hole or the "crick-stone"—in the names of
      saints; and hundreds had already been handed through it centuries before under like appeal to
      pagan deities.</p>
<p>Of Madron baptistery, now a picturesque ruin, it seems clear that until the Reformation
      regular worship and the service of baptism were therein celebrated. The place has mercifully
      escaped all restoration or renovation and stands at this moment open to the sky in the slow
      hand of Time. A brook runs babbling outside, but the holy well or colymbethra is now dry,
      though it might easily be filled again. This interesting portion of the chapel remains intact,
      and the entrance to it lies upon the level of the floor according to ancient custom, being so
      ordered that the adult to undergo baptism might step down into the water, and that not without
      dignity.</p>
<p>Hither came Joan. Her patchwork of faith and Nature-worship was a live thing to her now, and
      she found no difficulty in reconciling the sweet saint-stories heard in childhood from her
      dead mother's lips, with the beautiful and fair exposition of truth which "Mister Jan" found
      written large upon the world by Nature in spring-time.</p>
<p>It was half-past four o'clock when she trudged through Madron to see the gray church and the
      little gray houses all sleeping under the gray sky. She plodded on up the hill past the gaunt
      workhouse which stands at the top of it; and what had seemed soft, sweet repose among the
      cottage homes, felt like cold death beneath these ashy walls. To Joan, the workhouse was a
      word of shame unutterable. Those among whom she lived would hurl the word against enemies as a
      prophecy of the utmost degradation. She shivered as she passed, and was sad, knowing that a
      whole world of poverty, failure, sorrow, regret, was hidden away in that cold, still pile. But
      the hand of sleep lay softly there; only a sick soul or two stirred, the paupers were the
      equal of princes till a hoarse bell brought them back out of blessed unconsciousness.</p>
<p>Bars of light streaked the east, and Joan, only stopping at the hill crest to see dawn open
      silver eyes on the sea, hastened inland through silent, dewy fields. Presently a fence and
      wall cut civilization from the wild land of the coomb, and the girl proceeded where
      grass-grown cart-ruts wound among furze and heather and the silver coils of new-born bracken
      just beginning to peep up above the dead fern of last year. This hollow ran between
      undulations of fallow and meadow; no harrow clinked as yet; only the cows stood here and there
      above the dry patches on the dewy fields where their bodies had lain in sleep. She saw their
      soft eyes and smelled the savor of them. Presently the cart-ruts disappeared in fine grass all
      bediamonded, knobbed with heather, sprouting rusty-red, and sprinkled with tussocks of coarser
      grass, whereon green blades sprang up above the dead ones, where they struggled, matted and
      bleached and sere. Rabbits flashed here and there, the white under-side of their little scuts
      twinkling through the gorse; and then the birds woke up; a thrush sang low, sleepy notes from
      the heart of a whitethorn; yellowhammers piped their mournful calls from the furze. On Joan's
      left hand there now rose a clump of wind-worn beech-trees, their brown spikes breaking to
      green, even where dead red leaves still clung to the parent branches. Beneath them ran a hedge
      of earth above a deep pool or two, very clear and fringed with young rushes, upright and
      triumphant above the old dead ones. Everywhere Joan saw Life trampling and leaping, growing
      and laughing over the ruins of things that had lived and died. It saddened her a little. Did
      Nature forget so soon? Then she told herself that kind Nature had loved them and gloried in
      them too; and now she would presently bury all her dead children in beautiful graves of new
      green. The mosses and marsh were lovely and the clear pools full of living creatures. But
      these things were not saint-blessed and eternal. No spring fed these silent wells, no holy man
      of old had ever smiled upon them.</p>
<p>A stepping-stone by a wall lay before her now; this she crossed, heard the stream murmuring
      peace, and hastened, and presently stood beside it. Here were holy ground and water; here were
      peace and a place to pray in. Blue forget-me-nots looked wondering up, seeing eyes as blue as
      their own, and she smiled at them and drank of the ripples that ran at their roots. Gray
      through the growing haze of green, a ruined wall showed close to the girl. The blackthorns'
      blooms were faded around her, the hawthorn was not yet powdered with white. She cast one look
      to right and left before entering the chapel. A distant view of the moorland rose to the sky,
      and the ragged edge of the hills was marked by a gaunt engine-stack noting past enterprise,
      triumphs long gone by, ruined hopes but recently dead. Snug fox-covers of rhododendron swept
      up toward the head of the coomb; and below, distant half a mile or more, cottages already
      showed a glimmer of gold on their thatches where the increasing splendor of day brightened
      them, and morning mists were raising jeweled arms. Then Joan passed into the ruin through that
      narrow opening which marks the door of it. The granite walls now stand about the height of a
      man's shoulder and the chamber itself is small. Stone seats still run round two sides of it;
      ivy and stone-worts and grasses have picked the mortar from the walls and clothed them, even
      as emerald moss and gray lichens and black and gold glorify each piece of granite; a may-bush,
      tangled about a great shiny ivy-tod, surmounts the western walls above the dried well; furzes
      and heather and tall grasses soften the jagged outlines of the ruin, and above a stone altar,
      at the east end of it, rises another white-thorn. At this season of the year the subsequent
      floral glories of the little chapel were only indicated: young briers already thrust their
      soft points over the stone of the altar and the first leaves of foxgloves were unfolding, with
      dandelions and docks, biting-stone-crop and ferns, ragged-robins and wild geraniums. These
      infant things softened no outline yet. The flat paving of the floor, where it yet remained,
      was bedded in grass; a little square incision upon the stone of the altar glimmered full of
      water and reflected the light from fleecy clouds which now climbed into heaven, bearing
      sunrise fires upward over a pale blue sky.</p>
<p>Here, under the circumambient, sparkling clearness, coolness and silence, Joan stood with
      strange medley of thoughts upon her soul. The saints and the fairies mingled there with
      visions of Nature, always smiling, with a vague shadow of one great God above the blue, but
      dim and very far away; and a nearer picture which quickened her heart-beat: the picture of
      "Mister Jan." Here she felt herself at one with the world spread round her. The mother eyes of
      a blackbird, sitting upon her eggs in the ivy-tod, kept their bright gold on Joan, but showed
      no fear; the young rabbits frisked at hand; a mole poked his snout and little paddle-paws out
      of the grass; all was peace and happiness, it seemed, with the voice of good St. Madron
      murmuring love in his brooklet at hand.</p>
<p>Joan knelt down by the old altar and bowed her head there and prayed to Nature and to God.
      At first merely wordless prayers full of passionate entreaty rose to the Throne; then
      utterance came in a wild simple throng of petitions; and all her various knowledge, won from
      her mother and John Barren, found a place. Pan and Christ might each have heard and listened,
      for she called on the gods of earth and heaven from a heart that was full.</p>
<p>"Kind Mother o' the flowers, doan't 'e forget a poor maiden what loves 'e so dear. I be sad
      an' sore-hearted 'cause things is bad wi' me now Mister Jan's gone; an' I knaws as I've lied
      an' bin wicked 'bout Joe, but, kind Mother, I awnly done what Mister Jan, as was wise an'
      loved me, bid. Oh, God A'mighty, doan't 'E let en forget me, 'cause I've gived up all—all the
      lil I had for en, an' Nature made me as I be. Oh, kind God, make me happy an' light-hearted
      an' strong agin, same as the lil birds an' sich like is happy an' strong; an' forgive me for
      all my sins an' make me well for Mister Jan, an' clever for Mister Jan, so's I'll be a fine
      an' good wife to en. An' forgive me for lyin', 'cause what I done was Nature, 'cordin' to
      Mister Jan; an' Nature's kind to young things, 'cordin' to Mister Jan; an' I be young yet. An'
      make me a better lass, for I caan't abear to feel as I do; an' make me think o' the next world
      arter this wan. But, oh, dear God, make me well an' braave agin, for 'tis awful wisht for me
      wi'out Mister Jan; an' make Mister Jan strong too. I be all in a miz-maze and doan't knaw
      wheer to turn 'cept to Nature, dear Lard. Oh, kind God A'mighty, lemme have my angel watchin'
      over me close, same as what mother used to say he did allus. An' bring Mister Jan back long
      very quick, 'cause I'm nothin' but sadness wi'out en. An', dear St. Madern, I ax 'e to bless
      me same as you done when—when I was a lil baaby, 'cause I be gwaine to bathe in your brook,
      bein' a St. Madern cheel. Oh, dear, good God o' all things, please to help me an' look to me,
      'cause I be very sad, an' I never done no harm to none, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen."</p>
<p>Then she said the Lord's Prayer, because her mother had taught her that no human petition
      was ever heard unless accompanied by it. And it seemed as though the lark, winding upward with
      wide spiral to his song-throne in the sky and tinkling thin music on the morning wind, was her
      messenger: which thought was beautiful to Joan and made her heart glad.</p>
<p>Never had she looked fairer. Her blue eyes were misty, but the magic of prayer, the glory of
      speaking straight to the Father of all, call Him what she might, had nobly fortified her
      sinking spirit. Peace brooded in her soul then, and faith warmed her blood. She was sure her
      prayer would be answered; she was certain that her health and her loved one would both come
      back to her. And she stood by the altar and smiled at the golden morning, herself the fairest
      thing the sun shone upon.</p>
<p>Having peeped shyly about her, Joan took off her clothes, placed them on the altar-stones,
      shook down her hair, and glided softly to the stream. At one point its waters caught the
      sunshine and babbled over white sand between many budding spikes of wild parsley and young
      fronds of fern. Naked and beautiful the girl stood, her bright hair glinting to her waist, all
      rippled with the first red gold of the morning, her body very white save where the sun and
      western wind had browned both arms and neck; her form innocent as yet of the mystery hid for
      her in Time. Joan's fair limbs spoke of blood not Cornish, of days far past when a race of
      giants swept up from behind the North Sea to tread a new earth and take wives of the little
      dark women of the land, abating the still prevalent nigrescence of the Celt with Saxon eyes
      and hair, adding their stature and their strength to races unborn. A sweet embodiment of all
      that was lovely and pure and fresh, she looked—a human incarnation of youth and
      springtime.</p>
<p>There was a pool deeper than the general shallowness of the stream which served for Joan's
      bath, and she entered there, where soft white sand made pleasant footing for her toes, where
      more forget-me-nots twinkled their turquoise about the margin, where shining gorse towered
      like a sentinel above.</p>
<p>She suffered the holy water to flow over every inch of her body, and then, rubbing her white
      self red and glowing with the dead brake fern of last year and squeezing the water out of her
      hair, Joan quickly dressed again and prepared to depart. She was about to leave a fragment
      torn from her skirt hanging by the chapel, but changed her mind, and getting a splinter of
      granite, rough-edged, she began to chip away a tress of her own bright hair, sawing it off
      upon the stone table as best she could. Like a fallen star it presently glimmered in the thorn
      bush above St. Madron's altar where she wound the little lock, presently to bring gold to the
      nests and joy to the heart of small feathered folk.</p>
<p>Joan walked home with the warm blood racing in her veins, roses on her cheeks and the glory
      of hope in her eyes. Already she felt her prayers were being heard; already she was thanking
      God for heeding her cry, and St Madron for the life-giving waters of his holy stream. Thee,
      where finches chattered and fluttered forward, breakfasting together in pleasant company, a
      shadow and a swift, strong wing flashed across Joan's sight—and a hawk struck. The little
      people shrieked, a few gray feathers puffed here and there, and one spark of life was blown
      out that other sparks might shine the brighter. For presently Joan's kind "Mother o' the
      flowers" watched the beaks of fledgeling hawks grow red, and the parent bird of prey's cold
      eyes brightened with satisfaction; as will every parent eye brighten at the spectacle of baby
      things eating wholesome food with hearty appetite.</p>
<p>The death of the small fowl clouded the pilgrim's thoughts, but only for a moment. Sentiment
      and emotion had passed; now she was eager with delicious physical hunger and longing for her
      breakfast. The girl had not felt so well or so happy for a considerable time. Half her prayer,
      she told herself, was answered already; and the other half, relating to "Mister Jan," would
      doubtless meet with similar merciful response ere many hours had flown.</p>
<p>So joyfully homeward out of dreamland into a world of facts Joan hastened.</p>
</div>