<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER NINE</head>
<head>AT SANCREED</head>
<p> Mary Chirgwin would allow none but herself to perform the last offices of kindness for her
      cousin. In poor Joan's pocket she found a wet, crumpled mass of paper which might have been
      dried and read without difficulty, but Mary lacked curiosity to approach the matter. She
      debated with herself as to how her duty stood in connection with the communication from John
      Barron, then took it in her hand, not without a sensation of much loathing, and burned it to
      ashes. The act produced considerable and unforeseen consequences. Her own mundane happiness
      was wholly dependent on the burning of the letter, and a man's life likewise hung upon the
      incident; but these results of her conduct were only brought to the woman's understanding in
      the light of subsequent events. Then, and with just if superficial cause, she directly read
      God's hand in the circumstance. Another discovery saddened Mary far more than that of the
      letter, which had caused her little surprise. Around Joan's white body was a strange
      amulet—the glen-ader. She had sewed it upon flannel, then fastened the ends about herself, and
      so worn the snake skin at all seasons since the finding of it. The fact was nothing, the
      condition of mind which it indicated brought great grief to the discoverer. She judged that
      Joan was little better than heathen after all; she greatly feared that the girl had perished
      but half-believing. Any soul which could thus cherish the slough of a serpent must most surely
      have been wandering afar out of the road of faith. The all-embracing credulity of Joan was, in
      fact, a phenomenon beyond Mary's power to estimate or translate; and her present discovery,
      therefore, caused her both pain and consternation. But as she had burned the letter, so she
      likewise destroyed all evidence of her cousin's superstitious weakness; and of neither one nor
      the other did she speak when the farmer returned to his home.</p>
<p>He was sadly crushed and broken; and the spectacle of his loved one, lying silent and
      peaceful, brought with it deep grief for him. Not until he had seen her and held her dead hand
      did he begin slowly to realize the truth.</p>
<p>"Her mother do lie at Paul 'cordin' to the wish o' Michael, but I seem as Joan had best be
      laid 'long wi' the Chirgwins at Sancreed. If you'll awnly give your mind to the matter an'
      settle it, I'll go this evenin' to wan plaace or t'other an' see the diggers," said Mary.</p>
<p>"Sancreed for sartain. Her'll be nearer to us, an' us can see wheer she be restin' 'pon
      Sundays. Sancreed's best an' fittest, for she was Chirgwin all. They be comin' to sit 'pon her
      tomorrow marnin'. Please God He'll hold me up agin it, but I feels as if I'd welcome death to
      be 'long-side my lil Joan again."</p>
<p>He wept an old man's scanty tears, and Mary comforted him, while she smothered her own real
      sorrows entirely before his. She spoke coldly and practically; she fetched him a stiff dose of
      spirits and a mutton-chop freshly cooked. These things she made him drink and eat, and she
      spoke to the old man while he did so, larding the discussion of necessary details with
      expressions of hope for the dead.</p>
<p>"Be strong, an' faace it, uncle. God knaws best. I lay the poor lovey was took from gert
      evil to come. You knaw so well as me. You can guess wheer her'd be now if livin'. She'm in a
      better home than that. I s'pose the bury-in' might be two days off, or three. I'll step awver
      to Sancreed bimebye, an' if the undertaker come, Mrs. Bartlett can be with him when he do his
      work."</p>
<p>"Iss, an' I've said as 'tis to be oak—braave, bold, seasoned oak, an' polished, wi' silvered
      handles to it. Her should lie in gawld, my awn Joan, if I could bring it about."</p>
<p>"Ellum be more—" began Mary, then held her tongue upon that detail and approached
      another.</p>
<p>"Shall us ask Mrs. Tregenza? Sorrer be gripping her heart just now, but a buryin's a
      soothin' circumstance to such as she. An' she could carry her son in the mind. Poor young Tom
      won't get no good words said above his dust; us can awnly think 'em for him."</p>
<p>"She might like to come if her could get some o' the neighbors to bide along wi' Michael.
      He'm daft for all time, but 'tis said as he'll be childlike wi' it, thank God. I let en knaw
      'bout the lass an' he rolled his head an' dropped his jaw, like to a feesh, an' said as
      'tweern't no news to en. Which maybe it weern't, for the Lard's got His awn way wi' the idiot.
      The sayin's of en! Like as not Thomasin'll be here if 'tis awnly to get the rids of Michael
      for a while."</p>
<p>The coroner's inquest found that Joan Tregenza had come by her death from drowning upon the
      night of the flood; the tragedy filled an obscure paragraph or two in local journals; Joan's
      funeral was fixed for two days later, and Mrs. Tregenza decided that she would attend it.</p>
<p>At a spot where fell the shadow of the church when the sun sank far westerly on summer days,
      they dug the grave in Sancreed churchyard. Round about it on slate slabs and upright stones
      appeared the names of Chirgwins not a few. Her maternal grandparents lay there, her uncle,
      Mary's father, and many others. Some of the graves dated back for a hundred and more
      years.</p>
<p>On the morning of the funeral, Uncle Thomas himself tied scraps of crape around the stems of
      his tall geraniums, according to an ancient custom; and Mrs. Tregenza arrived at Drift in good
      time to join the few who mourned. Six men bore Joan's oaken coffin to Sancreed, while there
      walked behind her, Uncle Chirgwin, Mary and Thomasin, Mr. Bartlett, his wife, Gaffer Polglaze,
      and two farm maidens. A few of the Drift folk and half a dozen young children came in the wake
      of the procession proper; and that was all. The mourners and their dead proceeded along the
      high lanes to Sancreed, and conversation was general. Uncle Chirgwin tugged at his black
      gloves and snuffled, then snuffled and tugged again; Mary walked on one side of him; and Mrs.
      Tregenza, in new and heavy black bought for another, found the opportunity convenient for the
      display of varied grief, as she marched along on the farmer's right hand. Her condition indeed
      became hysterical, and Mary only soothed her with difficulty. So the party crawled within
      sound of the minute bell and presently reached the church. The undertaker buzzed here and
      there issuing directions, an old clergyman met the dead at the lych-gate and walked before her
      up the aisle; while those who had a right to attend the service, clustered in the pews to
      right and left of the trestles. Upon them lay Joan. The words of the service sounded with
      mournful reverberations through the chill echoes of an unwarmed and almost empty church; and
      then the little sister, sleeping peacefully enough after her one short year of storm, was
      carried to the last abode of silence. Then followed an old man's voice, sounding strangely
      thin in the open air, the straining of cords, the sweating and hard breathing and shuffling of
      men, the grating of oak on a grave-bottom, the updrawing of the ropes that had lowered the
      coffin. Genuine grief accompanied the obsequies of Joan Tregenza, and her uncle's sorrow
      touched even men to visible grief and sympathy; but there was no heart to break for the heart
      which had itself come so near to breaking, there was no mighty wellspring of love to be choked
      with tears for one who had herself loved so much. A feeling, hidden in some minds, expressed
      by others, latent in all, pervaded that throng; and there was not one among those present,
      save Thomas Chirgwin, but felt that Providence, harsh till now, had dealt kindly by Joan in
      dealing death to her.</p>
<p>Upon the flowerless, shiny coffin-lid a staring plate of white metal gleamed up at the world
      above like an eye and met the gaze of the mourners, as each in turn, with Mrs. Tregenza first,
      peered down into Joan's grave before departing. After which all went away; the children were
      shut out of the churchyard; the old clergyman disappeared to the vestry; a young florid man,
      with pale hair, tightened his leather belt, turned up his sleeves, watched a grand pair of
      biceps roll up as he crooked his elbows, then, taking a spade, set to work upon the wet mound
      he had dug from the earth the day before to clear those few square feet of space below. As he
      worked, he whistled, for his occupation held no more significance to him than an alternative
      employment: the breaking of stones by the highway side. He could see the black heads of the
      mourners bobbing away upon the road to Drift, and stopped to watch them for a moment. But soon
      he returned to his labor; the earth rose foot by foot, and the strong young man stamped it
      down. Then it bulged and overflowed the full hole; whereupon he patted and hammered it into
      the customary mound and slapped upon it sundry pieces of sodden turf with gaping gashes
      between their edges. The surplus soil he removed in a wheelbarrow, the boards he also took
      away, then raked over the earth-smeared, bruised grass about the grave and so made an end of
      his work.</p>
<p>"Blamed if I ever filled wan quicker'n that," he thought, with some satisfaction; "I
      reckoned the rain must fall afore I'd done, but it do hold off yet seemin'ly."</p>
<p>The man departed, gray twilight fell, and out from the gathering darkness, like a wound on
      the hand of Time, that new-made grave and its fringe of muddy grass stood forth, crude of
      color, raw, unsightly in the deepening monochrome of the gloaming.</p>
<p>At Drift the important meal which follows a funeral was enjoyed with sober satisfaction by
      about fifteen persons. Cold fowls and a round of cold beef formed the main features of the
      repast; Mary poured out tea for the women at her end of the table, while the men drank two or
      three bottles of grocer's sherry among them. The undertaker and his assistants followed when
      the funeral assembly dispersed. Mrs. Tregenza was about to depart in the fly specially ordered
      to take her home when a lawyer, who was of the company, begged she would stay a little
      longer.</p>
<p>"I learn that you are the deceased's stepmother, madam, and as you stand related to the
      parties both now unhappily swept away by Providence—I mean Thomas Tregenza and Joan—it is
      sufficiently clear that you inherit directly the bequest left by the poor girl to her brother.
      I framed her little will myself; failing her own child, her property went to Thomas Tregenza,
      his heirs and assigns—those were the words. The paper is here; the sum mentioned lies at
      interest of three per cent. Let me know when convenient what you would wish to be done."</p>
<p>So the pile of money, at a cost terrible enough, had reached Mrs. Tregenza after all. She
      had been drinking brown sherry as well as tea, and was in a condition of renewed tears
      approaching to maudlin, when the announcement reached her. It steadied the woman. Then the
      thought that this wealth would have been her son's made her weep again, until the fact that it
      was now her own became grasped in her mind. There is a sort of people who find money a
      reasonably good support in all human misfortune, and if Mrs. Tregenza did not entirely belong
      to that callous company, yet it is certain that this sudden afflux of gold was more likely to
      assuage her grief than most things. She presently retired, all tears and care; but at
      intervals, when sorrow rested to regain its strength, the lawyer's information recurred and
      the distractions of mind caused by the contemplation of a future brightened by this wealth
      soothed Thomasin's nerves to an extent beyond the power of religion or any other force which
      could possibly have been brought to bear upon them. She felt that her own position must
      henceforth be exalted in Newlyn, for the effects of the combination of catastrophes led to
      that end. Her husband was the sole care she had left, and physicians foretold no great length
      of days for him. The lugger would be put up to auction, with the drift nets and all pertaining
      thereto. The cottage was already Tregenza property. Thomasin therefore looked through the
      overwhelming misery of the time, counted her moneys and felt comforted without knowing it. As
      for her insane husband, his very sufferings magnified him into a man of importance, and she
      enjoyed the reflected glory of being his keeper. People came from remote villages to listen to
      him, and it was held a privilege among the humbler sort to view the ruin of Michael Tregenza
      and hark to the chaotic ravings of a mind overthrown.</p>
</div>