
CHAPTER SEVEN
UNCLE CHIRGWIN
Joan's first announcement upon the following morning was a regret that the sitting must be
      short.
"We'm mighty busy, come wan thing an' another," she said. "Mother's gwaine to Penzance wi'
      my brother to buy his seafarin' kit; and Uncle Chirgwin, as keeps a farm up Drift, be comin'
      to dinner, which he ain't done this long time; an' faither may by chance be home tu, so like
      as not, for the first bwoats be tackin' back from the islands a'ready."
"You shall stop just as short a time as you choose, Joan. It was very good of you to come at
      all under these circumstances," declared the artist.
"Us be fine an' busy when uncle comes down-long, an' partickler this time, 'cause theer've
      bin a differ'nce of 'pinion 'bout—'bout a matter betwixt him and faither, but now he's wrote
      through the post to say as he'm comin', so 'tis all right, I s'pose, an' us'll have to give en
      a good dinner anyways."
"Of course you must," admitted Barren, working steadily the while.
"He'm a dear sawl, an' I likes en better'n anybody in the world, I think, 'cept faither. But
      he's easier to please than faither, an' so humble as a beggar-man. An' I wants to make some
      cakes for en against tea-time, 'cause when he comes, he bides till candle-lighting or
      later."
Presently the artist bid her rest for a short while, and her thoughts reverted to him and
      the picture.
"I hope as you'm feelin' strong an' no worser, Mister Jan," she said timidly.
He was puzzled for a moment, then recollected that he had mentioned his health to her.
"Thank you very much for asking, Joan. It was good and thoughtful. I am no worse—rather
      better if anything, now I come to think about it. Your Cornish air is kind to me, and when the
      sun shines I am happy."
"How be the picksher farin'?"
"I get on well, I think."
"'Tis cruel clever of 'e, Mister Jan. An' you'll paint me wi' the fuzz all around?"
"That is what I hope to do; a harmony in brown and gold."
"You'll get my likeness tu, I s'pose, same as the photograph man done it last winter to
      Penzance? Me an' Joe was took side by side, an' folks reckoned 'twas the moral of us,
      specially when the gen'leman painted Joe's hair black an' mine yeller for another shillin'
      cost."
"It must have been very excellent."
"Iss, 'twas for sartain."
"What did Mr. Tregenza say of it?"
"Well, faither, he'm contrary to sich things, as I tawld 'e, Mister Jan. Faither said Joe'd
      better by a deal keep his money in his purse; but he let me have the picksher, an' 'tis nailed
      up in a lil frame, what Joe made, at home in the parlor."
She stopped a moment and sighed, then spoke again.
"Faither's a wonnerful God-fearin' man, sure 'nough."
"Is he a God-loving man too, Joan?"
"I dunnaw. That ed'n 'sackly the same, I s'pose?"
"As different as fear and love. I'm not an atom frightened of God myself—no more than I am
      of you."
"Lard! Mister Jan."
"Why should I be? You are not frightened of the air you breathe—yet that is part of God; you
      are not frightened of the gold gorse or the blue sky—yet they are part of God too. God made
      you—you are part of God—a deliberate manifestation of Him. What's the use of being frightened?
      You and I can only know God by the shapes He takes—by the bluebells and the ferns and the
      larks in the sky, and the rabbits and wild things."
His effort to inspire the girl with Nature-worship, though crudely cast in a fashion most
      likely to attract her, yet failed just then, and failed ludicrously. Her mind comprehended
      barely enough to accept his idea in a sense suggested by her acquaintance with fable, and when
      he instanced a rabbit as an earthly manifestation of the Everlasting, she felt she could cap
      the example from her own store of knowledge.
"I reckon I sees what you'm meanin', Mister Jan. Theer's things us calls witch-hares in
      these paarts up-long. The higher-quarter people have seed 'em 'fore now; nothin' but siller
      bullets will kill 'em. They goes loppettin' about down lawnly lanes on moonlight nights, an'
      they draws folks arter 'em. But if you could kill wan of 'em 'tis said as they'd turn into
      witches theer an' then. So you means that God A'-mighty' takes shaapes sometimes same as they
      witches do, doan't 'e?"
"Not quite that, Joan. What I want you to know is that the great Being you call God is
      nearer to you here, on Gorse Point, than in the Luke Gospelers' meeting-house, and He takes
      greater delight in a bird's song than in all your father's prayers and sermons put together.
      That is because the great Being taught the bird to sing Himself, but He never taught your
      father to pray."
"I dunnaw 'sackly what you means, Mister Jan, but I judges you ban't so religious like as
      what faither is."
"Religion came from God to man, Joan, because man wanted it and couldn't get on comfortably
      without it; but theology—if you know what that means—man invented for himself. Religion is the
      light; theology is the candlestick. Never quarrel with any man's candlestick as long as you
      can see his light burning bravely. Mr. Tregenza thinks all men are mistaken but the Luke
      Gospelers—so you told me. But if that is the case, what becomes of all your good Cornish
      saints? They were not Luke Gospelers—at least I don't think they were."
Joan frowned over this tremendous problem, then dismissed it for the pleasanter and simpler
      theme John Barron's last remark suggested.
"Them saints was righteous men anyhow, an' they worked miracles tu, so it ban't no gude
      sayin' they wasn't godly in their ways, the whole boilin' of 'em. Theer's St. Piran, St.
      Michael, St. Austell, St. Blazey, St. Buryan, St. Ives, St. Sennen, St. Levan, an' a many
      more, I could call home if I was to think. Did 'e ever hear tell 'bout St. Neot, Mister
      Jan?"
"'No, Joan; I'm afraid I don't know much about him."
"Not 'bout they feesh?"
"Tell me, while you rest a minute or two."
"'Tis a holy story, an' true as any Bible tale, I should guess. St. Neot had a well, an' wan
      day he seed three feesh a swimmin' in it an' he was 'mazed to knaw how they comed theer. So a
      angel flew down an' tawld en that they was put theer for his eatin', but he must never draw
      out more'n wan at a time. Then he'd all us find three when he comed again. An' so he did; but
      wance he failed sick an' his servant had to look arter his vittles meantime. He was a man by
      the name of Barius, an' he judged as maybe a change of eatin' might do the saint good. So he
      goes an' takes two o' them feesh 'stead o' wan as the angel said. An' he b'iled wan feesh, an'
      fried t'other, an' took 'em to St. Neot; an' when he seed what his man been 'bout, he was
      flustered, I tell 'e. Then the saint up and done a marvelous straange thing, for he flinged
      them feesh back in the well, just as they was, and began praayin' to the Lard to forgive his
      man. An' the feesh comed alive ag'in and swimmed around, though Barius had cleaned 'em, I
      s'pose, an' took the guts out of 'em an' everything. Then the chap just catched wan feesh
      proper, an' St. Neot ate en, an' grawed well by sundown. So he was a saint anyways."
"You can't have a miracle without a saint, of course, Joan?"
"Or else the Lard. But I'll hold in mind what you sez 'bout Him bein' hid in flowers an'
      birds an' sich like, 'cause that's a butivul thing to knaw."
"And in the stars and the sun and the moon, Joan; and in the winds and clouds. See how I've
      got on to-day. I don't think I ever did so much work in an hour before."
She looked and blushed to note her brown frock and shoes.
"You've done a deal more to them fuzzes than what you have to me, seemin'ly," she said.
"That's because the gorse is always here and you are not. I work at the gorse morning after
      morning, when the sun is up, until my fingers ache. You'll see great changes in the picture of
      yourself soon though."
But she was not satisfied, of course misunderstanding the unfinished work.
"You mustn't say anything yet, you know, Joan," added the artist, seeing her pouting
      lips.
"But—but you've drawed me as flat as a cheeld, an' I be round as a wummon, ban't I?" she
      said, holding out her hands that he might see her slight figure. Her blue eyes were clouded,
      for she deemed that he had put an insult upon her budding womanhood. Barren showed no sign of
      his enjoyment, but explained as clearly as possible that she was looking at a thing wholly
      unfinished, indeed scarce begun.
"You might as well grumble with me for not painting your fingers or your face, Joan. I told
      you I was a slow artist; only be patient; I'm going to do all fitting honor to every scrap of
      you, if only you will let me."
"Warmer words had come to his lips, but he did not suffer them to pass. Then the girl's
      beautiful face broke into a smile again. 
"I be nigher eighteen than sebenteen, you knaw, Mister Jan. But, coorse, I hadn't no bizness
      to talk like that to 'e, 'cause what do I knaw 'bout sich things?"
"You shan't see the picture again till it is finished, Joan. It was my fault for showing it
      to you like that, and you had every right to protest. Now you must go, for it's long past
      twelve o'clock."
"I'm afeared I caan't come to-morrer."
"As you please. I shall be here every day, ready and only too glad to see you."
"An'—an' you ban't cross wi' me for speakin' so rude, Mister Jan?"
"Cross, Joan? No, I'm never cross with anybody but myself. I couldn't be cross with my kind
      little friend if I tried to be."
He shook hands; it was the first occasion that he had done so, and she blushed. His hand was
      cold and thin, and she heard one of the bones in it give a little crack as he held her palm
      within his own for the briefest space of time. Then, as usual, the moment after he had said
      "good-by," he appeared to become absolutely unconscious of her presence, and returned to his
      picture.
Joan's mind dwelt much upon the artist after she had departed, and every train of reflection
      came back to the last words Barron spoke that morning. He had called her his kind little
      friend. It was very wonderful, Joan thought, and a statement not to be explained at all. Her
      stepmother's voice cut these pleasant memories sharply, and she returned home to find that
      Uncle Chirgwin had already arrived—a fact his old gray horse, tethered in the orchard, and his
      two-wheeled market cart, drawn up in the side-lane, testified to before Mrs. Tregenza
      announced it.
"Out again, of coorse, just because you knawed I was to be drove off my blessed legs to-day.
      I'll tell your faither of 'e, so I will. Gals like you did ought to be chained 'longside theer
      work till 'tis done."
Uncle Chirgwin sat by the fireside with a placid if bored expression on his round face. His
      hands were folded on his stomach; his short legs were stuck out before him; his head was quite
      bald, his color high, his gray eyes weak, though they had some laughter hidden in them. His
      double chin was shaved, but a very white bristle of stubbly whisker surrounded it and ascended
      to where all that remained of his hair stuck, like two patches of cotton wool, above his ears.
      The old man wore a suit of gray tweed and blinked benignly through a pair of spectacles. He
      had already heard enough of Mrs. Tregenza's troubles to last some time, and turned with
      pleasure to Joan as she entered. So hearty indeed was the greeting and a kiss which
      accompanied it that his niece felt the displeasure which her uncle had recorded by post upon
      the occasion of her engagement to Mary Chirgwin's former sweetheart existed no more.
"My ivers! a braave, bowerly maid you'm grawin', sure 'nough! Joan'll be a wummon 'fore us
      can look round, mother."
"Iss—an' a fine an' lazy wummon tu. I wish you could make her work like what Mary does up
      Drift."
"Well, I dunnaw. You see there's all sorts of girls, same as plants an' 'osses an' cetera.
      Some's for work, some's for shaw. You 'specks a flower to be purty, but you doan't blame a
      'tater plant 'cause 'e ed'n particular butivul. Same wi' 'osses, an' wi' gals. Joan's like
      that chinee plate 'pon the bracket, wi' the pickshers o' Saltash Burdge 'pon en, an' gold
      writin' under; an' Mary's like that pie-dish, what you put in the ubben a while back. Wan's
      for shaw, t'other's for use—eh?"
"Gwan! you'm jokin', Uncle Thomas!" said Joan.
"An' a poor joke tu, so 'tis. You'd turn any gal's 'ead wi' your stuff, Chirgwin. Wheer's
      the gude of a fuzz-pole o' yeller hair an' a pair o' blue eyes stuck 'pon top of a idle,
      good-for-nothin' body? Maidens caan't live by looks in these paarts, an' they'll find
      theerselves in trouble mighty quick if they tries to."
Uncle Chirgwin instantly admitted that Mrs. Tregenza had the better of the argument. He was
      a simple man with a soft heart and no brains worth naming. Most people laughed at him and
      loved him. As sure as he went to Penzance on market-day, he was cordially greeted and made
      much of, and robbed. People suspected that his shrewd, black-eyed niece stood between him and
      absolute misfortune. She never let him go to market without her if she could help it; for, on
      those infrequent occasions when he jogged to town with his gray horse and cart alone, he
      always went with a great trust of the world in his heart and endeavored to conduct the sale of
      farm produce in the spirit of Christianity, which was magnificent but not business. Mr.
      Chirgwin's simple theories had kept him a poor man; yet the discovery, often repeated, that
      his knowledge of human nature was bad, never imbittered him, and he mildly persisted in his
      pernicious system of trusting everybody until he found he could not; unlike his neighbors who
      trusted nobody until they found that they could. The farmer had blazed with indignation when
      Joe Noy flung over Mary Chirgwin because she would not become a Luke Gospeler. But the matter
      was now blown over, for the jilted girl, though the secret bitterness of her sorrow still bred
      much gall in her bosom, never paraded it or showed a shadow of it in her dark face. Uncle
      Thomas greatly admired Mary and even feared her; but he loved Joan, for she was like her dead
      mother outwardly and like himself in character: a right Chirgwin, loving sunshine and
      happiness, herself sunshiny and happy.
"'Pears I've comed the wrong day, Joan," he said presently, when Mrs. Tregenza's back was
      turned, "but now I be here, you must do with me as you can."
"Mother's gwaine to town wi' Tom bimebye; then me an' you'll have a talk, uncle, wi'out
      nothin' to let us. You'm lookin' braave, me auld dear."
He liked a compliment, and anticipated pleasure from a quiet afternoon with his niece. She
      bustled about, as usual, to make up for lost time; and presently, when the cloth was laid,
      walked to the cottage door to see if her father's lugger was at its moorings or in sight.
      Meantime Mrs. Tregenza, having brought forth dinner from the oven, called at the back door to
      her son in a voice harsh and shrill beyond customary measure, as became her exceptional
      tribulations.
"Come in, will 'e, an' ait your food, bwoy. Theer ed'n no call to kick out they boots agin'
      the pig's 'ouse because I be gwaine to buy new wans for 'e presently."
Fired by a word which she had heard from John Barron, that flowers became the house as well
      as the garden, Joan plucked an early sprig of pink ribe and the first buds of wall-flower
      before returning to the kitchen. These she put in a jug of water and planted boldly upon the
      dinner-table as Mrs. Tregenza brought out a pie.
"Butivul, sure 'nough," said Mr. Chirgwin, drawing in his chair. His eye was on the
      pie-dish, but Joan thought he referred to her bouquet.
"Lard! what'll 'e do next? Take they things off the table to wance, Joan."
"But Uncle Thomas sez they'm butivul," she pleaded.
"They be pleasant," admitted Mr. Chirgwin, "but bloody-warriors [Footnote:
       Bloody-warrior—Wall-flower.] be out o' plaace 'pon the dinner-table. I was 'ludin'
      to this here. You do brown a 'tater to rights, mother."
Mrs. Tregenza's shepherd's pies had a reputation, and anybody eating of one without
      favorable comment was judged to have made a hole in his manners. Now she helped the steaming
      delicacy and sighed as she sat down before her own ample share.
"Lard knaws how I done it to-day. 'Tis just a enstance how some things comes nachrul to some
      people. You wants a light hand wi' herbs an' to knaw your ubben. Get the brandy, Joan. Uncle
      allus likes the edge off drinkin' water."
The Tregenzas were teetotalers, but a bottle of brandy for medicinal purposes occupied the
      corner of a certain cupboard.
"You puts it right, mother. 'Tis just the sharpness I takes off. I can't drink no beer
      nowadays, though fond o' it, 'cause 'tis belly-vengeance stuff arter you gets past a certain
      time o' life. But I'd as soon have tea."
"That's bad to drink 'long wi' vlaish," said Mrs. Tregenza. "Tea turns mayte leather-hard
      an' plagues the stomach cruel, as I knaws to my cost."
They ate in silence a while, then, having expressed and twice repeated a wish that Mary
      could be taught to make shepherd's pies after the rare fashion of his hostess, Mr. Chirgwin
      turned to Tom.
"So you'm off for a sailor bwoy, my lad?"
"Iss, uncle, an' mother gwaine to spend fi' puns o' money on my kit."
"By Golles! be she now? I lay you'll be smart an' vitty!"
"That he will!" said Joan, but Mrs. Tregenza shook her head.
"I did sadly want en to be a landsman an' 'prenticed to some good body in bizness. It's
      runnin' 'gainst dreams as I had 'fore the bwoy was born, an' the voice I heard speakin' by
      night arter I were churched by the Luke Gosp'lers. But you knaw Michael. What's dreams to him,
      nor yet voices?"
"The worst paart 'bout 'em, if I may say it, is that they'm so uncommon well acquainted like
      wi' theer awn virtues. I mean the Gosp'lers an' all chapel-members likewise. It blunts my
      pleasure in a good man to find he knaws how good he is. Same as wan doan't like to see a purty
      gal tossin' her head tu high."
"You caan't say no sich thing o' Michael, I'm sure," remonstrated Mrs. Tregenza instantly;
      "he'm that modest wi' his righteousness as can be. I've knawn en say open in prayer, 'fore the
      whole chapel, as he's no better'n a crawlin' worm. An' if he's a worm, what's common folks
      like you an' me? Awnly Michael doan't seem to take 'count in voices an' dreams, but I knaws
      they'm sent a purpose an' not for nort."
Mr. Chirgwin admitted his own ridiculous religious insignificance as contrasted with Gray
      Michael. Indeed the comparison, so little in his favor, amused him extremely. He sipped his
      brandy and water and enjoyed a treacle-pudding which followed the pie. Then, when Joan was
      clearing up and Mrs. Tregenza had departed to prepare for her visit to Penzance, Uncle Thomas
      began to puff out his cheeks, and blow, and frown, and look uneasily to the right and
      left—actions invariably performed when he contemplated certain monetary achievements of which
      he was only too fond. The sight of Mary's eyes upon him had often killed such indiscretions in
      the bud, but she was not present just then, so, with further furtive glances, he brought out
      his purse, opened it, and found a half-sovereign which reposed alone in the splendor of a
      separate compartment. Uncle Chirgwin then beckoned to Tom, who had gone into the garden till
      his mother should be ready to start.
"Good speed to 'e, bwoy," he said, "an' may the Lard watch over 'e by land an' sea. Take you
      this lil piece o' money to buy what you've a mind to; an' knaw you've got a auld man's
      blessin' 'long wi' it."
"Mother," said Tom, a minute later, "uncle have gived me a bit o' gawld!"
She took the coin from him and her eyes rested on it lovingly while the outlines of her face
      grew softer and she moistened her lips.
"First gawld's ever I had," commented Tom.
"You'm 'mazin' generous wi' your moneys, uncle, an' I thank 'e hearty for the bwoy. Mighty
      good of 'e—so much money to wance," said Thomasin, showing more gratification than she
      knew.
"I wants en to be thrifty," answered the old man, very wisely. "You knaws how hard it is to
      teach young people the worth o' money."
"Ay, an' some auld wans! Blest if I doan't think you'd give your head away if 'e could. But
      I'll take this here half-suvrin' for Tom. 'Tis a nest-egg as he shall add to as he may."
Tom did not foresee this arrangement, and had something to say as he tramped off with his
      mother to town; but though he could do more with her and get more out of her than anybody else
      in the world, money was a subject concerning which Mrs. Tregenza always had her way. She
      understood it and loved it and allowed no interference from anybody, Michael alone excepted.
      But he cared not much for money and was well content to let his wife hold the purse; yet when
      he did occasionally demand an account, it was always forthcoming to the uttermost farthing,
      and he fully believed what other people told him that Thomasin could make a sixpenny-piece go
      further than any other woman in Newlyn.
Mother and son presently departed; while Mr. Chirgwin took off his coat, lighted his pipe,
      and walked with Joan round about the orchard. He foretold great things for the plums, now in
      full flower; he poked the pigs with his stick and spoke encouragingly of their future also.
      Then he discussed Joan's prospects and gladdened her heart by telling her the past must be let
      alone and need never be reverted to again.
"Mary's gettin' over it tu," he said, "least-ways I think she is. Her knaws wheer to look
      for comfort, bless her. Us must all keep friendly for life's not long enough to do 'nough good
      in, I allus says, let alone the doin' o' bad."
Then he discussed Joe Noy, and Joan was startled to find, when she came to think seriously
      upon the subject, that though but a week and three days had passed since she bid her lover
      "good-by," yet the picture of him in her mind already grew a trifle dim, and the prospect of
      his absence for a year held not the least sorrow in it for her.
Presently, after looking to his horse, Uncle Thomas hinted at forty winks, if the same would
      be quite convenient, and Joan, settling him with some approach to comfort upon a little
      horsehair sofa in the parlor, turned her attention to the making of saffron cakes for tea.
