
CHAPTER TWO
THE PARTING
Joan had only told her lover a part of what happened in her home when Thomasin broke her
      suspicions to Gray Michael. He had taken the matter very seriously indeed, delivered a stern
      homily and commanded his daughter to read the Book of Ecclesiasticus through thrice.
"'The gad-about is a vain thing and a mighty cause for stumblin'.' You mind that, an' take
      better care hencefarrard to set a right example to other maids an' not lead 'em wrong. Theer
      shan't be no froward liver under this roof, Joan Tregenza, an' you, as be my awn darter's the
      last I'd count to find wanderin'."
She lied as to particulars. She had no fear of her father now as a man, but hard words
      always hurt her, and superstition, though she was fast breaking from many forms of it under
      Barron's tuition, still chained her soul in some directions. Did her father know even a shadow
      of the truth, some dire and blasting prediction would probably result from it, and though
      personally he was little to her now, as a mouthpiece of supernatural powers he might bring
      blighting words upon her; for he walked with God. But Michael's God was Joan's no more. She
      had fled from that awful divinity to the more beautiful Creator of John Barron. He was kind
      and gentle, and she loved to hear His voice in the hum of the bees upon the gorse and see His
      face everywhere in the fair on-coming of spring. Nature, as she understood it now, chimed with
      the things her mother had taught Joan. She found room for all the old, pretty stories in this
      new creed. The dear saints fitted in with it, and their wonders and mysteries, and the
      comprehensive if vague knowledge that "God is Love." She believed she understood the truth
      about religion at last; and Nature smiled very sweetly at her and shared in the delight of the
      time. So she walked dreaming on toward the invisible door of her fool's paradise, and never
      guessed how near it was or what Nature would look like from the other side.
She still dwelt at the little home on the cliff, so unreal and shadowy now; she built cloud
      castles ablaze with happiness; she found falsehood not difficult, for her former absolute
      truthfulness deadened her stepmother's suspicion. Certain lies told at home enabled her to
      keep faith with the artist; and the weather also befriending him, three more sittings in
      speedy succession brought John Barron to the end of his labors. After Joan's exhibition of
      jealousy he was careful to say little about his work and affect no further interest in it. He
      let her chatter concerning the future, told her of his big house in London, and presently took
      care to drop hints from time to time that the habitation was by no means as yet ready to
      receive his bride. She always spoke on the assumption that when the picture was done he would
      leave for London and take her with him. She already imagined herself creeping off to join him
      at the station, sitting beside him in the train, and then rolling away, past Marazion, into
      the great unfamiliar world which lay beyond. And he knew that no such thing would happen. He
      intended that Joan should become a pleasant memory, with the veil of distance and time over it
      to beautify what was already beautiful. He wanted to remember the music of her throbbing
      voice, and forget the words it used to utter. The living girl's part was played and ended.
      Their lives had crossed at right angles and would never meet again. "Nature makes a glorious
      present to Art, and I am privileged to execute the deed of gift," thought Barron; "that is the
      position in an epigram." He felt very grateful to Joan. He knew her arm must have ached often
      enough, but whether her heart would presently do so he hardly felt qualified to judge. The
      incidents of that stormy day might have been buried in time ten years, so faint was his
      recollection of them now. He remembered the matter with no greater concern than the image of
      the shivering negresses in the blue water at Tobago.
And so the picture, called "Joe's Ship," was finished, and while it fell far short of what
      Barron had hoped, yet he knew his work was great and the best thing he had done. A packing
      case for the canvas was already ordered and he expected it upon the identical day that saw his
      farewell to Joan.
Bit by bit he had broken to her that it was not his intention to take her with him, but that
      he must go to his house alone and order things in readiness. Then he would come back and fetch
      her. And she had accepted the position and felt wondrous sad at the first meeting with Barren
      after the completion of the picture. It seemed as though a great link was broken between them,
      and she realized now what folly her dislike of his work had been.
"I wish I could take you right away with me, Joan, my little love; but a bachelor's house is
      a comfortless concern from a woman's point of view. You will hear from me in a day or two. You
      must call at the post-office in Penzance for letters, because I shall not send them here."
"You'll print out what you writes big, so's I doan't miss nort, won't 'e?"
"I'll make the meaning as clear as possible, Joan."
"'Tis wisht to think as theer'll be hunderds o' miles 'twixt us. I doan't know how I be
      gwaine to live the days out."
"Only a fortnight, remember."
"Fourteen whole days an' nights."
"Yes, indeed. It seems a terribly long time. You must comfort me, sweetheart, and tell me
      that they will be very quickly done with."
Joan laughed at this turning of the tables.
"I reckon a man's allus got a plenty things to make time pass for en. But 'tis different wi'
      a gal."
She trusted him as she trusted God to lift the sun out of the eastern sea next morning and
      swing it in its solemn course over heaven. And as there was no fear of danger and no shadow of
      distrust upon her, Joan made a braver parting than her lover expected.
"Some men are coming to see my picture presently," he said, very gently. "I expect my sweet
      Joan would like to be gone before they arrive."
She took the hint, braced her heart for the ordeal, and rose from where they had been
      sitting on Gorse Point. She looked dreamily a moment at the furzes and the place whereon she
      had stood so often, then turned to the man and came close and held up four little spring
      lilies which she had brought with her. Her voice grew unsteady, but she mastered it again and
      smiled at him.
"I brot these for 'e, dear Jan. Us calls 'em butter-an'-eggs, 'cause o' the colors, I
      s'pose. They'm awnly four lil flowers. Will 'e keep 'em? An'—an' give me summat as I can
      knaw's just bin in your hand, will 'e? 'Tis fulishness, dear heart, but I'm thinkin' 'twould
      make the days a dinky bit shorter."
He took the gift, thought a moment, and gave her a little silver ring off his finger. Then
      he kissed her, pressed her close to him and said "good-by," asking God to bless her, and so
      forth.
With but a few tears rebelling against her determination, Joan prayed good upon his head,
      repaid the caress, begged him for his love to come quickly back again, then tore herself away,
      turned and hastened off with her head held bravely up. But the green fields swam and the sea
      danced for her a moment later. The world was all splashed and blotched and misty. "I'll be
      braave like him," she thought, smothering the great sobs and rubbing her knuckles into her
      eyes till she hurt them. But she could not stem the sorrow in a moment, and, climbing through
      a gap in the hedge, she sat down, where only ewes and lambs might see, and cried bitterly a
      while. And so weeping, a sensation, strange, vague, tremendous, came into her being; and she
      knew not what it meant; but the mystery of it filled her with great awe. "'Tis God," she said
      to herself, "'tis God's hand upon me. He've touched me, He've sealed me to dear, dear Jan.
      'Tis a feelin' to bring happiness along with it, nor sorrer." She battled with herself to read
      the wonder aright, and yet at the bottom of her heart was fear. Then physical sensations
      distracted her; she found her head was aching and her body feeling sick. Truly the girl had
      been through an ordeal that day, and so she explained her discomfort. "I be wivvery an' wisht
      along o' leavin' en," she said; "oh! kind, good God A'mighty, as hears all, send en back to
      me, send en back to me very soon, for I caan't live wi'out en no more."
As for the man, he sighed when Joan disappeared; and the expiration of breath was short and
      sharp as the sound of a key in a lock. He had in truth turned the key upon a diary to be
      opened no more; for the sweetness of the closed chapter was embalmed in memory, blazoned on
      canvas. Yet there was bitterness, too, of a sort in his sigh, and the result of this sunken
      twinge at his heart appeared when Brady, Tarrant and one or two other artists presently joined
      him. They saw their companion was perturbed, and found him plunged into a black, cynic fit
      more deeply than usual. He spared no subject, no individual, least of all himself.
Paul Tarrant—a Christian painter, already mentioned—was the first to find fault with
      Barron's picture. The rest had little but praise for it, and Brady, who grew madly
      enthusiastic, swore that "Joe's Ship" was the finest bit of work that ever went out of
      Cornwall. But Tarrant cherished a private grievance, and, as his view of art and ethics made
      it possible for him, from his standpoint, to criticise the picture unfavorably in some
      respects, he did so. It happened that he had recently finished a curious work for the Academy:
      a painting called "The Good Shepherd." It represented a young laboring man with a face of rare
      beauty but little power, plodding homeward under setting sunlight. Upon his arm he bore a
      lamb, and behind his head the sinking sun made a glorious nimbus. Barron had seen this work,
      admired some of the painting, but bluntly sneered at the false sentiment and vulgar parade of
      religious conviction which, as he conceived, animated the whole. And now, the other man, in
      whose heart those contemptuous words still rankled, found his turn had come. He had bitterly
      resented Barron's sarcastic reference to those holy things which guided his life; there was
      something of feminine nature in him too; so he did not much regret the present
      opportunity.
"And you, Tarrant? This gives you scant pleasure—eh?" asked Barron.
"It is very wonderful painting, but there's nothing under the paint that I can see."
"Nothing but the canvas—in so far at least as the spectator is concerned. Every work of art
      must have a secret history only known to its creator." 
"What the divil d'you mean, Paul?" asked Brady.
"You know what I mean well enough," answered the first speaker coldly. "My views are not
      unfamiliar to any of you. Here is a thing without a soul—to me."
"God! you say that! You can look at those eyes and say that?"
"I admire the painting, but cui bono? Who is the better, the wiser? There is
      nothing under the paint." 
"You are one of those who turn shadows into crosses, clouds into angels. Is it not so?"
      asked Barron smiling; and the other fired at this allusion to his best known picture.
"I am one of those who know that Art is the handmaid of God," he answered hotly. "I happen
      to believe in Jesus Christ, and I conceive that no picture is worthy to be called great or
      worthy of any Christian's painting unless it possess some qualities calculated to ennoble the
      mind of those who see. Art is the noblest labor man can employ time upon. The thing comes from
      God; it is a talent only to be employed in the highest sense when devoted to His glory."
"Then what of heathen art? You let your religion distort your view of Nature. You sacrifice
      truth to a dogma. Nature has no ethics. You profess to paint facts and paint them wrong. You
      are not a mystic; that we could understand and criticise accordingly. You try to run with the
      hare and hunt with the hounds. You talk about truth and paint things not true."
"From your standpoint possibly. Yours is the truth of naturalism; mine is the truth of
      Faith."
"If you are going to entrench yourself behind Faith, I have done, of course. Only, don't go
      about saying, as you did just now, that Art is the noblest labor man can employ time upon.
      That's bosh, pure and simple. There are some occupations not so noble, that is all. Art is a
      heathen and always will be, and you missionary-men, with a paint-brush in one hand and a Bible
      in the other, are even worse than certain objectionable literary celebrities, whose novels
      reek of the 'new journalism' and the Sermon on the Mount—the ridiculous and sublime in
      tasteless combination. You missionaries, I say, sap the primitive strength of Art; you
      demoralize her. To dare to make Art pander to a passing creed is vile—worse than the spectacle
      of the Salvation Army trying to convert Buddhists. That I saw in India, and laughed. But we
      won't quarrel. You paint Faith's jewelry; I'll amuse myself with Truth's drabs and duns. The
      point of view is all. I depict pretty Joan Tregenza looking over the sea to catch a glimpse of
      her sweetheart's outward-bound ship. I paint her just as I saw her. There was no occasion to
      leave out or put in. I reveled in a mere brutal transcript of Nature. You would have set her
      down by one of the old Cornish crosses praying to Christ to guard her man. And round her you
      would have wrought a world of idle significance. You would have twisted dogma into the flowers
      and grass-blades. The fact that the girl happened to be practically brainless and a Luke
      Gospeler would not have weighed with you a moment."
"I'm weary of the old cant about Nature," said Tarrant. "You're a naturalist and a
      materialist. That ends it. There is no possibility of argument between us."
"Would the man who painted that gorse cant?" burst out Brady. "Damn it all, Tarrant, if a
      chap can teach us to paint, perhaps he can teach us something else as well. Look at that
      gorse, I tell you. That's the truth, won with many a wrestle and heartache, I'll swear. You
      know as well as I do what went to get that, and yet you say there's nothing behind the paint.
      That's cant, if you like. And as to your religious spirit, what's the good of preaching
      sermons in paint if the paint's false? We're on it now and I'll say what I believe, which is
      that your 'Good Shepherd' is all wrong, apart from any question of sentiment at all. Your own
      party will probably say it's blasphemous, and I say it's ridiculous. You've painted a grand
      sky and then ruined it with the subject. Did you ever see a man's head bang between you and a
      clear setting sun? Any way, that figure of yours was never painted with a sunset behind him,
      I'll swear."
"You can't paint truth as you find it and preach truth as you believe it on the same canvas
      if you belong to any creed but mine," said Barron calmly. "You build on the foundations of Art
      a series of temples to your religious convictions. You blaze Christianity on every canvas. I
      suppose that is natural in a man of your opinions, but to me it is as painful as the spectacle
      of advertisements of quack nostrums planted, as you shall see them, beside railway lines—here
      in a golden field of buttercups, there rising above young barley. Of course, I don't presume
      to assert that your faith is a quack nostrum; only real Art and Religion won't run in double
      harness for you or anybody. They did once, but the world has passed beyond that point."
"Never," answered Tarrant. "We have proof of it. Souls have been saved by pictures. That is
      as certain as that God made the earth and everything on it."
"There again! Every word you speak only shows how difficult it is for us to exchange ideas.
      Why is it so positively certain that God made the earth and everything on it? To attribute
      man's origin direct to God is always, in my mind, the supreme proposition of human conceit.
      Did it need a God to manufacture you or me or Brady? I don't think so. Consider creation. I
      suppose if an ant could gauge the ingenuity of a steam engine, he would attribute it without
      hesitation to God, but it happens that the steam engine is the work of a creature—a being
      standing somewhere between God and the ant, but much nearer the latter than the former. You
      follow me? Even Tarrant will admit, for it is an article of his creed, that there exist many
      beings nearer to God than man. They have wings, he would tell us, and are eternal, immortal,
      everlasting."
"I see," said Brady, "you're going to say next that faulty concerns like this particular
      world are the work of minor intelligences. What rot you can talk at times, old man!"
"Yet is it an honor to God Almighty that we attribute the contents of this poor pill of a
      planet to Him? I think it would be an insult if you ask me. Out of respect to the Everlasting,
      I would rather suppose that the earth, being by chance a concern too small for His present
      purposes, He tosses it, as we toss a dog a bone, to some ingenious archangel with a theory.
      Then you enjoy the spectacle of that seraph about as busy over this notable world as a child
      with a mud pie. The winged one sets to work with a will. A little pinch of life; develops
      under his skillful manipulation; evolution takes its remorseless course through the wastes of
      Time until—behold! the apotheosis of the ape at last. Picture that well-meaning but
      muddle-headed archangel's dismay at such a conclusion! All his theories and conceits—his
      splendid scheme of evolution and the rest—end in a mean but obstinate creature with conscious
      intelligence and an absolute contempt and disregard for Nature. This poor Frankenstein of a
      cherub watches the worm he has produced defy him and refuse absolutely to obey his most
      fundamental postulates or accept his axioms. The fittest survive no more; these gregarious,
      new-born things presently form themselves into a pestilential society, they breed rubbish,
      they—"
"By God! stop it, John," said Murdoch. "Now you're going too far. Look at Tarrant. He'd burn
      you over a slow fire for this if he could. Speak for yourself at any rate, not for us."
"I do," answered the other bitterly. "I speak for myself. I know what a poor, rotten cur I
      am physically and mentally—not worth the bread I eat to keep me alive. And shall I dare say
      that God made me?"
"But what's the end of this philosophy of despair, old chap?" asked Brady; "what becomes of
      your worst of all possible planets?"
"The end? Dust and ashes. My unfortunate workman, having blundered on for certain millions
      of years tinkering and patching and improving his dismal colony, will give the thing up; and
      God will laugh and show him the mistakes and then blot the essay out, as a master runs his pen
      through the errors in a pupil's exercise. The earth grows cold at last, and the herds of
      humanity die, and the countless ages of agony and misery are over. Yes, the poor vermin perish
      to the last one; then their black tomb goes whirling on until it shall be allowed to meet
      another like itself, when a new sun shines in heaven and space is the richer by one more
      star."
"May God forgive you for your profanity, John Barren," said Tarrant. "That He places in your
      hand such power and suffers your brain to breed the devil's dung that fills it, is to me a
      mystery. May you live to learn your errors and regret them."
He turned away and two men followed him. Conversation among those who remained reverted to
      the picture; and presently all were gone, excepting only Barren, who had to wait and see his
      work packed.
Remorse will take strange shapes. His bitter tirade against his environment and himself was
      the direct result of this man's recent experiences. He knew himself for a mean knave in his
      dealings with an innocent girl and the thought turned the aspect of all things into gall.
Solitude brought back a measure of peace. The picture was packed and started to Penzance
      railway-station, while Barron's tools also went, by pony-cart, back to his rooms in Newlyn. He
      was to leave upon the following morning with Murdoch and others who were taking their work to
      the Exhibitions.
Now he looked round the cow-byre before locking it for the last time and returning the key
      to Farmer Ford's boy, who waited outside to receive it. "The chapter is ended," he said to
      himself. "The chapter which contains the best thing that ever I did, and, I suppose, the
      worst, as morals have it. Yet Art happily rises above those misty abstractions which we call
      right and wrong. She resembles Nature herself there. Both demand their sacrifices. 'The white
      martyrdom of self-denial, the red martyrdom of blood—each is a thousand times recorded in the
      history of painting and will be a thousand times again."
