<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER ELEVEN</head>
<head>DISENCHANTMENT</head>
<p>With summer, Nature, proceeding on her busy way, approached again the annual phenomena of
      seed-time and harvest. To Joan, as spring had brought with it a world of mothers, so the
      subsequent season filled Nature with babies; and, in the light of all this newborn life, the
      mothers suffered a change. Now, sorrow-guided, did Joan begin to read under the face of
      things, "to get behind the sunset," as Barren had said in his letter to Murdoch, to realize a
      little of the mystery hidden in green leaves and swelling fruits and ripening grain, to
      observe at least the presence of mystery though she could not translate more than an
      occasional manifestation thereof. She found much matter for wonder and for fear. Visible
      Nature had grown to be a smiling curtain behind which raged eternal struggles for life. Every
      leaf sheltered a tragedy, every bough was a battlefield. The awful frailty of all existence
      began to dawn upon Joan Tregenza, and the discovery left her helpless, lonely, longing for new
      gods. She knew not where to turn. Any brightness from any source had been welcome then.</p>
<p>Disenchantment came with the second visit of the artist to the stream. There; young Murdoch
      had met her and told her that "Mister Jan" was going to write her a letter. Upon which she had
      sung glad songs in a sunlit world and amazed Mary and Uncle Chirgwin alike by the exhibition
      of a sudden and profound happiness. But that longed-for letter never came; weeks passed by;
      the truth rolled up over her life at last; and, as a world seen in a blaze of sunshine only
      dazzles us and conceals its facts under too much light, but reveals the same clear cut and
      distinct at dawn or early twilight, so now Joan's eyes, obscured no more by the blinding
      promise of great joy, began to see her world as it was, her future as it would be.</p>
<p>Strange thoughts came to her on an evening when she stood by the door of the kitchen at
      Drift, waiting for the cart to return from market. It was a cool, gray gloaming, wreathed in
      diaphanous mists born of past ram. These rendered every outline of tree and building vague and
      immense. Where Joan stood, the peace of the time was broken only by a gentle dripping from the
      leaves of a great laurel by the gate which led from the farmyard to the fields. Below it,
      moist ground was stamped with the trident impress of many fowls' feet; and, now and then, a
      feather sidled down from the heart of the evergreen, where poultry, black and white and
      spangled, were settling to roost. A subdued clucking and fluttering marked their hidden
      perches; then came showers of rain-drops from the shining leaves as a bird mounted to a higher
      branch; after which silence fell again.</p>
<p>And Joan found all hope fairly dead at last. There and then, in the misty eveningtide, the
      fact fell on the ear of her heart as though one had spoken it; and henceforth she dated
      disenchantment from that hour. The whole pageant of her romance, with the knightly figure of
      the painter that filled its foreground, shriveled to a scroll no bigger than a curled, dead
      leaf—sere, wasted, ghostly, and light enough to be washed away on a tear, borne away upon a
      sigh.</p>
<p>Then there followed for her prodigious transformations in the panorama of Nature. Seen from
      the standpoint of his great, overwhelming lie to her, the philosophy which this man had
      professed changed in its appearance, and that mightily. He had used his cleverness like a net
      to trap her, and now, though she could not prove his words untrue save in one particular, yet
      that crowning act of faithlessness much tended to vitiate all the beauties of imagination
      which had gone before it. They were lilies grown from a dung-heap. Looking back in the new
      cold sidelight, her life came out clearly with all the color gone from it and the remorseless
      details distinct. And in this survey Nature dwindled to a minor Deity, a goddess with moods as
      many and whims as wild as a woman's. She was unstable, it seemed to Joan then; the immemorial
      solidity and splendor of her had departed; her eyes were not fixed on Heaven any more, nor did
      peace any longer rest within them; they were frightened, terrified, and their wild and furtive
      glances followed one Shadow, reflected one Shape. It stood waiting at the end of all her
      avenues; It peered from the heart of her forests; it wandered on her heaths and moors; it lay
      under the stones in her rivers; it stalked her sea-shores, floated on her waves, rode upon her
      lightning, hid in her four winds; and the Shadow's name was Death. Joan stood face to face
      with it at last and gazed round-eyed at a revelation. She was saddened to find her own story
      told by Nature in many allegories, painted upon the garden, set forth in waste places,
      fashioned by humble weeds, reflected in the small, brief lives of unconsidered creatures. Now
      she imagined herself an ill-shaped apple in the orchard which the mother of all had neglected.
      It was crumpled up on one side, twisted out of its fair full beauty, ruined by some wicked
      influence—a failure. Now she was a fly caught by the gold spider who set his web shaking to
      deceive. Now she was a little bird singing one moment, the next crawling dazed and shaking
      under the paw of a cat. Why should Nature make the strong her favorites and be so cruel to the
      weak? That seemed an ungodly thing to Joan. She had only reached this point. She had no
      inkling of the great cleansing process which removes the dross, the eternal competition from
      which only the cleanest and sweetest and best come forth first. She saw the battle indeed, but
      did not understand the meaning of it any more than the rest of the world which, in the words
      of the weakling Barren, beneath the emblems of a false humanity, keeps its weeds under
      hot-house glasses and, out of mercy to futile individuals, does terribly wrong its
      communities. Our cleansing processes are only valuable so far as they go hand in hand with
      Nature, and where the folly of many fools rejects the wisdom of the wise, there Nature has her
      certain revenge sooner or later. The sins of the State are visited on the children of the
      State, and those who repeal laws which Science, walking hand in hand with Nature, has
      proposed, those who refuse laws which Science, Nature-taught, urges upon Power, do not indeed
      suffer themselves, but commit thousands of others to suffering. So their false sentiment in
      effect poisons the blood-springs of a nation. Religion leads to these disasters, and any
      religion answerable for gigantic human follies is either false or most falsely
      comprehended.</p>
<p>Her uncle still tarried, and Joan, weary of waiting, betook herself and her sorrows to the
      old garden, there to view a spectacle which she never tired of. She watched the evening
      primroses, saw their green bud-cases spring open and the soft yellow leaves tremble out like
      butterflies new come from the chrysalis. She loved these little lemon-colored lamps that
      twinkled anew at every sundown in the green twilight of the garden. She knew their eyes would
      watch through the night and that their reward would be death. Many shriveled fragments marked
      the old blossoms on the long stems, but the crowns of each still put out new buds, and every
      dusk saw the wakening of fresh blossoms heedless of their dead sisters below. "They was killed
      'cause they looked at the sun," thought Joan. "I suppose the moon be theer mistress and they
      should not chaange their god. Yet it do seem hard like to be scorched to death for lookin'
      upward."</p>
<p>What she saw now typified in a dead flower was her own case under a new symbol; but the girl
      wasted no anger on the man who had played with her to make a holiday pleasant, on that mock
      sun whose light now turned to darkness. Her mind was occupied entirely with pity for herself.
      And that fact probably promised to be a sure first step to peace. The lonely void of her life
      must be filled, else Joan was like to go mad; and the filling, left to Faith, might yet be
      happily accomplished. For Faith, if no more than a "worm with diamond eyes" yet has eyes of
      diamonds, and rainbows are the arches of her shape. Faith is fair and a very heart-companion
      to those who know her and love her courts; and Joan, of all others, was best endowed by
      disposition and instinct for the possession of her. Faith had slept in the girl's heart since
      her mother died; but, sleeping, had grown, and now waited in all strength to be called to a
      great task. The void was at its deepest just now; the lowest note of Joan's soul had sounded;
      the facts of her ruin and desertion were fully accepted at last; and such knowledge served
      even to turn the growing mother in her sour for a time. Maternal instinct stood still just a
      little while at this point in the girl's inner life; then, when all things whirled away to
      chaos; on this night, when nothing remained sure for her but death; in her hour of ultimate,
      unutterable weakness and at the dawn of a blank despair, came one last plea from Uncle
      Chirgwin. Mary had given up talking, fairly wearied out and convinced that to waste more words
      on Joan would be a culpable disposal of time; but Mr. Chirgwin blundered doggedly on with the
      humility of a worm and the obstinacy of a friendly dog. He hammered at the portals of Joan's
      spiritual being with admirable pertinacity; and at length he had his reward. Faith in
      something being an absolute and vital essential to the welfare of every woman, Joan Tregenza
      was no exception to the rule.</p>
<p>It fell out on the night of her uncle's weekly visit to market, that Joan had just returned
      from the garden, when she heard the clatter of the spring-cart. It drew up at the kitchen door
      and Mary alighted with Mr. Chirgwin. The baskets that had started laden with eggs, butter and
      other produce came back empty save for a few brown paper parcels. Exceptional prices had ruled
      in the market-place that day, so Mr. Chirgwin and his niece returned home in excellent
      temper.</p>
<p>They all met at supper, together with those farm-servants who took their meals at the
      farmer's table. Then the laborers and the women workers withdrew; Mary sat down to a little
      sewing before bedtime; and Mr. Chirgwin smoked his pipe and looked at Joan. He noticed that
      the weather reflected much upon her moods. She was more than usually silent tonight despite
      the bright news from market.</p>
<p>Presently Mary put on the kettle and brought out a bottle of rum. Her uncle had taken his
      nightcap of spirit and water from her hand for nearly ten years, and the little duty of
      preparing it was dear to her. She also made cups of tea for Joan and herself. Mary often
      blamed herself for this luxury and only allowed it on the night that ended those arduous
      duties proper to market-day. "While thus employed, both she and Uncle Thomas tried to draw
      Joan out of her gloomy silence.</p>
<p>"Theer's to be a braave sight o' singin' down to Penzance come next week, Joan. Lunnon
      folks, they tell me, wi' names a foot tall stuck 'pon the hoardings. Us thot 'twould be a
      pleasin' kind o' junketin' to go an' listen. Not but entertainments o' singin' by night be
      mighty exciting to the blood. Awnly just for wance, Polly reckoned it might do us all good.
      An' Polly knaws what's singin' an' what edn' so well as any lass. The riders [Footnote:
       <hi>The riders</hi>—A circus.] be comin' likewise, though maybe that's tu wild an' savage
      amoosment for quiet folks."</p>
<p>"You an' Polly go to the singin' then. 'Tedn' for the likes o' me."</p>
<p>Then Joan turned to her cousin, who was pouring tea out of a little pot which held two cups
      and no more.</p>
<p>"Let me have the last nine drops, Polly; they'm good for the heartache, an' mine's more'n
      common sore to-night."</p>
<p>Mary sighed, opened her mouth to preach a sermon, but shut it without a word. She drained
      the teapot into Joan's cup, and then, from a bright mood for her, relapsed into cold silence.
      Uncle Chirgwin, however, prattled on about the concert until his elder niece finished her tea
      and went to bed. Then he put down his pipe, took a long pull at his drink, and began to talk
      hurriedly to Joan.</p>
<p>"I bin an' got a wonnerful fine notion this day, drivin' home-long, Joan; an' it's comed
      back an' back that importuneous that I lay it's truth, an' sent for me to remember. D'you knaw
      that since you comed to Drift us have prospered uncommon? Iss, us have. The winter dedn' give
      no mighty promise, nor yet the spring, till you comed. Then the Lard smiled 'pon Drift. Look
      at the hay what's gwaine to be cut, God willin', next week. I never seed nothin' more butivul
      thick underneath in all my days. A rare aftermath tu, I'll warrant. 'Tis so all round. The
      wheat's kernin' somethin' cruel fine—I awnly wish theer was more of it—an' the sheep an'
      cattle's in braave kelter likewise. Then the orchard do promise no worse. I never seed such a
      shaw of russets an' of quarantines 'pon they old trees afore."</p>
<p>"'Tis a fine, fair season."</p>
<p>"Why, so I say—a 'mazin' summer thus far—but what's the reason o't? That's the poser as an
      answer comed to in the cart a drivin' home. You'm the reason! You mind when good Saint Levan
      walked through the fields that the grass grawed the greener for his tread, an' many days
      arter, when he'd gone dead years an' years, the corn allus comed richest 'long the path what
      he trod. An' 'tis the same here, 'cause God's eye be on you, Joan Tregenza, an' His eye caan't
      be fixed 'pon no spot wi'out brightening all around. You mind me, that's solemn truth. The
      Lard's watchin' over you—watchin' double tides, as the sailors say—and so this bit o' airth's
      smilin' from the herb o' the field to the biggest tree as graws. He'm watchin' over Drift for
      your sake, my girl, an' the farm prospers along o' the gert goodness o' the watchin' Lard. Iss
      fay, He fills all things livin' with plenshousness, an' fats the root an' swells the corn
      'cause He'm breathin' sweet over the land—'cause He'm wakin' an' watchin' for you, Joan."</p>
<p>"He'm watchin' all of us, I s'pose—just to catch the trippin' footstep, like what faither
      sez. He abbun no call to worry no more 'bout me, I reckon. I be Nature's cheel, I be; an' my
      mother's turnin' hard too—like a cat, as purrs to 'e wan moment an' sclows 'e the next. My
      day's done. I've chose wrong an' must abide by it. But 'tis along o' bein' sich a lil fool.
      Nature pushes the weak to the wall. I've seed that much 'o late days. I was born to have my
      heart broke, I s'pose. 'Tedn' nothin' very straange."</p>
<p>"I judge your angel do cry gert tears when you lets on like that, my Joan. Oh, gal, why
      won't 'e give ear to me, as have lived fifty an' more winters in the world than what you have?
      Why caan't 'e taste an' try what the Lard is? Drabbit this nonsense 'bout Nature! As if you
      was a fitcher, or an 'awk, or an owl! Caan't 'e see what a draggle tail, low-minded pass all
      this be bringin' 'e to? Yet you'm a thinkin' creature an' abbun done no worse than scores o'
      folks who be tanklin' 'pon harps afore the throne o' God this blessed minute. You chose wrong;
      you said so, an' I was glad to hear 'e, for you never 'lowed even that much till this night.
      What then? Everybody chooses wrong wan time or another. Some allus goes for it, like the
      bud-pickers to the red-currant bushes, some slips here an' theer, an' do straightway right
      'emselves—right 'emselves again an' again. The best life be just a slippin' up an' rightin'
      over an' over, till a man dies. You've slipped young an' maybe theer's half a cent'ry o' years
      waitin' for 'e to get 'pon the right road; yet you sez you must abide by what you've done.
      Think how it stands. You've forgived him as wronged 'e, an' caan't the Lard forgive as easy as
      you can? He forgived you 'fore you was born. I lay the Luke Gosp'lers never told 'e that
      braave fact, 'cause they doan't knaw it theerselves. 'Tis like this: your man did take plain
      Nature for God, an' he did talk fulishness 'bout finding Him in the scent o' flowers, the hum
      o' bees an' sichlike. Mayhap Nature's a gude working God for a selfish man, but she edn' wan
      for a maid, as you knaws by now. Then your faither—his God do sit everlastingly alongside
      hell-mouth, an' laugh an' girn to see all the world a walkin' in, same as the beasts walked in
      the Ark. Theer's another picksher of a God for 'e; but mark this, gal, they be lying
      prophets—lying prophets both! You've tried the wan, an' found it left your heart hollow like,
      an' you've tried t'other an' found that left it no better filled; now try Christ, will 'e—?
      Just try. Doan't keep Him, as is allus busy, a waitin' your whims no more. Try Christ, Joan
      dearie, an' you'll feel what you've never felt yet. I knaw, as put my 'and in His when 'twas
      plump an' young as yourn. An' He holds it yet, now 'tis shriveled an' crooked wi' rheumatics.
      He holds it. Iss, He do."</p>
<p>The old man put out his hand to Joan as he spoke and she took it between her own and kissed
      it.</p>
<p>"You'm very good," she said, "an' you'm wise 'cause you'm auld an' have seen many years. I
      prayed to Saint Madern to hear me not long since, an' I bathed in his waters, an' went home
      happy. But awnly the birds an' the rabbits heard me. An' next day faither turned me out o' his
      house an' counted me numbered for hell."</p>
<p>"Saints be very well, but 'tedn' in 'cordance with what we'm tawld nowadays to pray to any
      but the Lard direct."</p>
<p>He pleaded long and patiently, humbly praying for the religion which had lightened his own
      road. The thought of his vast experience and the spectacle of his own blameless and simple
      life, as she reviewed it, made Joan relent at last. The great loneliness of her heart yearned
      for something to fill it. Man had failed her, saints had failed her; Nature had turned cold;
      and Uncle Chirgwin held out a great promise.</p>
<p>"Ban't no sort o' use, I'm thinkin'," she said at last, "but if you'm that set 'pon it I'll
      do your wish. I owe you that an' more'n that. Iss, I'll come along wi' you an' Mary to
      Sancreed church next Sunday. 'Tis lil enough to do for wan as have done so much for me."</p>
<p>"Thank God!" he said earnestly. "That's good news, to be sure, bless your purty eyes! An'
      doan't 'e go a tremblin' an' fearin', you mind, like to meetin'. 'Tedn' no ways like that.
      Just love o' the Lard an' moosic an' holy thots from passon, an' not more hell-fire than keeps
      a body healthy-minded an' awake. My ivers! I could a'most sing an' dance myself now, an' arter
      my day's work tu, to think as you'll sit alongside o' me in church come Sunday!"</p>
<p>Joan smiled at his enthusiasm on her behalf, then kissed him and went to bed; while he,
      mixing up his prayers, his last pipe, and his final glass of spirits according to his custom,
      sat the fire out while he drank deeper and prayed harder than usual in the light of his
      triumph.</p>
<p>"Polly couldn' do it, not for all her brains an' godliness," he murmured to himself, "yet
      'twas given to an auld simple sawl like me! An' I have. I've led her slap-bang into the hand
      o' the Lard, an' the rest be His business. No man's done a better day's work inside Cornwall
      to-day than what I have—that's sure!"</p>
</div>