
CHAPTER FOUR
A GLEN-ADER
"A new broom sweeps clean, but 'tis the auld wan as is good for corners," said Uncle
      Chirgwin, when with his nieces he sat beside the kitchen fire that night and discussed the
      events of the day.
"By which I means," he added, "that these new-fangled ways of approaching the A'mighty may
      go to branch and trunk an' make a clean sweep o' evil, but they leaves the root o' pride
      stickin' in a man's sawl. 'Tis the auld broom as Christ brought in the world as routs into the
      dark corners like nothin' else."
"I be glad you spawk to en," said Mary. "Seed sawed do bring forth fruit in a 'mazin''
      way."
"I reckoned he'd a smote me, but he dedn'. He just turned rosy red an' stood glazin' at me
      as if I was a ghost."
"I never see en look like that afore," declared Joan; "he 'peared to be afeared. But the
      door's shut 'gainst me now. I caan't do no more'n I have done. He'll never forgive."
"As to that, Joan, I won't say. You bide quiet till the seed sprouts. I lay now as you'll
      hear tell about your faither an' maybe get a message from en 'fore the year's a month
      older."
With which hopeful prediction Uncle Chirgwin ended the discussion.
That night the circular storm, which had died away at dark, turned upon itself and the wind
      moaned at window latches and down chimneys, prophesying autumn. Dawn broke on a drenched, gray
      world, but the storm had clean passed, and at noon the gray brightened to silver and burned to
      gold when the sun came out. The wind wore to the west, and on to northwest; the weather
      settled down and days of a rare late summer pursued their even way.
A fortnight passed, and the farmer's belief that Gray Michael would communicate with his
      daughter began to waver.
"Pharaoh's a soft-'earted twoad to this wan," he declared gloomily. "It do beat me to
      picksher sich a man. I've piped to en hot an' strong, as Joan knaws, but he ban't gwaine to
      dance 'tall seemin'ly. Poor sawl! When the hand o' the Lard do fall, God send 'twon't crush en
      all in all. 'Saved'—him—dear, dear!"
"The likes of Tregenza be saved 'pon St. Tibbs Eve, [Footnote: St. Tibbs
      Eve—Equivalent to the "Greek Calends."] I reckon, an' no sooner," answered Mary
      scornfully. Then she modified her fiery statement according to her custom, for the woman's
      zeal always had first call upon her tongue, and her judgment usually took off the edge of
      every harsh statement immediately upon its utterance.
"Leastways 'tis hard to see how sich bowldashious standin' up in the eye o' God should
      prosper. But us can be saved even from our awnselves, I s'pose. So Tregenza have got his
      chance along o' the best." 
Joan never resented the outspoken criticisms on her parent. She listened, but rarely joined
      the discussion. The whole matter speedily sank to a position of insignificance. Her own mind
      was clear, and the deadlock only cut off one more outer interest and reduced Life's existing
      influences to a smaller field. She drew more and more into herself, slipped more and more from
      out the routine life of Drift. She became self-centered, and when her body was not absent, as
      happened upon most fine days, her mind abstracted itself to extreme limits. She grew shy of
      fellow-creatures, found no day happy of which a part had not been spent beside a cross, showed
      a gradual indifference to the services of the church which not long since had attracted her so
      strongly and braced the foundations of her soul. There came at last a black Sunday when Joan
      refused to accompany Mary and the farmer to morning worship at Sancreed. She made no excuse,
      but designed a pilgrimage of more than usual length, and, having driven as far as the church
      with her uncle and cousin, left them there and walked on her way. Even the fascinations of a
      harvest festival failed to charm her; and the spectacle of fat roots, mighty marrows, yellow
      corn and red apples on the window-ledges, of grapes and tomatoes, flowers and loaves upon the
      altar, pulpit and font, did not appeal overmuch to Joana—a fact perhaps surprising.
With a plump pasty of meat and flour in her pocket and one of Uncle Chirgwin's
      walking-sticks to help her footsteps, Joan went on her way, passed the Wesleyan Chapel of
      Sancreed, and then maintained a reasonably direct line to her destination by short cuts and
      field paths. She intended to visit Mên Scryfa, that famous "long stone" which stands away in a
      moor croft beyond Lanyon. She knew that it was no right cross, but she remembered it well,
      having visited the monument frequently in the past. It was holy with infinite age, and the
      writing upon it fascinated her as a mystery fascinates most of us.
The words, "Rialobrani Cunovali Fili," which probably mark the fact that Rialobran,
      son of Cunoval, some Brito-Celtic chieftain of eld, lies buried not far distant, meant nothing
      to Joan, but the old gray-headed stone, perhaps the loneliest in all Cornwall, was pleasant to
      her thoughts, and she trudged forward gladly with her eyes open for all the beauties of a
      smiling world.
Summer clouds, sunny-hearted and towering against the blue, dropped immense shadows on the
      glimmering gold of much stubble and on the wastes of the moor rising above them. In the
      cornfields, visible now that the crops were cut and gathered into mows, stood little
      gray-green islands—a mark distinctive of Cornish husbandry. Here grew cow-cabbages in rank
      luxuriance, on mounds of manure which would be presently scattered over the exhausted land.
      The little oases in the deserts of the fields were too familiar to arrest Joan's eye. She
      merely glanced at the garnered wheat and thought what a brief time the arrish geese, stuffing
      themselves in the stubble, had yet to live. A solemn, splendid peace held the country-side,
      and hardly a soul was abroad where the road led upward to wild moor and waste. Sometimes a
      group of calves crowding under the shady side of hedges regarded Joan with youthful interest;
      sometimes, in a distant coomb-bottom, where blackberries grew, little sunbonnets bobbed above
      the fern and a child's shrill voice came clear to her upon the wind. But the loneliness grew,
      and, anon, turning from her way a while, the traveler sat on the gray crown of Trengwainton
      Carn to rest and look at the wide world.
From the little tor, over undulations of broad light and blue shadow, Joan could see afar to
      Buryan's lofty tower, to Paul above the sea, to Sancreed's sycamores and to Drift beyond them.
      Wild sweeps of fell and field faded on the sight to those dim and remote hues of distance only
      visible upon days of exceeding aerial brilliancy. Immediately beneath the eminence subtended
      ragged expanses of rainbow-colored heath and fern and furze spotted with small fir trees which
      showed blue against the tones of the moor. The heather's pink clearly contrasted with the
      paler shades of the ling, and an additional silvery twinkle of light inhabited the latter
      plant, its cause last year's dead white branches and twigs still scattered through the living
      foliage and flower. Out of a myriad bells that wild world spoke, and the murmur of the heath
      came as the murmur of a wise voice to the ear on which it fell. There was a soul in the day;
      it lived, and Joan looked into the eyes of a glorious, conscious entity, herself a little part
      of the space-filling whole.
Presently, refreshed by brief rest, the pilgrim journeyed on over a road which climbs the
      moor above deep fox-covers of rhododendron, already mentioned as visible from Madron chapel.
      The way dipped presently, crossed a rivulet and mounted again past the famous cromlech of
      Lanyon. But Joan passed the quoit unheeding, and kept upon flint roads through Lanyon farm,
      where its irregular buildings stretch across the hill-crest. She saw the stacks roped
      strangely in nets with heavy stones to secure them against winter gales; she observed the
      various familiar objects of Drift repeated on a greater scale; then, going down hill yet
      again, Joan struck up the course of another stream and passed steadily over broad,
      granite-dotted tangles of whin, heather and rank grasses to her destination. Here the heath
      was blasted and scarred with summer fires. Great patches of the waste had been eaten naked by
      past flames, and Mên-an-tol—the "crick-stone"—past which she progressed, stood with its lesser
      granite pillars in a dark bed of scorched earth and blackened furze-stems stripped bare by the
      fire. She stood in a wide, desolate cup of the Cornish moor. To the south Ding-Dong Mine
      reared its shattered chimney-stack, toward the northwest Carn Galvas—that rock-piled fastness
      of dead giants—reared a gray head against the blue. A curlew piped; a lizard rustled into a
      tussock of grass where pink bog-heather and seeding cotton grasses splashed the sodden ground;
      a dragon-fly from the marsh stayed a moment upon Mên-an-tol, and the jewel of his eyes was a
      little world holding all the colors of the larger.
Joan, keeping her way to where Carn Galvas rose over the next ridge, walked another few
      hundred yards, crossed a disused road, climbed a stony bank, and then stood in the little
      croft sacred to Mên Scryfa. At the center, above a land almost barren save for stunted heath
      and wind-beaten fern it rose—a tall stone of rough and irregular shape. The bare black earth,
      in which shone quartz crystals, stretched at hand in squares. From these raw spaces, peat had
      been cut, to be subsequently burned for manure; and it stood hard by stacked in a row of
      beat-burrows or little piles of overlapping pieces, the cut side out. Near the famous old
      stone itself, surmounting a barrow-like tumulus, grew stunted bracken; and here Joan presently
      sat down full of happiness in that her pilgrimage had been achieved. The granite pillar of Mên
      Scryfa was crested with that fine yellow-gray lichen which finds life on exposed stones; upon
      the windward side clung a few atoms of golden growth; and its rude carved inscription
      straggled down the northern face. The monument rose sheer above black corpses of crooked
      furze, for fire had swept this region also, adding not a little to the prevailing sobriety of
      it, and only the elemental splendor of weather and the canopy of blue and gold beneath which
      spread this desolation rendered it less than mournful. Even under these circumstances
      imagination, as though rebelling against the conditions of sunshine and summer then
      maintaining, leaped to picture Mên Scryfa under the black screaming of winter storm or rising
      darkly upon deep snows; casting a transitory shadow over a waste ghastly blue under flashes of
      lightning, or throbbing to its deep roots when thunder roared over the moor and the levin
      brand hissed unseen into quag and fen.
The double crown of Carn Galvas fronted Joan as she presently sat with her back resting
      against the stone; and a medley of the old thoughts rose not unwelcome in her mind. Giant
      mythology seemed a true thing in sight of these vast regular piles of granite; and the thought
      of the kind simple monsters who had raised that earn led to musings on the "little people."
      Her mind brooded over the fairies and their strange ways with young human mothers. She
      remembered the stories of changelings, and vowed to herself that her own babe should never be
      out of sight. These reflections found no adverse criticism in faith. The Bible was full of
      giants; and if no fairies were mentioned therein, she had read nothing aimed against them.
      Presently she prayed for the coming child. Her soul went with the words; and they were
      addressed with vagueness as became her vague thoughts, half to Mên Scryfa, half to God, all in
      the name of Christ.
Going home again, after noon, Joan found a glen-ader, [Footnote: Glen-ader—The cast
      skin of an adder. Once accounted a powerful amulet, and still sometimes secretly preserved by
      the ignorant, as sailors treasure a caul.] which circumstance is here mentioned to illustrate
      the conflicting nature of those many forces still active in her mind. That they should have
      coexisted and not destroyed each other is the point of most peculiarity. But it seemed for a
      moment as though the girl had intellectually passed at least that form of superstition
      embraced by coveted possession of a glen-ader; for, upon finding the thing lying extended like
      a snake's ghost, she hesitated before picking it up. The old tradition, however, sucked in
      from a credulous parent with much similar folly at a time when the mind accepts impressions
      most readily, was too strong for Joan. Qualms she had, and some whisper at the bottom of her
      mind was heard with a clearness sufficient to make her uncomfortable, but reason held a feeble
      citadel at best in Joan's mind. The whisper died, memory spoke of the notable value which wise
      men through long past years had placed upon this charm, and in the face of the future it
      seemed wicked to reject a thing of such proven efficacy. So she picked up the adder's slough,
      designing to sew it upon a piece of flannel and henceforth wear it against her skin until her
      baby should be born. But she determined to tell neither Mary nor her uncle, though she did not
      stop to ask why secrecy thus commended itself to her.
That evening Mary came primed from church-going with grave admonition, Mr. Chirgwin was
      tearful, and hinted at his own sorrow arising from Joan's backsliding, but Mary did not mince
      language and spoke what she thought.
"You'm wrong, an' you knaw you'm wrong," she said. "The crosses be very well, an' coorious,
      butivul things to see 'pon the land tu, but they'm poor food to a body's sawl. They caan't
      shaw wheer you'm out; they caan't lead 'e right."
"Iss they can, then, an' they do," declared Joan. "The more I bide along wi' 'em the better
      I feel an' the nearer to God A'mighty, so theer! They'm allus the same, an' they puts thots in
      my head that's good to think; an' I must go my ways, Polly, same as you go yours."
When night came Joan slept within the mystic circumference of the glen-ader; and that she
      derived a growing measure of mental satisfaction from its embrace is unquestionable.
