
CHAPTER V.
"There are no more by-path meadows where you may innocently linger, but the road lies
       long and straight and dusty to the grave. You may think you had a conscience and believed in
       God; but what is conscience to a wife?.... To marry is to domesticate the Recording Angel.
       Once you are married, there is nothing left for you—not even suicide—but to be
      good."
There is no particular reason why Burgoyne should not impart to his companion what he
      knows—after all it is not very much—about their two countrywomen. Upon reflection he had told
      himself this, and conquered a reluctance, that he cannot account for, to mentioning their
      name; and to relating the story of those shadowy idyllic two months of his life, which form
      all of it that has ever come into contact with theirs. So that by the time—some thirty-six
      hours later—when they reach Florence, the younger man is in possession of as much information
      about the objects of their common interest as it is in the power of the elder one to
      impart.
To neither of them, meanwhile, is any second glimpse vouchsafed of those objects,
      eagerly—though with different degrees of overtness in that eagerness—as they both look out for
      them among the luggage-piles and the tweed-clad English ladies at the station. It had been the
      intention of Burgoyne that he and his friend should put up at the same hotel as that inhabited
      by his betrothed and her family; hut, finding that it is full, he orders rooms at the Minerva,
      and in the fallen dusk of a rather chill spring night, finds himself traversing the short
      distance from the railway to that hotel.
As he and Byng sit over their coffee after dinner in the salle à manger, almost its
      only tenants at that late hour, the younger man remarks matter-of-factly, as if stating a
      proposition almost too obvious to be worth uttering—
"I suppose you are off to the Anglo-Américain now."
"I think not," replies Jim slowly; "it is past ten, you see, and they are early people." He
      adds a moment later, as if suspecting his own excuse of insufficiency, "Mr. Wilson is rather
      an invalid, and there is also an invalid or semi-invalid sister; I think that I had better not
      disturb them to-night."
Byng has never been engaged to be married, except in theory, and it is certainly no business
      of his to blow his friend's flagging ardour into flame, so he contents himself with an
      acquiescent observation to the effect that the train must have been late. But at all events
      the next morning finds Burgoyne paying his fiacre at the door of the Anglo-Américain, with the
      confidence of a person who is certain of finding those he seeks, a confidence justified by the
      result; for, having followed a waiter across a courtyard, and heard him knock at a door on the
      ground-floor, that door opens with an instantaneousness which gives the idea of an ear having
      been pricked to catch the expected rap, and the next moment, the intervening garçon
      having withdrawn, Jim stands face to face with his Amelia. Her features are all alight with
      pleasure, but her first words are not particularly amorous.
"Would you mind coming into the dining-room? Sybilla is in the drawing-room already this
      morning. She said she was afraid it was going to be one of her bad days, so I thought" (rather
      regretfully) "that possibly she would be a little later than usual in coming down; but, on the
      contrary, she is much earlier."
It is possible that an extremely ardent love may be independent of surroundings; may burn
      with as fierce a flame, when its owner or victim is seated on a hard horsehair chair beside a
      dining-room table, in a little dull hotel back room, as when the senses are courted by
      softly-cushioned lounges, penetrating flower-scents, and cunningly arranged
       bric-à-brac; but perhaps Jim's passion is not of this intense and Spartan quality.
      At all events a chill steals over him as Amelia leads the way into that small and uncheerful
      chamber where the Wilson family daily banquet. He is not so lost to all sense of what England
      and Amelia expect of him as not to take her in his arms and kiss her very kindly and warmly,
      before they sit down on two hard chairs side by side; and even when they have done so, he
      still holds her hand, and kisses it now and then. He has a great many things to say to her,
      but "out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh" is not invariably true. Sometimes
      that very abundance clogs the utterance, and, after a ten months' separation, the hinges of
      even lovers' tongues are apt at first to be somewhat rusty.
"And are you really glad to see me again?" asks the woman—she is scarcely a girl, having the
      doubtful advantage of being her betrothed's senior by two years. The horsehair chairs are
      obviously powerless to take the edge off her bliss; and she can scarcely command her voice as
      she asks the question.
"I decline to answer all such futile inquiries," replies he, smiling not unkindly; but there
      is no tremor in his voice. "Even if I did not discourage them on principle, I should have no
      time to answer them to-day; I have so much to say to you that I do not know where to
      begin."
"After ten months that is not very surprising," rejoins she, with a stifled sigh. There is
      no sentimental reproach in her words or tone; but in both lurks a note of wistfulness which
      gives his conscience a prick.
"Of course not! of course not!" he rejoins hastily; "but it is not really ten months—no,
      surely——"
"Ten months, one week, two days, four hours and a half!"
Against such exactitude of memory what appeal has he? He attempts none, and only thinks with
      a faint unjust irritation that she might have spared him the odd hours.
"And how are things going? How are you all getting on?" he asks, precipitating himself upon
      a fresh subject, since he feels prevented by circumstances from saying anything likely to
      bring him much distinction upon the old one. "Your father?"
"His throat is better"—with an accent of hesitating filial piety, as if there were something
      else about him that was not better.
"And Sybilla?"
"Oh, poor Sybilla! she has her bad days now and then."
"And, like the early Christians, she resolves to have all things in common. I expect that
      her family have their bad days too," says Jim dryly.
"Well, we do sometimes," replies Amelia with reluctant admission; "but she really does try
      to control herself, poor thing; she is hardly ever unbearable now."
"And Cecilia?"
"She is rather in trouble just now; I fear there is no doubt that the man she was engaged to
      has thrown her over. You never saw him? Oh no! Of course, the affair came on after you left
      England."
Burgoyne's eyebrows have gone up, and his face has assumed an expression less of surprise
      than admiration at this piece of news.
"How many does that make? Four? Well, courage! There is luck in odd numbers; perhaps she
      will land the fifth."
"She will tell you about it herself," says Amelia; "she tells everybody; she likes talking
      about it—it is very odd, but she does. When you throw me over"—rubbing his hand which she
      holds, with shy and deprecating caressingness, against her own cheek—"I shall tell nobody; I
      shall keep my misfortune very dark."
"When I do!" repeats he with laughing emphasis; but to his own ear both the emphasis and the
      laughter sound flat. This is perhaps the cause why he, a second time, runs away from his
      subject; or, more probably, he is really in haste to get to the new one. "Meanwhile," he says,
      his eyes involuntarily dropping to the carpet, as if he had rather not see the effect of his
      words upon her; "meanwhile, someone has thrown me over."
"You?"
"Yes, me; I did not write it to you, because I do not see much use in putting down bad news
      in black and white, and even with this little delay, I am afraid," with a dry smile, "that you
      will have plenty of time to enjoy it."
He pauses for an instant, and she does not hurry him with any teasing questions; but waits,
      with meek patience, till he feels inclined to go on.
"My aunt is going to be married."
If he has wished that his news shall produce the effect of a torpedo, he has no cause to
      complain of his want of success. His placid Amelia vaults to her feet.
"Married!" she repeats with a gasp. "Why, she is quite, quite old!"
"She is sixty-five!"
The colour has flooded all Amelia's face; the blazing colour that means not pleasure, but
      consternation. It is some moments before she can frame her next query.
"And is he?—do you?—has she chosen wisely, I mean?"
Jim laughs again.
"Can one choose wisely at sixty-five? Well, whether she has or no is a matter of opinion;
      she has chosen the curate of the parish, who, by reason of his extreme juvenility, is still in
      deacon's orders."
Miss Wilson's limbs are shaking so that she cannot maintain her standing attitude. She sinks
      down by the dining-table again in her hard chair. It is a very hard chair on which to receive
      such ill news.
"And cannot you hinder it, cannot you dissuade her?" she asks falteringly.
"I shall not try; poor old woman! After all, she has a right to pursue her own happiness in
      her own way, only I wish that she had made up her mind twenty years ago; though, to be sure,
      how could she?"—with another smile—"since, at that time, her bridegroom was not much more than
      born."
A dead silence supervenes—a silence of shocked stupefaction on the one side, of rather
      dismal brooding on the other. At length Amelia nerves herself to put a question upon which it
      seems to her, not very incorrectly, that her whole future hangs. She does it in such a low
      voice that none but very sharp ears could have caught it. Jim's ears are so; practised as they
      are in listening for the stealthy tread of wild animals, and for the indescribable sounds of
      mountain solitudes at night.
"Will it—will it—make a great difference to you?"
Burgoyne lifts his eyes, which have been idly bent on the floor, and looks straight and full
      at her across the corner of the table.
"It will make all the difference!" he answers slowly.
Poor Amelia is holding her handkerchief in her hand. She lifts it to her mouth and bites a
      corner of it to hide the quivering of her lips and chin. She does not wish to add to his pain
      by any breakdown on her own part. But Jim divines the quivering even under the morsel of
      cambric, and looks away again.
"Her money is almost entirely in her own power," he continues, in an unemotional voice; "and
      when she announced her marriage to me, she also announced her intention of settling the whole
      of it upon her—her"—he pauses a second, as if resolved to keep out of his voice the accent of
      satire and bitterness that pierces through its calm—"her husband."
Amelia has dropped both shielding hand and handkerchief into her lap. She has forgotten her
      effort to conceal the blankness of her dismay. Unless she conceals the whole of her face,
      indeed, the attempt would be in vain, since each feature speaks it equally.
"Her whole fortune?" she repeats, almost inaudibly. "All?"

"What, all my pretty chickens and their dam?"

says Jim, oppressed by her overwhelmed look into an artificial and dreary levity, and in not
      particularly apt quotation. "My dear, do not look so broken-hearted. I am not absolutely
      destitute; I need not become a sandwich man. I have still got my £800 a year, my very own,
      which neither man nor mouse, neither curate nor vicar, can take from me. I can still go on
      rioting upon that; the question is"—his words coming more slowly, and his tone growing
      graver—"have I any right to ask you to riot on it too?"
Her hand has gone in feverish haste out to his for answer, and her eyes, into which the
      tears are welling, look with an intense dumb wistfulness into his; but, for the moment, it
      remains dumb. There is something painful to Burgoyne in that wistfulness, almost more painful
      than the telling of that news which has produced it. He looks down upon the tablecloth, and,
      with his disengaged hand, the one not imprisoned in his betrothed's fond hold, draws patterns
      with a paper-knife accidentally left there.
"The one thing that I blame her for," he continues, not following up the branch of the
      subject that his last speech had begun to open up, and speaking with a composure which, to the
      stricken Amelia, appears to evidence his attainment of the highest pinnacle of manly
      fortitude, "the only thing I blame her for, is her having hindered my adopting any profession.
      Poor old woman, it was not malice prepense, I know; she had not seen her Jessamey then,
      probably had not even a prophetic instinct of him, but as things turned out"—stifling a
      sigh—"it would have been kinder to have put me in the way of earning my own living."
Amelia's head has sunk down upon his hand—he feels her hot tears upon it; but now that the
      theme has no longer reference to herself, she can speak. She straightens herself, and there is
      a flash, such as he has very seldom seen there, in her rather colourless orbs.
"It was monstrous of her!" she cries, with the almost exaggerated passion of a usually very
      self-controlled person. "After having always told you that you were to be her heir!"
"But had she told me so?" replies Jim, passing his hand with a perplexed air over
      his own face. "That is what I have been trying to recall for the last few days. I never
      remember the time when I did not believe it, so I suppose that someone must have told me so;
      but I could not swear that she herself had ever put it down in black and white. However,"
      tossing his head back with a gesture as of one who throws off his shoulders a useless burden,
      "what does that matter now? I am not her heir, I am nobody's heir; we must look facts in the
      face! Amelia, dear"—in a tone of reluctant tender affection, as of one compelled, yet most
      unwilling, to give a little child, or some other soft, helpless creature, pain—"we must look
      facts in the face!" There is something in his voice that makes Amelia's heart stand still; but
      she attempts no interruption.
"It is very hard for me, dear, after all these"—he pauses a second; he is about to say
      "weary years' waiting," but his conscience arrests him; to him they have not been weary, so,
      after a hardly-perceptible break, he goes on—"after all these many years' waiting, to have
      come to this, is not it?"
He had not calculated on the effect which would be produced by his melancholy words and his
      caressing tone. She buries her face on his shoulder, sobbing uncontrollably.
"They were not long!" she murmurs brokenly. "Nothing is, nothing can be, long to me as long
      as I have you, or the hope of you!"
