<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XI.</head>
<p>A reconciliation is seldom effected without some price being paid for it. Jim's with
      Elizabeth, if it can be called such, is bought at the cost of a small sacrifice of principle
      on his part. No later than this morning he had laid it down as a Median rule that he should
      avoid opportunities of finding himself in Miss Le Marchant's company; and yet, not only has he
      spent the major part of the afternoon in her society, but, as he walks away from her door, he
      finds that he has engaged himself to help Byng, on no distant day, in doing the honours of the
      Certosa Monastery to her and her mother. On reflection, he cannot quite explain to himself how
      the arrangement has come about. The proposal certainly did not originate with him, and still
      less with the two ladies so strangely shy of all society. The three have somehow been swept
      into it by Byng, who, either with the noblest altruism, or because he feels justly confident
      that he has no cause for jealousy of his friend (Jim's cynical reflection is that the latter
      is the much more probable reason), has insisted on drawing him into the project.</p>
<p>Jim Burgoyne is not a man whom, as a rule, it is easy either to wile or cudgel into any
      course that does not recommend itself to his own judgment or taste—a fact of which he himself
      is perfectly aware, and which makes him remorsefully acknowledge that there must indeed have
      been a traitor in the citadel of his own heart before he could have so weakly yielded at the
      first push to what his reason sincerely disapproves. But yet it is not true that remorse is
      the leading feature of his thoughts, as he walks silently beside his friend down the Via di
      Servi. It ought to be, perhaps; but it is not. The picture that holds the foreground of his
      memory is that of Elizabeth sitting on the floor, and sending him peace-offerings from her
      pathetic eyes and across her sensitive lips. It was very sweet of her to think it necessary to
      make him amends at all for her trifling incivility, and nothing could be sweeter than the
      manner of it. How gladly would he buy some little rudeness from her every day at such a price!
      But yet, as he thinks it over, the manner of it, the ground on which she rested her excuse, is
      surely a strange one. That she should attribute her light lapse from courtesy to want of
      knowledge of the world comes strangely from the mouth of a woman of six-and-twenty. If it be
      true—and there was a naïve veracity in lip and eye as she spoke—how is it to be accounted for?
      Has her mind, has her experience of life, remained absolutely stationary during the last ten
      years? Her tell-tale face, over which some pensive story is so plainly written, forbids the
      inference. It is no business of his, of course. Amelia, thank Heaven! has no story; but, oh!
      if someone would tell him what that history is! And yet, three days later, he voluntarily puts
      away from himself the opportunity of hearing it.</p>
<p>During those three days he sees no more of her. He does not again seek her out, and accident
      does not throw her in his way. He buys his Cantagalli dinner-service in company with Amelia;
      chooses the soup-tureen out of which he is to ladle mutton broth for the inhabitants of
      Westbourne Grove; he tastes of the wedding-cake that has cost Cecilia so dear, and he avoids
      Byng. On the third day he can no longer avoid him, since he is to occupy, as on the San
      Miniato occasion, the fourth seat in the fiacre which conveys himself and the Misses Wilson to
      the garden-party at the villa in Bellosguardo inhabited by Mrs. Roche, the mother of the
      amiable Bertie. The Wilsons' acquaintances in Florence are few, and, as far as Burgoyne has at
      present had the opportunity of judging, evil. It is, therefore, with a proportionate elation
      that Cecilia dresses for a party at which she will meet the bulk, or at least the cream, of
      the English society. It is to Byng's good nature that she and her sister owe the introduction
      to a hostess whose acquaintance is already too large to make her eager for any causeless
      addition to it; but whose hand has been forced by Byng, in the mistaken idea that he is doing
      a service to his friend Jim.</p>
<p>They are late in setting off, as Amelia is delayed by the necessity of soothing Sybilla, who
      has been reduced to bitter tears by a <hi>tête-à-tête</hi> with her father, in which that
      well-intentioned but incautious gentleman has been betrayed into suggesting to her that she
      may possibly be suffering from biliousness. The administering of bromide, to calm her nerves
      under such a shock; the reiterated assurances that every member of the family except its head
      realizes the monstrosity of the suggestion, take up so much time that Amelia herself has to
      reduce to a minimum the moments allotted to her own toilette. She has cried a little with
      Sybilla, for company partly, and partly out of weariness of spirit. That and hurry have
      swollen her eyelids, and painted her cheeks with a hard, tired red, so that it is an even more
      homespun figure and a homelier face than usual, that seat themselves opposite Burgoyne, when
      at length they get under weigh.</p>
<p>He, Burgoyne, has been impatient of the delay, impatient to set off and to arrive; yet he
      would be puzzled to say why. He knows, on no less authority than her own word, that he shall
      not meet Elizabeth; and yet the mere feeling that the mistress of the house to which he is
      going is of the same blood as she; that he shall see the rude, spoilt child, whose
      ill-tempered pinch made her utter that low cry of pain, suffice to give a tartness to his
      tone, as he inquires the cause of her lagging, of the panting, flushed, apologetic Amelia.
      Byng and Cecilia have been sitting waiting for some time in the <hi>salon</hi>, from which
      Sybilla has removed her prostrate figure and tear-stained face; but they have been
      entertaining each other so well—she in paying him a series of marked attentions, and he in
      civilly and pleasantly accepting them—that the half-hour has not seemed long to either. But
      the party, in motion at last, has passed the Roman Gate, and is climbing up and up between the
      high walls, each step giving it a greater vantage ground over the Flower City, before Burgoyne
      recovers his equanimity.</p>
<p>The spring comes on apace. In the gardens above their heads laurestinus bushes, with all
      their flowers out (as they are never seen in England, where always the east wind nips half the
      little round buds before they can expand into blossom), stand in white and green; rosemary
      trees, covered with gray bloom, hang down; and against the azure of the high heaven purple
      irides stand up arow. It is one of those days on which one can with bodily eyes see the Great
      Mother at her quickening work; can see her flushing the apple-boughs, unfolding the
      fig-leaves, and driving the lusty green blood through the sappy vines. And in the slow
      creeping of the fiacre up the twisting white road, each turn lays the divine Tuscan city
      before them in some new aspect of arresting loveliness.</p>
<p>At Florence, one is like Balaam with the Israelites. One is taken to see her from one point
      after another, each point seeming fairer than the last; but the likeness ends there, for no
      wish to curse the sweet town could ever arise in even the morosest heart. The hills have put
      on their summer look of dreamy warmth and distance. Before they have reached the hilltop the
      boon Italian air has kissed most of the creases out of Jim's temper, and the brick-red from
      Amelia's cheek-bones. He looks remorsefully from the triumphant beauty around, into the poor,
      fond face opposite to him—looks at her with a sort of compassion for being so unlovely, mixed
      with a compunctious admiration and tenderness for her gentle qualities. He may touch her hand
      without fear of observation, so wholly is Byng enveloped in the mantle of Cecilia's voluble
      tenderness.</p>
<p>"Have you forgiven me?" he asks, smiling; "I will make any apologies, eat any dirt, say
      anything, short of allowing that Sybilla is not bilious."</p>
<p>They have reached the villa, and turned out of the dusty highway into a great cool
      courtyard, that has a Moorish look, with its high arches, over which the Banksia roses tumble
      in cascades of yellow and white. It seems wrong that the voices which come from the tea-tables
      under the Loggia should be chattering English or Yankee, instead of cooing that "sweet bastard
      Latin" that better suits place and day.</p>
<p>The hostess shakes hands absently with Burgoyne, offers his fair charges iced coffee, and
      then, having discharged her conscience towards them, draws Byng away for an intimate chat.
      From her hands he passes into those of several other willing matrons and maids, and it seems
      likely that the party who brought him will see him no more. Amelia, unused to, and unexpectant
      of attention, is perfectly content to sit silent, sipping her cold coffee; but Cecilia is
      champing her bit in a way which frightens her future brother-in-law so much that he cowardly
      takes the opportunity of her looking in another direction to lure his docile <hi>fiancée</hi>
      on to the broad terrace, whence all the young green glory of the Arno's plain, and the
      empurpled slopes and dreamful breast of Morello, are to be seen by the looker's beauty-drunk
      eye. Upon this terrace many people are walking and sitting in twos and threes, and in one of
      the little groups Amelia presently discovers a female acquaintance, who at once fastens upon
      her, and happening to be afflicted with a relative visited by a disorder of something the same
      nature as Sybilla's, subjects her to a searching and exhaustive catechism as to the nature of
      her sister's symptoms. Sybilla's symptoms, whether at first or second hand, have invariably
      the property of driving Jim into desert places; and, in the present instance, seeing no
      likelihood of an end to the relation of them, he turns impatiently away, and, without much
      thought of where he is going, follows a steep downward path that ends in a descent of old
      stone steps, between whose crevices green plants and little hawkweed blow-balls flourish
      undisturbed, to a large square well, framed by a low broad parapet, with flower-beds set
      around it, and the whole closed in by rugged stone walls. No one apparently has had the same
      impulse as he, for, at first, he has the cool solitude to himself. He sits down on the parapet
      of the still well, and drops in pebbles to see how deep the water is; and anon lifts his idle
      look to the empty niches in the crumbling wall—niches where once wood-god, or water-nymph, or
      rural Pan stood in stone, now empty and forsaken. Out of the wall two ilexes grow, and lift
      themselves against the sapphire arch, which yet is no sapphire, nor of any name that belongs
      to cold stone; a blue by which all other blues are but feeble colourless ghosts of that
      divinest tint.</p>
<p>He is roused from the vague reverie into which the cool silence and the brooding beauty
      around have lulled him, by the sound of approaching voices. He is not to have his well any
      longer to himself. He looks up with that scarcely latent hostility in his eye with which one
      regards the sudden intruder into a railway carriage, when—counting on keeping it to one's self
      for a long night journey—one has diffused limbs and parcels over its whole area. The owners of
      the voices, having descended, as he had done, the age-worn steps, come into sight. They are
      both men, and one of them he recognises at once as a Mr. Greenock, a well-known stock figure
      in Florentine society, a mature bachelor diner-out, a not ill-natured retailer of news,
      collector of <hi>bons-mots</hi>, and harmless appendage of pretty women. Of the other, at whom
      he scarcely glances, all he grasps is the fact that he is dressed in clerical attire, and that
      the first words audible of his speech, as he comes within hearing, is the name of an English
      county—Devonshire. The answer comes in a tone of keen interest:</p>
<p>"Ah, I thought there must be a screw loose!"</p>
<p>As the new arrivals become aware of the presence of a third person, they pause in their
      talk; but presently, Mr. Greenock having recognised Jim and greeted him with a friendly nod
      and a trivial remark upon the splendour of the day, they resume their interrupted theme,
      standing together a few yards distant from him on the walk—resume it in a rather lower but
      still perfectly audible key.</p>
<p>"I thought there must be some reason for their shutting themselves up so resolutely,"
      continues Mr. Greenock in the gratified tone of one who has at length solved a long-puzzling
      riddle. "I thought that there must be a screw loose, in fact; but are you quite sure of
      it?"</p>
<p>The other gives a sigh and a shrug.</p>
<p>"Unfortunately there can be no doubt on that head; the whole lamentable occurrence took
      place under my own eyes; the Moat is in my parish."</p>
<p>"Devonshire!" "A screw loose!" "The Moat!" Burgoyne is still sitting on the well-brim; but
      he no longer sees the lapis vault above, nor the placid dark water below. A sort of horrible
      mist is swimming before his eyes; it is of Elizabeth Le Marchant that they are speaking.
      Through that mist he snatches a scared look at the speaker; at him whom but two minutes ago he
      had glanced at with such a cursory carelessness. Does he recognise him? Alas! yes. Though
      changed by the acquisition of a bald head and a grizzled beard, he sees him at once to be the
      man who, at the time of his own acquaintance with the Le Marchant family, had filled the
      office of vicar of their parish; under whom he had sat on several drowsy summer Sunday
      mornings, trembling at the boys' perilous antics in the great curtained pew, and laughing
      inwardly at Elizabeth's mirth-struggling efforts to control them.</p>
<p>"And you say that they never held up their heads again afterwards?" pursues Mr. Greenock in
      a tone of good-natured compassion, that is yet largely tinged with gratified curiosity.</p>
<p>"They left the neighbourhood at once," returns the clergyman. "Dear me, how time flies! it
      must be ten years ago now, and I never saw them again until I met the unhappy girl and her
      mother yesterday, driving in the Via Tornabuoni; but"—lowering his voice a little more—"you
      will understand that this is strictly <hi>entre nous</hi>; that it must not go any
      further."</p>
<p>"What do you think I am made of?" cries Mr. Greenock in a burst of generous indignation;
      "but"—stepping a pace or two nearer to his interlocutor—"I am not quite sure that I have got
      the details of the story right; would you mind just running it over to me again?"</p>
<p>Jim has been sitting in such a stunned stillness that it is perhaps no wonder that they have
      forgotten his neighbourhood. At all events, the clergyman is evidently about to comply with
      his companion's request and recapitulate the tale. If Jim preserves his motionless attitude
      but five minutes longer, he will be put into possession of that story whose existence he has
      already heavily conjectured, and the imagining of which has made him often, within the last
      week or two, turn with nausea from his food, and toss restlessly upon his bed. Without any
      trouble on his part, without any possible blame attaching to him, he will learn the poor
      soul's secret. Never! If the devil wish to tempt him with a prospect of success, it must be
      with a less unhandsome bait. Almost before the two startled scandalmongers have recalled the
      fact of his existence by the abrupt noise of his departure, he is half-way back to the
      terrace, that mist still before his eyes, and a singing in his ears.</p>
</div>