
CHAPTER XXIII.
"I am going to turn the tables on you," says Amelia next morning to her lover, after the
      usual endearments, which of late he has been conscientiously anxious not to scant or slur,
      have passed between them, very fairly executed by him, and adoringly accepted and returned by
      her; "you are always arranging treats for me; now I have planned one for you!"
She looks so beaming with benevolent joy as she makes this statement, that Jim stoops and
      drops an extra kiss—not in the bond—upon her lifted face. "Indeed, dear!" he answers kindly,
      "I do not quite know what I have done to deserve it; but I hope it is a nice one."
"It is very nice—delightful."
"Delightful, eh?" echoes he, raising his brows, while a transient wonder crosses his mind as
      to what project she or anyone else could suggest to him that, at this juncture of his affairs,
      could merit that epithet; "well, am I to guess what it is? or are you going to tell me?"
Amelia's face still wears that smile of complacent confidence in having something pleasant
      to communicate which has puzzled her companion.
"We have never been at Vallombrosa, have we?" asks she.
"Never."
"Well, we are going there to-morrow."
"Are we? is that your treat?" inquires he, wondering what of peculiarly and distinctively
      festal for him this expedition may be supposed to have above all their former ones.
"And we are not going alone."
"There is nothing very exceptional in that; Cecilia is mostly good enough to lend us her
      company."
"I am not thinking of Cecilia; I have persuaded"—the benevolent smile broadening across her
      cheeks—"I have persuaded some friends of yours to join us."
It does not for an instant cross his mind either to doubt or to affect uncertainty as to who
      the friends of whom she speaks may be; but the suggestion is so profoundly unwelcome to him,
      that not even the certainty of mortifying the unselfish creature before him can hinder him
      from showing it. Her countenance falls.
"You are not glad?" she asks crestfallenly, "you are not pleased?"
It is impossible for him to say that he is, and all that is left to him is to put his
      vexation into words that may be as little as possible fraught with disappointment to his poor
      hearer's ear.
"I—I—had rather have had you to myself."
"Would you really?" she asks, in the almost awed tones of one who, from being quite
      destitute, has had the Koh-i-Noor put into his hand, and whose fingers are afraid to close
      over the mighty jewel; "would you really? then I am sorry I asked them; but"—with intense
      wistfulness—"if you only knew how I long to give you a little pleasure, a little enjoyment—you
      who have given me so infinitely much."
If Miss Wilson were ever addicted to the figure of speech called irony, she might be
      supposed to be employing it now; but one glance at her simple face would show that it
      expressed nothing but adoring gratitude. Her one good fortnight has spread its radiant veil
      backwards over her eight barren years.
He takes her hand, and passes the fingers across his lips, murmuring indistinctly and
      guiltily behind them:
"Do I really make you happy?"
"Do you?"—echoes she, while the transfiguring tears well into her glorified pale eyes—"I
      should not have thought it possible that so much joy could have been packed into any fortnight
      as I have had crammed into mine!"
They have to set off to Vallombrosa at seven o'clock in the morning, an hour at which few of
      us are at our cleverest, handsomest, or our best tempered; nor is the party of six, either in
      its proportion of women to men—four to two—or in its component parts, a very well adjusted
      one. They are too numerous to be contained in one carriage, and are therefore divided into two
      separate bands—three and three. Whether by some manœuvre of the well-meaning Amelia, or by
      some scarcely fortunate accident, Burgoyne finds himself seated opposite to his betrothed and
      to Elizabeth; while Byng follows in the second vehicle as vis-à-vis to Cecilia and
      Mrs. Le Marchant. There is a general feeling of wrongness about the whole arrangement—a sense
      of mental discomfort equivalent to that physical one of having put on your clothes inside out,
      or buttoned your buttons into unanswering buttonholes.
Mrs. Le Marchant's face, as Burgoyne catches sight of it now and then, as some turn in the
      road reveals the inmates of the closely-following second carriage to his view, wears that
      uneasy and disquieted look which always disfigures it when there is any question of her being
      brought into personal relation with strangers. And Elizabeth, of whom he has naturally a much
      nearer and more continuous view, is plainly ill-at-ease. Miss Wilson has not thought it
      necessary to mention to her lover how strong had been the opposition to her plan on the part
      of the objects of it; nor, that it was only because her proposal was made vivâ voce,
      and therefore unescapable, that it had been reluctantly accepted at last. At first Burgoyne
      had attributed Elizabeth's evident ill-at-easeness to her separation from Byng; but he
      presently discovers that it is what she possesses, and not what she lacks, that is the chief
      source of her malaise. During the latter part of his own personal intercourse with
      her she had been, when in his company, sometimes sad, sometimes wildly merry; but always
      entirely natural. Strange as it may seem, it is obviously the presence of Amelia that puts
      constraint upon her. Before the spirit of that most unterrifying of God's creatures,
      Elizabeth's "stands rebuked." Once or twice he sees her inborn gaiety—that gaiety whose
      existence he has so often noted as it struggles up from under the mysterious weight of sorrow
      laid upon it—spurt into life, only to be instantly killed by the reassumption of that nervous
      formal manner which not all Amelia's gentle efforts can break through.
A very grave trio they drive along through the grave day. For it is, alas! a grave
      day—overcast, now turning to rain, now growing fair again awhile. Not a grain of Italy's
      summer curse, her choking white dust, assails their nostrils. It must have rained all night.
      Through the suburbs by the river, crossing and recrossing that ugly iron interloper the
      railway; by the river flowing at the foot of the fair green hills, so green, so green on this
      day of ripe accomplished spring. The whole country is one giant green garland, of young wheat
      below and endless vine necklaces above—necklaces of new juicy, just-born, yet vigorous
      vine-leaves. The very river runs green with the reflection of the endless verdure on its
      banks. The road is level as far as Pontassieve, the town through which they roll, and then it
      begins to mount—mounts between garden-like hills, dressed in vine leaves and iris-flowers, and
      the dull fire of red clover; while the stream twists in flowing companionship at the valley
      bottom, until they turn abruptly away from it, up into a steep and narrow valley, almost a
      gorge, and climb up and up one side of it, turning and winding continually to break the
      steepness of the ascent. However broken, it is steep still. But who would wish to pass at more
      than a foot's pace through this great sheet of lilac irises wrapping the mountain side, past
      this bean-field that greets the nostrils with its homely familiar perfume, along this wealthy
      bit of hedge, framed wholly of honeysuckle in flower? At sight of the latter Elizabeth gives a
      little cry.
"Oh, what honeysuckle! I must have some! I must get out! Tell him to stop!"
In a moment her commands are obeyed; in another moment Byng has sprung out of the second
      carriage and is standing beside her. The door of Byng's vehicle is stiff apparently, and a
      sardonic smile breaks over the elder man's face as he hears the noise of the resounding kicks
      administered to it by the younger one's impatient foot. But he need not have been in such a
      hurry—no one interferes with his office of rifling the hedge of its creamy and coral
      bugles.
Burgoyne gets out of the carriage; but it is only to walk to the other one and assume Byng's
      vacated seat.
"Are you going to change places?" Amelia has asked rather chapfallenly as he leaves her; and
      he has given her hand a hasty pressure, and answered affectionately—
"It will not be for long, dear; but you know"—with an expressive glance, and what he rather
      too sanguinely hopes looks like a smile in the direction of the flower-gatherers—"fair play is
      a jewel!"
If his departure from the one vehicle is deplored, it is not welcomed at the other. Cecilia
      asks the same question as her sister had put, though the intonation is different.
"Are you going to change places?"—adding—"do not you think we did very well as we were?"
But probably he is too much occupied in wrestling with the stiff door to hear her, for he
      makes no answer beyond getting in. The only reward that he receives for his piece of
      self-sacrifice is a rapturous look of gratitude from Byng, when he perceives the changed
      position of his affairs, and that recompense Jim had far rather have been without.
They are off again. Being now second in the little procession, Burgoyne has but meagre and
      difficult views of the first; but now and again, when the road describes an acuter angle than
      usual, he can by turning his whole body, under pretext of admiring the view, snatch a glimpse
      of all three occupants leaning their heads sociably together, evidently in bright light talk.
      After all, he had deceived himself. It is he and not Amelia who had made her shy. Even when he
      cannot see her, there come to his ears little wafts of laughter, in which her voice is mixed.
      He catches himself trying to recall whether she had laughed even once during the period of his
      being her companion. There is not much mirth in his own carriage. What a kill-joy he has
      grown! Cecilia, though her heart is as pure as the babe unborn of any serious designs on Byng,
      of which indeed she has long seen the fruitlessness, yet thinks a sulky brother-in-law-elect
      but a poor exchange for a handsome young acquaintance, whom neither his good manners nor the
      amount of his intimacy allow to sit opposite to her in grumpy silence. Mrs. Le Marchant is
      obviously as ill at ease as was her daughter when in his fellowship, though in this case a
      little observation shows him that he counts for nothing in her discomfort of mind, but that
      she is watching the other half of the party with an anxiety as keen, if almost as covert, as
      his own. She is too well-bred indeed not to endeavour to keep up a decent show of
      conversation, but as neither of her companions makes any effort to second her, an
      ever-deepening silence falls upon them as they advance, nor, as the day grows older, is the
      weather calculated to exhilarate their spirits.
The sky's frown becomes more and more pronounced the higher they mount. Through a village
      nobly seated on its hilltop, but, like most Italian townlets, squalid enough on a nearer
      view—up and up—up and up—till they reach what were once groves of stately chestnuts, but where
      the hungry Tuscan axe has left nothing but twigs and saplings, but never a spreading tree;
      then on into the fir-woods, which are woods indeed, though even here the hatchet's cruel tooth
      has begun to bite. No sooner is their dark umbrage reached than the mist, that has been
      hanging with threatening lowness above the travellers' heads, comes down close, blinding,
      clinging like wet flannel, and as thick.
"Perhaps it will lift," Jim says, with a sort of dismal unlikely hopefulness as he strains
      his eyes, trying to look down the straight solemn fir aisles, with their files upon files of
      tall stems, that seem to be seen only as if through a thick gauze. Neither of his companions
      has the spirit necessary to echo the supposition. The road winds endlessly, steeper and
      steeper up through the mist. The tired horses step wearily, and the unfortunate
      pleasure-seekers are beginning to think that the muffled monotony of firs, of winding road, of
      painfully labouring horses, will never end, when the vetturino turns round with a smile on his
      fog-wet face, and says, "Vallombrosa!"
Under other circumstances, the announcement might have been cheering, might have excited a
      poetic curiosity; but as it is, the hood of the vehicle—necessarily raised some miles back—is
      so far poked forward that nothing is to be seen but a pour of rain—the rain has begun to
      descend in torrents—a glass-door in a house-wall opening to admit them, and a waiter holding
      up a green umbrella to protect their descent. Neither he nor the landlord, nor yet the
      chambermaid, show any signs of mirth or wonder at their arrival among the clouds on such a
      day. They are used to mad Inglese. And amongst the mad Inglese themselves there is certainly
      no temptation to mad merriment. On such an occasion there is nothing to do but eat, so they
      lunch dismally in a long, bare dining-room, with a carpetless floor, a table laid for a
      grossly improbable number of guests, and a feeling of searching cold. Having spun out their
      scanty meal to the utmost limits of possibility, and washed it down with the weakest red wine
      that ever lived in a wicker bottle, they pass into a funereal salon, to which the
      waiter invites them. Someone makes the cheering announcement that they have as yet been here
      only half an hour, and that the horses must have two full hours to bait before there can be
      any question of beginning the return journey. And then they amble about the room, looking at
      the dreadful lithographs of Italy's plain King and fair Queen on the walls; at the venerable
      journals and gaudy English storybook, so dull as to have been forgotten by its owner, on the
      table. Their spirits are not heightened by a pervading sense as of being in a cellar, minus
      the wine. The equipment of this pleasant apartment is completed by a half-dead nosegay of what
      must once have been charming mountain blossoms. The sight decides them. They must go out.
      Perhaps even through this opaque cloud they may dimly see the mountain flowers growing, the
      mountain brooks dashing, which John Milton has told them that—

"the Etrurian shades,
High over-arch'd imbower."

They all catch at the suggestion, when made by Byng, and presently sally forth to see as
      much of Vallombrosa as a fog that would not have disgraced the Strand, as a close blanket of
      almost confluent rain, and as umbrellas held well down over their cold noses, will
      let them; Mrs. Le Marchant alone declines to be one of the party, and is left sitting,
      swaddled in all the superfluous wraps, on a horsehair chair in the salon, to stare at
      the wall and at King Humbert's ugly face, until such time as her companions see fit to release
      her. It is no wonder that Burgoyne overhears her eagerly whispering to Elizabeth a request
      that she will not stay too long away. And Elizabeth, whose spirits have gone up like a rocket
      at the prospect of a taste of the fresh air, and who knows what else, lays her little face,
      crowned with a deer-stalking cap, against her mother's, and promises, and skips away.
At first they all five keep together, wet but sociable. They ask their way to the
      Paradiso—the name sounds ironical—and set off climbing up through the fir-wood in the
      direction indicated; along a path which in fair weather must be heavenly with piny odours, but
      which is now only a miry alternative of dripping stones and muddy puddles. Through the mist
      they see indeed fair flowers gleaming, yellow anemones, unfamiliar and lovely, but they are
      too drenched to pluck. The sound of falling water guides them to where the clear brook—clear
      even to-day—falls in little cascades down the hill's face between the pines. How delicious to
      sit on its flat stones some hot summer's noon, with your hands coolly straying among its
      grasses, or dabbling in its bright water; but to-day they can but look at it sadly from the
      low bridge, saying sighingly, "If!"
They reach the goal, some cross, and all floundering, the ladies with draggled skirts and
      cold, dank ankles. The Paradiso is a little house, a dépendance apparently of the
      hotel below—apparently also tenantless and empty. It is built on the bare rock, looking sheer
      down on—what? on a blanket of fog. What does, what can, that maddening blanket conceal? Oh, if
      they could but tear it in pieces, rend it asunder, hack it with knives, by any means abolish
      its unsightly veil from over the lovely face they will now, with all their climbing, all their
      early rising, never see! But will not they? Even as they look, despairingly straining their
      eyes, in the vain effort to pierce that obscure and baffling veil, there is a movement in it,
      a stirring of the inert mass of vapour; a wind has risen, and is blowing coldly on their
      brows, and in a moment, as it seems, the maddening wet curtain is swept away and up, as by
      some God-hand, the hand of some spirit that has heard their lament and has pitied them and
      said, "They have come from afar; it is their only chance; let us show it to them." The curtain
      has rolled up and up, the sombre fir-wood starts out, and the emerald meadows, the lowest and
      nearest range of hills, then the next, and then the next, and then the furthest and highest of
      all. There they stand revealed, even the city, Florence, far away. They can make out her
      Duomo, small and dim with distance, yet certainly there; in the sudden effulgence all the
      valley alight and radiant. Range behind range stand the hills; belated vapour wreaths
      floating, thin as lawn, up their flanks; wonderful dreamy patches of radiance on the far
      slopes; marvellous amethysts starring their breasts. Mystery and beauty, colour and space, sky
      and lovely land, where, five minutes ago, there was nothing but choking fog. Burgoyne stands
      as in a trance, vaguely conscious—trance-wise too—that Elizabeth is near him; all his soul
      passed into his eyes; stands—how long? He hardly knows. Before that fair sight time seems
      dead; but even as he yet looks, smiling as one smiles at anything surpassingly lovely, the
      cloud-wreaths float downwards again, wreaths at first, then great volumes, then one universal
      sheet of vapour, impenetrably dense as before. Vanished are the Apennine slopes, sun-kissed
      and dreamy; vanished the distant Arno plain; vanished even the near pines. He can scarce see
      his hand before him. And yet he can see Elizabeth's face transfigured and quivering, lifted to
      his—yes, to his—though Byng is on her other side; her eyes full of tender tears of
      ravishment, while her low voice says sighingly:
"It is gone; but we have seen it! Nothing can ever take that from us! nothing! nothing!"
And although the next moment she is reabsorbed into the fog and Byng, though for the rest of
      the deplorable walk he scarce catches sight again of the little brown head and the soaked
      deer-stalking cap, yet it makes a gentle warmth about his chilled heart to think that, in her
      moments of highest emotion, it is her impulse to turn to him.
