
CHAPTER XXIV.

"Oh, gentle Proteus, Love's a mighty lord,
And hath so humbled me that I confess
There is no grief to his correction
Nor to his service no such joy on earth.
Now no discourse except it be of Love;
Now can I break my fast, dine, sup and sleep
Upon the very naked name of Love."

Not once again, so long as they remain at Vallombrosa, does the envious cloud-blanket lift;
      and, after slopping about for some time longer, in the vain hope that it will, Burgoyne and
      his two female relatives-elect return to the inn, all fallen very silent. The other two
      members of the party have disappeared into the fog. At the door of the hotel they find Mrs. Le
      Marchant, who has broken from her cerements, and is looking anxiously out. As she catches
      sight of them the look of tension on her face lessens.
"Oh, here you are!" says she. "I am so glad; and the others—no doubt the others are close
      behind."
"We know nothing about the others," replies Cecilia, with some ill-humour, taking upon her
      the office of spokeswoman, which neither of her companions seems in any hurry to assume; "the
      others took French leave of us an hour ago. Oh dear, how wet I am! What a horrible excursion!
      How I detest Vallombrosa!"
Amelia is to the full as wet as her sister; nothing can well be more lamentable than the
      appearance of either; and upon Amelia's face there is, in addition to a handsome share of
      splashes of rain, a look of mortification and crestfallenness; but she now puts in her word,
      with her usual patience and thoughtful good-temper.
"I do not think you need be in the least anxious about them," she says, observing the
      immediate relapse into what seems an exaggerated concern following instantly upon Cecilia's
      remark on Mrs. Le Marchant's features; "they were with us not long ago. We were certainly all
      together not so long ago; they were with us at the Paradiso—they were certainly with us at the
      Paradiso?" turning with an interrogative air to Burgoyne.
"Yes, they were certainly with us at the Paradiso," he assents, not thinking it necessary to
      add why he is so very certain as to this fact.
"They must have so much inducement to loiter this charming weather," cries Cecilia, with an
      exasperated laugh. "Oh, how wet I am! I do not expect that we shall any of us forget
      Vallombrosa in a hurry! I shall go and ask the chambermaid to lend me some dry shoes and
      stockings."
With these words she walks towards the staircase and climbs it, leaving a muddy imprint on
      each step to mark her progress as she mounts.
Amelia does not at once follow her example. She remains standing where she was, her arms
      hanging listlessly by her sides, and the expression of crestfallenness deepened on her fagged
      face. Her lover is touched by her look, and, going up to her, lays his hand kindly and
      solicitously on her shoulder.
"Umbrellas are not what they were in my days," he says, trying to smile. "You are quite as
      wet as Cis, though you do not proclaim your sufferings nearly so loudly. Had not you better go
      and see whether the chambermaid owns two pairs of dry stockings?"
She lifts her eyes with wistful gratitude to his. "This is my treat," she says slowly; "my
      first treat to you; oh, poor Jim!"
There is a depth of compassion in her tone as disproportioned to the apparent cause as had
      been Mrs. Le Marchant's anxiety for her daughter's return, and beneath it he winces.
"Why do you pity me?" he inquires half indignantly.
"Am I—

"'A milksop; one that never in his life
Felt so much cold as over shoes in snow?'

What do I care for a little rain?" Adding cheerfully, "You shall give me a second treat,
      dear; we will come here again by ourselves when the sun shines."
"By ourselves—when the sun shines!" echoes she, as if repeating a lesson; and then she goes
      off docilely, in obedience to his suggestion, in search of dry raiment.
He rejoins Mrs. Le Marchant, whose unaccountable fears have led her beyond the house's
      shelter out into the rain, where she stands looking down that river of mud which represents
      the road by which she hopes to see the truants reappear.
"I think you are unnecessarily alarmed," he says, in a reassuring and remonstrating tone.
      "What harm could have happened to them?"
She does not answer, her eyes, into which the rain is beating under her umbrella brim, still
      fixed upon the empty road.
"Is she—is she apt to take cold?" he asks, his own tone catching the infection of her vague
      and nameless disquiet.
"Yes—no—not particularly, I think. Oh, it is not that!"—her composure breaking down into an
      unaffected outburst of distress. "It is not that! Do not you understand? Oh, how unwilling I
      was to come here to-day! It is—do not you see? Oh, I should not mind in the least if it had
      been you that were with her!"
"If it had been I that was with her?" repeats Jim slowly, not at the first instant
      comprehending, nor even at the second quite taking in the full, though unintentional,
      uncomplimentariness of this speech; which, however, before his companion again takes up her
      parable, has tinglingly reached—what? His heart, or only his vanity? They lie very close
      together.
"Why did not he go home with his mother?" pursues Mrs. Le Marchant, still in that voice of
      intense vexation. "It would have been so much more natural that he should, and I am sure that
      she wished it."
"You are making me feel extremely uncomfortable," says Burgoyne gravely; "when I remember
      that it was I who introduced him to you."
"Oh, I am not blaming you!" replies she, with an obvious effort to resume her usual
      courteous manner. "Please do not think that I am blaming you. How could you help it?"
"I thought you liked him."
"Oh, so I do—so we both do!" cries the poor woman agitatedly. "That is the worst of it! If I
      did not like him, I should not mind; at least, I should not mind half so much."
"I am very sorry," he begins; but she interrupts him.
"Do not be sorry," she says remorsefully; "you have nothing to say to it. I do not know, I
      am sure"—looking gratefully at him through the rain—"why I am always regaling you with my
      worries; but you are so dependable—we both feel that you are so dependable."
"Am I?" says he, with a melancholy air that does not argue much gratification at the
      compliment. "Do not be too sure of that."
But she does not heed his disclaimer.
"We have been so happy here," she goes on; "I do not mean here"—looking round with
      an involuntary smile at the envelope of wet vapour that encases them both—"but at Florence; so
      peacefully, blessedly happy, she and I—you do not know"—with an appealing touch of
      pathos—"what a dear little companion she is!—so happy that I naturally do not want our memory
      of the place to be spoilt by any painful contretemps. You can understand that, cannot
      you?"
It is senseless of him; but yet, little as he can comprehend why it should be so, the idea
      of Byng's love being described as a "painful contretemps" presents itself not
      disagreeably to his mind. For whatever mysterious reason, it is apparent that even Byng's own
      mother cannot be much more adverse to his suit than is the lady before him.
"I can perfectly enter into your feelings," he answers, with sympathetic gravity; "but do
      not you know that 'a watched pot never boils'? As long as you are looking for them, they will
      never appear; but the moment that your back is turned they will probably come round the corner
      at once."
"I think it is the truest proverb in the world," she says, with an impatient sigh; but she
      allows him to guide her and her umbrella back to the inn.
Burgoyne's prediction is not verified; probably he had no very great faith in it himself.
      Mrs. Le Marchant's back has, for the best part of an hour, been turned upon the mountain road,
      and the stragglers have not yet rejoined the main body. There has been plenty of time for
      Cecilia to be thoroughly dried, warmed, comforted, and restored to good humour; for the
       vetturino to send in and ask whether he shall not put the horses to; for Amelia to
      exhaust all her little repertory of soothing hypotheses; for Mrs. Le Marchant to stray in
      restless misery from salon to salle-à-manger and back again, and for
      Burgoyne to pull gloomily at a large cigar in the hall by himself before at length the voices
      of the truants are heard.
Burgoyne being, as I have said, in the hall, and therefore nearest the door of entrance, has
      the earliest sight of them. His first glance tells him that the blow apprehended by Mrs. Le
      Marchant has fallen. Of Elizabeth, indeed, he scarcely catches a glimpse, as she passes him
      precipitately, hurrying to meet her mother, who, at the sound of her voice, has come running
      into the outer room. But Byng! Byng has not experienced so many very strong emotions in his
      short life as to have had much practice in veiling them from the eyes of others when they
      come, and the gauze now drawn over his intolerable radiance is of the thinnest description.
      Again that earnest desire to hit him hard assails the elder friend.
"Why, you are back before us!" cries the young man.
"Yes, we are back before you," replies Burgoyne; and if the penalty had been death, he could
      not at that moment have added one syllable to the acrid assent.
"Are we late?" asks Elizabeth tremulously; "I am afraid we are late—I am afraid we have kept
      you waiting! Oh, I am so sorry!"
She looks with an engaging timidity of apology from one to other of the sulky countenances
      around her; and Burgoyne stealing a look at her, their eyes meet. He is startled by the
      singularity of expression in hers. Whatever it denotes, it certainly is not the stupid
      simplicity of rapture to be read, in print as big as a poster's, in Byng's. And yet, among the
      many ingredients that go to make up that shy fevered beam, rapture is undoubtedly one.
"Did you lose yourselves? Did you go further into the wood?" asks Cecilia, with a curiosity
      that is, considering the provocation given, not unjustifiable.
They both reply vaguely that they had lost themselves, that they had gone deeper into the
      wood. It is obvious to the meanest intelligence that neither of them has the slightest idea
      where they have been.
"I may as well tell the driver to put the horses in," says Burgoyne, in a matter-of-fact
      voice, glad of an excuse to absent himself.
When he comes back, he finds the Le Marchants standing together in the window, talking in a
      low voice, and Byng hovering near them. It is evident to Jim that the elder woman has no wish
      for converse with the young man; but in his present condition of dizzy exhilaration, he is
      quite unaware of that fact. He approaches her indeed (as the unobserved watcher notes) with a
      dreadful air of filial piety, and addresses her in a tone of apology it is true, but with a
      twang of intimacy that had never appeared in his voice before.
"You must not blame her; indeed you must not! it was entirely my fault. I am awfully sorry
      that you were alarmed, but indeed there was no cause. What did you think had happened? Did you
      think"—with an excited laugh of triumph and a bright blush—"that I had run off with her?"
The speech is in extremely bad taste, since, whatever may be the posture of affairs between
      himself and Elizabeth, it is morally impossible that her mother can yet be enlightened as to
      it; the familiarity of it is therefore premature and the jocosity ill-placed. No one can be
      more disposed to judge it severely than its unintended auditor; but even he is startled by the
      effect it produces.
Without making the smallest attempt at an answer, Mrs. Le Marchant instantly turns her
      shoulder upon the young man—a snub of which Jim would have thought so gentle-mannered a person
      quite incapable, and walks away from him with so determined an air that not even a person in
      the seventh heaven of drunkenness can mistake her meaning. Nor does Elizabeth's conduct offer
      him any indemnification. She follows her mother a little more slowly; and, as she passes Jim,
      he sees that she is shaking violently, and that her face is as white as chalk. A sort of
      generous indignation against the mother for spoiling the poor little soul's first moments of
      bliss mixes curiously in his mind with a less noble satisfaction at the reflection that there
      are undoubtedly breakers ahead of Byng.
"How—how are we to divide?" cries Cecilia, as they all stand at the door while the two
      carriages drive up.
No one answers. The arrangement seems planned by no one in particular, and yet, as he drives
      down the hill, Burgoyne finds himself sitting opposite the two Misses Wilson. He is thankful
      that the raised hood and unfurled umbrellas of the second equipage prevent his having any
      ocular evidence of the ecstasy that that wet leather and that dripping silk veil. But even
      this consolation is not long left him. As they leave the fir-wood, they come out of the clouds
      too, into clear, lower air. Hoods are pushed back and umbrellas shut. The horses, in good
      heart, with homeward-turned heads, pricked with emulation by another carriage ahead of them,
      trot cheerfully down the road—the road with all its bent-elbow turnings—down, down, into the
      valley beneath. But the clouds that have rolled away off the evening sky seem to have settled
      down with double density upon the spirit of Burgoyne and his companions. Even the fountain of
      Cecilia's chatter is dried. Once she says suddenly à propos de bottes:
"She must be years older than he!" To which Amelia quickly rejoins—
"But she does not look it."
It is almost the only remark she makes during the long drive, and Burgoyne is thankful to
      her for her silence. Conscious of and grateful for her magnanimity as he is, there is yet
      something that jars upon him in her intuition of his thoughts, and in her eager championship
      of that other woman. He looks out blankly at the flowers, wetly smiling from field and bank,
      at the endless garden of embracing vines and embraced mulberries, joining their young leafage;
      at the stealing river and the verdurous hill-sides. In vain for him Italy's spring laughter
      broadens across the eternal youth of her face.
On reaching Florence and the Anglo-Américain, he would fain enter and spend the evening with
      his betrothed. He has a feverish horror of being left alone with his own thoughts, but she
      gently forbids him.
"It would not be fair upon father and Sybilla," she says. "I am afraid they have not been
      getting on very well téte-à-téte together all this wet day, and I should not be much
      good to you in any case. I feel stupid. You will say"—smiling—"that there is nothing very new
      in that; but I am quite beyond even my usual mark to-night. Good-night, dear; I humbly beg
      your pardon for having caused you to spend such a wretched day. I will never give you another
      treat—never, never! it was my first and last attempt."
She turns from him dejectedly, and he is himself too dejected to attempt any reassuring
      falsities. She would not have believed him if he had told her that it had not been a wretched
      day to him, and the publicity of their place of parting forbids him to administer even the
      silent consolation of a kiss. And yet he feels a sort of remorse at having said nothing, as
      the door closes upon her depressed back. Backs can look quite as depressed as faces. The
      lateness of their start home has thrown their return late. Burgoyne reflects that he may as
      well dine at once, and then trudge through his solitary evening as best he may. Heaven knows
      at what hour Byng may return. Shall he await his coming, and so get over the announcement of
      his bliss to-night, or put the dark hours between himself and it?
He decides in favour of getting it over to-night, up to whatever small hour he may be
      obliged to attend his friend's arrival. But he has not to wait nearly so long as he expects.
      He has not to wait at all, hardly. Before he has left his own room, while he is still making
      such toilette for his own company as self-respect requires, the person whom he had not thought
      to behold for another four or five hours enters—enters with head held high, with joy-tinged,
      smooth cheeks, and with a superb lamp of love and triumph lit in each young eye. A passing
      movement of involuntary admiration traverses the other's heart as he looks at him. This is how
      the human animal ought to—was originally intended to—look! How very far the average specimen
      has departed from the type! There is not much trace of admiration, however, in the tone which
      he employs for his one brief word of interrogation:
"Already?"
"I was sent away," replies Byng, in a voice whose intoxication pierces even through the
      first four small words; "they sent me away—they would not let me go further than the
      house-door. I say 'they,' but of course she had no hand in it—she, not
       she. She would not have sent me away, God bless her! it was her mother, of
      course—how could she have had the heart?"
Burgoyne would no doubt have made some answer in time; though the "she," the implication of
      Elizabeth's willingness for an indefinite amount of her lover's company, the "God bless her,"
      gave him a sense of choking.
"But I do not blame Mrs. Le Marchant," pursues Byng, in a rapt, half-absent key. "Who would
      not wish to monopolize her? Who would not grudge the earth leave to kiss her sweet foot?

"'All I can is nothing
To her whose worth makes other worthies nothing.
She is alone!'"

"That at least is not your fault," replies Burgoyne dryly; "you have done your best to avert
      that catastrophe."
But to speak to the young man now is of as much avail as to address questions or
      remonstrances to one walking in his sleep.
"If she had allowed me, I would have lain on her threshold all night; I would have been the
      first thing that her heavenly eye lit on; I would—"
But Burgoyne's phial of patience is for the present emptied to the dregs.
"You would have made a very great fool of yourself, I have not the least doubt. Why try to
      persuade a person of what he is already fully convinced? But as Miss Le Marchant happily did
      not wish for you as a doormat, perhaps it is hardly worth while telling me what you would have
      done if she had."
The sarcastic words, ill-natured and unsympathetic as they sound in their own speaker's
      ears, yet avail to bring the young dreamer but a very few steps lower down his ladder of
      bliss.
"I beg your pardon," he says sweet-temperedly; "I suppose I am a hideous bore to-night; I
      suppose one must always be a bore to other people when one is tremendously happy."
"It is not your being tremendously happy that I quarrel with," growls Burgoyne, struggling
      to conquer, or at least tone down, the intense irritability of nerves that his friend's
      flights provoke. "You are perfectly right to be that if you can manage to compass it; but what
      I should be glad to arrive at is your particular ground for it in the present case."
The question, sobering in its tendency, has yet for sole effect the setting Byng off again
      with spread pinions into the empyrean.
"What particular ground I have?" he repeats, in a dreamy tone of ecstasy. "You ask what
      particular ground I have? Had ever anyone cause to be so royally happy as I?"
He pauses a moment or two, steeped in a rapture of oblivious reverie, then goes on, still as
      one only half waked from a beatific vision:
"I had a prognostic that to-day would be the culminating day—something told me that to-day
      would be the day; and when you gave me up your seat in her carriage—how could you be so
      magnificently generous? How can I ever adequately show you my gratitude?"
"Yes, yes; never mind that."
"Then, later on, in the wood"—his voice sinking, as that of one who approaches a Holy of
      Holies—"when that blessed mist wrapped her round, wrapped her lovely body round, so that I was
      able to withdraw her from you, so that you did not perceive that she was gone—were not you
      really aware of it? Did not it seem to you as if the light had gone out of the day? When we
      stood under those dripping trees, as much alone as if—"
"I do not think that there is any need to go into those details," interrupts Burgoyne, in a
      hard voice; "I imagine that in these cases history repeats itself with very trifling
      variations; what I should be glad if you would tell me is, whether I am to understand that you
      have to-day asked Miss Le Marchant to marry you?"
Byng brings his eyes, which have been lifted in a sort of trance to the ceiling, down to the
      prosaic level of his Mentor's severe and tight-lipped face.
"When you put it in that way," he says, in an awed half-whisper, "it does seem an
      inconceivable audacity on my part that I, who but a few days ago was crawling at her feet,
      should dare to-day to reach up to the heaven of her love."
Burgoyne had known perfectly well that it was coming; but yet how much worse is it than he
      had expected!
"Then you did ask her to marry you?"
But Byng has apparently fled back on the wings of fantasy into the wet woods of Vallombrosa,
      for he makes no verbal answer.
"She said yes?" asks Burgoyne, raising his voice, as if he were addressing someone deaf. "Am
      I to understand that she said yes?"
At the sound of that hard naked query the dreamer comes out of his enchanted forest
      again.
"I do not know what she said; I do not think she said anything," he answers, murmuring the
      words laggingly; while, as he goes on, the fire of his madness spires high in his flashing
      eyes. "We have got beyond speech, she and I! We have reached that region where hearts and
      intelligences meet without the need of those vulgar go-betweens—words."
There is a moment's pause, broken only by the commonplace sound of an electric bell rung by
      some inmate of the hotel.
"And has Mrs. Le Marchant reached that region too?" inquires Jim presently, with an irony he
      cannot restrain. "Does she, too, understand without words, or have you been obliged, in her
      case, to employ those vulgar go-betweens?"
"She must understand—she does—undoubtedly she does!" cries Byng, whose
      drunkenness shares with the more ordinary kind the peculiarity of believing whatever he wishes
      to be not only probable but inevitable. "Who could see us together and be in uncertainty for a
      moment? And her mother has some of her fine instincts, her delicate intuitions; not, of
      course, to the miraculous extent that she possesses them. In her they amount
      to genius!"
"No doubt, no doubt; but did you trust entirely to Mrs. Le Marchant's instincts, or did you
      broach the subject to her at all? You must have had time, plenty of time, during that long
      drive home."
"Well, no," answers Byng slowly, and with a slight diminution of radiance. "I meant to have
      approached it; I tried to do so once or twice; but I thought, I fancied—probably it was only
      fancy—that she wished to avoid it."
"To avoid it?"
"Oh, not in any offensive, obvious way; it was probably only in my imagination that she
      shirked it at all—and I did not make any great efforts. It was all so perfect"—the
      intoxication getting the upper hand again—"driving along in that balmy flood of evening
      radiance—did you see how even the tardy sun came out for us?—with that divine face opposite to
      me! Such a little face!"—his voice breaking into a tremor. "Is not it inconceivable, Jim, how
      so much beauty can be packed into so tiny a compass?"
Burgoyne has all the time had his brushes in his hand, the brushes with which he has been
      preparing himself for his solitary dinner. He bangs them down now on the table. How can he put
      a period to the ravings of this maniac? And yet not so maniac either. What gives the sharpest
      point to his present suffering is the consciousness that he would have made quite as good a
      maniac himself if he had had the chance. This consciousness instils a few drops of angry
      patience into his voice, as, disregarding the other's high-flown question, he puts one that is
      not at all high-flown himself.
"Then you have not told Mrs. Le Marchant yet?"
But the smile that the memory—so fresh, only half an hour old—of Elizabeth's loveliness has
      laid upon Byng's lips still lingers there; and makes his response dreamy and vague.
"No, not yet; not yet! She had taken one of her gloves off; her little hand lay,
      palm upward, on her knees almost all the way; once or twice I thought of taking it, of taking
      possession of it, of telling her mother in that way; but I did not. It seemed—out in the
      sunshine, no longer in the sacred mist of that blessed wood—too high an audacity, and I did
      not!"
He stops, his words dying away into a whisper, his throat's too narrow passage choked by the
      rushing ocean of his immense felicity.
Burgoyne looks at him in silence, again with a sort of admiration mixed with wrath. How has
      this commonplace, pink-and-white boy managed to scale such an altitude, while he himself, in
      all his life, though with a better intelligence, and, as he had thought, with a deeper heart,
      had but prowled around the foot? Why should he try to drag him down? On the peak of that great
      Jungfrau of rapture no human foot can long stand.
"As I told you, Mrs. Le Marchant turned me away from their door," pursues Byng. "It struck
      me—I could not pay much attention to the fact, for was not I bidding her
      good-night—taking farewell of those heavenly eyes?—did you ever see such astonishing eyes?—for
      four colossal hours—but it struck me that her mother's manner was a little colder to me than
      it usually is. It had been a little cold all day—at least, so I fancied. Had the same idea
      occurred to you?"
Burgoyne hesitates.
"But even if it were so," continues Byng, his sun breaking out again in full brilliancy from
      the very little cloud that, during his last sentence or two, had dimmed its lustre, "how can I
      blame her? Does one throw one's self into the arms of the burglar who has broken open one's
      safe and stolen one's diamonds?"
Burgoyne still hesitates. Shall he tell the young ranter before him what excellent reasons
      he has for knowing that any filial disposition on his part to throw himself on Mrs. Le
      Marchant's neck will be met by a very distinct resistance on that lady's part, or shall he
      leave him poised on

"The jag
Of his mountain crag"

till morning? The morning light will certainly see him tumbling at the least some few
      kilometres down. He decides generously to leave him in present possession of his peak; but
      yet, so inconsistent is human nature, his next speech can have no drift but that of giving a
      slight jog to his friend's towering confidence.
"And your own mother?"
It may generally be concluded that a person has not a very pertinent response to give to a
      question if his only answer to that question be to repeat it in the same words.
"My own mother?"
"Yes; you will write at once to tell her, I suppose?"
For a second the young man's forehead clouds, then he breaks into an excited laugh.
"Tell her? I should rather think I should! Do you suppose that I shall lose a moment in
      telling everybody I know—everybody I ever heard of? I want you to tell everybody too—every
      single soul of your acquaintance!"
"I?"
"Tell Amelia; tell Cecilia"—quite unaware, in his excitement, of the freedom he is taking,
      for the first time in his life, with those young ladies' Christian names—"tell the other
      one—the sick one; tell them all! I want her to feel that all my friends, everybody I
      know, welcome her—hold out their arms to her. I want them all to tell her they are glad—you
      most of all, of course, old chap; she will not think it is all right till you have given your
      consent!"—laughing again with that bubbling-over of superfluous joy. "Do you know—it seems
      incomprehensible now—but there was a moment when I was madly jealous of you? I was telling
       her about it to-day; we were laughing over it together in the wood."
Burgoyne feels that one more mention of that wood will convert him into a lunatic, quite as
      indisputable as his companion, only very much more dangerous.
"Indeed!" he says grimly. "I should have thought you might have found a more interesting
      subject of conversation."
"Perhaps I was not so very far out either"—possibly dimly perceiving, even through the
      golden haze of his own glory, the lack of enjoyment of his last piece of news conveyed by
      Jim's tone—"for she has an immense opinion of you. I do not know anyone of whom she has so
      high an opinion; she says you are so dependable."
The adjective, as applied to himself by Elizabeth and her mother, has not the merit of
      novelty in the hearer's ears, which is perhaps the reason why the elation that he must
      naturally feel on hearing it does not translate itself into words.
"So dependable," repeats Byng, apparently pleased with the epithet. "She says you give her
      the idea of being a sort of rock; you will come to-morrow, and wish her joy, will not
      you?"
"I am afraid that my wishing it her will not help her much to it," answers Burgoyne, rather
      sadly; "but I do not think you need much doubt that I do wish it. Joy"—repeating the word over
      reflectively—"it is a big thing to wish anyone."
The extreme dampness of his tone arrests for a few minutes Byng's jubilant pæan.
"You do not think that my mother will be pleased with the news?" he asks presently, in a
      changed and hesitating key.
"I do not think about it; I know she will not!"
"I suppose not; and yet"—with an accent of stupefaction—"it is inconceivable that she, who
      has always shown such a tender sympathy for me in any paltry little bit of luck that has
      happened to me, should not rejoice with me when all heaven ope——"
"Yes, yes; of course."
"Do you think"—with a gleam of hope—"that my mother may have tried to dissuade me because
      she thought I was only laying up disappointment for myself—because she thought it so unlikely
      that she should deign to stoop to me?"
Burgoyne shakes his head.
"Perhaps," he says, with the slowness of a man who is saying what he himself does not
      believe, "a part of your mother's dislike to the idea may be in the fact of Miss Le Marchant's
      being older than you."
"Older!" cries Byng, with almost a shout of angry derision at the suggestion. "What
      have creatures like her to do with age? I neither know nor care what her age is! If
      you know, do not tell me! I will not listen! Upon that exquisite body time and change are
      powerless to work their hideous metamorphoses!"
"Fiddlesticks!" replies Burgoyne gruffly. "If she live long enough, she will be an old
      woman, and will look like one, I suppose!" though, even as he speaks, he realizes that to him
      this is almost as incredible as to the young madman whom he is so pitilessly snubbing. "But,
      however that may be, I think you had better make up your mind to meeting the most resolved
      opposition on the part of your mother."
"I believe you are right," replies Byng, out of whose voice his kind Mentor has at last
      succeeded in momentarily conjuring the exaltation. "Her prejudice against them, against
       her, always filled me with stupefaction. I never dared trust myself to discuss it
      with her; I was afraid that if I did I might be led into saying something to her, something I
      should be sorry for afterwards. Thank God, I have never spoken unkindly to her in all my
      life!"
"You would have been a sweep if you had!" interjects Jim.
"I never heard her give any reason for it, did you? It was as baseless as it was senseless."
      After a pause, his voice taking on again its inflection of confident, soaring triumph: "But it
      cannot last—it is absolutely beyond the wildest bounds of possibility that it can last! After
      five minutes' talk mother will be at her feet; I know my mother so well! Not one of her
      exquisite ways will be lost upon her, and she will do her very best to win her! Jim,
      I ask you—I put it to you quietly and plainly—I know you think I am mad, but I am not—I am
      speaking quite rationally and coolly—but I ask you—you, an impartial bystander—do you
      think that any human being, anything made of flesh and blood, could resist
       her—her when she puts herself out to please—her at her very
      best?"
As Burgoyne is conscious of not being in a position to answer this question with much
      satisfaction to himself, he leaves it unanswered.
