
CHAPTER XIV.
VALE?
One would have thought that Jim had been in some measure prepared for the just-fallen blow,
      both by the overheard fragments of Mr. Greenock's conversation with the Devonshire clergyman
      at Florence last year; by the accumulated evidence of there being some blight upon Elizabeth's
      life; and, lastly and chiefly, by the ravings of Byng. But there is something so different
      from all these, so infinitely more dreadful, in hearing this naked statement from her own
      lips, that it stuns him as much as if he had never received any hint of that ruinous secret in
      the background of her life.
Having now uttered it, she stops, either to pick up her own spent strength or to give him
      the opportunity for some question or comment.
He makes neither.
"I thought—I hoped—that you had guessed, from what Mr. Byng said. I believed that when he
      was not himself——"
Again she breaks off, but still no sound comes from Jim.
"You understand, of course, that that was what I told him. I wanted to tell him the rest,
      but that time he could not hear it, and the last time he—he—did not care to hear it."
His continued muteness must daunt her, for she here makes a longer pause than before.
      Indeed, it is only the fear lest she should mean it for a final one that enables him to force
      out the two husky monosyllables:
"Go on."
She is always most obedient, and she now obeys.
"He came only two days after you left us; that was why the sight of you was so—so painful to
      us at first. It was not your fault, but we could not help mixing you up with him. You remember
      how we tried to avoid you—how discourteous we were? You forgave us afterwards, but you must
      have observed it."
The listener makes a slight motion of assent.
"He was a Hungarian, and had been recommended to father by Sir ——, who, as you know, is
      always so extraordinarily kind to struggling artists, and who thought highly of his talent,
      and wished to get him commissions. He was almost starving in London; that was one great
      reason, I think, why father employed him."
Even at this moment the thought darts across Jim's mind that he has never known Elizabeth
      miss an opportunity of implying some praise of that father whose harshness towards herself he
      has so often had an opportunity of witnessing.
"He was quite young—not more than twenty-three—and he looked very ill when he first came;
      indeed, he was really half starved. It has always been the surest passport to mammy's heart to
      be poor and sick and down in the world, and nothing could have been kinder than they both were
      to him."
"And well he repaid their kindness," says Jim, indignation at last giving him words.
She puts out her hand, as if to stop him.
"Wait, wait!" she says, almost authoritatively; "do not abuse him. He seemed very grateful
      to them, and they all—we all—became quite fond of him. When he grew stronger, he turned out to
      be very lively and light-hearted—almost as light-hearted as we."
She pauses, pulled up by a deep sigh, at the reminiscence of that young gaiety, then hurries
      on, as if afraid of his again breaking in upon her narrative with some scathing
      ejaculation.
"Before three weeks were over—you know how cheerful and easy-going we were—he was quite one
      of us—quite as—as intimate as you were."
Jim stirs uneasily, galled by the comparison.
"He was a long time painting my picture—could not satisfy himself with the likeness—and
      began it over again several times. At first there was always someone in the room with us when
      I sat to him, but by-and-by, as he became more and more one of us—as his presence among us
      grew to be a matter of course—we were allowed often to be tête-à-tête."
She stops to let pass two Frenchmen and a Frenchwoman of the petit bourgeois class
      who are sauntering homewards, frisked about by two little cheerful curs, and with armfuls of
      hawthorn—yes; real English hawthorn—in their embrace. They look inquisitively, but not rudely,
      at the pale couple, and now they are out of sight.
"It was a very fine autumn, as you may remember, and we used to go out sketching together.
      He was supposed to give us sketching lessons—the children and me. The governess was by way of
      always being there, but she was a sentimental creature, generally straying away by herself
      with a poetry-book, and we were virtually alone."
Jim sees how increasingly, how horribly difficult of relation is the tale as it nears its
      catastrophe; but he is quite incapable of helping her.
"We fell in love with one another"—almost brusquely—"and he asked me to marry him. What did
      his miserable poverty matter to us? He knew almost as little of the practical business of life
      as I, and he was full of hope and ambition. He was convinced that he had a future before him.
      Perhaps he had. Who knows?"
There is mixed with the hurry and shame and anguish of her tone such an element of almost
      regretful compassion as she pronounces these last words, that Jim's jealous wrath awakes. Does
      she, then, love him still? In her heart for how many is there lodging at once? For Byng? For
      this unknown? For how many more?
"Even he, high-flown as he was, knew that it was impossible that father could permit our
      marriage if we asked his consent; but what he laboured to convince me of was, that if the
      thing were once done and irrevocable, father would soon, doting as he did on me—you know he
       did dote on me, poor father!—he would soon forgive us; and I, after awhile—oh! it
      was after awhile; do not think it was at once"—with a piteous effort to mitigate the severity
      of her silent judge—"and I have always all my life been terribly easily persuaded—I gave
      in."
Far away a dull cloud, rain-charged, is settling over the Kabyle mountains, rubbing out
      their toothed ridge. Can she hold out to the end?
She has not reached the worst yet.
"We were soon given an opportunity. Father and mother went away for a couple of nights upon
      a visit, and left us under the nominal chaperonage of a deaf old aunt of mother's, and of the
      governess, who, as I have told you, was worse than useless. You know that our railway-station
      was not more than a mile from the lodge gates; we had, therefore, no difficulty in slipping
      away from the others while we were all out walking, making our way there, and getting into the
      little branch-line train which caught the London express at Exeter."
She has repeatedly put up her handkerchief, and passed it over her brow, but it is useless.
      The cold sweat breaks out afresh and afresh.
"That journey! I did not know that it was the end of my life. We both set off laughing and
      saying to each other what a good joke it was. That was at the beginning, but long and long
      before we reached London—it was not till very late that we did so—I would have given all the
      world to go back. I did not tell him so, because I thought it would hurt him, but I have often
      thought since that perhaps he was feeling the same."
Again that touch of almost tender ruth in her voice makes her auditor writhe.
"We went to an hotel. I think it must have been in some very out-of-the-way part of the
      town, probably the only one he knew of, and at first they would not take us in because we had
      no luggage; but they consented at last. I heard him telling the landlady that I was his
      sister. I suppose she did not believe it, as she looked very oddly at me. I did not understand
      why she should; but it made me feel very wretched—so wretched that I could scarcely swallow a
      mouthful of the supper he ordered. I do not think that he had much more appetite than I; but
      we tried very hard to laugh and keep up each other's spirits. They gave me a very dismal
      bedroom—I can see it now"—shuddering—"and as I had no change of clothes I lay all night
      outside my bed. It took a great deal to keep me awake in those days, and, wretched as I was, I
      slept a good deal. The next morning I awoke, feeling more cheerful. We should be married in
      the forenoon, return home in the afternoon, to spring our surprise upon the children and
      Fräulein, and be ready to receive and be pardoned by father and mother on their return
      to-morrow. It had not occurred to either of us that there would be the slightest difficulty in
      pursuing this course. We had decided upon at once inquiring the name and address of the
      clergyman in whose parish the hotel was—going together to ask for an interview, and beg him to
      marry us at once. We had a vague idea that a licence might be needed, but relied upon the
      clergyman also to inform us where that might be got. In one respect our plans had to be at
      once modified. When I came down I found that there was such a dense fog that he would not hear
      of my venturing out into it, particularly, he said, as my staying behind would entail no
      delay; since, when he had obtained the licence and engaged the clergyman, he would, of course,
      at once come back to fetch me to church. I gave in, though I had rather have gone with him,
      and fought my way through the fog than stayed behind, alone in that dreary sitting-room. I was
      there nearly all day by myself until late in the afternoon. The fog was so thick that I could
      not see a finger's length beyond the window, nor even across the room. I had neither book nor
      work. I had nothing to do but walk up and down by the flickering light of the bad gas, which
      was burning all day, and look at a wretched little dead aucuba in a pot. Sometimes I went out
      on the landing to see if there were any signs of his return. I had done this for the fiftieth
      time, when at last I saw him through the gas and the fog, coming up the staircase. I could not
      wait till he had reached me, but called out over the banisters, 'Well? Well?' His only answer
      was a sort of sign to me to go back into the room; but I did not understand it at first. Not
      until I saw, coming up the stairs too, a little behind him, the face of—of—that clergyman you
      saw at Certosa—our clergyman whom we used to make fun of. Oh, why did we?"
She breaks off with a low moan, but at once resumes as if she could not trust herself to
      pause:
"As soon as I caught sight of him I ran back; but it was too late. I knew that he had
      recognised me. I do not, to this day, understand how he came to be in that out-of-the-way
      place; whether it was a most unfortunate coincidence, or whether he had seen us in the train
      or at Paddington, and tracked us there. I ran back, as I have said, into the room; but I did
      not really mind much his having seen me; it would all be explained so soon, and I was too much
      taken up with the bitter disappointment in store for me to give him more than a passing
      thought. Of course you will understand that it was not in the power of any clergyman to marry
      us, as neither of us had lived in the parish for the requisite time beforehand, nor could we
      be married at a registry office, as our names had not been entered in the registrar's book for
      the legal time. I think I should have broken down altogether when I heard this if I had not
      had to comfort him. He was so overwhelmed with the fear that I should think that it was his
      fault—that he had not done his best. Heaven knows I had no such hard thought of him! Although
      we consulted together all that evening, and till late into the night, we could not hit upon
      any expedient. He had been told vaguely that the Scotch marriage law differed from the
      English, and that in Edinburgh we might be married at once. But we had not enough money to
      take us there. Our whole stock would only just buy an ordinary licence, keep us one day more
      at the hotel, and take us home third class. What should we do? We did not even try to
      laugh that evening—that last evening!"
In her voice is the same echo of some pitying sorrow that had before offended him; but his
      interest is now too strung up for him to notice it.
"I did not once close my eyes that night, and when I came down next morning I had made up my
      mind to beg him to let me go home and ask father to make everything right. I had such
      confidence that father could set everything right. When I came into the sitting-room he was
      not there. I waited for him, and after awhile the breakfast was brought up; but still he did
      not come. I waited on. It seemed to me odd that, at such a crisis, when we were both so
      miserable, he should be able to oversleep himself I am afraid"—with an accent of most
      regretful remorse—"that I did think hardly of him then. I looked at the clock; I had been down
      an hour. I rang for the waiter, and asked him to go and tell the gentleman this. He was so
      long in coming back that I lost patience, and went out into the passage. I saw a little group
      of people gathered round a door some way down it. They seemed to be whispering and speaking
      excitedly, and one chambermaid was crying. In an instant I was among them, through them, in
      the room. It was his bedroom. He was lying half on, half off the bed. He had evidently not
      undressed all night, and had taken off nothing but his coat. Before they could stop me—I
      believe that they humanely tried—I had caught a glimpse of his face, and had heard someone, as
      if at a great distance off, pronounce the word 'dead'! Then everything went away. I
      believe I crashed down like a log, as Mr. Byng did. When next I came to myself mammy was
      leaning over me. The people in the hotel had found a letter in my pocket, with my address, and
      had telegraphed for her and father. They took me home. I do not remember anything about that,
      but so I was told afterwards, as I was also told that he had died of deep-seated
      heart-disease, aggravated by his anxiety about me. I have never brought good-luck to anyone
      that had to do with me!"
She is crying quietly now. Is it her tale or her tears that have softened Jim's heart? He no
      longer grudges her that tribute to the lover of her youth.
"For the first few days after I came home I did not feel anything at all, and I saw nobody
      but mammy. At the end of a week she came to me, and told me that I must pull myself together,
      for that my father wished me to go with him to an agricultural meeting at Exeter, which we
      were always in the habit of attending. She said that there were reports about me in the
      county, which nothing but my appearing in public would contradict She said she knew how hard
      it was for me, but that she knew, too, that I would try to make the effort for their sakes.
       For their sakes!"—in a heart-wrung voice—"was not it the least I could do, for
       their sakes? I got up; my legs felt as if they did not belong to me. She dressed me
      herself—darling mammy!—and she tied on my veil, and—put some rouge on my cheeks! Think of
      mammy rouging anyone! If you remember, we had had some charades while you were with us, and
      had bought some rouge for them. And then she took me down to father, and we went—he and
      I."
Her breath has grown shorter, and her narrative more disjointed; but she perseveres. Is not
      she near the end?
"We went—and we walked about—among the shorthorns—and the prize poultry—and the tents—father
      and I—and we met a great many people whom we knew—the whole county was there—but we were too
      late. Our Rector had been before us with them—and not one of them would speak to me! Not one
      of them would have anything to say to me! And then we went home. Oh, poor father!"
She has covered her face with her transparent hands. The emotion that she would not permit
      herself for herself has mastered her at the recollection of that father's abasement and
      agony.
"He was quite right—it was quite natural that he should not allow me to live at home, after
      that. He said I must not blight the children's lives—must not stand in the light of the
      others. So I was sent away to live with some old friends of mammy's—two kind old ladies—with
      whom she had been at school; and they were very good to me, and I lived with them until, as
      Miriam and Rose were married, father thought I could not do anyone any more harm, and he let
      me come home again. There! that is all!"
She stops, her tale ended, sighing with the inexpressible relief of that lifted load. Speech
      from him now would be no interruption—would be kindly, rather, and welcome. Yet he still
      stares blankly before him. Why has she told him that painful tale? Is it that he may carry a
      more lenient judgment of her through the rest of his life—that life to be finally severed from
      hers? Or is it with some hope that that told tale may keep him for ever beside her? She does
      not love him. She loves Byng. But, as he has often told himself, she is not of the stuff of
      which great constancies are made. And, since Byng has forsaken her, whom has this pliant
      creature, that nature made so clinging and circumstances so lonely, left to throw her tendrils
      round, except him? She does not love him, and yet in the depth of his heart he knows that, if
      he wished it, he could make her love him. Shall he wish it? Shall he stay—stay to have those
      exquisite eyes, tear-washed, and yet laughing, watching for his lightest wish; that tripping
      step keeping time to his up the hills and through the valleys of life; that delicate sympathy,
      soaring with his highest thoughts, and yet playing with his lightest fancies? Shall he?
Elizabeth is looking down upon the asphodels, stooping to stroke, as if it were a sentient
      thing, a great plumy plant, like a sort of glorified fennel, out of whose fluthery breast a
      puissant sheath rises, from which an unfamiliar flower is pushing. What a fascination there is
      in this alien vegetation, in which every shut calyx holds a delightful secret!
Shall he? For himself, he believes her story implicitly, feeling, indeed, with a shock of
      mixed surprise and remorse, what a past want of faith in her is evidenced by his unspeakable
      relief at its being no worse a one. But who else will believe it? And the more penetratingly
      sweet, the more poignantly dear she is to him, the sharper to him will be the agony of the eye
      averted from her, the suspicious whisper, or the contemptuous smile. Is his heart stout
      enough, is his courage high enough, to support and uphold her through her life's long
      contumely? Dares he undertake that hard task? Dares he?
Elizabeth is never one apt to take offence, or she might resent his delay in making any
      observation on her ended story. Probably she divines that whatever may be the cause of his
      slowness, it is certainly not want of emotion.
At length his tardy speech makes itself heard.
"I do not know how—I have not words strong enough with which to thank you for telling
      me."
"I did not want my one friend to go away thinking more hardly of me than he need," she
      answers, with a poor, small smile.
This is one of the bitterest cups to which her lips have ever been set in the course of her
      sad history.
His next sentence is almost inaudible.
"I could not well think much better of you than I have done all along."
He knows, without seeing it, that her trembling hand makes a half-motion to go out to him at
      those kind-sounding words, but it is drawn back again before the action has passed much beyond
      the stage of a project.
The wind has fallen. With how almost disagreeable a strength does the sharp and pungent
      smell of the innumerable asphodels assail the nostrils. The light grows lower. Dares he? Has
      he the steady selfless valour that will be needed to fight through many years by the side of
      this forlorn creature against an enemy uglier—and, oh! how much more potent!—than any of the
      fierce forest creatures in contest with which he has so often lightly perilled his life? Dares
      he? He has never been lacking in self-reliance—been, perhaps, too little apt to blench at the
      obstacles strewn in his life-path. Is he going to blench now? Whether it be to his credit or
      his shame, the answer does not come all at once. Dares he? The response comes at last—comes
      slowly, comes solemnly, yet comes certainly:
"Yes."
He can never again laugh at Byng for his tears, for he is undoubtedly crying himself
      now.
"Elizabeth! Elizabeth!"—he cannot get further than that at first—"you—you are the worst-used
      woman in the world! and I—I have not the least desire to see the Escurial!"
THE END.
