
CHAPTER I.

"It was a chosen plot of fertile land,
Amongst wide waves set like a little nest,
As if it had by Nature's cunning hand
Been choycely picked out from all the rest,
And laid forth for ensample of the best.
No daintie flower or herb that grows on ground,
No arborete with painted blossomes drest,
And smelling sweete, but there it might be found
To bud out faire, and throwe her sweet smell all around."

Time has stepped upon another year; not much more than stepped, since that year's first
      month is not yet out; and Burgoyne has stepped upon another continent before we again rejoin
      him. There are few, if any of us, who, in the course of our lives, have not had occasion to
      wish that certain spaces in those lives might be represented by the convenient asterisks that
      cover them in books; but this is unfortunately impossible to Jim, as to the rest of us; and he
      has fought through each minute and its minuteful of pain (happily no minute can contain two
      minutefuls) during the seven months that have elapsed since we parted from him. At first those
      minutes held nothing but pain; he could not tell you which of them it was that first admitted
      within its little compass any alien ingredient; and he was shocked and remorseful when he
      discovered that any such existed. But that did not alter the fact. He has not sold his guns;
      on the contrary, he has bought two new ones, and he has visited his old friends, the Rockies.
      Since Amelia's funeral—immediately after which he again quitted England—he has seen no member
      of his dead betrothed's family, nor has he held any intercourse, beyond the exchange of an
      infrequent letter, with Mrs. Byng or her son. From the thought of both these latter he
      shrinks, with a distaste equal in degree, though inspired by different causes. From Mrs. Byng,
      because he knows that she was aware of his weariness of his poor love—that poor love whom, had
      he but known it, he had so short a time to be weary of; and from Byng, because, despite the
      ocean of sorrow, of remorse, of death that rolls in its hopelessness between him and her, he
      cannot even yet think, without a bitter pang, of the woman who had inspired the young man's
      hysterical tears and sincere, though silly, suicidal impulses. Jim took that pang with him to
      the Rockies, stinging, even through the overlying load of his other and acknowledged burden of
      repentant ache and loss, and he has brought it back with him. He packs it into his portmanteau
      as much as a matter of course as he does his shirts—in fact more so, for he has once
      inadvertently left his shirts behind, but the pang never.
It is the 20th day of January; here, in England, the most consistently detestable month in
      the year. The good Januaries of a British octogenarian's life might be counted upon the thumbs
      of that octogenarian's hands. The favoured inhabitants of London have breakfasted and lunched
      by gaslight; have groped their way along their dirty streets through a fog of as thick and
      close a fabric as the furs gathered round their chilled throats; have, even within their
      houses, seen each other dimly across a hideous yellow vapour that kills their expensive
      flowers, and makes their unwilling palm-trees droop in homesick sadness. There is no fog about
      the Grand Hotel, Mustapha Supérieur, Algiers; no lightest blur of mist to dim the intensity of
      the frame of green in which its white face is set. It is not so very grand, despite its
      unpromising big name, as it stands high aloft on the hillside, looking out over the bay and
      down on the town, looking down more immediately upon tree-tops, and on the Governor's summer
      palace. It is an old Moorish house, enlarged into an hotel, with little arched windows sunk in
      the thick walls, with red-tiled floors, and balconies, with low white balustrades of pierced
      brick, up which the lush creepers climb and wave—yes, climb and wave on this 20th of
      January.
From the red-floored balcony over the creepers, between the perennial leafage of the
      unchanging trees, one can daily descry in the azure bay the tiny puff of smoke that tells that
      the mail steamer from Marseilles has safely breasted the Gulf of Lyons, threaded her away
      among the Isles, and brought her freight of French and English and American news to the hands
      and ears of the various expectant nationalities. To-day, blown by a gently prosperous wind,
      the boat is punctual. It is the Eugène Perrère, the pet child of the Transatlantic
      Company, the narrow and strong-engined little vessel which is wont to accomplish the transit
      in a period of time less by an hour than her brother craft. To-day she has brought but one
      guest to the Grand Hotel, who, having left the bulk of his luggage to be struggled for by
      Arabs, and by the hotel-porter at the Douane, arrives at the modest Moorish-faced hostelry,
      having, with British mercifulness, walked up the break-neck green lane that leads from the
      steep main road in order to spare the wretched little galled, pumped horse that has painfully
      dragged him and his bag from the pier. He has travelled straight through from
      London—fifty-five hours without a pause—so that it is not to be wondered at that his thoughts
      turn affectionately towards a wash and a change of raiment. Having extracted from the case of
      unclaimed letters in the bar two or three that bear the address of James Burgoyne, Esq., he is
      ushered to his room by the civil little fussy Italian landlord, who, in order to enhance his
      appreciation of the apartment provided for him, assures him, in voluble bad French, that only
      yesterday he had been obliged to turn away a party of eight.
It is not until refreshed by a completed toilette—and who can overrate the joy of a bath
      after a journey?—that it occurs to him to look out of window. His room possesses two. One
      faces the hill's rich-clothed steepness, and a row of orange-trees covered with fruit, and at
      whose feet tumbled gold balls lie. But the dusk is falling fast, and he can only dimly see the
      prodigality of green in which the modest Grand Hotel lies buried. The other window looks
      out—but a very little way lifted above it, for the room is on the ground floor—upon the
      red-tiled terrace. It is growing very dim too. At the present moment it is empty and deserted,
      but the chairs studded over its surface in talkative attitudes, as if sociable twos and threes
      had drawn together in chat, tell plainly that earlier in the day it had been frequented, and
      that several people had been sitting out on it. Jim's London memories are too fresh upon him
      for him not to find something ludicrous in the idea of sitting out of doors on the 20th of
      January. How pleasant it would have been to do so to-day in Hyde Park! He turns back to the
      table with a smile at the idea, and, taking out a writing-case, sits down to scribble a line.
      Jim's correspondence is neither a large nor an interesting one. On the present occasion, his
      note is merely one of reminder as to some trifling order, addressed to the landlord of his
      London lodgings. It does not take him ten minutes to pen, and when it is finished he turns to
      have one final look out of window before leaving the room. How quickly the dark has fallen!
      The empty chairs show indistinct outlines, and the heavy green trees have turned black. But
      the terrace is no longer quite empty. A footfall sounds—coming slowly along it. One of the
      waiters, no doubt, sent to fetch in the chairs; but, no! an overworked Swiss waiter, hurried
      by electric bells, and with an imminent swollen table table d'hôte upon his burdened
      mind, never paced so slowly, nor did anything male ever step so lightly.
It must be a woman; and even now her white gown makes a patch of light upon the dark
      background of the quickly on-coming night. A white gown on the 20th of January! Again that
      pleasing sense of the ludicrous tickles his fancy. She must be one of the persons who lately
      occupied the empty chairs, and have come in search of some object left behind. He recollects
      having noticed an open book lying on the low parapet. She has a white gown; but what more can
      be predicated of her in this owl-light? The radiance from the candle behind him makes a small
      illuminated square upon the terrace, falling between the bars of the window through which the
      Moorish ladies once darted their dark and ineffectual ogles.
Having apparently accomplished her errand, the white-gowned figure obligingly steps into the
      illumined square, and still more obligingly lifts her face and looks directly up at him. It is
      clear that the action is dictated only by the impulse which prompts all seeing creatures to
      turn lightwards, and no gleam of recognition kindles in the eyes that are averted almost as
      soon as directed towards him. Placed as he is, with his back to the light, his own mother
      could not have distinguished his features; and, after her one careless glance, the
      white-gowned lady turns away and disappears again into the gloom. She has one more oasis of
      light to traverse before she reaches the hotel porch, just discernible, gleaming in its
      whitewash, at the far end of the terrace; just one more lit window throws its chequered lustre
      on the tiles. He presses his face against the bars of his own lattice, and holds his breath
      until she has reached and crossed that tell-tale patch. Her traversing of it does not occupy
      the tenth part of a second, and yet it puts the seal upon what he already knows.
Five minutes later he is standing before the case, hung on the wall of the entrance hall,
      which contains the names and numbers of the rooms of the visitors, eagerly scanning them with
      eye and finger. He scans them in vain. The name he seeks is not among them. Had it not been
      for that five minutes' delay—that five minutes of stunned and stupid staring out into the dark
      after her—he must have met her in the hall. He is turning away in baffled disappointment, when
      the little host again accosts him.
Monsieur must excuse him, but he must explain that the list of visitors that monsieur has
      been so obliging as to peruse is by no means a full or correct one. To-morrow morning he shall
      have the pleasure of placing beneath monsieur's eye a proper and complete list of the
      visitors; but, in point of fact, there has been such a press of business, he has been daily
      obliged to turn away such large and comme il faut families from the door, that time
      has been inadequate for all his obligations, which must be his excuse.
Burgoyne accepts his apologies in silence. It would seem easy enough to inquire whether
      among the English visitors there are any of the name of Le Marchant; but the question sticks
      in his throat. It is seven months since he has pronounced that name aloud, and he appears to
      have lost the faculty of doing it. The host comes to his aid.
Is there perhaps a family—a friend whom monsieur expects to meet? But monsieur only shakes
      his head, and moves away. He has ascertained that the table d'hôte is at seven, and
      it is now half-past five. He has, therefore, only an hour and a half of suspense ahead of him.
      She will surely appear at the table d'hôte? But will she?
As the hour of seven approaches, ever graver and graver doubts upon this head assail his
      mind, both when he reflects upon how much it is a habit with the better sort of travelling
      English to dine in their own rooms, and also when he calls to mind the extremely retired
      character of Elizabeth's and her mother's habits. Even if she does appear in the public
      room—and the more he thinks of it, the less probable, it seems—it is most unlikely that he
      will be placed near her. But he might possibly intercept her in the hall on her way to the
       salle à manger.
In pursuance of this project he takes up his position before the bell, tingling so lengthily
      as to reach the ears of the deafest and most distant, has summoned the company together; and
      it is several minutes before enough are assembled to justify, according to the etiquette
      prevailing at the Grand Hotel, a move to the dining-room. Men, at that hotel, although in a
      very distinct minority—as when, indeed, are they not?—are yet not quite the same choice
      rarities as at some of the Swiss and Italian ones. But the young of the one sex are
      perennially interesting to the other; and Burgoyne, as "the new man," is an object of some
      attention to half a dozen young girls, and even to two or three sprightly-hearted old ones.
      His eyes are eagerly shining as each opening door, each step on the staircase, raises his
      hopes afresh. But neither door nor staircase yields the form he seeks, and he is at last
      obliged, under penalty of exciting remark, reluctantly to follow the band that go trooping
      hungrily down a flight of steps to the whitewashed dining-room. He finds himself placed
      between a bouncing widow who is too much occupied in fondling an old valetudinarian on her
      other side to have much notice to spare for him; and a sparkling creature of five-and-thirty
      in a red shirt, who, before dinner is over, confides to him that she fears she has not got a
      nice nature, and that she cannot get on at home because her mother and the servants insist
      upon having cold supper instead of dinner on Sunday. When she tells him that she has not a
      nice nature, he absently replies that he is very sorry for it, and her confidence about the
      Sunday supper provokes from him only the extremely stupid observation that he supposes she
      does not like cold meat. It is a wonder that he can answer her even as rationally as he does.
      It is more by good luck than good management that there is any sense at all in his responses.
      And yet he may as well give his full attention to his neighbour, for now every place at the
      E-shaped table is filled up, and, travel as his eye may over those who sit, both at the long
      and cross-boards, it fails to discover any face in the least resembling that which lifted
      itself from the dusk terrace into his candle-light.
Was it her little ghost, then, that he had seen, her dainty delicate ghost? But why should
      it appear to him here? Why haunt these unfamiliar shores? The only places in the room
      which still remain untenanted are those at a round table laid for three, in the embrasure of a
      Moorish window, not very distant from where he sits. On first catching sight of it his hopes
      had risen, only immediately to fall again, as he realizes that it is destined for a trio. Why
      should three places be laid for Elizabeth and her mother?
With a disheartened sigh he tums to his neighbour, intending to put to her a question as to
      the habitual occupants of the empty table; but she is apparently affronted at his tepidness,
      and presents to him only the well-frizzled back of her expensive head. He is reduced to
      listening to the conversation of his vis-à-vis, an elderly couple, who have been upon
      some excursion, and are detailing their experiences to those around them. They have been to
      Blidah apparently, and seen real live monkeys hopping about without organs or red coats on
      real palm trees. He is drawn into the conversation by a question addressed to him as to his
      journey.
It is five minutes before he again looks towards the table in the window. His first glance
      reveals that the three persons for whom it is destined have at length arrived and taken their
      seats. Idiot that he is! he had forgotten Mr. Le Marchant's existence.
"They are nice-looking people, are they not?" says his neighbour in the red shirt,
      apparently repenting of her late austerity, and following the direction of his eyes; "but they
      give themselves great airs; nobody in the hotel is good enough for them to speak to. M.
      Cipriani evidently thinks them people of importance; he makes twice as much fuss about them as
      he does about anyone else. Look at him now!"
And in effect the obsequious little host may be seen hanging anxiously over the newcomers,
      evidently asking them with solicitous civility whether the not particularly appetizing fish
      (the strongest point of the blue Mediterranean does not lie in her fishes, of which some are
      coarse, some tasteless, and some even lie under the suspicion of having poisonous
      qualities)—whether it is not to their liking.
At something that M. Cipriani says they all laugh. Elizabeth, indeed, throws back her little
      head, and shows all her perfect teeth, in a paroxysm of the most genuine mirth. It gives
      Burgoyne a sort of shock to see her laugh.
Not a day, scarcely an hour, has passed since he last saw her in which he has not pictured
      her as doing or suffering, or living through something; he has never pictured her laughing. It
      seems to him now but a moment since he was reading her broken-hearted, tear-stained note;
      since he was seeing Byng grovelling in all the utter collapse of his ungoverned grief on the
      floor of the little Florentine entresol. What business has she to laugh? And how
      unchanged she is! How much less outwardly aged than he himself is conscious of being! Sitting
      as she now is, in her simple white tea-gown, with one slight elbow rested on the table, her
      eyes all sparkling with merriment and laughter, bringing into prominence that one enchanting
      dimple of hers, she does not look more than twenty. But a few moments later he forgives her
      even her dimple. However empressé may be the little landlord, he has to move away
      after a time; and the merriment moves away, too, out of Elizabeth's face. Jim watches it
      decline, through the degrees of humorous disgust, as she pushes the coarse white fish about
      her plate, without tasting it (she was always a very delicate eater), into a settled gravity.
      And now that she is grave he sees that she is aged, almost as much as he himself, after all.
      Her eyes had ever had the air of having shed in their time many tears; but since he last saw
      her, it is now evident to him that the tale of those tears has been a good deal added to.
There is no pleasing him. He was angry with her when he thought her gay, and now he quarrels
      with her for looking sad. As if, in her unconsciousness of his neighbourhood, she was yet
      determined to give him no cause of complaint, she presently again lays aside her sorrowful
      looks, and, drawing her chair confidentially nearer to her mother's, makes some remark of an
      evidently comic nature upon the company into her ear.
They stoop their heads together—what friends they always were, she and her mother!—and again
      the blue twinkle comes into her eyes; the dimple's little pitfall is dug anew in her white
      cheek. Was there ever such an April creature? Mr. Le Marchant appears to take no part in the
      jokes; he goes on eating his dinner silently, and his back, which is turned towards Burgoyne,
      looks morose.
How is it that Elizabeth's roving eye has not yet hit upon himself? He sees presently that
      the cause lies in the fact of her look alighting upon old and known objects of entertainment,
      rather than going in search of new ones. But it must sooner or later embrace him in its range.
      The fond fat widow beside him must surely be one of her favourites, and, in point of fact, as
      he feverishly watches to see the inevitable moment of recognition arrive, he perceives that
      Miss Le Marchant and her mother are delightedly—though not so openly as to be patent to the
      rest of the room—observing her. And then comes the expected careless glance at him, and the no
      less expected transformation. Her elbows have been carelessly resting on the table, and she
      has just been pressing her laughing lips against her lightly-joined hands to conceal their
      merriment. In an instant he sees the right hand go out in a silent desperate clutch at her
      mother's, and the next second he knows that she also has seen him. They both stare helplessly
      at him—at least, the one at him, and the other beyond him! How well he remembers that
      look of hers over his shoulder in search of someone else. But yet it is not the old look, for
      that was one of hope and red expectation. Is there any hope or expectation lurking even under
      the white dread of this one? His jealous heart is afraid quite to say no to this question, and
      yet an indisputable look of relief spreads over her face as she ascertains that he is alone.
      She even collects herself enough to give him a tiny inclination of the head—an example
      followed by her mother; but they are, in both cases, so tiny as to be unperceived, save by the
      person to whom they are addressed.
He would not have been offended by the minuteness of their salutations, even had he not
      divined that it was dictated by a desire—however futile—to conceal the fact of his presence
      from their companion. His heart goes out in all the profundity of his former pity towards
      them, as he sees how entirely that one glance at him (for she does not look again in his
      direction) has dried the fountain of Elizabeth's poor little jests; of how white and grave and
      frightened, and even shrunk, his mere presence has made her. Now that they have detected him,
      good breeding, and even humanity, forbid his continuing any longer his watch upon them. The
      better to set them at ease he turns the back of his head towards their table, and compels the
      reluctant widow to relinquish her invalid booty for fully ten minutes in his favour. Perhaps
      when Elizabeth can see only the back of his head she may resume her jokes. But all the same he
      knows that, for her, there will be no more mirth to-day.
"That is what they always do!" cries a voice on Burgoyne's left hand—the voice of his other
      neighbour, who begins to think that his attention has been usurped quite long enough by her
      plump rival. "That is what they always do—come long after dinner has begun, and go out long
      before it has ended. Such swagger!"
There is a tinge of exasperation in both words and voice, nor is the cause far to seek.
The table in the window is again empty. In the meantime the "swaggering" Elizabeth is
      clinging tremblingly about her mother's neck in the privacy of their own little salon. The
      absence of the husband and father for the moment in the smoking-room has removed the irksome
      restraint from both the poor women.
"Did you see him?" asks Elizabeth breathlessly, as soon as the door is safely closed upon
      them, flinging herself down upon her knees beside Mrs. Le Marchant, who has sunk into a chair,
      and cowering close to her as if for shelter. "What is he doing here? Why has he come? When
      first I caught sight of him I thought that of course—" She breaks off, sobbing; "and when I
      saw that he was alone I was relieved; but I was disappointed too! Oh, I must be a
      fool—a bad fool—but I was disappointed! Oh, mammy! mammy! how seeing him again brings
      it all back!"
"Do not cry, dear child! do not cry!" answers Mrs. Le Marchant apprehensively; though the
      voice in which she gives the exhortation is shaking too. "Your father will be in directly; and
      you know how angry——"
"I will not! I will not!" cries Elizabeth, trying, with her usual extreme docility, to
      swallow her tears; "and I do not show it much when I have been crying; my eyes do not mind it
      as much as most people's; I suppose"—with a small rainy smile—"because they are so used to
      it!"
"Perhaps he will not stay long," murmurs the mother, dropping a fond rueful kiss on the
      prone blonde head that lies on her knees; "perhaps if we are careful we may avoid speaking to
      him."
"But I must speak to him," breaks in the girl, lifting her head, and panting; "I
       must ask him; I must find out; why, we do not even know whether Willy is
      dead or alive!"
"He is not dead," rejoins the elder woman, with melancholy common-sense; "if he had been, we
      should have seen it in the papers; and, besides, why should he be? Grief does not kill;
      nobody, Elizabeth, is better able to attest that than you and I."
Elizabeth is now sitting on the floor, her hands clasped round her knees.
"He is aged," she says presently; and this time it is evident that the pronoun refers to
      Burgoyne.
Mrs. Le Marchant assents.
"He must have cared more for that poor creature than we gave him credit for. Get up,
      darling; dry your eyes, and sit with your back to the light; here comes your father!"
