
CHAPTER III
On the morning after her visit to Madame Cagliostra, Sylvia Bailey woke later than usual. She
     had had a disturbed night, and it was pleasant to feel that she could spend a long restful day
     doing nothing, or only taking part in one of the gay little expeditions which make Paris to a
     stranger the most delightful of European capitals.
She opened wide both the windows of her room, and from outside there floated in a busy, happy
     murmur, for Paris is an early city, and nine o'clock there is equivalent to eleven o'clock in
     London.
She heard the picturesque street cries of the flower-sellers in the Avenue de
     l'Opéra—"Beflower yourselves, gentlemen and ladies, beflower yourselves!"
The gay, shrill sounds floated in to her, and, in spite of her bad night and ugly dreams, she
     felt extraordinarily well and happy.
Cities are like people. In some cities one feels at home at once; others remain, however well
     acquainted we become with them, always strangers.
Sylvia Bailey, born, bred, married, widowed in an English provincial town, had always felt
     strange in London. But with Paris,—dear, delightful, sunny Paris,—she had become on the
     closest, the most affectionately intimate terms from the first day. She had only been here a
     month, and yet she already knew with familiar knowledge the quarter in which was situated her
     quiet little hotel, that wonderful square mile—it is not more—which has as its centre the Paris
     Opera House, and which includes the Rue de la Paix and the beginning of each of the great
     arteries of modern Paris.
And that was not all. Sylvia Bailey knew something of the France of the past. The quiet,
     clever, old-fashioned Frenchwoman by whom she had been educated had seen to that. She could
     wander through the narrow streets on the other side of the Seine, and reconstitute the amazing,
     moving, tragic things which happened there during the great Revolution.
She was now half sorry to think that in ten days or so she had promised to join some
     acquaintances in Switzerland. Luckily her trustee and would-be lover, Bill Chester, proposed to
     come out and join the party there. That was something to look forward to, for Sylvia was very
     fond of him, though he sometimes made her angry by his fussy ways. Chester had not approved of
     her going to Paris by herself, and he would certainly have shaken his head had he known of
     yesterday's visit to Madame Cagliostra.
And then Sylvia Bailey began to think of her new friend: of Anna Wolsky. She was sorry, very
     sorry, that they were going to part so soon. If only Anna would consent to come on with her to
     Switzerland! But alas! there was no chance of that, for there are no Casinos, no gambling, in
     the land of William Tell.
There came a knock at the door, and Madame Wolsky walked in. She was dressed for a
     journey.
"I have to go out of town this morning," she said, "but the place I am going to is quite
     near, and I shall be back this afternoon."
"Where are you going?" asked Sylvia, naïvely. "Or is it a secret?"
"No, it is not a secret." Anna smiled provokingly. "I am going to go to a place called
     Lacville. I do not suppose you have ever heard of Lacville, Sylvia?"
The other shook her head.
"I thought not," cried Anna, suddenly bursting out laughing. Then, "Good-bye!" she exclaimed,
     and she was gone before Sylvia could say anything else.
Lacville? There had been a sparkle, a look of life, of energy in Anna's face. Why was Anna
     Wolsky going to Lacville? There was something about the place concerning which she had chosen
     to be mysterious, and yet she had made no secret of going there.
Mrs. Bailey jumped out of bed, and dressed rather more quickly than usual.
It was a very hot day. In fact, it was unpleasantly hot. How delightful it would be to get
     into the country even for an hour. Why should she not also make her way to Lacville?
She opened the "Guide-Book to Paris and its Environs," of which she had made such good use in
     the last month, and looked up "Lacville" in the index.

Situated within a drive of the beautiful Forest of Montmorency, the pretty little town of
      Lacville is still famed for its healing springs and during the summer months of the year is
      much frequented by Parisians. There are frequent trains from the Gare du Nord.

No kind fairy whispered the truth to Sylvia—namely that this account is only half, nay, a
     quarter, or an eighth, of the truth.
Lacville is the spendthrift, the gambler—the austere would call her the chartered
     libertine—of the group of pretty country towns which encircle Paris; for Lacville is in the
     proud possession of a Gambling Concession which has gradually turned what was once the quietest
     of inland watering-places into a miniature Monte Carlo.
The vast majority of intelligent, cultivated English and American visitors to Paris remain
     quite unaware that there is, within half an hour of the French capital, such a spot; the
     minority, those tourists who do make their way to the alluring little place, generally live to
     regret it.
But Sylvia knew nothing, nay, less than nothing, of all this, and even if she had known, it
     would not have stayed her steps to-day.
She put on her hat and hurried down to the office. There M. Girard would doubtless tell her
     of a good train to Lacville, and if it were a small place she might easily run across Anna
     Wolsky.
M. Girard was a very busy man, yet he always found time for a talk with any foreign client of
     his hotel.
"I want to know," said Sylvia, smiling in spite of herself, for the hotel-keeper was such a
     merry-looking little man, and so utterly different from any English hotel-keeper she had ever
     seen!—"I want to know, M. Girard, which is the best way to a place called Lacville? Have you
     ever been there?"
"Lacville?" echoed M. Girard delightedly; but there came a rather funny look over his shrewd,
     round face. "Yes, indeed, I have been there, Madame! Not this season yet, but often last
     summer, and I shall be going there shortly again. I have a friend there—indeed, he is more than
     a friend, he is a relation of mine, who keeps the most select hotel at Lacville. It is called
     the Villa du Lac. Is Madame thinking of going to Lacville instead of to Switzerland?"
Sylvia shook her head. "Oh, no! But Madame Wolsky is there to-day, and I should have gone
     with her if I had been ready when she came down. It has turned so hot that I feel a few hours
     in the country would be pleasant, and I am quite likely to meet her, for I suppose Lacville is
     not a very large place, M. Girard?"
The hotel-keeper hesitated; he found it really difficult to give a true answer to this simple
     question.
"Lacville?" he repeated; "well—Dame! Lacville is Lacville! It is not like anything Madame has
     ever seen. On that I would lay my life. First, there is a most beautiful lake—that is, perhaps,
     the principal attraction;—then the villas of Lacville—ah! they are ravishingly lovely, and then
     there is also"—he fixed his black eyes on her—"a Casino."
"A Casino?" echoed Sylvia. She scarcely knew what a Casino was.
"But to see the Casino properly Madame must go at night, and it would be well if Madame were
     accompanied by a gentleman. I do not think Madame should go by herself, but if Madame really
     desires to see Lacville properly my wife and I will make a great pleasure to ourselves to
     accompany her there one Sunday night. It is very gay, is Lacville on Sunday night—or, perhaps,"
     added M. Girard quickly, "Madame, being English, would prefer a Saturday night? Lacville is
     also very gay on Saturday nights."
"But is there anything going on there at night?" asked Sylvia, astonished. "I thought
     Lacville was a country place."
"There are a hundred and twenty trains daily from the Gare du Nord to Lacville," said the
     hotel-keeper drily. "A great many Parisians spend the evening there each day. They do not start
     till nine o'clock in the evening, and they are back, having spent a very pleasant, or sometimes
     an unpleasant, soirée, before midnight."
"A hundred and twenty trains!" repeated Sylvia, amazed. "But why do so many people want to go
     to Lacville?"
Again the hotel-keeper stared at her with a questioning look. Was it possible that pretty
     Madame Bailey did not know what was the real attraction of Lacville? Yet it was not his
     business to run the place down—as a matter of fact, he and his wife had invested nearly a
     thousand pounds of their hard-earned savings in their relation's hotel, the Villa du Lac. If
     Madame Bailey really wanted to leave salubrious, beautiful Paris for the summer, why should she
     not go to Lacville instead of to dull, puritanical, stupid Switzerland?
These thoughts rushed through the active brain of M. Girard with amazing quickness.
"Many people go to Lacville in order to play baccarat," he said lightly.
And then Sylvia knew why Anna Wolsky had gone to Lacville.
"But apart from the play, Lacville is a little paradise, Madame," he went on
     enthusiastically. "It is a beauteous spot, just like a scene in an opera. There is the romantic
     lake, edged with high, shady trees and princely villas—and then the gay, the delightful
     Casino!"
"And is there a train soon?"
"I will look Madame out a train this moment, and I will also give her one of my cousin
     Polperro's cards. Madame has, of course, heard of the Empress Eugénie? Well, the Villa du Lac
     once belonged to one of the Empress's gentlemen-in-waiting. The very highest nobility stay at
     the Villa du Lac with my cousin. At this very moment he has Count Paul de Virieu, the
     brother-in-law of a duke, among his clients—"
M. Girard had noticed the British fondness for titles.
"You see, Madame, my cousin was chef to the Emperor of Brazil's sister—this has given him a
     connection among the nobility. In the winter he has an hotel at Mentone," he was looking up the
     train while he chatted happily.
"There is a train every ten minutes," he said at last, "from the Gare du Nord. Or, if Madame
     prefers it, she could walk up from here to the Square of the Trinité and take the tramway; but
     it is quicker and pleasanter to go by train—unless, indeed, Madame wishes to offer herself the
     luxury of an automobile. That, alas! I fear would cost Madame twenty to thirty francs."
"Of course I will go by train," said Sylvia, smiling, "and I will lunch at your cousin's
     hotel, M. Girard."
It would be quite easy to find Anna, or so she thought, for Anna would be at the Casino.
     Sylvia felt painfully interested in her friend's love of gambling. It was so strange that Anna
     was not ashamed of it.
And then as she drove to the great railway terminus, from which a hundred and twenty trains
     start daily for Lacville, it seemed to Sylvia that the whole of Paris was placarded with the
     name of the place she was now about to visit for the first time!
On every hoarding, on every bare piece of wall, were spread large, flamboyant posters showing
     a garish but not unattractive landscape. There was the sun sparkling on a wide stretch of water
     edged with high trees, and gay with little sailing boats, each boat with its human freight of
     two lovers. Jutting out into the blue lake was a great white building, which Sylvia realised
     must be the Casino. And under each picture ran the words "Lacville-les-Bains" printed in very
     black letters.
When she got to the Gare du Nord the same advertisement stared down at her from the walls of
     the station and of the waiting-rooms.
It was certainly odd that she had never heard of Lacville, and that the place had never been
     mentioned to her by any of those of her English acquaintances who thought they knew Paris so
     well.
The Lacville train was full of happy, chattering people. In her first-class carriage she had
     five fellow-travellers—a man and woman and three children. They looked cheerful, prosperous
     people, and soon the husband and wife began talking eagerly together.
"I really think," said the lady suddenly, "that we might have chosen some other place than
     Lacville in which to spend to-day! There are many places the children would have enjoyed
     more."
"But there is no place," said her husband in a jovial tone, "where I can spend an amusing
     hour in the afternoon."
"Ah, my friend, I feared that was coming!" exclaimed his wife, shaking her head. "But
     remember what happened the last time we were at Lacville—I mean the afternoon when you lost
     seventy francs!"
"But you forget that other afternoon!" answered the man eagerly. "I mean the afternoon when I
     made a hundred francs, and bought you and the children a number of delightful little gifts with
     the money!"
Sylvia was amused. How quaint and odd French people were! She could not imagine such an
     interchange of words between an English husband and wife, especially before a stranger. And
     then her amusement was further increased, for the youngest child, a boy of about six, cried out
     that he also wished to go to the Casino with his dear papa.
"No, no, my sweet cabbage, that will happen quite soon enough, when thou art older! If thou
     art in the least like thy father, there will certainly come a time when thou also wilt go and
     lose well-earned money at the Tables," said his mother tenderly.
"But if I win, then I shall buy thee a present," said the sweet cabbage coaxingly.
Sylvia looked out of the window. These happy, chattering people made her feel lonely, and
     even a little depressed.
The country through which the train was passing was very flat and ugly—in fact, it could
     scarcely be called country at all. And when at last they drew up into the large station of what
     was once a quiet, remote village where Parisian invalids, too poor to go elsewhere, came to
     take medicinal waters, she felt a pang of disappointment. Lacville, as seen from the railway,
     is an unattractive place.
"Is this Madame's first visit to Lacville?" asked her fellow-traveller, helping her out of
     the railway carriage. "If so, Madame would doubtless like to make her way to the lake. Would
     she care to accompany us thither?"
Sylvia hesitated. She almost felt inclined to go back to Paris by the next train. She told
     herself that there was no hope of finding Anna in such a large place, and that it was unlikely
     that this dreary-looking town would offer anything in the least pleasant or amusing on a very
     hot day.
But "It will be enchanting by the lake!" she heard some one say eagerly. And this chance
     remark made up her mind for her. After all, she might as well go and see the lake, of which
     everyone who mentioned Lacville spoke so enthusiastically.
Down the whole party swept along a narrow street, bordered by high white houses, shabby
     cafés, and little shops. Quite a crowd had left the station, and they were all now going the
     same way.
A turn in the narrow street, and Sylvia uttered a low cry of pleasure and astonishment!
Before her, like a scene in a play when the curtain is rung up, there suddenly appeared an
     immense sunlit expanse of water, fringed by high trees, and bordered by quaint, pretty châlets
     and villas, fantastic in shape, and each surrounded by a garden, which in many cases ran down
     to the edge of the lake.
To the right, stretching out over the water, its pinnacles and minarets reflected in blue
     translucent depths, rose what looked like a great white marble palace.
"Is it not lovely?" said the Frenchman eagerly. "And the water of the lake is so shallow,
     Madame, there is no fear of anyone being drowned in it! That is such an advantage when one has
     children."
"And it is a hundred times more charming in the afternoon," his wife chimed in, happily, "for
     then the lake is so full of little sailing-boats that you can hardly see the water. Oh, it is
     gay then, very gay!"
She glanced at Mrs. Bailey's pretty grey muslin dress and elegant parasol.
"I suppose Madame is going to one of the great restaurants? As for us, we shall make our way
     into a wood and have our luncheon there. It is expensive going to a restaurant with
     children."
She nodded pleasantly, with the easy, graceful familiarity which foreigners show in their
     dealings with strangers; and, shepherding their little party along, the worthy pair went
     briskly off by the broad avenue which girdles the lake.
Again Sylvia felt curiously alone. She was surrounded on every side by groups of
     merry-looking people, and already out on the lake there floated tiny white-sailed boats, each
     containing a man and a girl.
Everyone seemed to have a companion or companions; she alone was solitary. She even found
     herself wondering what she was doing there in a foreign country, by herself, when she might
     have been in England, in her own pleasant house at Market Dalling!
She took out of her bag the card which the landlord of the Hôtel de l'Horloge had pressed
     upon her. "Hôtel Pension, Villa du Lac, Lacville."
She went up rather timidly to a respectable-looking old bourgeois and his wife. "Do you
     know," she asked, "where is the Villa du Lac?"
"Certainly, Madame," answered the old man amiably. "It is there, close to you, not a hundred
     yards away. That big white house to our left." And then, with that love of giving information
     which possesses so many Frenchman, he added:
"The Villa du Lac once belonged to the Marquis de Para, who was gentleman-in-waiting to the
     Empress Eugénie. He and his family lived on here long after the war, in fact"—he lowered his
     voice—"till the Concession was granted to the Casino. You know what I mean? The Gambling
     Concession. Since then the world of Lacville has become rather mixed, as I have reason to know,
     for my wife and I have lived here fifteen years. The Marquis de Para sold his charming villa.
     He was driven away, like so many other excellent people. So the Villa du Lac is now an hotel,
     where doubtless Madame has friends?"
Sylvia bowed and thanked him. Yes, the Villa du Lac even now looked like a delightful and
     well-kept private house, rather than like an hotel. It stood some way back—behind high
     wrought-steel and gilt gates—from the sandy road which lay between it and the lake, and the
     stone-paved courtyard was edged with a line of green tubs, containing orange trees.
Sylvia walked through the gates, which stood hospitably open, and when she was half-way up
     the horseshoe stone-staircase which led to the front door, a man, dressed in the white dress of
     a French chef, and bearing an almost ludicrous resemblance to M. Girard, came hurrying out.
"Madame Bailey?" he exclaimed joyously, and bowing very low. "Have I the honour of greeting
     Madame Bailey? My cousin telephoned to me that you might be coming, Madame, to déjeuner!" And
     as Sylvia smiled in assent: "I am delighted, I am honoured, by the visit of Madame Bailey!"
Sylvia laughed outright. She really could not help it! It was very nice and thoughtful of M.
     Girard to have telephoned to his cousin. But how dreadful it would have been if she had gone
     straight back to Paris from the station. All these kind people would have had their trouble for
     nothing.
M. Polperro was a shrewd Southerner, and he had had the sense to make but few alterations to
     the Villa du Lac. It therefore retained something of the grand air it had worn in the days when
     it had been the property of a Court official. The large, cool, circular hall into which the
     hotel-keeper ushered Sylvia was charming, as were the long, finely decorated reception-rooms on
     either side.
The dining-room, filled with small oval tables, to which M. Polperro next led his honoured
     guest, had been built out since the house had become an hotel. It commanded a view of the lake
     on the one side, and of the large, shady garden of the villa on the other.
"I have arranged for Madame a little table in what we call the lake window," observed M.
     Polperro. "As yet Lacville is very empty. Paris is so delightful," he sighed, "but very soon,
     when the heat comes, Lacville will be quite full," he smiled joyously. "I myself have a very
     choice clientèle—I do not deal with rubbish." He drew himself up proudly. "My clients come back
     to me year after year. Already I have six visitors, and in ten days my pension will be au
      grand complet. It is quality, not quantity, that I desire, Madame. If ever you know
     anyone who wishes to come to Lacville you may safely recommend them—I say it with my hands on
     my heart," and he suited his action to his words—"to the Villa du Lac."
How delightful it all was to Sylvia Bailey! No wonder her feeling of depression and
     loneliness vanished.
As she sat down, and looked out of the bay window which commanded the whole length of the
     gleaming, sun-flecked lake, she told herself that, pleasant as was Paris, Lacville on a hot day
     was certainly a hundred times pleasanter than Paris.
And the Casino? Sylvia fixed her blue eyes on the white, fairy-like group of buildings, which
     were so attractive an addition to the pretty landscape.
Surely one might spend a pleasant time at Lacville and never play for money? Though she was
     inclined to feel that in this matter of gambling English people are curiously narrow. It was
     better to be philosophical about it, like that excellent Frenchwoman in the train, who had not
     grudged her husband a little amusement, even if it entailed his losing what she had described
     as "hard-earned money."
Though she had to wait nearly half an hour for her meal, the time passed quickly; and when at
     last déjeuner was served to her well and deftly by a pleasant-faced young waitress dressed in
     Breton costume, each item of the carefully-prepared meal was delicious. M. Polperro had not
     been chef to a Princess for nothing.
Sylvia Bailey was not greedy, but like most healthy people she enjoyed good food, and she had
     very seldom tasted quite such good food as that which was served to her at the Hôtel du Lac on
     this memorable June day.
She had almost finished her luncheon when a fair young man came in and sat down at a small
     table situated at the other end of the dining-room, close to the window overlooking the garden
     of the Villa du Lac.
