
CHAPTER X
And then there began a series of long cloudless days for Sylvia Bailey. For the first time
     she felt as if she was seeing life, and such seeing was very pleasant to her.
Not in her wildest dreams, during the placid days of her girlhood and brief married life, had
     she conceived of so interesting and so exhilarating an existence as that which she was now
     leading! And this was perhaps owing in a measure to the fact that there is, if one may so
     express it, a spice of naughtiness in life as led at Lacville.
In a mild, a very mild, way Sylvia Bailey had fallen a victim to the Goddess of Play. She
     soon learned to look forward to the hours she and Anna Wolsky spent each day at the baccarat
     tables. But, unlike Anna, Sylvia was never tempted to risk a greater sum on that dangerous
     green cloth than she could comfortably afford to lose, and perhaps just because this was so, on
     the whole she won money rather than lost it.
A certain change had come over the relations of the two women. They still met daily, if only
     at the Casino, and they occasionally took a walk or a drive together, but Madame Wolsky—and
     Sylvia Bailey felt uneasy and growing concern that it was so—now lived for play, and play
     alone.
Absorbed in the simple yet fateful turns of the game, Anna would remain silent for hours,
     immersed in calculations, and scarcely aware of what went on round her. She and Monsieur
     Wachner—"L'Ami Fritz," as even Sylvia had fallen into the way of calling him—seemed scarcely
     alive unless they were standing or sitting round a baccarat table, putting down or taking up
     the shining gold pieces which they treated as carelessly as if they were counters.
But it was not the easy, idle, purposeless life she was now leading that brought the pretty
     English widow that strange, unacknowledged feeling of entire content with life.
What made existence at Lacville so exciting and so exceptionally interesting to Sylvia Bailey
     was her friendship with Comte Paul de Virieu.
There is in every woman a passion for romance, and in Sylvia this passion had been baulked,
     not satisfied, by her first marriage.
Bill Chester loved her well and deeply, but he was her lawyer and trustee as well as her
     lover. He had an honest, straightforward nature, and when with her something always prompted
     Chester to act the part of candid friend, and the part of candid friend fits in very ill with
     that of lover. To take but one example of how ill his honesty of purpose served him in the
     matter, Sylvia had never really forgiven him the "fuss" he had made about her string of
     pearls.
But with the Comte de Virieu she never quite knew what to be at, and mystery is the food of
     romance.
At the Villa du Lac the two were almost inseparable, and yet so intelligently and quietly did
     the Count arrange their frequent meetings—their long walks and talks in the large deserted
     garden, their pleasant morning saunters through the little town—that no one, or so Sylvia
     believed, was aware of any special intimacy between them.
Sometimes, as they paced up and down the flower-bordered paths of the old kitchen-garden, or
     when, tired of walking, they made their way into the orangery and sat down on the circular
     stone bench by the fountain, Sylvia would remember, deep in her heart, the first time Count
     Paul had brought her there; and how she had been a little frightened, not perhaps altogether
     unpleasantly so, by his proximity!
She had feared—but she was now deeply ashamed of having entertained such a thought—that he
     might suddenly begin making violent love to her, that he might perhaps try to kiss her! Were
     not all Frenchmen of his type rather gay dogs?
But nothing—nothing of the sort had ever been within measurable distance of happening. On the
     contrary, he always treated her with scrupulous respect, and he never—and this sometimes piqued
     Sylvia—made love to her, or attempted to flirt with her. Instead, he talked to her in that
     intimate, that confiding fashion which a woman finds so attractive in a man when she has reason
     to believe his confidences are made to her alone.
When Bill Chester asked her not to do something she desired to do, Sylvia felt annoyed and
     impatient, but when Count Paul, as she had fallen into the way of calling him, made no secret
     of his wish that she should give up play, Sylvia felt touched and pleased that he should
     care.
Early in their acquaintance the Count had warned her against making casual friendships in the
     Gambling Rooms, and he even did not like her knowing—this amused Sylvia—the harmless
     Wachners.
When he saw her talking to Madame Wachner in the Club, Count Paul would look across the
     baccarat table and there would come a little frown over his eyes—a frown she alone could
     see.
And as the days went on, and as their intimacy seemed to grow closer and ever closer, there
     came across Sylvia a deep wordless wish—and she had never longed for anything so much in her
     life—to rescue her friend from what he admitted to be his terrible vice of gambling. In this
     she showed rather a feminine lack of logic, for, while wishing to wean him from his vice, she
     did not herself give up going to the Casino.
She would have been angry indeed had the truth been whispered to her, the truth that it was
     not so much her little daily gamble—as Madame Wachner called it—that made Sylvia so faithful an
     attendant at the Club; it was because when there she was still with Paul de Virieu, she could
     see and sympathise with him when he was winning, and grieve when he was losing, as alas! he
     often lost.
When they were not at the Casino the Comte de Virieu very seldom alluded to his play, or to
     the good or ill fortune which might have befallen him that day. When with her he tried, so much
     was clear to Sylvia, to forget his passion for gambling.
But this curious friendship of hers with Count Paul only occupied, in a material sense, a
     small part of Sylvia's daily life at Lacville; and the people with whom she spent most of her
     time were still Anna Wolsky and Monsieur and Madame Wachner, or perhaps it should be said
     Madame Wachner.
It was not wonderful that Mrs. Bailey liked the cheerful woman, who was so bright and jovial
     in manner, and who knew, too, how to flatter so cleverly. When with Madame Wachner Sylvia was
     made to feel that she was not only very pretty, but also immensely attractive, and just now she
     was very anxious to think herself both.
Late one afternoon—and they all four always met each afternoon at the Casino—Madame Wachner
     suddenly invited Sylvia and Anna to come back to supper at the Châlet des Muguets.
Anna was unwilling to accept the kindly invitation. It was clear that she did not wish to
     waste as much time away from the Casino as going to the Wachners' villa would involve. But,
     seeing that Sylvia was eager to go, she gave way.
Now on this particular afternoon Sylvia was feeling rather dull, and, as she expressed it to
     herself, "down on her luck," for the Comte de Virieu had gone into Paris for a few hours.
His sister, the Duchesse d'Eglemont, had come up from the country for a few days, and the
     great pleasure and delight he had expressed at the thought of seeing her had given the young
     English widow a little pang of pain. It made her feel how little she counted in his life after
     all.
And so, for the second time, Sylvia visited the odd, fantastic-looking Châlet des Muguets,
     and under very pleasant auspices.
This evening the bare dining-room she had thought so ugly wore an air of festivity. There
     were flowers on the round table and on the buffet, but, to her surprise, a piece of oilcloth
     now hid the parquet floor. This puzzled Sylvia, as such trifling little matters of fact often
     puzzle a fresh young mind. Surely the oilcloth had not been there on her last visit to the
     villa? She remembered clearly the unpolished parquet floor.
Thanks to the hostess and to Sylvia herself, supper was a bright, merry meal. There was a
     variety of cold meats, some fine fruit, and a plate of dainty pastry.
They all waited on one another, though Madame Wachner insisted on doing most of the work. But
     L'Ami Fritz, for once looking cheerful and eager, mixed the salad, putting in even more vinegar
     than oil, as Mrs. Bailey laughingly confessed that she hated olive oil!
After they had eaten their appetising little meal, the host went off into the kitchen where
     Sylvia had had tea on her first visit to the Châlet, and there he made the most excellent
     coffee for them all, and even Mrs. Bailey, who was treated as the guest of honour, though she
     knew that coffee was not good for her, was tempted into taking some.
One thing, however, rather dashed her pleasure in the entertainment.
Madame Wachner, forgetting for once her usual tact, suddenly made a violent attack on the
     Comte de Virieu.
They were all talking of the habitués of the Casino: "The only one I do not like," she
     exclaimed, in French, "is that Count—if indeed Count he be? He is so arrogant, so proud, so
     rude! We have known him for years, have L'Ami Fritz and I, for we are always running across him
     at Monte Carlo and other places. But no, each time we meet he looks at us as if he was a fish.
     He does not even nod!"
"When the Comte de Virieu is actually playing, he does not know that other people exist,"
     said Anna Wolsky, slowly.
She had looked across at Sylvia and noticed her English friend's blush and look of
     embarrassment. "I used to watch him two years ago at Monte Carlo, and I have never seen a man
     more absorbed in his play."
"That is no excuse!" cried Madame Wachner, scornfully. "Besides, that is only half the truth.
     He is ashamed of the way he is spending his life, and he hates the people who see him doing it!
     It is shameful to be so idle. A strong young man doing nothing, living on charity, so they say!
     And he despises all those who do what he himself is not ashamed to do."
And Sylvia, looking across at her, said to herself with a heavy sigh that this was true.
     Madame Wachner had summed up Count Paul very accurately.
At last there came the sound of a carriage in the quiet lane outside.
"Fritz! Go and see if that is the carriage I ordered to come here at nine o'clock," said his
     wife sharply; and then, as he got up silently to obey her, she followed him out into the
     passage, and Sylvia, who had very quick ears, heard her say, in low, vehement tones, "I work
     and work and work, but you do nothing! Do try and help me—it is for your sake I am taking all
     this trouble!"
What could these odd words mean? At what was Madame Wachner working?
A sudden feeling of discomfort came over Sylvia. Then the stout, jolly-looking woman was not
     without private anxieties and cares? There had been something so weary as well as so angry in
     the tone in which Madame Wachner spoke to her beloved "Ami Fritz."
A moment later he was hurrying towards the gate.
"Sophie," he cried out from the garden, "the carriage is here! Come along—we have wasted too
     much time already—"
Like Anna Wolsky, Monsieur Wachner grudged every moment spent away from the tables.
Madame Wachner hurried her two guests into her bed-room to put on their hats.
Anna Wolsky walked over to the window.
"What a strange, lonely place to live in!" she said, and drew the lace shawl she was wearing
     a little more closely about her thin shoulders. "And that wood over there—I should be afraid to
     live so near a wood! I should think that there might be queer people concealed there."
"Bah! Why should we be frightened, even if there were queer people there!"
"Well, but sometimes you must have a good deal of money in this house."
Madame Wachner laughed.
"When we have so much money that we cannot carry it about, and that, alas! is not very
     often—but still, when Fritz makes a big win, we go into Paris and bank the money."
"I do not trouble to do that," said Anna, "for I always carry all my money about with me.
     What do you do?" she turned to Sylvia Bailey.
"I leave it in my trunk at the hotel," said Sylvia. "The servants at the Villa du Lac seem to
     be perfectly honest—in fact they are mostly related to the proprietor, M. Polperro."
"Oh, but that is quite wrong!" exclaimed Madame Wachner, eagerly. "You should never leave
     your money in the hotel; you should always carry it about with you—in little bags like this.
     See!"
Again she suddenly lifted the light alpaca skirt she was wearing, as she had done before, in
     this very room, on the occasion of Sylvia's first visit to the Châlet. "That is the way to
     carry money in a place like this!" she said, smiling. "But now hurry, or all our evening will
     be gone!"
They left the house, and hastened down the garden to the gate, where L'Ami Fritz received his
     wife with a grumbling complaint that they had been so long.
And he was right, for the Casino was very full. Sylvia made no attempt to play. Somehow she
     did not care for the Club when Count Paul was not there.
She was glad when she was at last able to leave the others for the Villa du Lac.
Anna Wolsky accompanied her friend to the entrance of the Casino. The Comte de Virieu was
     just coming in as Sylvia went out; bowing distantly to the two ladies, he hurried through the
     vestibule towards the Club.
Sylvia's heart sank. Not even after spending a day with his beloved sister could he resist
     the lure of play!
