
CHAPTER IX
A quarter of an hour's sharp driving brought Sylvia and Madame Wachner to the door of the
     Casino. They found Madame Wolsky in the hall waiting for them.
"I couldn't think what had happened to you!" she exclaimed in an anxious tone. "But here is
     your membership card, Sylvia. Now you are free of the Baccarat tables!"
Monsieur Wachner met his wife with a frowning face. He might be pleased to see Madame
     Wachner, but he showed his pleasure in an odd manner. Soon, however, the secret of his angry
     look was revealed, for Madame Wachner opened the leather bag hanging from her wrist and took
     out of it a hundred francs.
"Here, Fritz," she cried, gaily. "You can now begin your play!"
Sylvia Bailey felt very much amused. So poor "Ami Fritz" was not allowed to gamble unless his
     wife were there to see that he did not go too far. No wonder he had looked impatient and eager,
     as well as cross! He had been engaged—that was clear—in putting down the turns of the game, and
     in working out what were no doubt abstruse calculations connected with his system.
The Club was very full, and it was a little difficult at that hour of the late afternoon to
     get near enough to a table to play comfortably; but a stranger had kindly kept Anna Wolsky's
     place for her.
"I have been quite lucky," she whispered to Sylvia. "I have made three hundred francs, and
     now I think I will rest a bit! Slip in here, dear, and I will stand behind you. I do not advise
     you to risk more than twenty francs the first time; on the other hand, if you feel en
      veine, if the luck seems persistent—it sometimes is when one first plays with gold—then
     be bold, and do not hesitate!"
Sylvia, feeling rather bewildered, slipped into her friend's place, and Anna kept close
     behind her.
With a hand that trembled a little, she put a twenty-franc piece down on the green table.
     After doing so she looked up, and saw that the Comte de Virieu was standing nearly opposite to
     her, on the other side of the table.
His eyes were fixed on her, and there was a very kind and indulgent, if sad, smile on his
     face. As their glances met he leant forward and also put a twenty-franc piece on the green
     cloth close to where Sylvia's money lay.
The traditional words rang out: "Faites vos jeux, Messieurs, Mesdames! Le jeu est fait!
      Rien ne va plus!"
And then Sylvia saw her stake and that of the Count doubled. There were now four gold pieces
     where two had been.
"Leave your money on, and see what happens," whispered Anna. "After all you are only risking
     twenty francs!"
And Sylvia obediently followed the advice.
Again there came a little pause; once more the words which she had not yet learnt to
     understand rang out in the croupier's monotonous voice.
She looked round her; there was anxiety and watchful suspense on all the eager faces. The
     Comte de Virieu alone looked indifferent.
A moment later four gold pieces were added to the four already there.
"You had better take up your winnings, or someone may claim them," muttered Anna
     anxiously.
"Oh, but I don't like to do that," said Sylvia.
"Of course you must!"
She put out her hand and took up her four gold pieces, leaving those of the Count on the
     table. Then suddenly she put back the eighty francs on the cloth, and smiled up at him; it was
     a gay little shame-faced smile. "Please don't be cross with me, kind friend,"—that is what
     Sylvia's smile seemed to say to Paul de Virieu—"but this is so very exciting!"
He felt stirred to the heart. How sweet, how confidingly simple she looked! And—and how very
     beautiful. He at once loved and hated to see her there, his new little "amie
     Anglaise!"
"Are you going to leave the whole of it on this time?" whispered Anna.
"Yes, I think I will. It's rather fun. After all, I'm only risking twenty francs!" whispered
     back Sylvia.
And once more she won.
"What a pity you didn't start playing with a hundred francs! Think of how rich you would be
     now," said Anna, with the true gambler's instinct. "But it is clear, child, that you are going
     to do well this evening, and I shall follow your luck! Take the money off now, however."
Sylvia waited to see what the Count would do. Their eyes asked and answered the same
     question. He gave an imperceptible nod, and she took up her winnings—eight gold pieces!
It was well that she had done so, for the next deal of the cards favoured the banker.
Then something very surprising happened to Sylvia.
Someone—she thought it was Monsieur Wachner—addressed the croupier whose duty it was to deal
     out the cards, and said imperiously, "A Madame la main!"
Hardly knowing what she was doing, Sylvia took up the cards which had been pushed towards
     her. A murmur of satisfaction ran round the table, for there lay what even she had learnt by
     now was the winning number, a nine of hearts, and the second card was the king of clubs.
Again and again, she turned up winning numbers—the eight and the ace, the five and the four,
     the six and the three—every combination which brought luck to the table and confusion to the
     banker.
Eyes full of adoring admiration, aye and gratitude, were turned on the young Englishwoman.
     Paul de Virieu alone did not look at her. But he followed her play.
"Now put on a hundred francs," said Anna, authoritatively.
Sylvia looked at her, rather surprised by the advice, but she obeyed it. And still the Comte
     de Virieu followed her lead.
That made her feel dreadfully nervous and excited—it would be so terrible to make him lose
     too!
Neither of them lost. On the contrary, ten napoleons were added to the double pile of
     gold.
And then, after that, it seemed as if the whole table were following Sylvia's game.
"That pretty Englishwoman is playing for the first time!"—so the word went round. And they
     all began backing her luck with feverish haste.
The banker, a good-looking young Frenchman, stared at Sylvia ruefully. Thanks to her, he was
     being badly punished. Fortunately, he could afford it.
At the end of half an hour, feeling tired and bewildered by her good fortune, Mrs. Bailey got
     up and moved away from the table, the possessor of £92. The Comte Virieu had won exactly the
     same amount.
Now everybody looked pleased except the banker. For the first time a smile irradiated
     Monsieur Wachner's long face.
As for Madame Wachner, she was overjoyed. Catching Sylvia by the hand, she exclaimed, in her
     curious, woolly French, "I would like to embrace you! But I know that English ladies do not
     like kissing in public. It is splendid—splendid! Look at all the people you have made
     happy."
"But how about the poor banker?" asked Sylvia, blushing.
"Oh, 'e is all right. 'E is very rich."
Madame Wolsky, like the Count, had exactly followed her friend's play, but not as soon as he
     had done. Still, she also had made over £80.
"Two thousand francs!" she cried, joyfully. "That is very good for a beginning. And you?" she
     turned to Monsieur Wachner.
He hesitated, and looked at his wife deprecatingly.
"L'Ami Fritz," said Madame Wachner, "will play 'is system, Mesdames. However, I am
     glad to say that to-day he soon gave it up in honour of our friend here. What 'ave you made?"
     she asked him.
"Only eight hundred francs," he said, his face clouding over. "If you had given me more than
     that hundred francs, Sophie, I might have made five thousand in the time."
"Bah!" she said. "That does not matter. We must not risk more than a hundred francs a day—you
     know how often I've told you that, Fritz." She was now speaking in French, very quickly and
     angrily.
But Sylvia hardly heard. She could not help wondering why the Count had not come up and
     congratulated her. The thought that she had brought him luck was very pleasant to her.
He had left off playing, and was standing back, near one of the windows. He had not even
     glanced across to the place where she stood. This aloofness gave Sylvia a curious little
     feeling of discomfiture. Why, several strangers had come up and cordially thanked her for
     bringing them such luck.
"Let us come out of this place and 'ave some ices," exclaimed Madame Wachner, suddenly. "When
     l'Ami Fritz 'as a stroke of luck 'e often treats 'is old wife to an ice."
The four went out of the Casino and across the way to an hotel, which, as Madame Wachner
     explained to her two new friends, contained the best restaurant in Lacville. The sun was
     sinking, and, though it was still very hot, there was a pleasant breeze coming up from the
     lake.
Sylvia felt excited and happy. How wonderful—how marvellous—to make nearly £100 out of a
     twenty-franc piece! That was what she had done this afternoon.
And then, rather to her surprise, after they had all enjoyed ices and cakes at Madame
     Wachner's expense, Anna Wolsky and l'Ami Fritz declared they were going back to the Casino.
"I don't mean to play again to-night," said Sylvia, firmly. "I feel dreadfully tired," and
     the excitement had indeed worn her out. She longed to go back to the Hôtel du Lac.
Still, she accompanied the others to the Club, and together with Madame Wachner, she sat down
     some way from the tables. In a very few minutes they were joined by the other two, who had by
     now lost quite enough gold pieces to make them both feel angry with themselves, and, what was
     indeed unfair, with poor Sylvia.
"I'm sure that if you had played again, and if we had followed your play, we should have
     added to our winnings instead of losing, as we have done," said Anna crossly.
"I'm so sorry," and Sylvia felt really distressed. Anna had never spoken crossly to her
     before.
"Forgive me!" cried the Polish woman, suddenly softening. "I ought not to have said that to
     you, dear little friend. No doubt we should all have lost just the same. You know that
     fortune-teller told me that I should make plenty of money—well, even now I have had a splendid
     day!"
"Do come back with me and have dinner at the Villa du Lac," said Sylvia eagerly.
They shook hands with the Wachners, and as they walked the short distance from the Casino to
     the villa, Sylvia told Anna all about her visit to the Châlet des Muguets.
"They seem nice homely people," she said, "and Madame Wachner was really very kind."
"Yes, no doubt; but she is a very strict wife," answered Anna smiling. "The poor man had not
     one penny piece till she came in, and he got so angry and impatient waiting for her! I really
     felt inclined to lend him a little money; but I have made it a rule never to lend money in a
     Casino; it only leads to unpleasantness afterwards."
In the hall of the Villa du Lac the Comte de Virieu was standing reading a paper. He was
     dressed for dinner, and he bowed distantly as the two ladies came in.
"Why, there is the Comte de Virieu!" exclaimed Anna, in a low, and far from a pleased tone.
     "I had no idea he was staying here."
"Yes, he is staying here," said Sylvia, blushing uneasily, and quickly she led the way
     upstairs. It wanted a few minutes to seven.
Anna Wolsky waited till the door of Sylvia's room was shut, and then,
"I cannot help being sorry that you are staying in the same hotel as that man," she said,
     seriously. "Do not get to know him too well, dear Sylvia. The Count is a worthless individual;
     he has gambled away two fortunes. And now, instead of working, he is content to live on an
     allowance made to him by his sister's husband, the Duc d'Eglemont. If I were you, I should keep
     on very distant terms with him. He is, no doubt, always looking out for a nice rich woman to
     marry."
Sylvia made no answer. She felt she could not trust herself to speak; and there came over her
     a feeling of intense satisfaction that Anna Wolsky was not staying here with her at the Villa
     du Lac.
She also made up her mind that next time she entertained Anna she would do so at the
     restaurant of which the cooking had been so highly commended by Madame Wachner.
The fact that Madame Wolsky thought so ill of the Comte de Virieu made Sylvia feel
     uncomfortable all through dinner. But the Count, though he again bowed when the two friends
     came into the dining-room, did not come over and speak to them, as Sylvia had felt sure he
     would do this evening.
After dinner he disappeared, and Sylvia took Anna out into the garden. But she did not show
     her the potager. The old kitchen-garden already held for her associations which she
     did not wish to spoil or even to disturb.
Madame Wolsky, sipping M. Polperro's excellent coffee, again mentioned the Count.
"I am exceedingly surprised to see him here at Lacville," she said in a musing voice, "I
     should have expected him to go to a more chic place. He always plays in the winter at
     Monte Carlo."
Sylvia summoned up courage to protest.
"But, Anna," she exclaimed, "surely the Comte de Virieu is only doing what a great many other
     people do!"
Anna laughed good-humouredly.
"I see what you mean," she said. "You think it is a case of 'the pot calling the kettle
     black.' How excellent are your English proverbs, dear Sylvia! But no, it is quite different.
     Take me. I have an income, and choose to spend it in gambling. I might prefer to have a big
     house, or perhaps I should say a small house, for I am not a very rich woman. But no, I like
     play, and I am free to spend my money as I like. The Comte de Virieu is very differently
     situated! He is, so I've been told, a clever, cultivated man. He ought to be working—doing
     something for his country's good. And then he is so disagreeable! He makes no friends, no
     acquaintances. He always looks as if he was doing something of which he was ashamed. He never
     appears gay or satisfied, not even when he is winning—"
"He does not look as cross as Monsieur Wachner," said Sylvia, smiling.
"Monsieur Wachner is like me," said Anna calmly. "He probably made a fortune in business, and
     now he and his wife enjoy risking a little money at play. Why should they not?"
"Madame Wachner told me to-day all about their poor friend who was drowned," said Sylvia
     irrelevantly.
"Ah, yes, that was a sad affair! They were very foolish to become so intimate with him. Why,
     they actually had him staying with them at the time! You see, they had a villa close to the
     lake-side. And this young Russian, it appears, was very fond of boating. It was a mysterious
     affair, because, oddly enough, he had not been out in the town, or even to the Casino, for four
     days before the accident happened. There was a notion among some people that he had committed
     suicide, but that, I fancy, was not so. He had won a large sum of money. Some thought the gold
     weighed down his body in the water—. But that is absurd. It must have been the weeds."
"Madame Wachner told me that quite a lot of money was found in his room," said Sylvia
     quickly.
"No, that is not true. About four hundred francs were found in his bed-room. That was all. I
     fancy the police made themselves rather unpleasant to Monsieur Wachner. The Russian Embassy
     made inquiries, and it seemed so odd to the French authorities that the poor fellow could not
     be identified. They found no passport, no papers of any sort—"
"Have you a passport?" asked Sylvia. "Madame Wachner asked me if I had one. But I've never
     even seen a passport!"
"No," said Anna, "I have not got a passport now. I once had one, but I lost it. One does not
     require such a thing in a civilised country! But a Russian must always have a passport, it is
     an absolute law in Russia. And the disappearance of that young man's passport was certainly
     strange—in fact, the whole affair was mysterious."
"It must have been terrible for Monsieur and Madame Wachner," said Sylvia thoughtfully.
"Oh yes, very disagreeable indeed! Luckily he is entirely absorbed in his absurd systems, and
     she is a very cheerful woman."
"Yes, indeed she is!" Sylvia could not help smiling. "I am glad we have got to know them,
     Anna. It is rather mournful when one knows no one at all in a place of this kind."
And Anna agreed, indifferently.
