
CHAPTER XX
Even to Chester there was something grateful in the sudden stillness in which he and the
     three others found themselves on leaving the Casino.
"Not a very safe issue out of a place where people carry about such a lot of money!" he
     exclaimed, as they made their way up the rough little lane. "One could half-throttle anyone
     here, and have a very good chance of getting off!"
"Oh, Lacville is a very safe place!" answered Madame Wachner, laughing her jovial laugh.
     "Still, considering all the money made by the Casino, it is too bad they 'aven't made a more
     splendid—what do you call it—?"
"—Approach," said L'Ami Fritz, in his deep voice, and Chester turned, rather surprised. It
     was the first word he had heard Monsieur Wachner utter.
Sylvia was trying hard to forget Count Paul and his broken promise, and to be her natural
     self.
As they emerged into the better-lighted thoroughfare, where stood a row of carriages, she
     said, "I will drive with you to the Pension Malfait, Bill."
Madame Wachner officiously struck in, "Do not think of driving your friend to the Pension
     Malfait, dear friend! We will gladly leave Mr. Chester there. But if 'e does not mind we will
     walk there; it is too fine a night for driving."
"But how about your luggage?" said Sylvia, anxiously. "Has your luggage gone on to the
     Pension?"
"Yes," said Chester, shortly. "Your landlord very kindly said he would see to its being sent
     on."
They were now close to the Villa du Lac. "Of course, I shall expect you to lunch to-morrow,"
     said Sylvia. "Twelve o'clock is the time. You'll want a good rest after your long day."
And then Chester started off with his two strange companions. How very unlike this evening
     had been to what he had pictured it would be! Years before, as a boy, he had spent a week at a
     primitive seaside hotel near Dieppe. He had thought Lacville would be like that. He had
     imagined himself arriving at a quiet, rural, little country inn, and had seen himself kindly,
     if a little shyly, welcomed by Sylvia. He could almost have laughed at the contrast between the
     place his fancy had painted and the place he had found, at what he had thought would happen,
     and at what had happened!
As they trudged along, Chester, glancing to his right, saw that there were still a great many
     boats floating on the lake. Did Lacville folk never go to bed?
"Yes," said Madame Wachner, quickly divining his thoughts, "some of the people 'ere—why, they
     stay out on the water all night! Then they catch the early train back to Paris in the morning,
     and go and work all day. Ah, yes, it is indeed a splendid thing to be young!"
She sighed, a long, sentimental sigh, and looked across, affectionately, at L'Ami Fritz.
"I do not feel my youth to be so very far away," she said. "But then, the people in my dear
     country are not cynical as are the French!"
Her husband strode forward in gloomy silence, probably thinking over the money he might have
     made or lost had he played that evening, instead of only noting down the turns of the game.
Madame Wachner babbled on, making conversation for Chester.
She was trying to find out something more about this quiet Englishman. Why had he come to
     Lacville? How long was he going to stay here? What was his real relation to Sylvia Bailey?
Those were the questions that the pretty English widow's new friend was asking herself,
     finding answers thereto which were unsatisfactory, because vague and mysterious.
At last she ventured a direct query.
"Are you going to stay long in this beautiful place, Monsieur?"
"I don't know," said Chester shortly. "I don't suppose I shall stay very long. I'm going on
     to Switzerland. How long I stay will a little bit depend on Mrs. Bailey's plans. I haven't had
     time to ask her anything yet. What sort of a place is the Villa du Lac?"
He asked the question abruptly; he was already full of dislike and suspicion of everything,
     though not of everybody, at Lacville. These Wachners were certainly nice, simple people.
"Oh, the Villa du Lac is a very respectable 'ouse," said Madame Wachner cautiously. "It is
     full of respectable—what do you call them?—dowagers. Oh, you need have no fear for your friend,
     sir; she is quite safe there. And you know she does not often go to the Casino"—she told the
     lie with bold deliberation. Some instinct told her that while Chester was at Lacville Sylvia
     would not go to the Casino as often as she had been in the habit of doing.
There was a pause—and then again Madame Wachner asked the Englishman a question:
"Perhaps you will go on to Switzerland, leaving Mrs. Bailey here, and then come back for
     her?"
"Perhaps I shall," he said heavily, without really thinking of what he was saying.
They were now walking along broad, shady roads which reminded him of those in a well-kept
     London suburb. Not a sound issued from any of the houses which stood in gardens on either side,
     and in the moonlight he saw that they were all closely shuttered. It might almost have been a
     little township of empty houses.
Again the thought crossed his mind what a dangerous place these lonely roads might be to a
     man carrying a lot of gold and notes on his person. They had not met a single policeman, or,
     indeed, anyone, after they had left the side of the lake.
At last Madame Wachner stopped short before a large wooden door.
'"Ere we are!" she said briskly. "I presume they are expecting you, sir? If they are not
     expecting you, they will probably 'ave all gone to bed. So we will wait, will we not, Ami
     Fritz, and see this gentleman safe in? If the worst came to the worst, you could come with us
     to our villa and sleep there the night."
"You are awfully kind!" said Chester heartily—and, indeed, he did feel this entire stranger's
     kindness exceptional.
How fortunate that Sylvia had come across such a nice, simple, kindly woman in such a queer
     place as Lacville!
But Madame Wachner's good-natured proposal had never to be seriously considered, for when her
     vigorous hand found and pulled the bell there came sounds in the courtyard beyond, and a moment
     later the door swung open.
"Who's there?" cried M. Malfait in a loud voice.
"It is the English gentleman, Mrs. Bailey's friend," said Madame Wachner quickly; and at once
     the Frenchman's voice softened.
"Ah! we had quite given up M'sieur," he said amiably. "Come in, come in! Yes, the bag has
     arrived; but people often send their luggage before they come themselves. Just as they
     sometimes leave their luggage after they themselves have departed!"
Chester was shaking hands cordially with the Wachners.
"Thank you for all your kindness," he said heartily. "I hope we shall meet again soon! I
     shall certainly be here for some days. Perhaps you will allow me to call on you?"
Once the good-natured couple had walked off arm in arm into the night, the door of the
     Pension Malfait was locked and barred, and Chester followed his landlord into the long, dark
     house.
"One has to be careful. There are so many queer characters about," said M. Malfait; and then,
     "Will M'sieur have something to eat? A little refreshment, a bottle of lemonade, or of pale
     ale? We have splendid Bass's ale," he said, solicitously.
But the Englishman shook his head, smiling. "Oh, no," he said slowly, in his bad French, "I
     dined in Paris. All I need now is a good night's rest."
"And that M'sieur will certainly have," said the landlord civilly. "Lacville is famous for
     its sleep-producing qualities. That is why so many Parisians content themselves with coming
     here instead of going further afield."
They were walking through the lower part of the house, and then suddenly M. Malfait
     exclaimed, "I was forgetting the bath-room! I know how important to English gentlemen the
     bath-room is!"
The pleasant vista of a good hot bath floated before Chester's weary brain and body. Really
     the house was not as primitive as he had thought it when he had seen the landlord come forward
     with a candle.
M. Malfait turned round and flung open a door.
"It was an idea of my wife's," he said proudly. "You see, M'sieur, the apartment serves a
     double purpose—"
And it did! For the odd little room into which Chester was shown by his host served as store
     cupboard as well as bath-room. It was lined with shelves on which stood serried rows of pots of
     home-made jam, jars of oil and vinegar, and huge tins of rice, vermicelli, and tapioca, in a
     corner a round zinc basin—but a basin of Brobdignagian size—stood under a cold water tap.
"The bath is for those of our visitors who do not follow the regular hydropathic treatment
     for which Lacville is still famous," said the landlord pompously. "But I must ask M'sieur not
     to fill the bath too full, for it is a great affair to empty it!"
He shut the door carefully, and led the way upstairs.
"Here we are," he whispered at last. "I hope M'sieur will be satisfied. This is a room which
     was occupied by a charming Polish lady, Madame Wolsky, who was a friend of M'sieur's friend,
     Madame Bailey. But she left suddenly a week ago, and so we have the room at M'sieur's
     disposal."
He put the candle down, and bowed himself out of the room.
Chester looked round the large, bare sleeping chamber in which he found himself with the
     agreeable feeling that his long, hot, exciting day was now at an end.
Yes, it was a pleasant room—bare, and yet furnished with everything essential to comfort.
     Thus there was a good big, roomy arm-chair, a writing-table, and a clock, of which the hands
     now pointed to a quarter to one o'clock.
The broad, low bed, pushed back into an alcove as is the French fashion, looked delightfully
     cool and inviting by the light of his one candle.
When M. Malfait had shown him into the room the window was wide open to the hot, starless
     night, but the landlord, though he had left the window open, had drawn the thick curtains
     across it. That was all right; Chester had no wish to be wakened at five in the morning by the
     sunlight streaming into the room. He meant to have a really long rest. He was too tired to
     think—too tired to do anything but turn in.
And then an odd thing happened. Chester's brain was so thoroughly awake, he had become so
     over-excited, that he could not, try as he might, fall asleep.
He lay awake tossing about hour after hour. And then, when at last he did fall into a heavy,
     troubled slumber, he was disturbed by extraordinary and unpleasant dreams—nightmares in which
     Sylvia Bailey seemed to play a part.
At last he roused himself and pulled back the curtains from across the window. It was already
     dawn, but he thought the cool morning air might induce sleep, and for a while, lying on his
     side away from the light, he did doze lightly.
Quite suddenly he was awakened by the sensation, nay, the knowledge, that there was someone
     in the room! So vivid was this feeling of unwished-for companionship that he got up and looked
     in the shadowed recess of the alcove in which stood his bed; but, of course, there was no one
     there. In fact there would not have been space there for any grown-up person to squeeze
     into.
He told himself that what he had heard—if he had heard anything—was someone bringing him his
     coffee and rolls, and that the servant had probably been trying to attract his attention, for,
     following his prudent custom, he had locked his door the night before.
He unlocked the door and looked out, staring this way and that along the empty passage. But
     no, in spite of the now-risen sun, it was still early morning; the Pension Malfait was sunk in
     sleep.
Chester went back to bed. He felt tired, disturbed, uneasy; sleep was out of the question; so
     he lay back, and with widely-open eyes, began to think of Sylvia Bailey and of the strange
     events of the night before.
He lived again the long hour he had spent at the Casino. He could almost smell the odd,
     sweet, stuffy smell of the Baccarat Room, and there rose before him its queer, varied inmates.
     He visioned distinctly Sylvia Bailey as he had suddenly seen her, sitting before the green
     cloth, with her money piled up before her, and a look of eager interest and absorption on her
     face.
There had always been in Sylvia something a little rebellious, a touch of individuality which
     made her unlike the other women he knew, and which fascinated and attracted him. She was a
     woman who generally knew her own mind, and who had her own ideas of right and wrong. Lying
     there, he remembered how determined she had been about those pearls....
Chester's thoughts took a softer turn. How very, very pretty she had looked last evening—more
     than pretty—lovelier than he had ever seen her. There seemed to be new depths in her blue
     eyes.
But Chester was shrewd enough to know that Sylvia had felt ashamed to be caught by him
     gambling—gambling, too, in such very mixed company. Well, she would soon be leaving Lacville!
     What a pity those friends of hers had given up their Swiss holiday! It would have been so jolly
     if they could have gone on there together.
He got tired of lying in bed. What a long night, as well as a very short night, it had been!
     He rose and made his way down to the primitive bath-room. It would be delightful to have any
     sort of bath, and the huge zinc basin had its points—
As Chester went quickly back to his room, instead of feeling refreshed after his bath, he
     again experienced the disagreeable sensation that he was not alone. This time he felt as if he
     were being accompanied by an invisible presence. It was a very extraordinary and a most
     unpleasant feeling, one which Chester had never experienced before, and it made him
     afraid—afraid he knew not of what.
Being the manner of man he was, he began to think that he must be ill—that there must be
     something the matter with his nerves. Had he been at home, in Market Dalling, he would have
     gone to a doctor without loss of time.
Long afterwards, when people used to speak before him of haunted houses, Bill Chester would
     remember the Pension Malfait and the extraordinary sensations he had experienced
     there—sensations the more extraordinary that there was nothing to account for them.
But Chester never told anyone of his experiences, and indeed there was nothing to tell. He
     never saw anything, he never even heard anything, but now and again, especially when he was
     lying awake at night and in the early morning, the lawyer felt as if some other entity was
     struggling to communicate with him and could not do so....
The whole time he was there—and he stayed on at Lacville, as we shall see, rather longer than
     he at first intended—Chester never felt, when in his room at the Pension Malfait really alone,
     and sometimes the impression became almost intolerably vivid.
