
DAPHNE, OR “MARRIAGE À LA MODE”

CHAPTER I
“A STIFLING hot day!” General Hobson lifted his hat and mopped his forehead
      indignantly. “What on earth this place can be like in June I can't conceive! The tenth of
      April, and I'll be bound the thermometer's somewhere near eighty in the shade. You never find
      the English climate playing you these tricks.”
Roger Barnes looked at his uncle with amusement.
“Don't you like heat, Uncle Archie? Ah, but I forgot, it's American heat.”
“I like a climate you can depend on,” said the General, quite conscious that he was talking
      absurdly, yet none the less determined to talk, by way of relief to some obscure annoyance.
      “Here we are sweltering in this abominable heat, and in New York last week they had a
      blizzard, and here, even, it was cold enough
       to give me rheumatism. The climate's always in extremes—like
      the people.”
“I'm sorry to find you don't like the States, Uncle Archie.”
The young man sat down beside his uncle. They were in the deck saloon of a steamer which had
      left Washington about an hour before for Mount Vernon. Through the open doorway to their left
      they saw a wide expanse of river, flowing between banks of spring green, and above it
      thunderous clouds, in a hot blue. The saloon, and the decks outside, held a great crowd of
      passengers, of whom the majority were women.
The tone in which Roger Barnes spoke was good-tempered, but quite perfunctory. Any shrewd
      observer would have seen that whether his uncle liked the States or not did not in truth
      matter to him a whit.
“And I consider all the arrangements for this trip most unsatisfactory,” the General
      continued angrily. “The steamer's too small, the landing-place is too small, the crowd getting
      on board was something disgraceful. They'll have a shocking accident one of these days. And
      what on earth are all these women here for—in the middle of the day? It's not a holiday.”
“I believe it's a teachers' excursion,” said young Barnes absently, his eyes resting on
       the rows of young women in white blouses and spring hats who
      sat in close-packed chairs upon the deck—an eager, talkative host.
“H'm—Teachers!” The General's tone was still more pugnacious. “Going to learn more lies
      about us, I suppose, that they may teach them to school-children? I was turning over some of
      their school-books in a shop yesterday. Perfectly abominable! It's monstrous what they teach
      the children here about what they're pleased to call their War of Independence. All that we
      did was to ask them to pay something for their own protection. What did it matter to us
      whether they were mopped up by the Indians, or the French, or not? ‘But if you want us to go
      to all the expense and trouble of protecting you, and putting down those fellows, why, hang
      it,’ we said, ‘you must pay some of the bill!’ That was all English Ministers asked; and
      perfectly right too. And as for the men they make such a fuss about, Samuel Adams, and John
      Adams, and Franklin, and all the rest of the crew, I tell you, the stuff they teach American
      school-children about them is a poisoning of the wells! Franklin was a man of profligate life,
      whom I would never have admitted inside my doors! And as for the Adamses—intriguers—canting
      fellows!—both of them.”
“Well, at least you'll give them George
       Washington.” As he spoke, Barnes concealed a yawn, followed
      immediately afterwards by a look of greater alertness, caused by the discovery that a girl
      sitting not far from the doorway in the crowd outside was certainly pretty.
The red-faced, white-haired General paused a moment before replying, then broke out: “What
      George Washington might have been if he had held a straight course I am not prepared to say.
      As it is, I don't hesitate for a moment! George Washington was nothing more nor less than a
      rebel—a damned rebel! And what Englishmen mean by joining in the worship of him I've never
      been able to understand.”
“I say, uncle, take care,” said the young man, looking round him, and observing with some
      relief that they seemed to have the saloon to themselves. “These Yankees will stand most
      things, but—”
“You needn't trouble yourself, Roger,” was the testy reply; “I am not in the habit of
      annoying my neighbours. Well now, look here, what I want to know is, what is the meaning of
      this absurd journey of yours?”
The young man's frown increased. He began to poke the floor with his stick. “I don't know
      why you call it absurd?”
“To me it seems both absurd and extravagant,” said the other with emphasis. “The
       last thing I heard of you was that Burdon and Co. had offered
      you a place in their office, and that you were prepared to take it. When a man has lost his
      money and becomes dependent upon others, the sooner he gets to work the better.”
Roger Barnes reddened under the onslaught, and the sulky expression of his handsome mouth
      became more pronounced. “I think my mother and I ought to be left to judge for ourselves,” he
      said rather hotly. “We haven't asked anybody for money yet, Uncle Archie. Burdon
      and Co. can have me in September just as well as now; and my mother wished me to make some
      friends over here who might be useful to me.”
“Useful to you. How?”
“I think that's my affair. In this country there are always openings—things turning
      up—chances—you can't get at home.”
The General gave a disapproving laugh. “The only chance that'll help you, Roger, at
      present—excuse me if I speak frankly—is the chance of regular work. Your poor mother has
      nothing but her small fixed income, and you haven't a farthing to chuck away on what you call
      chances. Why, your passage by the Lucania alone must have cost a pretty penny. I'll bet my hat
      you came first class.”

The young man was clearly on the brink of an explosion, but controlled himself with an
      effort. “I paid the winter rate; and mother, who knows the Cunard people very well, got a
      reduction. I assure you, Uncle Archie, neither mother nor I is a fool, and we know quite well
      what we are about.”
As he spoke he raised himself with energy, and looked his companion in the face.
The General, surveying him, was mollified, as usual, by nothing in the world but the youth's
      extraordinary good looks. Roger Barnes's good looks had been, indeed, from his childhood
      upwards the distinguishing and remarkable feature about him. He had been a king among his
      school-fellows largely because of them, and of the athletic prowess which went with them; and
      while at Oxford he had been cast for the part of Apollo in The Eumenides,
      Nature having clearly designed him for it, in spite of the lamentable deficiencies in his
      Greek scholarship, which gave his prompters and trainers so much trouble. Nose, chin, brow,
      the poising of the head on the shoulders, the large blue eyes, lidded and set with a Greek
      perfection, the delicacy of the lean, slightly hollow cheeks, combined with the astonishing
      beauty and strength of the head, crowned with ambrosial curls—these possessions, together with
      others, had so far made life an
       easy and triumphant business for their owner. The “others,”
      let it be noted, however, had till now always been present; and, chief amongst them, great
      wealth and an important and popular father. The father was recently dead, as the black band on
      the young man's arm still testified, and the wealth had suddenly vanished, wholly and
      completely, in one of the financial calamities of the day. General Hobson, contemplating his
      nephew, and mollified, as we have said, by his splendid appearance, kept saying to himself:
      “He hasn't a farthing but what poor Laura allows him; he has the tastes of forty thousand a
      year; a very indifferent education; and what the deuce is he going to do?”
Aloud he said:
“Well, all I know is, I had a deplorable letter last mail from your poor mother.”
The young man turned his head away, his cigarette still poised at his lips. “Yes, I
      know—mother's awfully down.”
“Well, certainly your mother was never meant for a poor woman,” said the General, with
      energy. “She takes it uncommonly hard.”
Roger, with face still averted, showed no inclination to discuss his mother's character on
      these lines.
“However, she'll get along all right, if you
       do your duty by her,” added the General, not without a
      certain severity.
“I mean to do it, sir.” Barnes rose as he spoke. “I should think we're getting near Mount
      Vernon by this time. I'll go and look.”
He made his way to the outer deck, the General following. The old soldier, as he moved
      through the crowd of chairs in the wake of his nephew, was well aware of the attention excited
      by the young man. The eyes of many damsels were upon him; and, while the girls looked and said
      nothing, their mothers laughed and whispered to each other as the young Apollo passed.
Standing at the side of the steamer, the uncle and nephew perceived that the river had
      widened to a still more stately breadth, and that, on the southern bank, a white building,
      high placed, had come into view. The excursionists crowded to look, expressing their
      admiration for the natural scene and their sense of its patriotic meaning in a frank,
      enthusiastic chatter, which presently enveloped the General, standing in a silent endurance
      like a rock among the waves.
“Isn't it fine to think of his coming back here to die, so simply, when he'd made a nation?”
      said a young girl—perhaps from Omaha—to her companion. “Wasn't it just lovely?”

Her voice, restrained, yet warm with feeling, annoyed General Hobson. He moved away, and as
      they hung over the taffrail, he said with suppressed venom to his companion: “Much good it did
      them to be ‘made a nation’! Look at their press—look at their corruption—their divorce
      scandals!”
Barnes laughed, and threw his cigarette-end into the swift brown water.
“Upon my word, Uncle Archie, I can't play up to you. As far as I've gone, I like America and
      the Americans.”
“Which means, I suppose, that your mother gave you some introductions to rich people in New
      York, and they entertained you?” said the General drily.
“Well, is there any crime in that? I met a lot of uncommonly nice people.”
“And didn't particularly bless me when I wired to you to come here?”
The young man laughed again and paused a moment before replying.
“I'm always very glad to come and keep you company, Uncle Archie.”
The old General reddened a little. Privately, he knew very well that his telegram summoning
      young Barnes from New York had been an act of tyranny—mild, elderly tyranny. He was not
      amusing himself in Washington, where he was paying a second visit after an absence of twenty
       years. His English soul was disturbed and affronted by a
      wholly new realisation of the strength of America, by the giant forces of the young nation, as
      they are to be felt pulsing in the Federal City. He was up in arms for the Old World,
      wondering sorely and secretly what the New might do with her in the times to come, and
      foreseeing an ever-increasing deluge of unlovely things—ideals, principles, manners—flowing
      from this western civilisation, under which his own gods were already half buried, and would
      soon be hidden beyond recovery. And in this despondency which possessed him, in spite of the
      attentions of Embassies, and luncheons at the White House, he had heard that Roger was in New
      York, and could not resist the temptation to send for him. After all, Roger was his heir.
      Unless the boy flagrantly misbehaved himself, he would inherit General Hobson's money and
      small estate in Northamptonshire. Before the death of Roger's father this prospective
      inheritance, indeed, had not counted for very much in the family calculations. The General had
      even felt a shyness in alluding to a matter so insignificant in comparison with the general
      scale on which the Barnes family lived. But since the death of Barnes père, and the complete pecuniary ruin revealed by that event, Roger's expectations
      from his uncle had assumed
       a new importance. The General was quite aware of it. A year
      before this date he would never have dreamed of summoning Roger to attend him at a moment's
      notice. That he had done so, and that Roger had obeyed him, showed how closely even the family
      relation may depend on pecuniary circumstance.
The steamer swung round to the landing-place under the hill of Mount Vernon. Again, in
      disembarkation, there was a crowd and rush which set the General's temper on edge. He emerged
      from it, hot and breathless, after haranguing the functionary at the gates on the inadequacy
      of the arrangements and the likelihood of an accident. Then he and Roger strode up the steep
      path, beside beds of blue periwinkles, and under old trees just bursting into leaf. A spring
      sunshine was in the air and on the grass, which had already donned its “livelier emerald.” The
      air quivered with heat, and the blue dome of sky diffused it. Here and there a magnolia in
      full flower on the green slopes spread its splendour of white or pinkish blossom to the sun;
      the great river, shimmering and streaked with light, swept round the hill, and out into a
      pearly distance; and on the height the old pillared house with its flanking colonnades stood
      under the thinly green trees in a sharp light and shade, which emphasised all its delightful qualities—made,
       as it were, the most of it, in response to the eagerness of
      the crowd now flowing round it.
Half-way up the hill Roger suddenly raised his hat.
“Who is it?” said the General, putting up his eyeglass.
“The girl we met last night and her brother.”
“Captain Boyson? So it is. They seem to have a party with them.”
The lady whom young Barnes had greeted moved towards the Englishmen, followed by her
      brother.
“I didn't know we were to meet to-day,” she said gaily, with a mocking look at Roger. “I
      thought you said you were bored—and going back to New York.”
Roger was relieved to see that his uncle, engaged in shaking hands with the American
      officer, had not heard this remark. Tact was certainly not Miss Boyson's strong point.
“I am sure I never said anything of the kind,” he said, looking brazenly down upon her;
      “nothing in the least like it.”
“Oh! oh!” the lady protested, with an extravagant archness. “Mrs. Phillips, this is Mr.
      Barnes. We were just talking of him, weren't we?”
An elderly lady, quietly dressed in grey
       silk, turned, bowed, and looked curiously at the
      Englishman.
“I hear you and Miss Boyson discovered some common friends last night.”
“We did, indeed. Miss Boyson posted me up in a lot of the people I have been seeing in New
      York. I am most awfully obliged to her,” said Barnes. His manner was easy and forthcoming, the
      manner of one accustomed to feel himself welcome and considered.
“I behaved like a walking ‘Who's Who,’ only I was much more interesting, and didn't tell
      half as many lies,” said the girl, in a high penetrating voice. “Daphne, let me introduce you
      to Mr. Barnes. Mr. Barnes—Miss Floyd; Mr. Barnes—Mrs. Verrier.”
Two ladies beyond Mrs. Phillips made vague inclinations, and young Barnes raised his hat.
      The whole party walked on up the hill. The General and Captain Boyson fell into a discussion
      of some military news of the morning. Roger Barnes was mostly occupied with Miss Boyson, who
      had a turn for monopoly; and he could only glance occasionally at the two ladies with Mrs.
      Phillips. But he was conscious that the whole group made a distinguished appearance. Among the
      hundreds of young women streaming over the lawn they were clearly marked out by their carriage
      and their clothes—especially their clothes—as belonging
       to the fastidious cosmopolitan class, between whom and the
      young school-teachers from the West, in their white cotton blouses, leathern belts, and neat
      short skirts, the links were few. Miss Floyd, indeed, was dressed with great simplicity. A
      white muslin dress, à la Romney, with a rose at the waist,
      and a black-and-white Romney hat deeply shading the face beneath—nothing could have been
      plainer; yet it was a simplicity not to be had for the asking, a calculated, a Parisian
      simplicity; while her companion, Mrs. Verrier, was attired in what the fashion-papers would
      have called a “creation in mauve.” And Roger knew quite enough about women's dress to be aware
      that it was a creation that meant dollars. She was a tall, dark-eyed, olive-skinned woman,
      thin almost to emaciation: and young Barnes noticed that while Miss Floyd talked much, Mrs.
      Verrier answered little, and smiled less. She moved with a languid step, and looked absently
      about her. Roger could not make up his mind whether she was American or English.
In the house itself the crowd was almost unmanageable. The General's ire was roused afresh
      when he was warned off the front door by the polite official on guard, and made to mount a
      back stair in the midst of a panting multitude.
“I really cannot congratulate you on your
       management of these affairs,” he said severely to Captain
      Boyson, as they stood at last, breathless and hustled, on the first-floor landing. “It is most
      improper, I may say dangerous, to admit such a number at once. And, as for seeing the house,
      it is simply impossible. I shall make my way down as soon as possible, and go for a walk.”
Captain Boyson looked perplexed. General Hobson was a person of eminence; Washington had
      been very civil to him; and the American officer felt a kind of host's responsibility.
“Wait a moment; I'll try and find somebody.” He disappeared, and the party maintained itself
      with difficulty in a corner of the landing against the pressure of a stream of damsels, who
      crowded to the open doors of the rooms, looked through the gratings which bar the entrance
      without obstructing the view, chattered, and moved on. General Hobson stood against the wall,
      a model of angry patience. Cecilia Boyson, glancing at him with a laughing eye, said in
      Roger's ear: “How sad it is that your uncle dislikes us so!”
“Us? What you do mean?”
“That he hates America so. Oh, don't say he doesn't, because I've watched him, at one, two,
      three parties. He thinks we're a horrid, noisy, vulgar people, with most
       unpleasant voices, and he thanks God for the Atlantic—and
      hopes he may never see us again.”
“Well, of course, if you're so certain about it, there's no good in contradicting you. Did
      you say that lady's name was Floyd? Could I have seen her last week in New York?”
“Quite possible. Perhaps you heard something about her?”
“No,” said Barnes, after thinking a moment. “I remember—somebody pointed her out at the
      opera.”
His companion looked at him with a kind of hard amusement. Cecilia Boyson was only
      five-and-twenty, but there was already something in her that foretold the formidable old
      maid.
“Well, when people begin upon Daphne Floyd,” she said, “they generally go through with it.
      Ah! here comes Alfred.”
Captain Boyson, pushing his way through the throng, announced to his sister and General
      Hobson that he had found the curator in charge of the house, who sent a message by him to the
      effect that if only the party would wait till four o'clock, the official closing hour, he
      himself would have great pleasure in showing them the house when all the tourists of the day
      had taken their departure.

“Then,” said Miss Floyd, smiling at the General, “let us go and sit in the garden, and feel
      ourselves aristocratic and superior.”
The General's brow smoothed. Voice and smile were alike engaging. Their owner was not
      exactly pretty, but she had very large dark eyes, and a small glowing face, set in a profusion
      of hair. Her neck, the General thought, was the slenderest he had ever seen, and the slight
      round lines of her form spoke of youth in its first delicate maturity. He followed her
      obediently, and they were all soon in the garden again, and free of the crowd. Miss Floyd led
      the way across the grass with the General.
“Ah! now you will see the General will begin to like us,” said Miss Boyson. “Daphne has got
      him in hand.”
Her tone was slightly mocking. Barnes observed the two figures in front of them, and
      remarked that Miss Floyd had a “very—well—a very foreign look.”
“Not English, you mean?—or American? Well, naturally. Her mother was a Spaniard—a South
      American—from Buenos Ayres. That's why she is so dark, and so graceful.”
“I never saw a prettier dress,” said Barnes, following the slight figure with his eyes.
      “It's so simple.”
His companion laughed again. The manner
       of the laugh puzzled her companion, but, just as he was
      about to put a question, the General and the young lady paused in front, to let the rest of
      the party come up with them. Miss Floyd proposed a seat a little way down the slope, where
      they might wait the half-hour appointed.
That half-hour passed quickly for all concerned. In looking back upon it afterwards two of
      the party were conscious that it had all hung upon one person. Daphne Floyd sat beside the
      General, who paid her a half-reluctant, half-fascinated attention. Without any apparent effort
      on her part she became indeed the centre of the group who sat or lay on the grass. All faces
      were turned towards her, and presently all ears listened for her remarks. Her talk was young
      and vivacious, nothing more. But all she said came, as it were, steeped in personality, a
      personality so energetic, so charged with movement and with action that it arrested the
      spectators—not always agreeably. It was like the passage of a train through the darkness,
      when, for the moment, the quietest landscape turns to fire and force.
The comparison suggested itself to Captain Boyson as he lay watching her, only to be
      received with an inward mockery, half bitter, half amused. This girl was always awakening
       in him these violent or desperate images. Was it her fault
      that she possessed those brilliant eyes—eyes, as it seemed, of the typical, essential
      woman?—and that downy brunette skin, with the tinge in it of damask red?—and that instinctive
      art of lovely gesture in which her whole being seemed to express itself? Boyson, who was not
      only a rising soldier, but an excellent amateur artist, knew every line of the face by heart.
      He had drawn Miss Daphne from the life on several occasions; and from memory scores of times.
      He was not likely to draw her from life any more; and thereby hung a tale. As far as he was
      concerned the train had passed—in flame and fury—leaving an echoing silence behind it.
What folly! He turned resolutely to Mrs. Verrier, and tried to discuss with her an
      exhibition of French art recently opened in Washington. In vain. After a few sentences, the
      talk between them dropped, and both he and she were once more watching Miss Floyd, and joining
      in the conversation whenever she chose to draw them in.
As for Roger Barnes, he too was steadily subjugated—up to a certain point. He was not sure
      that he liked Miss Floyd, or her conversation. She was so much mistress of herself and of the
      company, that his masculine vanity occasionally rebelled. A little flirt!—that gave
       herself airs. It startled his English mind that at
      twenty—for she could be no more—a girl should so take the floor, and hold the stage. Sometimes
      he turned his back upon her—almost; and Cecilia Boyson held him. But, if there was too much of
      the “eternal womanly” in Miss Floyd, there was not enough in Cecilia Boyson. He began to
      discover also that she was too clever for him, and was in fact talking down to him. Some of
      the things that she said to him about New York and Washington puzzled him extremely. She was,
      he supposed, intellectual; but the intellectual women in England did not talk in the same way.
      He was equal to them, or flattered himself that he was; but Miss Boyson was beyond him. He was
      getting into great difficulties with her, when suddenly Miss Floyd addressed him:
“I am sure I saw you in New York, at the opera?”
She bent over to him as she spoke, and lowered her voice. Her look was merry, perhaps a
      little satirical. It put him on his guard.
“Yes, I was there. You were pointed out to me.”
“You were with some old friends of mine. I suppose they gave you an account of me?”
“They were beginning it; but then Melba
       began to sing, and some horrid people in the next box said
      ‘Hush!’”
She studied him in a laughing silence a moment, her chin on her hand, then said:
“That is the worst of the opera; it stops so much interesting conversation.”
“You don't care for the music?”
“Oh, I am a musician!” she said quickly. “I teach it. But I am like the mad King of
      Bavaria—I want an opera-house to myself.”
“You teach it?” he said, in amazement.
She nodded, smiling. At that moment a bell rang. Captain Boyson rose.
“That's the signal for closing. I think we ought to be moving up.”
They strolled slowly towards the house, watching the stream of excursionists pour out of the
      house and gardens, and wind down the hill; sounds of talk and laughter filled the air, and the
      western sun touched the spring hats and dresses.
“The holidays end to-morrow,” said Daphne Floyd demurely, as she walked beside young Barnes.
      And she looked smiling at the crowd of young women, as though claiming solidarity with
      them.
A teacher? A teacher of music?—with that self-confidence—that air as though the world
      belonged to her! The young man was greatly mystified. But he reminded himself
       that he was in a democratic country where all men—and
      especially all women—are equal. Not that the young women now streaming to the steamboat were
      Miss Floyd's equals. The notion was absurd. All that appeared to be true was that Miss Floyd,
      in any circumstances, would be, and was, the equal of anybody.
“How charming your friend is!” he said presently to Cecilia Boyson, as they lingered on the
      verandah, waiting for the curator, in a scene now deserted. “She tells me she is a teacher of
      music.”
Cecilia Boyson looked at him in amazement, and made him repeat his remark. As he did so, his
      uncle called him, and he turned away. Miss Boyson leant against one of the pillars of the
      verandah, shaking with suppressed laughter.
But at that moment the curator, a gentle, grey-haired man, appeared, shaking hands with the
      General, and bowing to the ladies. He gave them a little discourse on the house and its
      history, as they stood on the verandah; and private conversation was no longer possible.
