

CHAPTER X
“WAS there ever anything so poetic, so suggestive?” said a charming voice. “One
      might make a new Turner out of it—if one just happened to be Turner!—to match ‘Rain, Steam,
      and Speed.’”
“What would you call it—‘Mist, Light, and Spring’?”
Captain Boyson leant forward, partly to watch the wonderful landscape effect through which
      the train was passing, partly because his young wife's profile, her pure cheek and soft hair,
      were so agreeably seen under the mingled light from outside.
They were returning from their wedding journey. Some six weeks before this date Boyson had
      married in Philadelphia a girl coming from one of the old Quaker stocks of that town, in whose
      tender steadfastness of character a man inclined both by nature and experience to expect
      little from life had found a happiness that amazed him.
The bridegroom, also, had just been appointed to the Military Attachéship at the Berlin
      Embassy, and the couple were, in fact, on their way south to New York and embarkation
       tion. But there were still a few days left of the
      honeymoon, of which they had spent the last half in Canada, and on this May night they were
      journeying from Toronto along the southern shore of Lake Ontario to the pleasant Canadian
      hotel which overlooks the pageant of Niagara. They had left Toronto in bright sunshine, but as
      they turned the corner of the lake westward, a white fog had come creeping over the land as
      the sunset fell.
But the daylight was still strong, the fog thin; so that it appeared rather as a veil of
      gold, amethyst, and opal, floating over the country, now parting altogether, now blotting out
      the orchards and the fields. And into the colour above melted the colour below. For the
      orchards that cover the Hamilton district of Ontario were in bloom, and the snow of the
      pear-trees, the flush of the peach-blossom broke everywhere through the warm cloud of pearly
      mist; while, just as Mrs. Boyson spoke, the train had come in sight of the long flashing line
      of the Welland Canal, which wound its way, outlined by huge electric lamps, through the sunset
      and the fog, till the lights died in that northern distance where stretched the invisible
      shore of the great lake. The glittering waterway, speaking of the labour and commerce of men,
      the blossom-laden earth, the white approaching mist, the softly falling night:—the
       girl-bride could not tear herself from the spectacle. She
      sat beside the window entranced. But her husband had captured her hand, and into the
      overflowing beauty of nature there stole the thrill of their love.
“All very well!” said Boyson presently. “But a fog at Niagara is no joke!”
The night stole on, and the cloud through which they journeyed grew denser. Up crept the
      fog, on stole the night. The lights of the canal faded, the orchards sank into darkness, and
      when the bride and bridegroom reached the station on the Canadian side the bride's pleasure
      had become dismay.
“Oh, Alfred, we shan't see anything!”
And, indeed, as their carriage made its slow progress along the road that skirts the gorge,
      they seemed to plunge deeper and deeper into the fog. A white darkness, as though of
      impenetrable yet glimmering cloud, above and around them; a white abyss beneath them; and
      issuing from it the thunderous voice of wild waters, dim first and distant, but growing
      steadily in volume and terror.
“There are the lights of the bridge!” cried Boyson, “and the towers of the aluminium works.
      But not a vestige of the Falls! Gone! Wiped out! I say, darling, this is going to be a
      disappointment.”
Mrs. Boyson, however, was not so sure.
       The lovely “nocturne” of the evening plain had passed into
      a Vision or Masque of Force that captured the mind. High above the gulf rose the towers of the
      great works, transformed by the surging fog and darkness into some piled and castled fortress;
      a fortress of Science held by Intelligence. Lights were in the towers, as of genii at their
      work; lights glimmered here and there on the face of the farther cliff, as though to measure
      the vastness of the gorge and of that resounding vacancy towards which they moved. In front,
      the arch of the vast suspension bridge, pricked in light, crossed the gulf, from nothingness
      to nothingness, like that skyey bridge on which the gods marched to Walhalla. Otherwise, no
      shape, no landmark; earth and heaven had disappeared.
“Here we are at the hotel,” said Boyson. “There, my dear,”—he pointed ironically—“is the
      American Fall, and there—is the Canadian! Let me introduce you to Niagara!”
They jumped out of the carriage, and while their bags were being carried in they ran to the
      parapeted edge of the cliff in front of the hotel. Niagara thundered in their ears; the spray
      of it beat upon their faces; but of the two great Falls immediately in front of them they saw
      nothing whatever. The fog, now cold and clammy, enwrapped them; even the bright lights of the
      hotel, but a stone's
       throw distant, were barely visible; and the carriage still
      standing at the steps had vanished.
Suddenly, some common impulse born of the moment and the scene—of its inhuman ghostliness
      and grandeur—drew them to each other. Boyson threw his arm round his young wife and pressed
      her to him, kissing her face and hair, bedewed by the spray. She clung to him passionately,
      trembling a little, as the roar deafened them and the fog swept round them.
As the Boysons lingered in the central hall of the hotel, reading some letters which had
      been handed to them, a lady in black passed along the gallery overhead and paused a moment to
      look at the new arrivals brought by the evening train.
As she perceived Captain Boyson there was a quick, startled movement; she bent a moment over
      the staircase, as though to make sure of his identity, and then ran along the gallery to a
      room at the farther end. As she opened the door a damp cold air streamed upon her, and the
      thunder of the Falls, with which the hotel is perpetually filled, seemed to redouble.
Three large windows opposite to her were, in fact, wide open; the room, with its lights
      dimmed by fog, seemed hung above the abyss.
An invalid couch stood in front of the window, and upon it lay a pale, emaciated
       woman, breathing quickly and feebly. At the sound of the
      closing door, Madeleine Verrier turned.
“Oh, Daphne, I was afraid you had gone out! You do such wild things!”
Daphne Barnes came to the side of the couch.
“Darling, I only went to speak to your maid for a moment. Are you sure you can stand all
      this damp fog?”
As she spoke Daphne took up a fur cloak lying on a chair near, and wrapped herself warmly in
      it.
“I can't breathe when they shut the windows. But it is too cold for you.”
“Oh, I'm all right in this.” Daphne drew the cloak round her.
Inwardly she said to herself, “Shall I tell her the Boysons are here? Yes, I must. She is
      sure to hear it in some way.”
So, stooping over the couch, she said:
“Do you know who arrived this evening? The Alfred Boysons. I saw them in the hall just
      now.”
“They're on their honeymoon?” asked the faint voice, after a just perceptible pause.
Daphne assented. “She seems a pretty little thing.”
Madeleine Verrier opened her tired eyes to look at Daphne. Mrs. Floyd—as Daphne now called
      herself—was dressed in deep black. The
       costly gown revealed a figure which had recently become
      substantial, and the face on which the electric light shone had nothing left in it of the
      girl, though Daphne Floyd was not yet thirty. The initial beauty of complexion was gone; so
      was the fleeting prettiness of youth. The eyes were as splendid as ever, but combined with the
      increased paleness of the cheeks, the greater prominence and determination of the mouth, and a
      certain austerity in the dressing of the hair, which was now firmly drawn back from the
      temples round which it used to curl, and worn high, à la
       Marquise, they expressed a personality—a formidable personality—in which self-will
      was no longer graceful, and power no longer magnetic. Madeleine Verrier gazed at her friend in
      silence. She was very grateful to Daphne, often very dependent on her. But there were moments
      when she shrank from her, when she would gladly never have seen her again. Daphne was still
      erect, self-confidant, militant; whereas Madeleine knew herself vanquished—vanquished both in
      body and soul.
Certain inner miseries and discomforts had been set vibrating by the name of Captain
      Boyson.
“You won't want to see him or come across him?” she said abruptly.
“Who? Alfred Boyson? I am not afraid
       of him in the least. He may say what he pleases—or think
      what he pleases. It doesn't matter to me.”
“When did you see him last?”
Daphne hesitated a moment. “When he came to ask me for certain things which had belonged to
      Beatty.”
“For Roger? I remember. It must have been painful.”
“Yes,” said Daphne unwillingly, “it was. He was very unfriendly. He always has been—since it
      happened. But I bore him no malice”—the tone was firm—“and the interview was short.”
“Beatty—” The half audible word fell like a sigh from Madeleine's lips as she closed her
      eyes again to shut out the light which teased them. And presently she added, “Do you ever hear
      anything now—from England?”
“Just what I might expect to hear—what more than justifies all that I did.”
Daphne sat rigid on her chair, her hands crossed on her lap. Mrs. Verrier did not pursue the
      conversation.
Outside the fog grew thicker and darker. Even the lights on the bridge were now engulfed.
      Daphne began to shiver in her fur cloak. She put out a cold hand and took one of Mrs.
      Verrier's.
“Dear Madeleine! Indeed, indeed, you
       ought to let me move you from this place. Do let me!
      There's the house at Stockbridge all ready. And in July I could take you to Newport. I must be
      off next week, for I've promised to take the chair at a big meeting at Buffalo on the 29th.
      But I can't bear to leave you behind. We could make the journey quite easy for you. That new
      car of mine is very comfortable.”
“I know it is. But, thank you, dear, I like this hotel; and it will be summer directly.”
Daphne hesitated. A strong protest against “morbidness” was on her lips, but she did not
      speak it. In the mist-filled room even the bright fire, the electric lights, had grown
      strangely dim. Only the roar outside was real—terribly, threateningly real. Yet the sound was
      not so much fierce as lamentable; the voice of Nature mourning the eternal flaw and conflict
      at the heart of things. Daphne knew well that, mingled with this primitive, cosmic voice,
      there was—for Madeleine Verrier—another: a plaintive, human cry, that was drawing the life out
      of her breast, the blood from her veins, like some baneful witchcraft of old. But she dared
      not speak of it; she and the doctor who attended Mrs. Verrier dared no longer name the
      patient's “obsession” even to each other. They had tried to combat it, to tear her from this
      place; with no other
       result, as it seemed, than to hasten the death-process
      which was upon her. Gently, but firmly, she had defied them, and they knew now that she would
      always defy them. For a year past, summer and winter, she had lived in this apartment facing
      the Falls; her nurses found her very patient under the incurable disease which had declared
      itself; Daphne came to stay with her when arduous engagements allowed, and Madeleine was
      always grateful and affectionate. But certain topics, and certain advocacies, had dropped out
      of their conversation—not by Daphne's will. There had been no spoken recantation; only the
      prophetess prophesied no more; and of late, especially when Daphne was not there—so Mrs. Floyd
      had discovered—a Roman Catholic priest had begun to visit Mrs. Verrier. Daphne, moreover, had
      recently noticed a small crucifix, hidden among the folds of the loose black dress which
      Madeleine commonly wore.
Daphne had changed her dress and dismissed her maid. Although it was May, a wood-fire had
      been lighted in her room to counteract the chilly damp of the evening. She hung over it, loth
      to go back to the sitting-room, and plagued by a depression that not even her strong will
      could immediately shake off. She wished the Boysons had not come.
       She supposed that Alfred Boyson would hardly cut her; but
      she was tolerably certain that he would not wish his young wife to become acquainted with her.
      She scorned his disapproval of her; but she smarted under it. It combined with Madeleine's
      strange delusions to put her on the defensive; to call out all the fierceness of her pride; to
      make her feel herself the champion of a sound and reasonable view of life as against weakness
      and reaction.
Madeleine's dumb remorse was, indeed, the most paralysing and baffling thing; nothing seemed
      to be of any avail against it, now that it had finally gained the upper hand. There had been
      dark times, no doubt, in the old days in Washington; times when the tragedy of her husband's
      death had overshadowed her. But in the intervals, what courage and boldness, what ardour in
      the declaration of that new Feminist gospel to which Daphne had in her own case borne witness!
      Daphne remembered well with what feverish readiness Madeleine had accepted her own pleas after
      her flight from England; how she had defended her against hostile criticism, had supported her
      during the divorce court proceedings, and triumphed in their result. “You are unhappy? And he
      deceived you? Well, then, what more do you want?, Free yourself, my
       dear, free yourself! What right have you to bear more
      children to a man who is a liar and a shuffler? It is our generation that must suffer, for the
      liberty of those that come after!”
What had changed her? Was it simply the approach of mortal illness, the old questioning of
      “what dreams may come”? Superstition, in fact? As a girl she had been mystical and devout; so
      Daphne had heard.
Or was it the death of little Beatty, to whom she was much attached? She had seen something
      of Roger during that intermediate Philadelphia stage, when he and Beatty were allowed to meet
      at her house; and she had once or twice astonished and wounded Daphne at that time by sudden
      expressions of pity for him. It was she who had sent the cable message announcing the child's
      death, wording it as gently as possible, and had wept in sending it.
“As if I hadn't suffered too!” cried Daphne's angry thought. And she turned to look at the
      beautiful miniature of Beatty set in pearls that stood upon her dressing-table. There was
      something in the recollection of Madeleine's sensibility with regard to the child—as in that
      of her compassion for the father's suffering—that offended Daphne. It seemed a reflection upon
      herself, Beatty's mother, as lacking in softness and natural feeling.

On the contrary! She had suffered terribly; but she had thought it her duty to bear it with
      courage, not to let it interfere with the development of her life. And as for Roger, was it
      her fault that he had made it impossible for her to keep her promise? That she had been forced
      to separate Beatty from him? And if, as she understood now from various English
      correspondents, it was true that Roger had dropped out of decent society, did it not simply
      prove that she had guessed his character aright, and had only saved herself just in time?
It was as though the sudden presence of Captain Boyson under the same roof had raised up a
      shadowy adversary and accuser, with whom she must go on thus arguing, and hotly defending
      herself, in a growing excitement. Not that she would ever stoop to argue with Alfred Boyson
      face to face. How could he ever understand the ideals to which she had devoted her powers and
      her money since the break-up of her married life? He could merely estimate what she had done
      in the commonest, vulgarest way. Yet who could truthfully charge her with having obtained her
      divorce in order thereby to claim any fresh licence for herself? She looked back now with a
      cool amazement on that sudden rush of passion which had swept her into marriage, no less than the
       jealousy which had led her to break with Roger. She was
      still capable of many kinds of violence; but not, probably, of the violence of love. The
      influence of sex and sense upon her had weakened; the influence of ambition had increased. As
      in many women of Southern race, the period of hot blood had passed into a period of intrigue
      and domination. Her wealth gave her power, and for that power she lived.
Yes, she was personally desolate, but she had stood firm, and her reward lay in the fact
      that she had gathered round her an army of dependents and followers—women especially—to whom
      her money and her brains were indispensable. There on the table lay the plans for a new
      Women's College, on the broadest and most modern lines, to which she was soon to devote a
      large sum of money. The walls should have been up by now but for a quarrel with her secretary,
      who had become much too independent, and had had to be peremptorily dismissed at a moment's
      notice. But the plan was a noble one, approved by the highest authorities; and Daphne, looking
      to posterity, anticipated the recognition that she herself might never live to see. For the
      rest she had given herself—with reservations—to the Feminist movement. It was not in her
      nature to give herself wholly to anything; and she was instinctively critical of people who professed
       fessed to be her leaders, and programmes to which she was
      expected to subscribe. Wholehearted devotion, which, as she rightly said, meant blind
      devotion, had never been her line; and she had been on one or two occasions offensively
      outspoken on the subject of certain leading persons in the movement. She was not, therefore,
      popular with her party, and did not care to be; her pride of money held her apart from the
      rank and file, the college girls, and typists, and journalists who filled the Feminist
      meetings, and often made themselves, in her eyes, supremely ridiculous, because of what she
      considered their silly provinciality and lack of knowledge of the world.
Yet, of course, she was a “Feminist”—and particularly associated with those persons in the
      suffrage camp who stood for broad views on marriage and divorce. She knew very well that many
      other persons in the same camp held different opinions; and in public or official gatherings
      was always nervously—most people thought arrogantly—on the look-out for affronts. Meanwhile,
      everywhere, or almost everywhere, her money gave her power, and her knowledge of it was always
      sweet to her. There was nothing in the world—no cause, no faith—that she could have accepted
      “as a little child.” But everywhere, in her own opinion, she stood for Justice; justice for
      women as against the
       old primæval tyranny of men; justice, of course, to the
      workman, and justice to the rich. No foolish Socialism, and no encroaching Trusts! A lucid
      common-sense, so it seemed to her, had been her cradle-gift.
And with regard to Art, how much she had been able to do! She had generously helped the
      public collections, and her own small gallery, at the house in Newport, was famous throughout
      England and America. That in the course of the preceding year she had found among the
      signatures, extracted from visitors by the custodian in charge, the name of Chloe Fairmile,
      had given her a peculiar satisfaction.
She walked proudly across the room, her head thrown back, every nerve tense. Let the
      ignorant and stupid blame her if they chose. She stood absolved. Memory reminded her,
      moreover, of a great number of kind and generous things—private things—that she had done with
      her money. If men like Herbert French, or Alfred Boyson, denounced her, there were many
      persons who felt warmly towards her—and had cause. As she thought of them the tears rose in
      her eyes. Of course she could never make such things public.
Outside the fog seemed to be lifting a little. There was a silvery light in the south-east,
      a gleam and radiance over the gorge. If the
       moon struggled through, it would be worth while slipping
      out after dinner to watch its play upon the great spectacle. She was careful to cherish in
      herself an openness to noble impressions and to the high poetry of nature and life. And she
      must not allow herself to be led by the casual neighbourhood of the Boysons into weak or
      unprofitable thought.
The Boysons dined at a table, gay with lights and flowers, that should have commanded the
      Falls but for the curtain of fog. Niagara, however, might flout them if it pleased; they could
      do without Niagara. They were delighted that the hotel, apparently, contained no one they
      knew. All they wanted was to be together, and alone. But the bride was tired by a long day in
      the train; her smiles began presently to flag, and by nine o'clock her husband had insisted on
      sending her to rest.
After escorting her upstairs Captain Boyson returned to the verandah, which was brightly lit
      up, in order to read some letters that were still unopened in his pocket. But before he began
      upon them he was seized once more by the wizardry of the scene. Was that indistinct glimmer in
      the far distance—that intenser white on white—the eternal cloud of spray that hangs over the
      Canadian Fall?
       If so, the fog was indeed yielding, and the full moon
      behind it would triumph before long. On the other hand, he could no longer see the lights of
      the bridge at all; the rolling vapour choked the gorge, and the waiter who brought him his
      coffee drily prophesied that there would not be much change under twenty-four hours.
He fell back upon his letters, well pleased to see that one among them came from Herbert
      French, with whom the American officer had maintained a warm friendship since the day of a
      certain consultation in French's East-End library. The letter was primarily one of
      congratulation, written with all French's charm and sympathy; but over the last pages of it
      Boyson's face darkened, for they contained a deplorable account of the man whom he and French
      had tried to save.
The concluding passage of the letter ran as follows:
“You will scarcely wonder after all this that we see him very seldom, and that he no longer
      gives us his confidence. Yet both Elsie and I feel that he cares for us as much as ever. And,
      indeed, poor fellow, he himself remains strangely lovable, in spite of what one
      must—alas!—believe as to his ways of life and the people with whom he associates. There is in
      him, always, something of what
       Myers called ‘the imperishable child.’ That a man who might
      have been so easily led to good has been so fatally thrust into evil is one of the abiding
      sorrows of my life. How can I reproach him for his behaviour? As the law stands, he can never
      marry; he can never have legitimate children. Under the wrong he has suffered, and, no doubt,
      in consequence of that illness in New York, when he was badly nursed and cared for—from which,
      in fact, he has never wholly recovered—his will-power and nerve, which were never very strong,
      have given way; he broods upon the past perpetually, and on the loss of his child. Our poor
      Apollo, Boyson, will soon have lost himself wholly, and there is no one to help.
“Do you ever see or hear anything of that woman? Do you know what has become of her? I see
      you are to have a Conference on your Divorce Laws—that opinion and indignation are rising. For
      Heaven's sake, do something! I gather some appalling facts from a recent Washington report.
      One in twelve of all your marriages dissolved! A man or a woman divorced in one State, and
      still bound in another! The most trivial causes for the break-up of marriage, accepted and
      acted upon by corrupt courts, and reform blocked by a phalanx of corrupt interests! Is it all
      true? An American correspondent of mine—a lady—
       repeats to me what you once said, that it is the women who
      bring the majority of the actions. She impresses upon me also the remarkable fact that it is
      apparently only in a minority of cases that a woman, when she has got rid of her husband,
      marries someone else. It is not passion, therefore, that dictates many of these actions; no
      serious cause or feeling, indeed, of any kind; but rather an ever-spreading restlessness and
      levity, a readiness to tamper with the very foundations of society, for a whim, a nothing!—in
      the interests, often, of what women call their ‘individuality’! No foolish talk here of being
      ‘members one of another’! We have outgrown all that. The facilities are always there, and the
      temptation of them. ‘The women—especially—who do these things,’ she writes me, ‘are moral
      anarchists. One can appeal to nothing; they acknowledge nothing. Transformations infinitely
      far-reaching and profound are going on among us.’
“‘Appeal to nothing!’ And this said of women, by a woman! It was of
       men that a Voice said long ago: ‘Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts,
      suffered you to put away your wives’—just such grounds, apparently—trivial and cruel
      pretexts—as your American courts admit. ‘But I say unto you!—I say unto
       you!’....
“Well, I am a Christian priest, incapable,
       of course, of an unbiassed opinion. My correspondent tries
      to explain the situation a little by pointing out that your women in America claim to be the
      superiors of your men, to be more intellectual, better-mannered, more refined. Marriage
      disappoints or disgusts them, and they impatiently put it aside. They break it up, and seem to
      pay no penalty. But you and I believe that they will pay it!—that there are divine avenging
      forces in the very law they tamper with—and that, as a nation, you must either retrace some of
      the steps taken, or sink in the scale of life.
“How I run on! And all because my heart is hot within me for the suffering of one man, and
      the hardness of one woman!”
Boyson raised his eyes. As he did so he saw dimly through the mist the figure of a lady,
      veiled, and wrapped in a fur cloak, crossing the farther end of the verandah. He half rose
      from his seat, with an exclamation. She ran down the steps leading to the road and disappeared
      in the fog.
Boyson stood looking after her, his mind in a whirl.
The manager of the hotel came hurriedly out of the same door by which Daphne Floyd had
      emerged, and spoke to a waiter on the verandah, pointing in the direction she had taken.

Boyson heard what was said, and came up. A short conversation passed between him and the
      manager. There was a moment's pause on Boyson's part; he still held French's letter in his
      hand. At last, thrusting it into his pocket, he hurried to the steps whereby Daphne had left
      the hotel, and pursued her into the cloud outside.
The fog was now rolling back from the gorge, upon the Falls, blotting out the transient
      gleams which had seemed to promise a lifting of the veil, leaving nothing around or beneath
      but the white and thunderous abyss.
