<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Tarr</title><author>Lewis, Percy Wyndham (1882-1957)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER V
On the first day of his letter being overdue, a convenient way of counting, Otto rose late,
      from a maze of shallow dreams, and was soon dressed, wanting to get out of his room.
As the clock struck one he slammed his door and descended the stairs alertly. The concierge,
      on the threshold of her “loge,” peered up at him.
“Good morning, Madame Leclerc ; it’s a fine day,” said Kreisler, in his heavy French, his
      cold direct gaze incongruously ornamented by a cheerful smile.
“Monsieur has got up late this morning,” replied the concierge, with very faint
      amiability.
“Yes, I have lost all sense of time. J’ai perdu le temps ! Ha ha !” He grinned
      mysteriously. The watch had gone the way of the dress clothes some days already.
She followed him slowly along the passage, become extremely grave. “Quel original! quel
      genre !” With a look of perplexed distrust she watched him 
        down the street. — This German good humour and sudden expansiveness has always
      been a portentous thing to French people. Latin races are as scandalized at northern
      amenities, the badness of our hypocrisies or manners and total immodesty displayed, as the
      average man of Teutonic race is with the shameful perfection of and ease in deceit shown by
      the French neighbour. Kreisler, still beneath the eye of the concierge, with his rhythmic
      martial tread, approached the restaurant. A few steps from the threshold he slowed down,
      dragging his long German boots, which acted as brakes.
The Restaurant Lejeune, like many others in Paris, had been originally a clean, tranquil
      little creamery, consisting of a small shop a few feet either way. — Then one customer after
      another had become more gluttonous. He had asked, in addition to his daily glass of milk, for
      beefsteak and spinach, or some other terrific nourishment, which the decent little business at
      first supplied with timid protest. But perpetual scenes of sanguine voracity — weeks of
      compliance with the most brutal and unbridled appetites of man — gradually brought about a
      change in its character. — It became frankly a place where the most carnivorous palate might
      be palled. As trade grew, the small business had burrowed backwards into the house — the
      victorious flood of commerce had burst through walls and partitions, flung down
      doors, discovered many dingy rooms in the interior that it instantly filled with serried
      cohorts of eaters. It had driven out terrified families, had hemmed the apoplectic concierge
      in her “loge,” it had broken out on to the court at the back in shed-like structures. And in
      the musty bowels of the house it had established a broiling, luridly-lighted, roaring den,
      inhabited by a rushing and howling band of slatternly savages. — The chef’s wife sat at a desk
      immediately fronting the entrance door. When a diner had finished, adding up the bill himself
      on a printed slip of paper, he paid it there on his way out. In the first room a tunnel-like
      and ill-lit recess furnished with a 
       long table formed a cul-de-sac to the left. Into this Kreisler got. At the
      right-hand side the passage led to the inner rooms.
A mind feeling the need for things clean and clear cut would have been better content,
      although demurring, with Kreisler’s military morning suit, slashed with thick seams; carefully
      cut hair, short behind,a little florid and bunched on the top; his German high-crowned
      bowler hat, and plain cane, than the Charivari of the Artfashion and uniform of The Brush in
      those about him, chiefly students from the neighbouring Art schools.
He was staring at the bill of fare when some one took the seat in front of him. — He looked
      up, put down the card. A young woman was sitting there, who now seemed waiting, as though
      Kreisler might be expected, after a rest, to take up the menu again and go on reading it.
“Have you done with—? May I—?”
At the sound of her voice he moved a little forward, and in handing it to her, spoke in
      German.
“Danke schön,” she said, smiling with a German nod of racial recognition.
He ordered his soup. — Usually this meal passed in surly impassible inspection of his
      neighbours and the newspaper. Staring at and through the figure in front of him, he spent
      several minutes. He seemed making up his mind.
“Monsieur est distrait aujourd’hui,” Jeanne said, who was waiting to take his order.
Contrary to custom, he sought for some appetizing dish, to change the routine. Appetite had
      not woken, but he had become restless before the usual dull programme. There were certain
      tracts of menu he never explored. His eye always guided him at once to the familiar place
      where the “plat du jour” was to be found, and the alternative sweets heading the list. He
      now plunged his eye down the long line of unfamiliar dishes.
He fixed his eye on Jeanne with indecision too, and picked up the menu. “My vis-à-vis is
      pretty !” he thought.

“Lobster salad, mayonnaise, and a pommes à l’huile, Jeanne,” he called out.
This awakening to beauties of the menu brought with it a survey of his neighbour. Vaguely,
      she must be connected with lobster salad. How could that be?
First he was surprised that such a beautiful girl should be sitting there. Beautiful people
      wander dangerously about in life, just like ordinary folk. He appeared to think that they
      should be isolated like powder magazines or lepers. This man could never leave good luck
      alone, or reflect that that, too, was a dangerous vagrant. He could not quite grasp that it
      was a general good luck and easily explained phenomenon.
He had already been examined by the beautiful girl. Throwing an absent far-away look into
      her eyes, she let them wander over him. Afterwards she cast them down into her soup. As a
      pickpocket, after brisk work in a crowd, hurries home to examine and evaluate his spoil, so
      she then examined collectedly what her dreamy eyes had noted. This method was not
      characteristic of her, but of the category of useful habits bequeathed us, each sex having its
      own. Perhaps in her cloudy soup she beheld something of the storm and shock that inhabited her
      neighbour.
Without preliminary reflection Kreisler found himself addressing her, a little abashed when
      he suddenly heard his voice, and with eerie feeling when it was answered.
“From your hesitation in choosing your lunch, gnadiges Fraulein, I suppose you have not
      been long in Paris ?”
“No, I only arrived a week ago, from America.” She settled her elbows on the table for a
      moment.
“Allow me to give you some idea of what the menu of this restaurant is like.” This was like
      a lesson. He started ponderously. “At the head of each list you will find simple dishes;
      elemental dishes, I might call them! (Elementalische platter!) This 
       is the rough material from which the others are evolved. Each list is like an
      oriental dance. It gets wilder as it goes along. In the last dish you can be sure that the
      potatoes will taste like tomatoes, and the pork like a sirloin of beef.”
“So!” laughed the young woman, with good German gutteral. “I’m glad to say I
      have ordered dishes that head the list.”
“Garlic is an enemy usually ambushed in gigot. — That is his only quite certain haunt.”
“Good ; I will avoid gigot.” She was indulgent to his clowning, and drawled a little in
      sympathy. Between language and feeding, Kreisler sought to gain the young lady’s confidence,
      adhering conventionally to the progress of Creation.
He found his neighbour inclined to slight Nature. He, too, was a little overlooked; in
      waiving of conventions being blandly forestalled. There was something uncomfortable about all
      this. He must brace himself He realized with the prophetic logic of his hysteria, racing
      through the syllogisms his senses divined, sensations now anachronisms, afterwards recognized
      as they burst out in due course. This precocity in the restaurant took him to the solution of
      what their coming together might mean.
One plethoric impression of her was received — although from her — instalment of a
      senseless generosity.
She wore a heavy black burnous, very voluminous and severe ; a large ornamental bag was on
      the chair at her side, which you expected to contain herbs and trinkets, paraphernalia of the
      witch, rather than powder, lip-cream, and secrets. Her hat was immense and sinuous ; generally
      she implied an egotistic code of advanced order, full of insolent strategies.
Other women in the restaurant appeared dragged down and drained of vitality by their clothes
      beside her, Kreisler thought, although she wore so much more than they did. Her large
      square-shouldered and slim body swam in hers like a duck.
When she laughed, this commotion was transmitted to her body as though sharp, sonorous blows
      had been 
        struck on her mouth. Her lips were long, hard bubbles risen in the blond heavy
      pool of her face, ready to break, pitifully and gaily. Grown forward with ape-like intensity,
      they refused no emotion noisy egress if it got so far. Her eyes were, large, stubborn, and
      reflective, brown coming out of blondness. Her head was like a deep white egg in
      a tobacco-coloured nest. She exuded personality with alarming and disgusting intensity. It was
      an ostentation similar to diamonds and gold watch-chains. Kreisler felt himself in the midst
      of a cascade, a hot cascade.
She seemed to feel herself a travelling circus of tricks and wonders, beauty shows and
      monstrosities. Quite used to being looked at, she had become resigned to inability to avoid
      performing. She possessed the geniality of public character and the genius of sex. Kreisler
      was a strange loafer talked to easily, without any consciousness of condescension.
Just as he was most out of his depth, Kreisler had run up against all this ! It all had the
      mellowness of sunset, and boomed in this small alcove infernally. — By the fact of sex this
      figure seems to offer him a traditional substantiality. He clutches at it eagerly as at
      something familiar and unmetamorphosed — and somewhat unmetamorphosable — by Fate.
In the first flush he revolves with certain skill in this new champ de manoeuvres,
      executing one or two very pretty gymnastics. He has only to flatter himself on the excellent
      progress, really, that he makes.
_ “My name is Anastasya,” she says irrelevantly to him, as if she had stupidly forgotten,
      before, this little detail.
Whew! his poor ragged eyelashes flutter, a cloud of astonishment passes grotesquely over his
      face; like the clown of the piece, he looks as though he were about to rub his head, click his
      tongue, and give his nearest man-neighbour an enthusiastic kick. “Anastasya !” It will be “
      Tasy” soon !
He outwardly becomes more solemn than ever,
        like a merchant who sees an incredible dupe before him, and would in some way
      conceal his exhilaration. But he calls her carefully at regular intervals, Anastasya !
“I suppose you’ve come here to work ?” he asked.
“I don’t want to work any more than is absolutely necessary. I am overworked as it is, by
      living merely.” He could well believe it; she must do some overtime!  “If it were not for my
      excellent constitution——”
This was evidently, Kreisler felt, the moment to touch on the heaviness of life’s burden ;
      as her expression was perfectly even and non-committal.
“Ah, yes,” he sighed heavily, one side of the menu rising gustily and relapsing, “Life
      gives one work enough.”
She looked at him and reflected, “What work does ‘ cet oiseau-la ’ perform ?”
“Have you many friends here, Anastasya ?”
“None.” — She laughed with ostentatious satisfaction at his funniness. “I came here, as a
      matter of fact, to be alone. I want to see only fresh people. I have had all the gusto and
      illusion I had lent all round steadily handed back to me where I come from.
‘ I beg your pardon ! Your property, ma’am ! ’ The result is that I am amazingly rich ! — I
      am tremendously rich!” She opened her eyes wide; Kreisler pricked up his ears and wondered if
      this were to be taken in another sense. He cast down his eyes respectfully. “I have the sort
      of feeling that I have enough to go all round. — But perhaps I haven’t!”
Kreisler lingered over her first observation: “wanted to be alone.” The indirect
      compliment conveyed (and he felt, when it was said, that he was somewhere near the frontier,
      surely, of a German confidence) was rather mitigated by what followed. The “having enough to
      go all round” ; that was very universal, and included him too easily in its sweep.
“Do you want to go all round ?” he asked, with
        heavy plagiarism of her accent, and solemn sentimental face.
“I don’t want to be mean.”
His eyes struggled with hers; he was easily thrown.
But she had the regulation feminine foible of charity he reassured himself, by her
      answer.
Kreisler’s one great optimism was a belief in the efficacy of women. — You did not
      deliberately go there — at least, he usually did not — unless you were in straits. But there
      they were all the time, vast dumping-ground for sorrow and affliction — a world-dimensioned
      pawnshop, in which you could deposit not your dress-suit or garments, but yourself,
      temporarily, in exchange for the gold of the human heart. Their hope consisted, no doubt, in
      the reasonable uncertainty as to whether you would ever be able to take yourself out again.
      Kreisler had got in and out again almost as many times as his “smokkin” in its
      pawnshop.
Women were Art or expression for him in this way. They were Man’s Theatre. The Tragedies
      played there purged you periodically of the too violent accumulations of desperate life. There
      its burden of laughter as well might be exploded. — Woman was a confirmed
       Schauspielerin or play-actress ; but coming there for illusion he was willingly
      moved. Much might be noticed in common between him and the drunken navvy on Saturday night,
      who comes home bellicosely towards his wife, blows raining gladly at the mere sight of her. He
      may get practically all the excitement and exertion he violently needs, without any of the
      sinister chances a more real encounter would present. His wife is “his little bit” of
      unreality, or play. He can declaim, be outrageous to the top of his bent; can be maudlin too;
      all conducted almost as he pleases, with none of the shocks of the real and too tragic world.
      In this manner woman was the aesthetic element in Kreisler’s life. Love, too, always meant
      unhappy love for him, with its misunderstandings and wistful
       separations. He issued forth solemnly and the better for it. He approached a love
      affair as the deutscher Student engages in a student’s duel — no vital part exposed,
      but where something spiritually of about the importance of a nose might be lost; at
      least stoically certain that blood would be drawn.
A casual observer of the progress of Otto Kreisler’s life might have said that the chief
      events, the crises, consisted of his love affairs — such as that unfortunate one with his
      present stepmother. — But, in the light of a careful analysis, this would have been an
      inversion of the truth. When the events of his life became too unwieldy or overwhelming, he
      converted them into love, as he might have done, with specialized talent, into some art or
      other . He was a sculptor — a German sculptor of a mock-realistic and degenerate school —  in
      the strange sweethearting of the “free-life.” The two or three women he had left about the
      world in this way — although perhaps those symbolic statues had grown rather characterless in
      Time’s weather and perhaps lumpish — were monuments of his perplexities. After weeks of
      growing estrangement, he would sever all relations suddenly one day — usually on some
      indigestible epigram, that worried the poor girl for the rest of her days. Being no adept in
      the science of his heart, there remained a good deal of mystery for him about the appearance
      of “Woman” in his life. He felt that she was always connected with its important periods; he
      thought, superstitiously, that his existence was in some way implicated with dem
       Weib. She was, in any case, for him, a stormy petrel. He would be killed by a woman,
      he sometimes thought. This superstition had flourished with him before he had yet found for it
      much raison d'etre. — A serious duel having been decided on in his early student
      days, this reflection, “I am quite safe; it is not thus that I shall die,” had given him a
      grisly coolness. His opponent nearly got himself killed, because he, for his part, had no hard
      and fast theory about the sort of death in store for him.
This account, to be brought up to date, must be
        modified. Since knowing Volker, no woman had come conspicuously to disturb him.
      Volker had been the ideal element of balance in his life.
But between this state — the minimum degree of friendship possible — a distant and soothing
      companionship — and more serious states, there was no possible foothold for Kreisler.
Friendship usually dates from unformed years. But Love still remains in full swing long
      after Kreisler’s age at that time ; a sort of spurious and intense friendship.
An uncomfortable thing happened now. He realized suddenly all the possibilities of this
      chance acquaintanceship, plainly and cinematographically. —  He was seized with panic. — He
      must make a good impression. — From that moment he ran the risk of doing the reverse. For he
      was unaccustomed to act with calculation. — There he was like some individual who had gone
      nonchalantly into the presence of a prince; who — just in the middle of the audience —  when
      he would have been getting over his first ’ embarrassment — is overcome with a tardy
      confusion, the imagination in some way giving a jump. It is the imagination, repressed and as
      it were slighted, revenging itself.
Casting about desperately for means of handling the situation, he remembered she had spoken
      of getting a dog to guide her. — What had she meant ? Anyway, he grasped at the dog.
      He could regain possession of himself in romantic stimulus of this figure. He would be her
      dog! Lie at her feet! He would fill with a merely animal warmth and vivacity the void that
       must exist in her spirit. His imagination, flattered, came in as ally. This, too,
      exempted him from the necessity of being victorious. All he asked was to be her dog! — only
      wished to impress her as a dog ! Even if she did not feel much sympathy for him now, no
      matter. — He would humbly follow her up, put himself at her disposal, not be exigent. It was a
      role difficult to refuse him. Sense 
       of security the humility of this resolution brought about caused him to regain a
      self-possession. Only it imposed the condition, naturally, of remaining a dog. — Every time he
      felt his retiring humbleness giving place to another sensation, he anew felt qualms.
“Do you intend studying here, Fraulein ?” he asked, with a new deference in his tone —
      hardly a canine whine, but deep servient bass of the faithful St. Bernard. — She seemed to
      have noticed this something new already, and Kreisler on all fours evidently astonished her.
      She was inclined to stroke him, but at the same time to ask what was the matter.
“A year or two ago I escaped from a bourgeois household in an original manner. Shall I tell
      you about that, Otto ?”
Confidence for confidence, he had told Anastasya that he was Otto.
“Please!” he said, with reverent eagerness.
“Well, the bourgeois household was that of my father and mother. — I got out of it in this
      way. — I made myself such a nuisance to my family that they had to get rid of me.” Otto flung
      himself back in his chair with dramatic incredulity. “It was quite simple. — I began
      scribbling and scratching all over the place — on blotting-pads, margins of newspapers, on my
      father’s correspondence, the wall-paper. I inundated my home with troublesome images. It was
      like vermin; my multitude of little figures swarmed everywhere. They simply had to
      get rid of me. — I said nothing. I pretended to be possessed. I got a girl-friend in Munich to
      write enthusiastic letters : her people lived quite near us when we were in Germany.”
Kreisler looked at her rather dully, and smiled solemnly, with really something of the
      misplaced and unaccountable pathos and protest of dogs (although still with a slavish wagging
      of the tail) at some pleasantry of the master. — Her expansiveness, as a fact, embarrassed him
      very much at this point. He was divided between his inclination to 
        respond to it in some way, and mature their acquaintance at once, and his
      determination to be merely a dog. Yet he felt that her familiarity, if adopted, in turn, by
      him, might not be the right thing. And yet, as it was, he would appear to be holding
      back, would seem “reserved” in his mere humility. He was a very perplexed dog for some
      time.
He remained dumb, smiling up at her with appealing pathos from time to time. She wondered if
      he had indigestion or what. He made several desperate dog-like sorties. But she saw he was
      clearly in difficulties. — As her lunch was finished, she called the waitress. — Her bill was
      made out, Kreisler scowling at her all the while. Her attitude, suggesting, “Yes, you
       are funny, you know you are. I’d better go, then you’ll be better,” was responded to
      by him with the same offended dignity as the drunken man displays when his unsteadiness is
      observed. He repudiated sulkily the suggestion that there was anything wrong. Then he grew
      angry with her. His nervousness was her doing. — All was lost. He was very near some violence.
      — But when she stood up, he was so impressed that he sat gaping after her. He remained cramped
      in his place until she had left the restaurant.
He moved in his chair stiffly ; he ached as though he had been sitting for his portrait. The
      analogy struck him. Had he been sitting for his portrait ? These people dining near him as
      though they had suddenly appeared out of the ground — he was embarrassed at finding himself
      alone with them. They knew all that had happened, but were pretending not to. He had not
      noticed that they were there all round him, overhearing and looking on. It was as though he
      had been talking to himself, and had just become aware of it. A tide of magnetism had flowed
      away, leaving him bare and stranded. — He cursed his stupidity. He then stopped this
      empty mental racket abruptly. — Only a few minutes had passed since Anastasya’s departure. He
      seized hat and stick and hurried up to the desk. — Once outside 
       he gave his glasses an adjusting pull, gazed up and down the boulevard in all
      directions. No sign of the tall figure he was pursuing. He started off, partly at a run, in
      the likeliest direction. — At the Café Berne corner, where several new vistas opened, there
      she was, some way down the Boulevard du Paradis, on the edge of the side-walk, waiting till a
      tram had passed to cross. Having seen so much, should he not go back ? For there was nothing
      else to be done. To catch her up and force himself on her could have only one result, he
      thought. He might, perhaps, follow a little way. That was being done already.
They went on for some hundred yards, she a good distance ahead on the other side of the
      boulevard. Walking for a moment, his eyes on the ground, he looked up and caught her head
      pivoting slowly round. She no doubt had seen him. — With shame he realized what was happening.
      — “Here I am following this girl as though we were strangers! This is what I began in the
      restaurant. I am putting the final touch by following her in the street, as though we had
      never spoken!” Either he must catch her up at once or vanish. He promptly turned up a
      side street, and circled round to his starting-point.
</div></body></text></TEI>