<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Tarr</title><author>Lewis, Percy Wyndham (1882-1957)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="46">
CHAPTER V
When he got outside Bertha’s house, Bertha waving to him from the window with tears in her
      eyes, he came in for the counter-attack.

One after the other the protesting masses of good sense rolled up.
He picked his way out of the avenue with a reasoning gesticulation of the body; a
      chicken-like motion of sensible fastidious defence in front of buffonic violence. At the gate
      he exploded in harsh laughter, looking bravely and railingly out into the world through his
      glasses. Then he walked slowly away in his short jacket, his buttocks moving methodically just
      beneath its rim.
“Ha ha ! Ha ha ! Kreisleriana !” he shouted without his voice.
The indignant plebs of his glorious organism rioted around his mind.
“Ha ha ! Ha ha ! Sacré farceur, where are you leading us ?” They were vociferous.
      “You have kept us fooling in this neighbourhood so long, and now you are pledging us to your
      idiotic fancy for ever. Ha ha ! Ha ha !”
“Be reasonable ! What are you doing, master of our destiny ? We shall all be lost!”
A faction clamoured, “Anastasya!” Certain sense-sections attacked him in vulnerable spots
      with Anastasya’s voluptuous banner unfurled and fragrant.
He buffeted his way along, as though spray were dashing in his face, watchful behind his
      glasses. He met his thoughts with a contemptuous stiff veteran smile. This capricious and
      dangerous master had an offensive stylistic coolness, similar to Wellington breakfasting at
      Salamanca while Marmont hurried exultingly into traps; although he resembled his great
      countryman in no other way.
Those thoughts that bellowed, “Anastasya!” however, worried him. He answered them.
“Anastasya! Anastasya!! I know all about that! What do you take me for ? You will
      still have your Anastasya. I am not selling myself or you. A man such as I does not dispose of
      himself in a case like this. I am going to marry Bertha Lunken. Well ? Shall I be any the less
      my own master for that reason ? If I want to sleep with 
       Anastasya, I shall do so. Why marry Bertha Lunken, and shoulder all that
      semi-contagious muck ? Because it is only the points or movements in life that matter, and one
      of those points indicates that course, namely, to keep faith with another person: and secretly
      to show my contempt for the world by choosing the premier venu to be my body-servant
      and body companion ; my contempt for my body too.”
He sought to overcome his reasons by appeals to their corporate vanity
He had experienced rather a wrench as regards Anastasya. The swanky sex with which he
      had ornamented his future could not be dismissed so easily. He was astonished that it could be
      dismissed at all, and asked himself the reason. He sacrificed Anastasya with a comparatively
      light heart. It was chiefly his vanity that gave trouble.
He came back to his earlier conclusions. Such successful people as Anastasya and himself
      were by themselves. It was as impossible to combine or wed them as to compound the
      genius of two great artists. If you mixed together into one whole Gainsborough and Goya you
      would get nothing, for they would be mutually destructive. Beyond a certain point
      of perfection individual instinct was its own law. A subtle lyrical wail would gain nothing
      from living with a rough and powerful talent, or vice versa. Success is always personal.
      Co-operation, group-genius was, he was convinced, a slavish pretence and absurdity. Only when
      the group was so big that it became a person again, as with a nation, did you get mob-talent
      or popular art. This big, diffuse, vehement giant was the next best thing to the great artist;
      Patchin Tcherana coming just below.
He saw this quite clearly. He and Anastasya were a superfluity, and destructive conflict. It
      was like a mother being given a child to bear the same size already as herself. Anastasya was
      in every way too big; she was too big physically. But did not sex change the whole question,
      when it was a woman ? He did not agree to this. Woman and the sexual 
        sphere seemed, to him to be an average from which everything came :
      from it everything rose, or attempted to rise. There was no mysterious opposition extending up
      into Heaven, and dividing Heavenly Beings into Gods and Goddesses. There was only one God, and
      he was a man. A woman was a lower form of life. Everything was female to begin with.
      A jellyish diffuseness spread itself and gaped on the beds and in the bas-fonds of
      everything. Above a certain level of life sex disappeared, just as in highly organized
      sensualism sex vanishes. And, on the other hand, everything beneath that line was
      female. Bard, Simpson, Mackenzie, Townsend, Annandale —  he enumerated acquaintances evidently
      below the absolute line, and who displayed a lack of energy, permanently mesmeric state, and
      almost purely emotional reactions. He knew that everything on the superior side of that line
      was not purged of jellyish attributes; also that Anastasya’s flaccid and fundamental charms
      were formidable, although the line had been crossed by her. One thing was impressive, however.
      The loss of Anastasya did not worry him, except magnified through the legal acquisition
      of Bertha. What did he want ? Well, he did not want Anastasya as much as he
       should. He was incorrigible, he concluded. He regarded the Anastasya evening as a sort
      of personal defeat even. The call of duty was nevertheless very strong. He ought to
      love Anastasya ; and his present intentions as regards his despicable fiancée were a
      disgraceful betrayal, etc. etc. The mutterings of reason continued.
That evening he met Anastasya. The moment he saw her he realized the abysses of indignity
      and poorness he was flinging himself into -with Bertha Lunken. A sudden humbleness entered him
      and put him out of conceit with his judgment, formed away from bright objects like Anastasya.
      The selfishness that caused his sentimentality when alone -with Bertha was dissipated or not
      used in presence of more or less successful objects and people. None of his ego 
        was required by his new woman. She possessed plenty of her own. This, he
      realized later, was the cause of his lack of attachment. He needed an empty vessel to flood
      with his vitality, and not an equal and foreign vitality to exist side by side with coldly. He
      had taken into sex the procédés and selfish arrangements of life in general. He had
      humanized sex too much. He frequently admitted this, but with his defence lost sight of the
      flagrancy of the permanent fact.
He felt in Anastasya for the first time now an element of protection and safety. She was a
      touch-  wood and harbour from his perplexed interior life. She had a sort of ovation from him.
      All his obstinacy in favour of his fiancee had vanished. With Anastasya’s appearance an
      entirely different world was revealed that demanded completely new arguments.
They went to the same restaurant as the night before. He talked quietly, until they had
      drunk too much, and Bertha was not mentioned.
“And what of Bertha ?” she asked finally.
“Never mind about Bertha.”
“Is she extinct ?”
“No. She threatens an entirely new sort of eruption.”
“Oh. In what way new—?”
“It doesn’t matter. It won’t come our way.”
“Are you going there to-morrow ?”
“I suppose I must. But I shall not make many more visits of——”
“What’s that ?”
“I shall give up going, I say.” He shifted restlessly in his chair.
After breakfast next morning they parted, Tarr going back to work. Butcher, whom he had not
      seen for some days, came in. He agreed to go down into town and have lunch with him. Tarr put
      on a clean shirt. Talking to Butcher while he was changing, he stood behind his bedroom door.
      Men of ambitious physique, like himself, he had always noticed, were 
       inclined to puff themselves out or let their arms hang in a position favourable
      to their muscles while changing before another man. To avoid this embarrassment or absurdity,
      he made a point of never exhibiting himself unclothed.
His conversation with Butcher did not fall on matters in hand. As with Anastasya, he was
      unusually reticent. He had turned over a new leaf. He became rather alarmed at this himself
      when he realized it. After lunch he left Butcher and went to the Mairie of the Quartier du
      Paradis and made inquiries about civil marriages. He did it like a sleep-walker.
He was particularly amiable with Bertha that day, and told her of his activities at the
      Mairie and made an appointment with her there for the next day.
Daily, then, he proceeded with his marriage arrangements in the afternoons, saw Bertha
      regularly, but without modifying the changed “correctness” of his attitude. The evenings he
      spent with Anastasya.
By the time the marriage preliminaries had been gone through, and Bertha and he could formally
      be united, his relations with Anastasya had become as close as formerly his friendship with
      Bertha had been. With the exception of the time from three in the afternoon to seven in the
      evening that he took off every day to see his fiancee, he was with her.
On September 29, three weeks after Bertha had told him that she was pregnant, he married her
      — in the time between three in the afternoon and seven in the evening set aside for her.
      Anastasya knew nothing about these things. Neither Bertha nor she were seeing their German
      women friends for the moment.
After the marriage at the Mairie Bertha and Tarr walked back to the Luxembourg Gardens and
      sat down. She had not during the three intervening weeks mentioned Anastasya. It was no time
      for 
       generosity ; she had done too much of that. Fraulein Vasek was the last person
      for whom she felt inclined to revive chivalry. She let Tarr marry her out of pity, and never
      referred to his confidence about his other love.
They sat for some time without speaking, as though they had quarrelled. She said, then:
“I am afraid, Sorbert, I have been selfish——”
“You — selfish ? How’s that ? Don’t talk nonsense.” He had turned at once to her with a
      hurried fondness genuinely assumed.
She looked at him with her wistful, democratic face, full of effort and sentiment.
“You are very unhappy, Sorbert—”
He laughed convincingly.
“No, I’m all right. Don’t worry about me. I’m a little meditative. That is only natural on
      such a solemn occasion. I was thinking, Bertha, we must set up house somewhere, and announce
      our marriage. We must do this for appearance’ sake. You will soon be incapacitated——” 
“Oh, I shan’t be just yet.”
“In any case, we have gone through this form because—— We must make this move
      efficacious.
What are your ideas as to an establishment V Let us take a flat together somewhere
      round here. The Rue Servandoni is a nice street. Do you know it ?”
“No.” She put her head on one side and puckered up her forehead.
“Near the Luxembourg Museum.”
They discussed a possible domicile.
He got up.
“It’s rather chilly. Let’s get back.”
They walked for some time without speaking. So much unsaid had to be got rid of, without
      necessarily being said. Bertha did not know at all where she was. Their “establishment,” as
      discussed by Tarr, appeared very unreal, and also, what there was of it, disagreeable. She
      wondered what he was going to do with her.
“You remember what I said to you some weeks ago — about Anastasya Vasek. I am afraid
      there has been no change in that. You do not mind that ?”
“No, Sorbert. You are perfectly free.”
“I am afraid I shall seem unkind. This is not a nice marriage for you. Perhaps I was wrong
      to suggest it ?”
“How, wrong ? I have not been complaining.”
They arrived at the iron gate.
“Well, I’d better not come up now. I will come along to-morrow — at the usual time.”
“Good-bye, Sorbert. A demain !”
“A demain !”
</div></body></text></TEI>