<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Tarr</title><author>Lewis, Percy Wyndham (1882-1957)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="34">
CHAPTER VIII
For the first time since his “return” Tarr found no Kreisler at the café “I wonder what
      that animal’s up to,” he thought. The garçon told him that Kreisler had not been
      there at all that evening. Tarr reconsidered his responsibilities. He could not return
      to Montmartre without just informing himself of Kreisler’s whereabouts and state of mind. The
      “obstacle” had been eluded. It must be transported rapidly “in the way” again, wherever and
      in whatever direction the sluggish stream was flowing.
Bertha’s he did not intend to go to if he could help it. A couple of hours at tea-time was
      what he had instituted as his day’s “amount” of her company. Kreisler's room would
      be better. This he did. There was a light in Kreisler’s room. The window had been pointed out
      to him. This perhaps was sufficient, Tarr felt. He might now go home, having located 
       him. Still, since he was there he would go up and make sure. He lighted his way
      up the staircase with matches. Arrived at the top floor he was uncertain at which door to
      knock. He chose one with a light beneath it and knocked.
In a moment some one called out “Who is it?” Recognizing the voice Tarr answered, and the
      door opened slowly. Kreisler was standing there in his shirt-sleeves, glasses on, and a brush
      in his hand.
“Ah, come in,” he said.
Tarr sat down, and Kreisler went on brushing his hair. When he had finished he put the brush
      down quickly, turned round, and pointing to the floor said, in a voice suggesting that that
      was the first of several questions:
“Why have you come here ?”
Tarr at once saw that he had gone a step too far, and either shown bad calculation or
      chanced on his rival at an unfortunate time. It was felt, no doubt, that — acting more or less
      as “keeper,” or check, at any rate — he had come to look after his charge, and hear why
      Kreisler had absented himself from the café
“Why have you come here ?” Kreisler asked again, in an even tone, pointing again with his
      forefinger to the centre of the floor.
“Only to see you, of course. I thought perhaps you weren’t well.”
’ “Ah, so ! I want you, my dear English friend, now that you are here, to explain yourself
      a little. Why do you honour me with so much of your company ?”
“Is my company disagreeable to you ?”
“I wish to know, sir, why I have so much of it !” The Deutscher-student was coming to the
      top. His voice had risen and the wind of his breath appeared to be making his moustaches
      whistle.
“I, of course, have reasons, besides the charm of your society, for seeking you out.”
Tarr was sitting stretched on one of Kreisler’s two chairs looking up frowningly. He was
      annoyed at having let himself in for this interview. Kreisler stood in front of him without
      any expression in 
        particular, his voice rather less guttural than usual. Tarr felt ill at ease at
      this sudden breath of storm and kept still with difficulty.
“You have reasons ? You have reasons I Heavens'! Outside! Quick! Out!”
There was no doubt this time that it was in earnest. He was intended rapidly to depart.
      Kreisler was pointing to the door. His cold grin was slightly on his face again, and an
      appearance of his hair having receded on his forehead and his ears gone close against his head
      warned Tarr definitely where he was. He got up. The absurdity in the situation he had
      got himself into chiefly worried him. He stood a moment in a discouraged way, as though trying
      to remember something. His desire for a row had vanished with the arrival of it. It had come
      at such an angle that it was difficult to say anything, and he had a superstition of the
      vanity about the marks left by hands, or rather his hands.
“Will you tell me what on earth’s the matter with you to-night ?” he asked.
“Yes ! I don’t want to be followed about by an underhand swine like you any longer! By
      what devil’s impudence did you come here to-night ? For a week I’ve had you in the café. What
      did you want with me ? If you wanted your girl back, why hadn’t you the courage to say so ? I
      saw you with another lady to-night. I’m not going to have you hovering and slavering around
      me. Be careful I don’t come and pull your nose when I see you with that other lady! You’re
      welcome, besides, to your girl——”
“I recommend you to hold your mouth ! Don’t talk about my girl. I’ve had enough of
      it. Where her sense was when she alighted on a specimen like you —” Tarr’s German hesitated
      and suddenly struck, as though for the rest of the night. He had stepped forward with a
      suggestion of readiness for drama :
“Heraus, schwein !” shouted Kreisler, in a sort of incredulous drawling crescendo,
      shooting his hand 
       towards the door and urging his body like the cox of a boat. Like a sheep-dog he
      appeared to be collecting Tarr together and urging him out.
Tarr stood staring doubtfully at him.
“What—”
“Heraus ! Out! Quicker ! Quicker! ! Quick !” His last word, “Schnell!” dropped like a
      plummet to the deepest tone his throat was capable of. It was short and so absolutely final
      that the grace given, even after it had been uttered, for this hateful visitor to remove
      himself, was a source of astonishment to Tarr. For a man to be ordered out of a room that does
      not belong to him always puts him at a disadvantage. Should he insist, forcibly and
      successfully, to remain, it can only be for a limited time. He will have to go sooner or
      later, and make his exit, unless he establish himself there and make it his home henceforth; a
      change of lodging most people are not, on the spur of the moment, prepared to decide on. The
      room, somehow, too, seems on its owner’s side, and to be vomiting forth the intruder.
      The civilized man’s instinct of ownership makes it impossible for any but the most indelicate
      to resist a feeling of hesitation before the idea of resistance in another man’s shell! All
      Tarr’s attitude to this man had been made up of a sort of comic hypocrisy. Neither comedy nor
      hypocrisy were usable for the moment.
Had Tarr foreseen this possible termination of his rôle of “obstacle ?” And ought he, he
      would ask himself, to have gone on with this half-farce if he were not prepared to meet the
      ultimate consequences ? Kreisler was quite unworthy to stand there, with perfect reason, and
      to be telling him to “get out.” It was absurd to exalt Kreisler in that way! But Tarr had
      probably counted on being equal to any emergency, and baffling or turning Kreisler’s
      violence in some genial manner.
He stood for a few seconds in a tumultuous hesitation, when he saw Kreisler run across the
      room, bend forward and dive his arm down behind his box. He 
        watched with uncomfortable curiosity this new move, as one might watch a
      surgeon’s haste at the crisis of an operation, searching for some necessary implement, mislaid
      for the moment. He felt schoolboy-like, left waiting there at Kreisler’s disposition. It was
      as a reaction against this unpleasant feeling that he stepped towards the door. The wish not
      to “obey” or to seem to turn tail either had alone kept him where he was. He had just found
      the door when Kreisler, with a bound, was back from his box, flourishing an old dog-whip in
      his hand.
“Ah, you go ? Look at this !” He cracked the whip once or twice. “This is what I keep for
      hounds like you !” Crack ! He cracked it again in rather an inexperienced way with a certain
      difficulty. He frowned and stopped in his discourse, as though it had been some invention he
      were showing off, that would not quite work at the proper moment, necessitating concentration.
      .
“If you wish to see me again, you can always find me here. You won’t get off so easily next
      time !” He cracked the whip smartly and then slammed the door.
Tarr could imagine him throwing it down in a corner of the room, and then going on with his
      undressing.
When Kreisler had jumped to the doorway Tarr had stepped out with a half-defensive,
      half-threatening gesture and then gone on with strained slowness, lighting a match at the head
      of the stairs. He felt like a discomfited pub-loafer as he raised the match to an imaginary
      clay pipe rising in his mind. There was the ostentatious coolness of the music-hall
      comedian.
The thing that had chiefly struck him in Kreisler under this new aspect was a kind of
      nimbleness, a pettiness in his behaviour and movements, where perhaps he had expected more
      stiffness and heroics ; the clown-like gibing form his anger took, a frigid disagreeable
      slyness and irony, a juvenile quickness and coldness.
Tarr was extremely dissatisfied with the part he had played in this scene. First of all he
      felt he had
        withdrawn too quickly at the appearance of the whip, although he had in fact
      got under way before it had appeared. Then, he argued, he should have stopped at the
      appearance of this instrument of disgrace. To stop and fight with Kreisler, what objection was
      there to that, he asked himself ? A taking Kreisler too seriously ? But what
       less serious than fighting ? He had saved himself an unpleasantness,
      something ridiculous, merely to find himself outside Kreisler’s door, a feeling of primitive
      dissatisfaction in him. Had he definitely been guilty of a lack of pluck or pride, it would
      have been better.
There was something mean and improper in all this that he could not reason away or mistake.
      He had undoubtedly insulted this man by his attitude, s'en était fiché de lui; and
      when the other turned, whip in hand, he had walked away. What really should he have done ? He
      should, no doubt, he thought, having humorously instituted himself Kreisler’s keeper, have
      humorously struggled with him, when the idiot became obstreperous. At that point his humour
      had stopped. Then his humour had limitations ?
Once and for all and certainly : he had no right to treat a man as he had treated Kreisler
      and yet claim, when he turned and resented this treatment, immunity .from action on the score
      of Kreisler’s idiocy. In allowing the physical struggle any importance he allowed Kreisler an
      importance, too, that made his former treatment of him unreal and unjustified. In Kreisler’s
      eyes he was a blagueur, without resistance at a pinch, who walks away when turned
      on. This opinion was of no importance, since he had not a shadow' of respect for Kreisler.
      Again he turned on himself. If he was so weak-minded as to care what trash like Kreisler
      thought or felt! He wandered in the direction of the Café de l’Aigle, gripped in
      this ratiocination.
His unreadiness, his dislike for action, his fear of ridicule, he treated severely in turn.
      He thought of everything he could against himself. And he laughed 
        at himself. But it was no good. At last he gave way to the urgency of his
      vanity and determined not to leave the matter where it was. At once plans for retrieving this
      discomfort came crowding on him. He would go to the café as usual on the following evening,
      sit down smilingly at Kreisler’s table as though nothing had happened. In short, he
      would altogether endorse the opinion that Kreisler had formed of him. And yet why this
      meanness, even assumed, Tarr asked himself, even while arranging realistically his to-morrow
      evening’s purification? Always in a contemptuous spirit, some belittlement or unsavoury rôle
      was suggesting itself. His contempt for everybody degraded him.
Still, for a final occasion and since he was going this time to accept any consequences, he
      would follow his idea. He would be, to Kreisler’s mind for a little, the strange “slaverer
      and hoverer” who had been kicked out on the previous night. He would even have to “pile it
      on thick” to be accepted at all, exaggerate in the direction of Kreisler’s
      unflattering notion of him. Then he would gradually aggravate Kreisler, and with the same
      bonhomie attack him with resolution. He laughed as he came to this point, as a sensible old
      man might laugh at himself on arriving at a similar decision.
Soothed by the prospect of this rectification of the evening’s blunder, Tarr once more
      turned to reflect on it, and saw more clearly than ever the parallel morals of his Bertha
      affair and his Kreisler affair. His sardonic dream of life got him, as a sort of Quixotic
      dreamer of inverse illusions, blows from the swift arms of windmills and attacks from
      indignant and perplexed mankind. He, instead of having conceived the world as more chivalrous
      and marvellous than it was, had conceived it as emptied of all dignity, sense, and
      generousness. The drovers and publicans were angry at not being mistaken for
      legendary chivalry or chatelaines. The very windmills resented not being taken for giants! The
      curse of humour was in him, anchoring him at one end of the 
       see-saw whose movement and contradiction was life.
Reminded of Bertha, he did not, however, hold her responsible. But his protectorate would be
      wound up. Acquaintance with Anastasya would be left where it was, despite the threatened
      aggression against his nose.
</div></body></text></TEI>