
CHAPTER I.

He left me when the down upon his lip
Lay like the shadow of a hovering kiss.
"Beautiful mother, do not grieve," he said;
"I will be great, and build our fortunes high,
And you shall wear the longest train at court,
And look so queenly, all the lords shall say,
'She is a royal changeling: there's some crown
Lacks the right head, since hers wears nought but braids.'"
O, he is coming now—but I am grey:
And he—
On the 1st of September, in the memorable year 1832, some one was expected at
      Transome Court. As early as two o'clock in the afternoon the aged lodge-keeper had opened the
      heavy gate, green as the tree trunks were green with nature's powdery paint, deposited year
      after year. Already in the village of Little Treby, which lay on the side of a steep hill not
      far off the lodge gates, the elder matrons sat in their best gowns at the few cottage doors
      bordering the road, that they might be ready to get up and make their curtsy when a travelling
      carriage should come in sight; and beyond the village
       several small boys were stationed on the lookout, intending to run a race to the
      barn-like old church, where the sexton waited in the belfry ready to set the one bell in
      joyful agitation just at the right moment.
The old lodge-keeper had opened the gate and left it in the charge of his lame wife, because
      he was wanted at the Court to sweep away the leaves, and perhaps to help in the stables. For
      though Transome Court was a large mansion, built in the fashion of Queen Anne's time, with a
      park and grounds as fine as any to be seen in Loamshire, there were very few servants about
      it. Especially, it seemed, there must be a lack of gardeners; for, except on the terrace
      surrounded with a stone parapet in front of the house, where there was a parterre kept with
      some neatness, grass had spread itself over the gravel walks, and over all the low mounds once
      carefully cut as black beds for the shrubs and larger plants. Many of the windows had the
      shutters closed, and under the grand Scotch fir that stooped towards one corner, the brown
      firneedles of many years lay in a small stone balcony in front of two such darkened windows.
      All round, both near and far, there were grand trees, motionless in the still sunshine, and,
      like all large motionless
       things, seeming to add to the stillness. Here and there a leaf fluttered down;
      petals fell in a silent shower; a heavy moth floated by, and, when it settled, seemed to fall
      wearily; the tiny birds alighted on the walks, and hopped about in perfect tranquillity; even
      a stray rabbit sat nibbling a leaf that was to its liking, in the middle of a grassy space,
      with an air that seemed quite impudent in so timid a creature. No sound was to be heard louder
      than a sleepy hum, and the soft monotony of running water hurrying on to the river that
      divided the park. Standing on the south or east side of the house, you would never have
      guessed that an arrival was expected.
But on the west side, where the carriage entrance was, the gates under the stone archway
      were thrown open; and so was the double door of the entrance-hall, letting in the warm light
      on the scagliola pillars, the marble statues, and the broad stone staircase, with its matting
      worn into large holes. And, stronger sign of expectation than all, from one of the doors which
      surrounded the entrance-hall, there came forth from time to time a lady, who walked lightly
      over the polished stone floor, and stood on the door-steps and watched and listened. She
      walked lightly, for her figure was
       slim and finely formed, though she was between fifty and sixty. She was a tall,
      proud-looking woman, with abundant grey hair, dark eyes and eyebrows, and a somewhat
      eagle-like yet not unfeminine face. Her tight-fitting black dress was much worn; the fine lace
      of her cuffs and collar, and of the small veil which fell backwards over her high comb, was
      visibly mended; but rare jewels flashed on her hands, which lay on her folded black-clad arms
      like finely-cut onyx cameos.
Many times Mrs Transome went to the door-steps, watching and listening in vain. Each time
      she returned to the same room: it was a moderate-sized comfortable room, with low ebony
      bookshelves round it, and it formed an anteroom to a large library, of which a glimpse could
      be seen through an open doorway, partly obstructed by a heavy tapestry curtain drawn on one
      side. There was a great deal of tarnished gilding and dinginess on the walls and furniture of
      this smaller room, but the pictures above the bookcases were all of a cheerful kind: portraits
      in pastel of pearly-skinned ladies with hair-powder, blue ribbons, and low boddices; a
      splendid portrait in oils of a Transome in the gorgeous dress of the Restoration; another of a
      Transome in his boyhood, with his hand on the
       neck of a small pony; and a large Flemish battle-piece, where war seemed only a
      picturesque blue-and-red accident in a vast sunny expanse of plain and sky. Probably such
      cheerful pictures had been chosen because this was Mrs Transome's usual sitting-room: it was
      certainly for this reason that, near the chair in which she seated herself each time she
      re-entered, there hung a picture of a youthful face which bore a strong resemblance to her
      own: a beardless but masculine face, with rich brown hair hanging low on the forehead, and
      undulating beside each cheek down to the loose white cravat. Near this same chair were her
      writing-table, with vellum-covered account-books on it, the cabinet in which she kept her
      neatly-arranged drugs, her basket for her embroidery, a folio volume of architectural
      engravings from which she took her embroidery patterns, a number of the North Loamshire
       Herald , and the cushion for her fat Blenheim, which was too old and sleepy to notice
      its mistress's restlessness. For, just now, Mrs Transome could not abridge the sunny tedium of
      the day by the feeble interest of her usual indoor occupations. Her consciousness was absorbed
      by memories and prospects, and except when she walked to the entrance-door to look out, she
      sat motionless with folded arms, involuntarily
       from time to time turning towards the portrait close by her, and as often, when
      its young brown eyes met hers, turning away again with self-checking resolution.
At last, prompted by some sudden thought or by some sound, she rose and went hastily beyond
      the tapestry curtain into the library. She paused near the door without speaking: apparently
      she only wished to see that no harm was being done. A man nearer seventy than sixty was in the
      act of ranging on a large library-table a series of shallow drawers, some of them containing
      dried insects, others mineralogical specimens. His pale mild eyes, receding lower jaw, and
      slight frame, could never have expressed much vigour, either bodily or mental; but he had now
      the unevenness of gait and feebleness of gesture which tell of a past paralytic seizure. His
      threadbare clothes were thoroughly brushed; his soft white hair was carefully parted and
      arranged: he was not a neglected-looking old man; and at his side a fine black retriever, also
      old, sat on its haunches, and watched him as he went to and fro. But when Mrs Transome
      appeared within the doorway, her husband paused in his work and shrank like a timid animal
      looked at in a cage where flight is impossible. He was conscious of a troublesome
       intention, for which he had been rebuked before— that of disturbing all his
      specimens with a view to a new arrangement.
After an interval, in which his wife stood perfectly still, observing him, he began to put
      back the drawers in their places in the row of cabinets which extended under the bookshelves
      at one end of the library. When they were all put back and closed, Mrs Transome turned away,
      and the frightened old man seated himself with Nimrod the retriever on an ottoman. Peeping at
      him again, a few minutes after, she saw that he had his arm round Nimrod's neck, and was
      uttering his thoughts to the dog in a loud whisper, as little children do to any object near
      them when they believe themselves unwatched.
At last the sound of the church-bell reached Mrs Transome's ear, and she knew that before
      long the sound of wheels must be within hearing; but she did not at once start up and walk to
      the entrance-door. She sat still, quivering and listening; her lips became pale, her hands
      were cold and trembling. Was her son really coming? She was far beyond fifty; and since her
      early gladness in this best-loved boy, the harvests of her life had been scanty. Could it be
      that now—when her hair was grey, when sight had become one of the day's fatigues, when her
      young
       accomplishments seemed almost ludicrous, like the tone of her first harpsichord
      and the words of the songs long browned with age—she was going to reap an assured joy?—to feel
      that the doubtful deeds of her life were justified by the result, since a kind Providence had
      sanctioned them?—to be no longer tacitly pitied by her neighbours for her lack of money, her
      imbecile husband, her graceless eldest-born, and the loneliness of her life; but to have at
      her side a rich, clever, possibly a tender, son? Yes; but there were the fifteen years of
      separation, and all that had happened in that long time to throw her into the background in
      her son's memory and affection. And yet—did not men sometimes become more filial in their
      feeling when experience had mellowed them, and they had themselves become fathers? Still, if
      Mrs Transome had expected only her son, she would have trembled less; she expected a little
      grandson also: and there were reasons why she had not been enraptured when her son had written
      to her only when he was on the eve of returning that he already had an heir born to him.
But the facts must be accepted as they stood, and, after all, the chief thing was to have
      her son back again. Such pride, such affection, such hopes as she cherished in this
      fifty-sixth year of her life, must
       find their gratification in him—or nowhere. Once more she glanced at the
      portrait. The young brown eyes seemed to dwell on her pleasantly; but, turning from it with a
      sort of impatience, and saying aloud, "Of course he will be altered!" she rose almost with
      difficulty, and walked more slowly than before across the hall to the entrance-door.
Already the sound of wheels was loud upon the gravel. The momentary surprise of seeing that
      it was only a post-chaise, without a servant or much luggage, that was passing under the stone
      archway and then wheeling round against the flight of stone steps, was at once merged in the
      sense that there was a dark face under a red travelling-cap looking at her from the window.
      She saw nothing else: she was not even conscious that the small group of her own servants had
      mustered, or that old Hickes the butler had come forward to open the chaise door. She heard
      herself called "Mother!" and felt a light kiss on each cheek; but stronger than all that
      sensation was the consciousness which no previous thought could prepare her for, that this son
      who had come back to her was a stranger. Three minutes before, she had fancied that, in spite
      of all changes wrought by fifteen years of separation, she should clasp her son again as she
      had done at their parting;
       but in the moment when their eyes met, the sense of strangeness came upon her
      like a terror. It was not hard to understand that she was agitated, and the son led her across
      the hall to the sitting-room, closing the door behind them. Then he turned towards her and
      said, smiling,
"You would not have known me, eh, mother?"
It was perhaps the truth. If she had seen him in a crowd, she might have looked at him
      without recognition—not, however, without startled wonder; for though the likeness to herself
      was no longer striking, the years had overlaid it with another likeness which would have
      arrested her. Before she answered him, his eyes, with a keen restlessness, as unlike as
      possible to the lingering gaze of the portrait, had travelled quickly over the room, alighting
      on her again as she said,
"Everything is changed, Harold. I am an old woman, you see."
"But straighter and more upright than some of the young ones!" said Harold; inwardly,
      however, feeling that age had made his mother's face very anxious and eager. "The old women at
      Smyrna are like sacks. You've not got clumsy and shapeless. How is it I have the trick of
      getting fat?" (Here Harold lifted his arm and spread
       out his plump hand.) "I remember my father was as thin as a herring. How is my
      father? Where is he?"
Mrs Transome just pointed to the curtained doorway, and let her son pass through it alone.
      She was not given to tears; but now, under the pressure of emotion that could find no other
      vent, they burst forth. She took care that they should be silent tears, and before Harold came
      out of the library again they were dried. Mrs Transome had not the feminine tendency to seek
      influence through pathos; she had been used to rule in virtue of acknowledged superiority. The
      consciousness that she had to make her son's acquaintance, and that her knowledge of the youth
      of nineteen might help her little in interpreting the man of thirty-four, had fallen like lead
      on her soul; but in this new acquaintance of theirs she cared especially that her son, who had
      seen a strange world, should feel that he was come home to a mother who was to be consulted on
      all things, and who could supply his lack of the local experience necessary to an English
      landholder. Her part in life had been that of the clever sinner, and she was equipped with the
      views, the reasons, and the habits which belonged to that character: life would have little
      meaning for her if she were to be
       gently thrust aside as a harmless elderly woman. And besides, there were secrets
      which her son must never know. So, by the time Harold came from the library again, the traces
      of tears were not discernible, except to a very careful observer. And he did not observe his
      mother carefully; his eyes only glanced at her on their way to the North Loamshire
       Herald , lying on the table near her, which he took up with his left hand, as he
      said,
"Gad! what a wreck poor father is! Paralysis, eh? Terribly shrunk and shaken—crawls about
      among his books and beetles as usual, though. Well, it's a slow and easy death. But he's not
      much over sixty-five, is he?"
"Sixty-seven, counting by birthdays; but your father was born old, I think," said Mrs
      Transome, a little flushed with the determination not to show any unasked-for feeling.
Her son did not notice her. All the time he had been speaking his eyes had been running down
      the columns of the newspaper.
"But your little boy, Harold—where is he? How is it he has not come with you?"
"O, I left him behind, in town," said Harold, still looking at the paper. "My man Dominic
      will bring him, with the rest of the luggage. Ah, I see it is
       young Debarry, and not my old friend Sir Maximus, who is offering himself as
      candidate for North Loamshire."
"Yes. You did not answer me when I wrote to you to London about your standing. There is no
      other Tory candidate spoken of, and you would have all the Debarry interest."
"I hardly think that," said Harold, significantly. "Why? Jermyn says a Tory candidate can
      never be got in without it."
"But I shall not be a Tory candidate."
Mrs Transome felt something like an electric shock.
"What then?" she said, almost sharply. "You will not call yourself a Whig?"
"God forbid! I'm a Radical."
Mrs Transome's limbs tottered; she sank into a chair. Here was a distinct confirmation of
      the vague but strong feeling that her son was a stranger to her. Here was a revelation to
      which it seemed almost as impossible to adjust her hopes and notions of a dignified life as if
      her son had said that he had been converted to Mahometanism at Smyrna, and had four wives,
      instead of one son, shortly to arrive under the care of Dominic. For the moment she had a
      sickening feeling that it was all of no
       use that the long-delayed good fortune had come at last—all of no use though the
      unloved Durfey was dead and buried, and though Harold had come home with plenty of money.
      There were rich Radicals, she was aware, as there were rich Jews and Dissenters, but she had
      never thought of them as county people. Sir Francis Burdett had been generally regarded as a
      madman. It was better to ask no questions, but silently to prepare herself for anything else
      there might be to come.
"Will you go to your rooms, Harold, and see if there is anything you would like to have
      altered?"
"Yes, let us go," said Harold, throwing down the newspaper, in which he had been rapidly
      reading almost every advertisement while his mother had been going through her sharp inward
      struggle. "Uncle Lingon is on the bench still, I see," he went on, as he followed her across
      the hall; "is he at home—will he be here this evening?"
"He says you must go to the Rectory when you want to see him. You must remember you have
      come back to a family who have old-fashioned notions. Your uncle thought I ought to have you
      to myself in the first hour or two. He remembered that I had not seen my son for fifteen
      years."
"Ah, by Jove! fifteen years—so it is!" said
       Harold, taking his mother's hand and drawing it under his arm; for he had
      perceived that her words were charged with an intention. "And you are as straight as an arrow
      still; you will carry the shawls I have brought you as well as ever."
They walked up the broad stone steps together in silence. Under the shock of discovering her
      son's Radicalism, Mrs Transome had no impulse to say one thing rather than another; as in a
      man who had just been branded on the forehead all wonted motives would be uprooted. Harold, on
      his side, had no wish opposed to filial kindness, but his busy thoughts were imperiously
      determined by habits which had no reference to any woman's feeling; and even if he could have
      conceived what his mother's feeling was, his mind, after that momentary arrest, would have
      darted forward on its usual course.
"I have given you the south rooms, Harold," said Mrs Transome, as they passed along a
      corridor lit from above, and lined with old family pictures. "I thought they would suit you
      best, as they all open into each other, and this middle one will make a pleasant sitting-room
      for you."
"Gad! the furniture is in a bad state," said Harold, glancing round at the middle room which
       they had just entered, "the moths seem to have got into the carpets and
      hangings."
"I had no choice except moths or tenants who would pay rent," said Mrs Transome. "We have
      been too poor to keep servants for uninhabited rooms."
"What! you've been rather pinched, eh?"
"You find us living as we have been living these twelve years."
"Ah, you've had Durfey's debts as well as the lawsuits—confound them! It will make a hole in
      sixty thousand pounds to pay off the mortgages. However, he's gone now, poor fellow; and I
      suppose I should have spent more in buying an English estate some time or other. I always
      meant to be an Englishman, and thrash a lord or two who thrashed me at Eton."
"I hardly thought you could have meant that, Harold, when I found you had married a foreign
      wife."
"Would you have had me wait for a consumptive lackadaisical Englishwoman, who would have
      hung all her relations round my neck? I hate English wives; they want to give their opinion
      about everything. They interfere with a man's life. I shall not marry again."

Mrs Transome bit her lip, and turned away to draw up a blind. She would not reply to words
      which showed how completely any conception of herself and her feelings was excluded from her
      son's inward world.
As she turned round again she said, "I suppose you have been used to great luxury; these
      rooms look miserable to you, but you can soon make any alteration you like."
"O, I must have a private sitting-room fitted up for myself down-stairs. And the rest are
      bedrooms, I suppose," he went on, opening a side-door. "Ah, I can sleep here a night or two.
      But there's a bedroom down-stairs, with an anteroom, I remember, that would do for my man
      Dominic and the little boy. I should like to have that."
"Your father has slept there for years. He will be like a distracted insect, and never know
      where to go, if you alter the track he has to walk in."
"That's a pity. I hate going up-stairs."
"There is the steward's room: it is not used, and might be turned into a bedroom. I can't
      offer you my room, for I sleep up-stairs." (Mrs Transome's tongue could be a whip upon
      occasion, but the lash had not fallen on a sensitive spot.)

"No; I'm determined not to sleep up-stairs. We'll see about the steward's room to-morrow,
      and I daresay I shall find a closet of some sort for Dominic. It's a nuisance he had to stay
      behind, for I shall have nobody to cook for me. Ah, there's the old river I used to fish in. I
      often thought, when I was at Smyrna, that I would buy a park with a river through it as much
      like the Lapp as possible. Gad, what fine oaks those are opposite! Some of them must come
      down, though."
"I've held every tree sacred on the demesne, as I told you, Harold. I trusted to your
      getting the estate some time, and releasing it; and I determined to keep it worth releasing. A
      park without fine timber is no better than a beauty without teeth and hair."
"Bravo, mother!" said Harold, putting his hand on her shoulder. "Ah, you've had to worry
      yourself about things that don't properly belong to a woman—my father being weakly. We'll set
      all that right. You shall have nothing to do now but to be grandmamma on satin cushions."
"You must excuse me from the satin cushions. That is a part of the old woman's duty I am not
      prepared for. I am used to be chief bailiff, and to sit in the saddle two or three hours every
      day.
       There are two farms on our hands besides the Home Farm."
"Phew-ew! Jermyn manages the estate badly then. That will not last under my reign,"
      said Harold, turning on his heel and feeling in his pockets for the keys of his portmanteaus,
      which had been brought up.
"Perhaps when you've been in England a little longer," said Mrs Transome, colouring as if
      she had been a girl, "you will understand better the difficulty there is in letting farms in
      these times."
"I understand the difficulty perfectly, mother. To let farms, a man must have the sense to
      see what will make them inviting to farmers, and to get sense supplied on demand is just the
      most difficult transaction I know of. I suppose if I ring there's some fellow who can act as
      valet and learn to attend to my hookah?"
"There is Hickes the butler, and there is Jabez the footman; those are all the men in the
      house. They were here when you left."
"O, I remember Jabez—he was a dolt. I'll have old Hickes. He was a neat little machine of a
      butler; his words used to come like the clicks of an engine. He must be an old machine now,
      though."

"You seem to remember some things about home wonderfully well, Harold."
"Never forget places and people—how they look and what can be done with them. All the
      country round here lies like a map in my brain. A deuced pretty country too; but the people
      were a stupid set of old Whigs and Tories. I suppose they are much as they were."
"I am, at least, Harold. You are the first of your family that ever talked of being a
      Radical. I did not think I was taking care of our old oaks for that. I always thought
      Radicals' houses stood staring above poor sticks of young trees and iron hurdles."
"Yes, but the Radical sticks are growing, mother, and half the Tory oaks are rotting," said
      Harold, with gay carelessness. "You've arranged for Jermyn to be early to-morrow?"
"He will be here to breakfast at nine. But I leave you to Hickes now; we dine in an
      hour."
Mrs Transome went away and shut herself in her own dressing-room. It had come to pass now
      —this meeting with the son who had been the object of so much longing; whom she had longed for
      before he was born, for whom she had sinned, from whom she had wrenched herself with pain at
      their
       parting, and whose coming again had been the one great hope of her years. The
      moment was gone by; there had been no ecstasy, no gladness even; hardly half an hour had
      passed, and few words had been spoken, yet with that quickness in weaving new futures which
      belongs to women whose actions have kept them in habitual fear of consequences, Mrs Transome
      thought she saw with all the clearness of demonstration that her son's return had not been a
      good for her in the sense of making her any happier.
She stood before a tall mirror, going close to it and looking at her face with hard
      scrutiny, as if it were unrelated to herself. No elderly face can be handsome, looked at in
      that way; every little detail is startlingly prominent, and the effect of the whole is lost.
      She saw the dried-up complexion, and the deep lines of bitter discontent about the mouth.
"I am a hag!" she said to herself (she was accustomed to give her thoughts a very sharp
      outline), "an ugly old woman who happens to be his mother. That is what he sees in me, as I
      see a stranger in him. I shall count for nothing. I was foolish to expect anything else."
She turned away from the mirror and walked up and down her room.

"What a likeness!" she said, in a loud whisper; "yet, perhaps, no one will see it besides
      me."
She threw herself into a chair, and sat with a fixed look, seeing nothing that was actually
      present, but inwardly seeing with painful vividness what had been present with her a little
      more than thirty years ago—the little round-limbed creature that had been leaning against her
      knees, and stamping tiny feet, and looking up at her with gurgling laughter. She had thought
      that the possession of this child would give unity to her life, and make some gladness through
      the changing years that would grow as fruit out of these early maternal caresses. But nothing
      had come just as she had wished. The mother's early raptures had lasted but a short time, and
      even while they lasted there had grown up in the midst of them a hungry desire, like a black
      poisonous plant feeding in the sunlight,—the desire that her first, rickety, ugly, imbecile
      child should die, and leave room for her darling, of whom she could be proud. Such desires
      make life a hideous lottery, where every day may turn up a blank; where men and women who have
      the softest beds and the most delicate eating, who have a very large share of that sky and
      earth which some are born to have no more of than the fraction to be got
       in a crowded entry, yet grow haggard, fevered, and restless, like those who watch
      in other lotteries. Day after day, year after year, had yielded blanks; new cares had come,
      bringing other desires for results quite beyond her grasp, which must also be watched for in
      the lottery; and all the while the round-limbed pet had been growing into a strong youth, who
      liked many things better than his mother's caresses, and who had a much keener consciousness
      of his independent existence than of his relation to her: the lizard's egg, that white rounded
      passive prettiness, had become a brown, darting, determined lizard. The mother's love is at
      first an absorbing delight, blunting all other sensibilities; it is an expansion of the animal
      existence; it enlarges the imagined range for self to move in: but in after years it can only
      continue to be joy on the same terms as other long-lived love—that is, by much suppression of
      self, and power of living in the experience of another. Mrs Transome had darkly felt the
      pressure of that unchangeable fact. Yet she had clung to the belief that somehow the
      possession of this son was the best thing she lived for; to believe otherwise would have made
      her memory too ghastly a companion. Some time or other, by some means, the estate she was
      struggling to save from the grasp
       of the law would be Harold's. Somehow the hated Durfey, the imbecile eldest, who
      seemed to have become tenacious of a despicable squandering life, would be got rid of; vice
      might kill him. Meanwhile the estate was burthened: there was no good prospect for any heir.
      Harold must go and make a career for himself: and this was what he was bent on, with a
      precocious clearness of perception as to the conditions on which he could hope for any
      advantages in life. Like most energetic natures, he had a strong faith in his luck; he had
      been gay at their parting, and had promised to make his fortune; and in spite of past
      disappointments, Harold's possible fortune still made some ground for his mother to plant her
      hopes in. His luck had not failed him; yet nothing had turned out according to her
      expectations. Her life had been like a spoiled shabby pleasure-day, in which the music and the
      processions are all missed, and nothing is left at evening but the weariness of striving after
      what has been failed of. Harold had gone with the Embassy to Constantinople, under the
      patronage of a high relative, his mother's cousin; he was to be a diplomatist, and work his
      way upward in public life. But his luck had taken another shape: he had saved the
       life of an Armenian banker, who in gratitude had offered him a prospect which his
      practical mind had preferred to the problematic promises of diplomacy and high-born
      cousinship. Harold had become a merchant and banker at Smyrna; had let the years pass without
      caring to find the possibility of visiting his early home, and had shown no eagerness to make
      his life at all familiar to his mother, asking for letters about England, but writing scantily
      about himself. Mrs Transome had kept up the habit of writing to her son, but gradually the
      unfruitful years had dulled her hopes and yearnings; increasing anxieties about money had
      worried her, and she was more sure of being fretted by bad news about her dissolute eldest son
      than of hearing anything to cheer her from Harold. She had begun to live merely in small
      immediate cares and occupations, and, like all eager-minded women who advance in life without
      any activity of tenderness or any large sympathy, she had contracted small rigid habits of
      thinking and acting, she had her "ways" which must not be crossed, and had learned to fill up
      the great void of life with giving small orders to tenants, insisting on medicines for infirm
      cottagers, winning small triumphs in bargains and personal economies, and parrying ill-natured
       remarks of Lady Debarry's by lancet-edged epigrams. So her life had gone on till
      more than a year ago, when that desire which had been so hungry while she was a blooming young
      mother, was at last fulfilled—at last, when her hair was grey, and her face looked bitter,
      restless, and unenjoying, like her life. The news came from Jersey that Durfey, the imbecile
      son, was dead. Now Harold was heir to the estate; now the wealth he had gained could
      release the land from its burthens; now he would think it worth while to return home. A change
      had at last come over her life, and the sunlight breaking the clouds at evening was pleasant,
      though the sun must sink before long. Hopes, affections, the sweeter part of her memories,
      started from their wintry sleep, and it once more seemed a great good to have had a second son
      who in some ways had cost her dearly. But again there were conditions she had not reckoned on.
      When the good tidings had been sent to Harold, and he had announced that he would return so
      soon as he could wind up his affairs, he had for the first time informed his mother that he
      had been married, that his Greek wife was no longer living, but that he should bring home a
      little boy, the finest and most desirable of heirs and grandsons. Harold, seated
       in his distant Smyrna home, considered that he was taking a rational view of what
      things must have become by this time at the old place in England, when he figured his mother
      as a good elderly lady, who would necessarily be delighted with the possession on any terms of
      a healthy grandchild, and would not mind much about the particulars of the long-concealed
      marriage.
Mrs Transome had torn up that letter in a rage. But in the months which had elapsed before
      Harold could actually arrive, she had prepared herself as well as she could to suppress all
      reproaches or queries which her son might resent, and to acquiesce in his evident wishes. The
      return was still looked for with longing; affection and satisfied pride would again warm her
      later years. She was ignorant what sort of man Harold had become now, and of course he must be
      changed in many ways; but though she told herself this, still the image that she knew, the
      image fondness clung to, necessarily prevailed over the negatives insisted on by her
      reason.
And so it was, that when she had moved to the door to meet him, she had been sure that she
      should clasp her son again, and feel that he was the same who had been her boy, her little
      one, the loved child of her passionate youth. An hour seemed to have
       changed everything for her. A woman's hopes are woven of sunbeams; a shadow
      annihilates them. The shadow which had fallen over Mrs Transome in this first interview with
      her son was the presentiment of her powerlessness. If things went wrong, if Harold got
      unpleasantly disposed in a certain direction where her chief dread had always lain, she seemed
      to foresee that her words would be of no avail. The keenness of her anxiety in this matter had
      served as insight; and Harold's rapidity, decision, and indifference to any impressions in
      others which did not further or impede his own purposes, had made themselves felt by her as
      much as she would have felt the unmanageable strength of a great bird which had alighted near
      her, and allowed her to stroke its wing for a moment because food lay near her.
Under the cold weight of these thoughts Mrs Transome shivered. That physical reaction roused
      her from her reverie, and she could now hear the gentle knocking at the door to which she had
      been deaf before. Notwithstanding her activity and the fewness of her servants, she had never
      dressed herself without aid; nor would that small, neat, exquisitely clean old woman who now
      presented herself have wished that her labour should be saved at the
       expense of such a sacrifice on her lady's part. The small old woman was Mrs
      Hickes, the butler's wife, who acted as housekeeper, lady's-maid, and superintendent of the
      kitchen—the large stony scene of inconsiderable cooking. Forty years ago she had entered Mrs
      Transome's service, when that lady was beautiful Miss Lingon, and her mistress still called
      her Denner, as she had done in the old days.
"The bell has rung, then, Denner, without my hearing it?" said Mrs Transome, rising.
"Yes, madam," said Denner, reaching from a wardrobe an old black velvet dress trimmed with
      muchmended point, in which Mrs Transome was wont to look queenly of an evening.
Denner had still strong eyes of that shortsighted kind which sees through the narrowest
      chink between the eyelashes. The physical contrast between the tall, eagle-faced, dark-eyed
      lady, and the little peering waiting-woman, who had been round-featured and of pale mealy
      complexion from her youth up, had doubtless had a strong influence in determining Denner's
      feeling towards her mistress, which was of that worshipful sort paid to a goddess in ages when
      it was not thought necessary or likely that a goddess should be very moral. There were
      different orders of beings—so ran Denner's creed—
       and she belonged to another order than that to which her mistress belonged. She
      had a mind as sharp as a needle, and would have seen through and through the ridiculous
      pretensions of a born servant who did not submissively accept the rigid fate which had given
      her born superiors. She would have called such pretensions the wrigglings of a worm that tried
      to walk on its tail. There was a tacit understanding that Denner knew all her mistress's
      secrets, and her speech was plain and unflattering; yet with wonderful subtlety of instinct
      she never said anything which Mrs Transome could feel humiliated by, as by a familiarity from
      a servant who knew too much. Denner identified her own dignity with that of her mistress. She
      was a hardheaded godless little woman, but with a character to be reckoned on as you reckon on
      the qualities of iron.
Peering into Mrs Transome's face, she saw clearly that the meeting with the son had been a
      disappointment in some way. She spoke with a refined accent, in a low, quick, monotonous
      tone—
"Mr Harold is drest; he shook me by the hand in the corridor, and was very pleasant."
"What an alteration, Denner! No likeness to me now."

"Handsome, though, spite of his being so browned and stout. There's a fine presence about Mr
      Harold. I remember you used to say, madam, there were some people you would always know were
      in the room though they stood round a corner, and others you might never see till you ran
      against them. That's as true as truth. And as for likenesses, thirty-five and sixty are not
      much alike, only to people's memories."
Mrs Transome knew perfectly that Denner had divined her thoughts.
"I don't know how things will go on now; but it seems something too good to happen that they
      will go on well. I am afraid of ever expecting anything good again."
"That's weakness, madam. Things don't happen because they're bad or good, else all eggs
      would be addled or none at all, and at the most it is but six to the dozen. There's good
      chances and bad chances, and nobody's luck is pulled only by one string."
"What a woman you are, Denner! You talk like a French infidel. It seems to me you are afraid
      of nothing. I have been full of fears all my life— always seeing something for other hanging
      over me that I couldn't bear to happen."
"Well, madam, put a good face on it, and don't
       seem to be on the look-out for crows, else you'll set other people watching. Here
      you have a rich son come home, and the debts will all be paid, and you have your health and
      can ride about, and you've such a face and figure, and will have if you live to be eighty,
      that everybody is cap in hand to you before they know who you are—let me fasten up your veil a
      little higher: there's a good deal of pleasure in life for you yet."
"Nonsense! there's no pleasure for old women, unless they get it out of tormenting other
      people. What are your pleasures, Denner—besides being a slave to me?"
"Oh, there's pleasure in knowing one's not a fool, like half the people one sees about. And
      managing one's husband is some pleasure; and doing all one's business well. Why, if I've only
      got some orange flowers to candy, I shouldn't like to die till I see them all right. Then
      there's the sunshine now and then; I like that, as the cats do. I look upon it, life is like
      our game at whist, when Banks and his wife come to the still-room of an evening. I don't enjoy
      the game much, but I like to play my cards well, and see what will be the end of it; and I
      want to see you make the best of your hand, madam, for your luck has been mine these forty
      years now. But
       I must go and see how Kitty dishes up the dinner, unless you have any more
      commands."
"No, Denner; I am going down immediately."
As Mrs Transome descended the stone staircase in her old black velvet and point, her
      appearance justified Denner's personal compliment. She had that high-born imperious air which
      would have marked her as an object of hatred and reviling by a revolutionary mob. Her person
      was too typical of social distinctions to be passed by with indifference by any one: it would
      have fitted an empress in her own right, who had had to rule in spite of faction, to dare the
      violation of treaties and dread retributive invasions, to grasp after new territories, to be
      defiant in desperate circumstances, and to feel a woman's hunger of the heart for ever
      unsatisfied. Yet Mrs Transome's cares and occupations had not been at all of an imperial sort.
      For thirty years she had led the monotonous narrowing life which used to be the lot of our
      poorer gentry, who never went to town, and were probably not on speaking terms with two out of
      the five families whose parks lay within the distance of a drive. When she was young she had
      been thought wonderfully clever and accomplished, and had been rather ambitious of
      intellectual superiority —had secretly picked out for private reading
       the lighter parts of dangerous French authors—and in company had been able to
      talk of Mr Burke's style, or of Chateaubriand's eloquence—had laughed at the Lyrical Ballads
      and admired Mr Southey's Thalaba. She always thought that the dangerous French writers were
      wicked, and that her reading of them was a sin; but many sinful things were highly agreeable
      to her, and many things which she did not doubt to be good and true were dull and meaningless.
      She found ridicule of Biblical characters very amusing, and she was interested in stories of
      illicit passion: but she believed all the while that truth and safety lay in due attendance on
      prayers and sermons, in the admirable doctrines and ritual of the Church of England, equally
      remote from Puritanism and Popery; in fact, in such a view of this world and the next as would
      preserve the existing arrangements of English society quite unshaken, keeping down the
      obtrusiveness of the vulgar and the discontent of the poor. The history of the Jews, she knew,
      ought to be preferred to any profane history; the Pagans, of course, were vicious, and their
      religions quite nonsensical, considered as religions—but classical learning came from the
      Pagans; the Greeks were famous for sculpture; the Italians for painting; the middle ages were
      dark
       and Papistical; but now Christianity went hand in hand with civilisation, and the
      providential government of the world, though a little confused and entangled in foreign
      countries, in our favoured land was clearly seen to be carried forward on Tory and Church of
      England principles, sustained by the succession of the House of Brunswick, and by sound
      English divines. For Miss Lingon had had a superior governess, who held that a woman should be
      able to write a good letter, and to express herself with propriety on general subjects. And it
      is astonishing how effective this education appeared in a handsome girl, who sat supremely
      well on horseback, sang and played a little, painted small figures in water-colours, had a
      naughty sparkle in her eyes when she made a daring quotation, and an air of serious dignity
      when she recited something from her store of correct opinions. But however such a stock of
      ideas may be made to tell in elegant society, and during a few seasons in town, no amount of
      bloom and beauty can make them a perennial source of interest in things not personal; and the
      notion that what is true and, in general, good for mankind, is stupid and drug-like, is not a
      safe theoretic basis in circumstances of temptation and difficulty. Mrs Transome had been in
      her
       bloom before this century began, and in the long painful years since then, what
      she had once regarded as her knowledge and accomplishments had become as valueless as
      old-fashioned stucco ornaments, of which the substance was never worth anything, while the
      form is no longer to the taste of any living mortal. Crosses, mortifications, money-cares,
      conscious blameworthiness, had changed the aspect of the world for her: there was anxiety in
      the morning sunlight; there was unkind triumph or disapproving pity in the glances of greeting
      neighbours; there was advancing age, and a contracting prospect in the changing seasons as
      they came and went. And what could then sweeten the days to a hungry much-exacting self like
      Mrs Transome's? Under protracted ill every living creature will find something that makes a
      comparative ease, and even when life seems woven of pain, will convert the fainter pang into a
      desire. Mrs Transome, whose imperious will had availed little to ward off the great evils of
      her life, found the opiate for her discontent in the exertion of her will about smaller
      things. She was not cruel, and could not enjoy thoroughly what she called the old woman's
      pleasure of tormenting; but she liked every little sign of power her lot had left her. She
      liked that a
       tenant should stand bareheaded below her as she sat on horseback. She liked to
      insist that work done without her orders should be undone from beginning to end. She liked to
      be curtsied and bowed to by all the congregation as she walked up the little barn of a church.
      She liked to change a labourer's medicine fetched from the doctor, and substitute a
      prescription of her own. If she had only been more haggard and less majestic, those who had
      glimpses of her outward life might have said she was a tyrannical, griping harridan, with a
      tongue like a razor. No one said exactly that; but they never said anything like the full
      truth about her, or divined what was hidden under that outward life—a woman's keen sensibility
      and dread, which lay screened behind all her petty habits and narrow notions, as some
      quivering thing with eyes and throbbing heart may lie crouching behind withered rubbish. The
      sensibility and dread had palpitated all the faster in the prospect of her son's return; and
      now that she had seen him, she said to herself, in her bitter way, "It is a lucky eel that
      escapes skinning. The best happiness I shall ever know, will be to escape the worst
      misery."

