
CHAPTER XXXI.
"In the copia of the factious language the word Tory was entertained, ... and being a vocal
      clever-sounding word, readily pronounced, it kept its hold, and took possession of the foul
      mouths of the faction. ... The Loyalists began to cheer up and to take heart of grace, and in
      the working of this crisis, according to the common laws of scolding, they considered which
      way to make payment for so much of Tory as they had been treated with, to clear scores. ...
      Immediately the train took, and ran like wildfire and became general. And so the account of
      Tory was balanced, and soon began to run up a sharp score on the other side."—
NORTH's Examen , p. 321.
At last the great epoch of the election for North Loamshire had arrived. The roads
      approaching Treby were early traversed by a larger number of vehicles, horsemen, and also
      foot-passengers, than were ever seen there at the annual fair. Treby was the polling-place for
      many voters whose faces were quite strange in the town; and if there were some strangers who
      did not come to poll, though they had business not unconnected with the election, they were
      not liable to be regarded with suspicion or especial curiosity. It was understood that no
      division of a county had ever been more thoroughly canvassed, and that there would be a hard
      run between
       Garstin and Transome. Mr Johnson's head-quarters were at Duffield; but it was a
      maxim which he repeated after the great Putty, that a capable agent makes himself omnipresent;
      and quite apart from the express between him and Jermyn, Mr John Johnson's presence in the
      universe had potent effects on this December day at Treby Magna.
A slight drizzling rain which was observed by some Tories who looked out of their bedroom
      windows before six o'clock, made them hope that, after all, the day might pass off better than
      alarmists had expected. The rain was felt to be somehow on the side of quiet and Conservatism;
      but soon the breaking of the clouds and the mild gleams of a December sun brought back
      previous apprehensions. As there were already precedents for riot at a Reformed election, and
      as the Trebian district had had its confidence in the natural course of things somewhat shaken
      by a landed proprietor with an old name offering himself as a Radical candidate, the election
      had been looked forward to by many with a vague sense that it would be an occasion something
      like a fighting match, when bad characters would probably assemble, and there might be
      struggles and alarms for respectable men, which would make it expedient
       for them to take a little neat brandy as a precaution beforehand and a
      restorative afterwards. The tenants on the Transome estate were comparatively fearless: poor
      Mr Goffe, of Rabbit's End, considered that "one thing was as mauling as another," and that an
      election was no worse than the sheep-rot; while Mr Dibbs, taking the more cheerful view of a
      prosperous man, reflected that if the Radicals were dangerous, it was safer to be on their
      side. It was the voters for Debarry and Garstin who considered that they alone had the right
      to regard themselves as targets for evil-minded men; and Mr Crowder, if he could have got his
      ideas countenanced, would have recommended a muster of farm-servants with defensive pitchforks
      on the side of Church and King. But the bolder men were rather gratified by the prospect of
      being groaned at, so that they might face about and groan in return.
Mr Crow, the high constable of Treby, inwardly rehearsed a brief address to a riotous crowd
      in case it should be wanted, having been warned by the Rector that it was a primary duty on
      these occasions to keep a watch against provocation as well as violence. The Rector, with a
      brother magistrate who was on the spot, had thought it desirable to swear in some special
      constables, but the presence of loyal
       men not absolutely required for the polling was not looked at in the light of a
      provocation. The Benefit Clubs from various quarters made a show, some with the
      orange-coloured ribbons and streamers of the true Tory candidate, some with the mazarine of
      the Whig. The orange-coloured bands played "Auld Langsyne," and a louder mazarine band came
      across them with "O whistle and I will come to thee, my lad"—probably as the tune the most
      symbolical of Liberalism which their repertory would furnish. There was not a single club
      bearing the Radical blue: the Sproxton Club members wore the mazarine, and Mr Chubb wore so
      much of it that he looked (at a sufficient distance) like a very large gentianella. It was
      generally understood that "these brave fellows," representing the fine institution of Benefit
      Clubs, and holding aloft the motto, "Let brotherly love continue," were a civil force
      calculated to encourage voters of sound opinions and keep up their spirits. But a considerable
      number of unadorned heavy navvies, colliers, and stone-pit men, who used their freedom as
      British subjects to be present in Treby on this great occasion, looked like a possibly uncivil
      force whose politics were dubious until it was clearly seen for whom they cheered and for whom
      they groaned.

Thus the way up to the polling-booths was variously lined, and those who walked it, to
      whatever side they belonged, had the advantage of hearing from the opposite side what were the
      most marked defects or excesses in their personal appearance; for the Trebians of that day
      held, without being aware that they had Cicero's authority for it, that the bodily blemishes
      of an opponent were a legitimate ground for ridicule; but if the voter frustrated wit by being
      handsome, he was groaned at and satirised according to a formula, in which the adjective was
      Tory, Whig, or Radical, as the case might be, and the substantive a blank to be filled up
      after the taste of the speaker.
Some of the more timid had chosen to go through this ordeal as early as possible in the
      morning. One of the earliest was Mr Timothy Rose, the gentleman-farmer from Leek Malton. He
      had left home with some foreboding, having swathed his more vital parts in layers of flannel,
      and put on two greatcoats as a soft kind of armour. But reflecting with some trepidation that
      there were no resources for protecting his head, he once more wavered in his intention to
      vote; he once more observed to Mrs Rose that these were hard times when a man of independent
      property was expected to vote
       "willy-nilly;" but finally, coerced by the sense that he should be looked ill on
      "in these times" if he did not stand by the gentlemen round about, he set out in his gig,
      taking with him a powerful waggoner, whom he ordered to keep him in sight as he went to the
      polling-booth. It was hardly more than nine o'clock when Mr Rose, having thus come up to the
      level of his times, cheered himself with a little cherry-brandy at the Marquis, drove away in
      a much more courageous spirit, and got down at Mr Nolan's, just outside the town. The retired
      Londoner, he considered, was a man of experience, who would estimate properly the judicious
      course he had taken, and could make it known to others. Mr Nolan was superintending the
      removal of some shrubs in his garden.
"Well, Mr Nolan," said Rose, twinkling a self-complacent look over the red prominence of his
      cheeks, "have you been to give your vote yet?"
"No; all in good time. I shall go presently."
"Well, I wouldn't lose an hour, I wouldn't. I said to myself, if I've got to do gentlemen a
      favour, I'll do it at once. You see, I've got no landlord, Nolan—I'm in that position o' life
      that I can be independent."
"Just so, my dear sir," said the wiry-faced Nolan,
       pinching his under-lip between his thumb and finger, and giving one of those
      wonderful universal shrugs, by which he seemed to be recalling all his garments from a
      tendency to disperse themselves. "Come in and see Mrs Nolan?"
"No, no, thankye. Mrs Rose expects me back. But, as I was saying, I'm a independent man, and
      I consider it's not my part to show favour to one more than another, but to make things as
      even as I can. If I'd been a tenant to anybody, well, in course I must have voted for my
      landlord—that stands to sense. But I wish everybody well; and if one's returned to Parliament
      more than another, nobody can say it's my doing; for when you can vote for two, you can make
      things even. So I gave one to Debarry and one to Transome; and I wish Garstin no ill, but I
      can't help the odd number, and he hangs on to Debarry, they say."
"God bless me, sir," said Mr Nolan, coughing down a laugh, "don't you perceive that you
      might as well have stayed at home and not voted at all, unless you would rather send a Radical
      to Parliament than a sober Whig?"
"Well, I'm sorry you should have anything to say against what I've done, Nolan," said Mr
      Rose, rather crestfallen, though sustained by inward
       warmth. "I thought you'd agree with me, as you're a sensible man. But the most a
      independent man can do is to try and please all; and if he hasn't the luck—here's wishing I
      may do it another time," added Mr Rose, apparently confounding a toast with a salutation, for
      he put out his hand for a passing shake, and then stepped into his gig again.
At the time that Mr Timothy Rose left the town, the crowd in King Street and in the
      market-place, where the polling-booths stood, was fluctuating. Voters as yet were scanty, and
      brave fellows who had come from any distance this morning, or who had sat up late drinking the
      night before, required some reinforcement of their strength and spirits. Every public-house in
      Treby, not excepting the venerable and sombre Cross-Keys, was lively with changing and
      numerous company. Not, of course, that there was any treating: treating necessarily had
      stopped, from moral scruples, when once "the writs were out;" but there was drinking, which
      did equally well under any name.
Poor Tommy Trounsem, breakfasting here on Falstaff's proportion of bread, and something
      which, for gentility's sake, I will call sack, was more than usually victorious over the ills
      of life, and felt himself
       one of the heroes of the day. He had an immense light-blue cockade in his hat,
      and an amount of silver in a dirty little canvass bag which astonished himself. For some
      reason, at first inscrutable to him, he had been paid for his bill-sticking with great
      liberality at Mr Jermyn's office, in spite of his having been the victim of a trick by which
      he had once lost his own bills and pasted up Debarry's; but he soon saw that this was simply a
      recognition of his merit as "an old family kept out of its rights," and also of his peculiar
      share in an occasion when the family was to get into Parliament. Under these circumstances, it
      was due from him that he should show himself prominently where business was going forward, and
      give additional value by his presence to every vote for Transome. With this view he got a
      half-pint bottle filled with his peculiar kind of "sack," and hastened back to the
      market-place, feeling good-natured and patronising towards all political parties, and only so
      far partial as his family bound him to be.
But a disposition to concentrate at that extremity of King Street which issued in the
      market-place was not universal among the increasing crowd. Some of them seemed attracted
      towards another
       nucleus at the other extremity of King Street, near the Seven Stars. This was
      Garstin's chief house, where his committee sat, and it was also a point which must necessarily
      be passed by many voters entering the town on the eastern side. It seemed natural that the
      mazarine colours should be visible here, and that Pack, the tall "shepherd" of the Sproxton
      men, should be seen moving to and fro where there would be a frequent opportunity of cheering
      the voters for a gentleman who had the chief share in the Sproxton mines. But the side lanes
      and entries out of King Street were numerous enough to relieve any pressure if there was need
      to make way. The lanes had a distinguished reputation. Two of them had odours of brewing; one
      had a side entrance to Mr Tiliot's wine and spirit vaults; up another Mr Muscat's cheeses were
      frequently being unloaded; and even some of the entries had those cheerful suggestions of
      plentiful provision which were among the characteristics of Treby.
Between ten and eleven the voters came in more rapid succession, and the whole scene became
      spirited. Cheers, sarcasms, and oaths, which seemed to have a flavour of wit for many hearers,
      were beginning to be reinforced by more practical
       demonstrations, dubiously jocose. There was a disposition in the crowd to close
      and hem in the way for voters, either going or coming, until they had paid some kind of toll.
      It was difficult to see who set the example in the transition from words to deeds. Some
      thought it was due to Jacob Cuff, a Tory charity-man, who was a well-known ornament of the
      pothouse, and gave his mind much leisure for amusing devices; but questions of origination in
      stirring periods are notoriously hard to settle. It is by no means necessary in human things
      that there should be only one beginner. This, however, is certain—that Mr Chubb, who wished it
      to be noticed that he voted for Garstin solely, was one of the first to get rather more notice
      than he wished, and that he had his hat knocked off and crushed in the interest of Debarry by
      Tories opposed to coalition. On the other hand, some said it was at the same time that Mr
      Pink, the saddler, being stopped on his way and made to declare that he was going to vote for
      Debarry, got himself well chalked as to his coat, and pushed up an entry, where he remained
      the prisoner of terror combined with the want of any back outlet, and never gave his vote that
      day.
The second Tory joke was performed with much
       gusto. The majority of the Transome tenants came in a body from the Ram Inn,
      with Mr Banks the bailiff leading them. Poor Goffe was the last of them, and his worn
      melancholy look and forward-leaning gait gave the jocose Cuff the notion that the farmer was
      not what he called "compus." Mr Goffe was cut off from his companions and hemmed in; asked, by
      voices with hot breath close to his ear, how many horses he had, how many cows, how many fat
      pigs; then jostled from one to another, who made trumpets with their hands and deafened him by
      telling him to vote for Debarry. In this way the melancholy Goffe was hustled on till he was
      at the polling-booth—filled with confused alarms, the immediate alarm being that of having to
      go back in still worse fashion than he had come. Arriving in this way after the other tenants
      had left, he astonished all hearers who knew him for a tenant of the Transomes by saying
      "Debarry," and was jostled back trembling amid shouts of laughter.
By stages of this kind the fun grew faster, and was in danger of getting rather serious. The
      Tories began to feel that their jokes were returned by others of a heavier sort, and that the
      main strength of the crowd was not on the side of sound opinion,
       but might come to be on the side of sound cudgelling and kicking. The navvies
      and pitmen in dishabille seemed to be multiplying, and to be clearly not belonging to the
      party of Order. The shops were freely resorted to for various forms of playful missiles and
      weapons; and news came to the magistrates, watching from the large window of the Marquis, that
      a gentleman coming in on horseback at the other end of the street to vote for Garstin had had
      his horse turned round and frightened into a headlong gallop out of it again.
Mr Crow and his subordinates, and all the special constables, felt that it was necessary to
      make some energetic effort, or else every voter would be intimidated and the poll must be
      adjourned. The Rector determined to get on horseback and go amidst the crowd with the
      constables; and he sent a message to Mr Lingon, who was at the Ram, calling on him to do the
      same. "Sporting Jack" was sure the good fellows meant no harm, but he was courageous enough to
      face any bodily dangers, and rode out in his brown leggings and coloured bandanna, speaking
      persuasively.
It was nearly twelve o'clock when this sally was made: the constables and magistrates tried
      the most pacific measures, and they seemed to succeed.
       There was a rapid thinning of the crowd: the most boisterous disappeared, or
      seemed to do so by becoming quiet; missiles ceased to fly, and a sufficient way was cleared
      for voters along King Street. The magistrates returned to their quarters, and the constables
      took convenient posts of observation. Mr Wace, who was one of Debarry's committee, had
      suggested to the Rector that it might be wise to send for the military from Duffield, with
      orders that they should station themselves at Hathercote, three miles off: there was so much
      property in the town that it would be better to make it secure against risks. But the Rector
      felt that this was not the part of a moderate and wise magistrate, unless the signs of riot
      recurred. He was a brave man, and fond of thinking that his own authority sufficed for the
      maintenance of the general good in Treby.

