
CHAPTER XIII.
It is five o'clock, the hour fixed for the expedition to Certosa, and in the
       entresol of 12 bis, Piazza d'Azeglio, Mrs. and Miss Le Marchant are sitting—hatted,
      gloved, and en-tout-cas-ed—in expectation of the arrival of their double escort.
      Elizabeth's afternoon has, so far, not been a lazy one, as her little cousin Bertie and his
      dog have again been good enough to pay her a lengthy visit, and the former has insisted upon a
      repetition of the musical performance of the other day, though with truncated rites. Without
      the powerful aid of Byng, Elizabeth has found it a task considerably beyond her strength to
      hold a large collie, poised on his hind-legs, on a music-stool. He has jumped down repeatedly,
      and now lies on his back—an attitude in which experience has taught him he is less attackable
      than in any other—sawing the air with his fore-paws, and lifting his lip in a deprecating
      grin.
"Where is Mr. Byng?" cries Bertie fretfully, baulked in his efforts to make his wily victim
      resume the perpendicular. "I want Mr. Byng! Why does not Mr. Byng come?"
"Perhaps if you went to the window," suggests Mrs. Le Marchant, in that patiently coaxing
      voice in which we are wont to address a tiresome child on a visit, instead of the buffet which
      we should bestow upon it were it resident—"perhaps if you went to the window and looked out,
      you would see him coming round the corner of the Piazza."
The suggestion is at once accepted, and the child, balancing his fidgety body on a chair,
      and craning his neck over the window-ledge, is shouting shrill pieces of information as to the
      passers-by to his friends within the room. Presently he shrieks out in triumph:
"I see him! He is just coming into sight! He is walking so fast! No!"—a moment later, with a
      changed and disgusted note, as a nearer view corrects the first impression—"it is not he at
      all! It is only the other one!"
"Only the other one!" It is quite impossible that the sound of the child's voice
      can reach down to the open portal of No. 12 bis, at which Jim has now arrived, and it is also
      certain that neither of the ladies whom he has come to visit is likely to word her surprise at
      his having arrived alone with the frank brutality which is confined to the utterances of
      infancy; and yet Jim, as he presents himself, announced by Annunziata, the hard-featured
      possessor of a lovely name, is quite as conscious, as if he had overheard the boy's slighting
      remark, of being "only the other one!"
Before he can begin his apologies, the eager little boy has run up to him.
"Where is Mr. Byng? I want Mr. Byng! Why has not he come? Elizabeth wants Mr. Byng!"
At this last clause Burgoyne is conscious of a dark, hot flush rising to his face, and,
      partly to hide it, partly to avoid seeing what the effect of his communication may be upon her
      for whom it is meant, he stoops over the child, addressing his answer to him:
"Mr. Byng is very sorry, very sorry indeed, but he cannot come."
"Cannot come! Why cannot he come?"
"Because he has gone to meet his mammy," replies Jim, trying to speak in a light and playful
      voice; "she is to arrive unexpectedly in Florence to-day; no good boy would leave his mammy
      when she had come all the way from England to see him, would he?"
But to this fustian and copy-book generality the young gentleman addressed is too angry to
      reply.
"It is a great disappointment to Byng; he bid me tell you what a great disappointment it is
      to him!" says Jim, turning to the two ladies, and looking apologetically from one to the
      other.
Elizabeth's head is averted; but on her mother's features he sees, or fancies he sees,
      slight evidences of a feeling not unlike relief.
"It is not of the least consequence," she says cheerfully; "we can go any other day just as
      well."
Burgoyne's heart sinks. In these last sentences he too surely traces signs of the evasive
      and would-be-retrograde nature which has all along characterized Mrs. Le Marchant's relations
      with him. It has seemed to him that he has been looking forward to the expedition with
      sensations of almost unmixed dread, and yet, now that he seems to be going to be delivered
      from it, what he experiences certainly does not come under the head of elation.
"You wish to give up the excursion?" he asks, in a tone which he honestly tries to make as
      neutral and colourless as he can.
"Well, I thought so—we thought so, did not we, Elizabeth?"
The person thus addressed lifts her head, and all over her features he, eagerly scanning
      them, sees written a warm acquiescence in her motherly decision, an acquiescence which, as her
      eyes meet his—his, in which his disappointment is written a good deal more plainly than he is
      aware—changes slowly and sweetly into indecision.
"I do not know," she answers, her gentle look clouded a little, and yet kindly interrogating
      his; "if Mr. Burgoyne is willing to burden himself with us; and Bertie must play at being a
      grown-up gentleman, and help to take care of us! Bertie, will you play at being a grown-up
      gentleman?"
To this proposition Bertie assents warmly, and begins thrasonically to recount to
      inattentive ears the high and singular deeds with which he will celebrate his arrival at
      maturity. But, as Mrs. Le Marchant puts a strenuous veto upon his adoption as escort, and as
      his nurse appears at the same juncture to fetch him, he and his dog are presently removed; and
      the other three set off without him.
Burgoyne has chartered a fiacre, with a horse as little lame as is ever to be found in
      Florence, and in this vehicle they are presently rolling along. None of them are in very
      exuberant spirits. Burgoyne is as well aware as if her sensitive lips had put the fact into
      words, that for Elizabeth the pleasure of the outing has evaporated with the absence of Byng,
      and that it is only the soft-hearted shrinking of a sweet nature from inflicting mortification
      on a fellow-creature that has set her opposite to him in her white gown. He has never seen her
      dressed in white before, and says to himself that it was for Byng's sake that she has made
      herself so summer-fine. But even if it be so, it is not Byng who is profiting by it. It is for
      him, not Byng, that the large Italian light is glorifying its thin fabric. Lily-pure,
      snow-clean she looks, sitting under her sunshade; and he sits over against her in a stupid
      silence. It seems to him as if his only safety were in silence, as if, did he speak at all, he
      must put into brutal words the brutal questions that are dinging in his head, that seem
      knocking for utterance against the gate of his set teeth.
"What is the 'screw loose'? How is she an 'unfortunate girl'? Why have they 'never held up
      their heads since'? Since what?" He looks, in a fierce perplexity, from one to the other of
      those delicately poised heads, held aloft with such modest dignity. Surely it is beyond the
      bounds of possibility that any heavily hideous shame or leaden disgrace can ever have weighed
      upon them! Probably the intensity of his thought has given an intensity to his look, of which
      he is unaware; for he presently finds the soft veiled voice of Elizabeth—Elizabeth who has
      hitherto been as mute as himself—addressing him:
"How very grave you look! I wonder what you are thinking of?"
The question, striking in so strangely pat, brings him back with a start. For a second an
      almost overpowering temptation assails him to tell her what is the object of his thought, to
      answer her with that whole and naked truth which we can so seldom employ in our intercourse
      with our fellow-men. But one glance at her innocent face, which has a vague trouble in it,
      chases the lunatic impulse, though he dallies with the temptation to the extent of saying:
"Would you really like to know? Do you really wish me to tell you?"
He looks at her penetratingly as he puts the question. Before either his eyes or his manner
      she shrinks.
"Oh, no—no!" she cries with tremulous haste, "of course not! I was only joking. What
      business have I with your thoughts? I never wish to know people's thoughts; if their looks and
      words are kind, that is all that concerns me!"
He relapses into silence; but her words, and still more the agitated manner in which they
      are pronounced, make a vague yet definite addition to the disquiet of his soul.
By setting off at so judiciously late an hour as five o'clock, they have avoided the greater
      part of the flood of tourists which daily sets towards Certosa, and which they meet, tightly
      packed in crowded vehicles, sweeping Florence-wards in a choking cloud of white dust; so that
      on reaching the Certosa Monastery, sitting so grandly on its hilltop, they have the
      satisfaction of finding that it is temporarily all their own—all their own but for the few
      white-frocked figures and tonsured heads which an economico-democratic Government has left to
      hint what in its palmy days was the state of that which is now only a Government museum.
A burly monk receives them. He does not look at all a prey to the pensive sorrow one would
      expect at the desecration of his holy things and the dispersion of his fraternity. Probably,
      in his slow peasant mind there is room for nothing but self-congratulation at his being one of
      the few—only fifteen in all—left to end their days in the old home. He leads them stolidly
      through chapels and refectory—the now too roomy refectory, where the poor remnant of
      Carthusians dine together only on Sundays—through meagrely furnished cells, in one of which he
      matter-of-factly lets down the front flap of a cupboard to show what forms his daily
      dining-table except on the happy Sunday, to which he must look forward so warmly.
"Must not he love Sunday!" cries Elizabeth, with sparkling eyes. "Do not you long to know
      what they have for dinner on Sundays? Do you think he would mind telling us?"
Elizabeth's spirits are going up like quicksilver. It is evident, despite the delicate
      melancholy of her face, that she is naturally of an extremely joyous and enjoying nature, and
      gifted with a freshness of sensation which belongs ordinarily rather to the green age at which
      Jim first remembers her, than to the mature one which he knows for a certainty that she has
      now reached. She is filled with such a lively and surprised delight at all the little details
      of arrangement of the monastic life that he is at last impelled to say to her, something
      wonderingly:
"But you must have seen hundreds of monasteries before?"
"Not one."
"But there are, or were, such swarms of them all over Italy."
"I dare say. I was never in Italy before."
"Not really?"
She lifts up her hand, and waves it at him with an air of hasty deprecation of further
      question, growing suddenly grave.
"Don't ask me whether I have been here or there, or whether I have done this or that. I have
      never been anywhere or done anything."
Her desire for a cessation of all inquiries as to her doings is obviously so earnest that
      Jim of course complies with it. Once or twice before he has been struck by her strange want of
      acquaintance with facts and phenomena, which would have come as a matter of course within the
      range of observation of every woman of her age and station. Against his will, a horrid
      recollection flashes upon him of a novel he had once read, in which the hero exhibits a
      singular ignorance of any events or incidents that had occurred within the ten years preceding
      the opening of the story—an ignorance which towards the end of the third volume was accounted
      for by its transpiring that he has spent the intervening period in a convict prison! He drives
      the grotesque and monstrous idea with scourges out of his mind; but it recurs, and recurs to
      be displaced by another hardly less painful, if in some degree more probable. Can it be
      possible that the crushing blow which has fallen upon the Le Marchant family, and upon
      Elizabeth in particular, whitening the mother's hair, and giving that tear-washed look to the
      daughter's sweet eyes—can it be possible that that heavy stroke was insanity? Can Elizabeth
      have been out of her mind? Can she have spent in confinement any of that past, from all
      allusion to which she shies away with a sensitiveness more shrinking than that of

"The tender horns of cockled snails"?

He is so much absorbed in his tormenting speculations about her that for the moment he
      forgets her bodily presence; and it is only her voice, her soft sane voice, that brings him
      back to a consciousness of it. They have been led into a salon, in which, as their
      guide tells them, the confraternity used to receive any "personage" that came to visit them.
      Alas, no personage ever visits the poor frocked remnant now! It is a charming lightsome room,
      that gives one no monastic idea, with pretty airy fancies of flower-wreaths and arabesques,
      and dainty dancing figures painted on wall and ceiling and doors. One of these latter is half
      open, and through it comes an exquisite sudden view of the hills, with their sharp-cut shadows
      and their sunlit slopes; of shining Florence at their feet, of the laugh of young verdure, and
      the wedded gloom and glory of cypress and poplar filling the foreground. Upon Elizabeth's
      small face, turned suddenly towards him, seems reflected some of the ineffable radiance of the
      Tuscan light.
"When next I dream of heaven," she says, in her tender, vibrating voice, "it will be like
      this. Do you ever dream of heaven? I often do, and I always wake crying because it is not
      true; but"—with a joyful change of key—"I will not cry any more without better cause. Since I
      came here I have found earth beautiful and delightful enough for me!"
He looks back at her, hardly hearing her words, but chiding himself fiercely for the
      disloyal thought which he has entertained, however unwillingly; the thought that the foul
      fiend of madness could ever, even temporarily, have defiled the temple of those eyes whence
      reason and feeling, so sweetly wedded, are shining out upon him, unworthy as he is of their
      rays.
"Since you came here?" he repeats in a sort of dreamy interrogation; "only since you came
      here?"
"You must not take me up so sharply!" she cries in a voice of playful remonstrance, in which
      there is a lilt of young gaiety. "I warn you that I will not be taken up so sharply! I did not
      say, 'only since I came here!' I said, 'Since I came here!'"
