
CHAPTER XIX
The evening of the Murewell Hall dinner-party proved to be a date of some importance in the
      lives of two or three persons. Rose was not likely to forget it; Langham carried about with
      him the picture of the great drawing-room, its stately light and shade, and its scattered
      figures, through many a dismal subsequent hour; and to Robert it was the beginning of a period
      of practical difficulties such as his fortunate youth had never yet encountered.
His conjecture had hit the mark. The squire's sentiments towards him, which had been on the
      whole friendly enough, with the exception of a slight nuance of contempt provoked in
      Mr. Wendover's mind by all forms of the clerical calling, had been completely transformed in
      the course of the afternoon before the dinner-party, and transformed by the report of his
      agent. Henslowe, who knew certain sides of the squire's character by heart, had taken Time by
      the forelock. For fourteen years before Robert entered the parish he had been king of it. Mr.
      Preston, Robert's predecessor, had never given him a moment's trouble. The agent had developed
      a habit of drinking, had favoured his friends and spited his enemies, and had allowed certain
      distant portions of the estate to go finely to ruin, quite undisturbed by any sentimental
      meddling of the priestly sort. Then the old rector had been gathered to the majority, and this
      long-legged busybody had taken his place, a man, according to the agent, as full of
      communistical notions as an egg is full of meat, and always ready to poke his nose into other
      people's business. And as all men like mastery, but especially Scotchmen, and as during even
      the first few months of the new rector's tenure of office it became tolerably evident to
      Henslowe that young Elsmere would soon become the ruling force of the neighbourhood unless
      measures were taken to prevent it, the agent, over his nocturnal drams, had taken sharp and
      cunning counsel with himself concerning the young man.
The state of Mile End had been originally the result of indolence and caprice on his part
      rather than of any set purpose of neglect. As soon, however, as it was brought to his notice
      by Elsmere, who did it, to begin with, in the friendliest way, it
       became a point of honour with the agent to let the place go to the devil, nay, to
      hurry it there. For some time notwithstanding, he avoided an open breach with the rector. He
      met Elsmere's remonstrances by a more or less civil show of argument, belied every now and
      then by the sarcasm of his coarse blue eye, and so far the two men had kept outwardly on
      terms. Elsmere had reason to know that on one or two occasions of difficulty in the parish
      Henslowe had tried to do him a mischief. The attempts, however, had not greatly succeeded, and
      their ill-success had probably excited in Elsmere a confidence of ultimate victory which had
      tended to keep him cool in the presence of Henslowe's hostility. But Henslowe had been all
      along merely waiting for the squire. He had served the owner of the Murewell estate for
      fourteen years, and if he did not know that owner's peculiarities by this time, might he
      obtain certain warm corners in the next life to which he was fond of consigning other people!
      It was not easy to cheat the squire out of money, but it was quite easy to play upon his
      ignorance of the details of English land management—ignorance guaranteed by the learned habits
      of a lifetime—on his complete lack of popular sympathy, and on the contempt felt by the
      disciple of Bismarck and Mommsen for all forms of altruistic sentiment. The squire despised
      priests. He hated philanthropic cants. Above all things he respected his own leisure, and was
      abnormally, irritably sensitive as to any possible inroads upon it.
All these things Henslowe knew, and all these things he utilised. He saw the squire within
      forty-eight hours of his arrival at Murewell. His fancy picture of Robert and his doings was
      introduced with adroitness, and coloured with great skill, and he left the squire walking up
      and down his library, chafing alternately at the monstrous fate which had planted this
      sentimental agitator at his gates, and at the memory of his own misplaced civilities towards
      the intruder. In the evening those civilities were abundantly avenged, as we have seen.
Robert was much perplexed as to his next step. His heart was very sore. The condition of
      Mile End—those gaunt-eyed women and wasted children, all the sordid details of their unjust
      avoidable suffering weighed upon his nerves perpetually. But he was conscious that this state
      of feeling was one of tension, perhaps of exaggeration, and though it was impossible he should
      let the matter alone, he was anxious to do nothing rashly.
However, two days after the dinner-party he met Henslowe on the hill leading up to the
      rectory. Robert would have passed the man with a stiffening of his tall figure and the
      slightest possible salutation. But the agent, just returned from a round wherein the bars of
      various local inns had played a conspicuous part, was in a truculent mood and stopped to
      speak. He took up the line of insolent condolence with the rector on the impossibility of
      carrying his wishes with regard to Mile End into
       effect. They had been laid before the squire, of course, but the squire had his own
      ideas and wasn't just easy to manage.
'Seen him yet, sir?' Henslowe wound up jauntily, every line of his flushed countenance, the
      full lips under the fair beard, and the light prominent eyes, expressing a triumph he hardly
      cared to conceal.
'I have seen him, but I have not talked to him on this particular matter,' said the rector
      quietly, though the red mounted in his cheek. 'You may, however, be very sure, Mr. Henslowe,
      that everything I know about Mile End the squire shall know before long.'
'Oh, lor' bless me, sir!' cried Henslowe with a guffaw, 'it's all one to me. And if the
      squire ain't satisfied with the way his work's done now, why he can take you on as a second
      string, you know. You'd show us all, I'll be bound, how to make the money fly.'
Then Robert's temper gave way, and he turned upon the half-drunken brute before him with a
      few home-truths delivered with a rapier-like force which for the moment staggered Henslowe,
      who turned from red to purple. The rector, with some of those pitiful memories of the hamlet,
      of which we had glimpses in his talk with Langham, burning at his heart, felt the man no
      better than a murderer, and as good as told him so. Then, without giving him time to reply,
      Robert strode on, leaving Henslowe planted in the pathway. But he was hardly up the hill
      before the agent, having recovered himself by dint of copious expletives, was looking after
      him with a grim chuckle. He knew his master, and he knew himself, and he thought between them
      they would about manage to keep that young spark in order.
Robert meanwhile went straight home into his study, and there fell upon ink and paper. What
      was the good of protracting the matter any longer? Something must and should be done for these
      people, if not one way, then another.
So he wrote to the squire, showing the letter to Catherine when it was done, lest there
      should be anything over-fierce in it. It was the simple record of twelve months' experience
      told with dignity and strong feeling. Henslowe was barely mentioned in it, and the chief
      burden of the letter was to implore the squire to come and inspect certain portions of his
      property with his own eyes. The rector would be at his service any day or hour.
Husband and wife went anxiously through the document, softening here, improving there, and
      then it was sent to the Hall. Robert waited nervously through the day for an answer. In the
      evening, while he and Catherine were in the footpath after dinner, watching a chilly autumnal
      moonrise over the stubbles of the cornfield, the answer came.
'H'm,' said Robert dubiously as he opened it, holding it up to the moonlight; 'can't be said
      to be lengthy.'


He and Catherine hurried into the house. Robert read the letter, and handed it to her
      without a word.
After some curt references to one or two miscellaneous points raised in the latter part of
      the rector's letter, the squire wound up as follows:—

'As for the bulk of your communication, I am at a loss to understand the vehemence of your
       remarks on the subject of my Mile End property. My agent informed me shortly after my return
       home that you had been concerning yourself greatly, and, as he conceived, unnecessarily about
       the matter. Allow me to assure you that I have full confidence in Mr. Henslowe, who has been
       in the district for as many years as you have spent months in it, and whose authority on
       points connected with the business management of my estate naturally carries more weight with
       me, if you will permit me to say so, than your own.—I am, sir, your obedient servant,
'Roger Wendover.'

Catherine returned the letter to her husband with a look of dismay. He was standing with his
      back to the chimney-piece, his hands thrust far into his pockets, his upper lip quivering. In
      his happy expansive life this was the sharpest personal rebuff that had ever happened to him.
      He could not but smart under it.
'Not a word,' he said, tossing his hair back impetuously, as Catherine stood opposite
      watching him—'not one single word about the miserable people themselves! What kind of stuff
      can the man be made off?'
'Does he believe you?' asked Catherine, bewildered.
'If not, one must try and make him,' he said energetically, after a moment's pause.
      'To-morrow, Catherine, I go down to the Hall and see him.'
She quietly acquiesced, and the following afternoon, first thing after luncheon, she watched
      him go, her tender inspiring look dwelling with him as he crossed the park, which was lying
      delicately wrapped in one of the whitest of autumnal mists, the sun just playing through it
      with pale invading shafts.
The butler looked at him with some doubtfulness. It was never safe to admit visitors for the
      squire without orders. But he and Robert had special relations. As the possessor of a bass
      voice worthy of his girth, Vincent, under Robert's rule, had become the pillar of the choir,
      and it was not easy for him to refuse the rector.
So Robert was led in, through the hall, and down the long passage to the curtained door,
      which he knew so well.
'Mr. Elsmere, sir!'
There was a sudden hasty movement. Robert passed a magnificent lacquered screen newly placed
      round the door, and found himself in the squire's presence.


The squire had half risen from his seat in a capacious chair, with a litter of books round
      it, and confronted his visitor with a look of surprised annoyance. The figure of the rector,
      tall, thin, and youthful, stood out against the delicate browns and whites of the book-lined
      walls. The great room, so impressively bare when Robert and Langham had last seen it, was now
      full of the signs of a busy man's constant habitation. An odour of smoke pervaded it; the
      table in the window was piled with books just unpacked, and the half-emptied case from which
      they had been taken lay on the ground beside the squire's chair.
'I persuaded Vincent to admit me, Mr. Wendover,' said Robert, advancing hat in hand, while
      the squire hastily put down the German professor's pipe he had just been enjoying, and coldly
      accepted his proffered greeting. 'I should have preferred not to disturb you without an
      appointment, but after your letter it seemed to me some prompt personal explanation was
      necessary.'
The squire stiffly motioned towards a chair, which Robert took, and then slipped back into
      his own, his wrinkled eyes fixed on the intruder.
Robert, conscious of almost intolerable embarrassment, but maintaining in spite of it an
      excellent degree of self-control, plunged at once into business. He took the letter he had
      just received from the squire as a text, made a good-humoured defence of his own proceedings,
      described his attempt to move Henslowe, and the reluctance of his appeal from the man to the
      master. The few things he allowed himself to say about Henslowe were in perfect temper, though
      by no means without an edge.
Then, having disposed of the more personal aspects of the matter, he paused, and looked
      hesitatingly at the face opposite him, more like a bronzed mask at this moment than a human
      countenance. The squire, however, gave him no help. He had received his remarks so far in
      perfect silence, and seeing that there were more to come, he waited for them with the same
      rigidity of look and attitude.
So, after a moment or two, Robert went on to describe in detail some of those individual
      cases of hardship and disease at Mile End, during the preceding year, which could be most
      clearly laid to the sanitary condition of the place. Filth, damp, leaking roofs, foul floors,
      poisoned water—he traced to each some ghastly human ill, telling his stories with a nervous
      brevity, a suppressed fire, which would have burnt them into the sense of almost any other
      listener. Not one of these woes but he and Catherine had tended with sickening pity and labour
      of body and mind. That side of it he kept rigidly out of sight. But all that he could hurl
      against the squire's feeling, as it were, he gathered up, strangely conscious through it all
      of his own young persistent yearning to right himself with this man,
       whose mental history, as it lay chronicled in these rooms, had been to him, at a
      time of intellectual hunger, so stimulating, so enriching.
But passion and reticence and hidden sympathy were alike lost upon the squire. Before he
      paused Mr. Wendover had already risen restlessly from his chair, and from the rug was
      glowering down on his unwelcome visitor.
Good heavens! had he come home to be lectured in his own library by this fanatical slip of a
      parson? As for his stories, the squire barely took the trouble to listen to them.
Every popularity-hunting fool, with a passion for putting his hand into other people's
      pockets, can tell pathetic stories; but it was intolerable that his scholar's privacy should
      be at the mercy of one of the tribe.
'Mr. Elsmere,' he broke out at last with contemptuous emphasis, 'I imagine it would have
      been better—infinitely better—to have spared both yourself and me the disagreeables of this
      interview. However, I am not sorry we should understand each other. I have lived a life which
      is at least double the length of yours in very tolerable peace and comfort. The world has been
      good enough for me, and I for it, so far. I have been master in my own estate, and intend to
      remain so. As for the new-fangled ideas of a landowner's duty, with which your mind seems to
      be full'—the scornful irritation of the tone was unmistakable—'I have never dabbled in them,
      nor do I intend to begin now. I am like the rest of my kind; I have no money to chuck away in
      building schemes, in order that the rector of the parish may pose as the apostle of the
      agricultural labourer. That, however, is neither here nor there. What is to the purpose is,
      that my business affairs are in the hands of a business man, deliberately chosen and approved
      by me, and that I have nothing to do with them. Nothing at all!' he repeated with emphasis.
      'It may seem to you very shocking. You may regard it as the object in life of the English
      landowner to inspect the pigstyes and amend the habits of the English labourer. I don't
      quarrel with the conception, I only ask you not to expect me to live up to it. I am a student
      first and foremost, and desire to be left to my books. Mr. Henslowe is there on purpose to
      protect my literary freedom. What he thinks desirable is good enough for me, as I have already
      informed you. I am sorry for it if his methods do not commend themselves to you. But I have
      yet to learn that the rector of the parish has an ex-officio right to interfere between a
      landlord and his tenants.'
Robert kept his temper with some difficulty. After a pause he said, feeling desperately,
      however, that the suggestion was not likely to improve matters,—
'If I were to take all the trouble and all the expense off your hands, Mr. Wendover, would
      it be impossible for you to authorise me to make one or two alterations most urgently
      necessary for the improvement of the Mile End cottages?'


The squire burst into an angry laugh.
'I have never yet been in the habit, Mr. Elsmere, of doing my repairs by public
      subscription. You ask a little too much from an old man's powers of adaptation.'
Robert rose from his seat, his hand trembling as it rested on his walking-stick.
'Mr. Wendover,' he said, speaking at last with a flash of answering scorn in his young
      vibrating voice, 'what I think you cannot understand is that at any moment a human creature
      may sicken and die, poisoned by the state of your property, for which you—and nobody else—are
      ultimately responsible.'
The squire shrugged his shoulders.
'So you say, Mr. Elsmere. If true, every person in such a condition has a remedy in his own
      hands. I force no one to remain on my property.'
'The people who live there,' exclaimed Robert, 'have neither home nor subsistence if they
      are driven out. Murewell is full—times bad—most of the people old.'
'And eviction "a sentence of death," I suppose, 'interrupted the squire, studying him with
      sarcastic eyes. 'Well, I have no belief in a Gladstonian Ireland, still less in a Radical
      England. Supply and demand, cause and effect, are enough for me. The Mile End cottages are out
      of repair, Mr. Elsmere, so Mr. Henslowe tells me, because the site is unsuitable, the type of
      cottage out of date. People live in them at their peril; I don't pull them down, or
      rather'—correcting himself with exasperating consistency—'Mr. Henslowe doesn't pull them down,
      because, like other men, I suppose, he dislikes an outcry. But if the population stays, it
      stays at its own risk. Now have I made myself plain?'
The two men eyed one another.
'Perfectly plain,' said Robert quietly. 'Allow me to remind you, Mr. Wendover, that there
      are other matters than eviction capable of provoking an outcry.'
'As you please,' said the other indifferently. 'I have no doubt I shall find myself in the
      newspapers before long. If so, I daresay I shall manage to put up with it. Society is made up
      of fanatics and the creatures they hunt. If I am to be hunted, I shall be in good
      company.'
Robert stood hat in hand, tormented with a dozen crosscurrents of feeling. He was forcibly
      struck with the blind and comparatively motiveless pugnacity of the squire's conduct. There
      was an extravagance in it which for the first time recalled to him old Meyrick's
      lucubrations.
'I have done no good, I see, Mr. Wendover,' he said at last, slowly. 'I wish I could have
      induced you to do an act of justice and mercy. I wish I could have made you think more kindly
      of myself. I have failed in both. It is useless to keep you any longer. Good-morning.'
He bowed. The squire also bent forward. At that moment
       Robert caught sight beside his shoulder of an antique, standing on the mantelpiece,
      which was a new addition to the room. It was a head of Medusa, and the frightful stony calm of
      it struck on Elsmere's ruffled nerves with extraordinary force. It flashed across him that
      here was an apt symbol of that absorbing and overgrown life of the intellect which blights the
      heart and chills the senses. And to that spiritual Medusa, the man before him was not the
      first victim he had known.
Possessed with the fancy the young man made his way into the hall. Arrived there, he looked
      round with a kind of passionate regret: 'Shall I ever see this again?' he asked himself.
      During the past twelve months his pleasure in the great house had been much more than
      sensuous. Within those walls his mind had grown, had reached to a fuller stature than before,
      and a man loves, or should love, all that is associated with the maturing of his best
      self.
He closed the ponderous doors behind him sadly. The magnificent pile, grander than ever in
      the sunny autumnal mist which enwrapped it, seemed to look after him as he walked away, mutely
      wondering that he should have allowed anything so trivial as a peasant's grievance to come
      between him and its perfections.
In the wooded lane outside the rectory gate he overtook Catherine. He gave her his report,
      and they walked on together arm-in-arm, a very depressed pair.
'What shall you do next?' she asked him.
'Make out the law of the matter,' he said briefly.
'If you get over the inspector,' said Catherine anxiously, 'I am tolerably certain Henslowe
      will turn out the people.'
He would not dare, Robert thought. At any rate, the law existed for such cases, and it was
      his bounden duty to call the inspector's attention.
Catherine did not see what good could be done thereby, and feared harm. But her wifely
      chivalry felt that he must get through his first serious practical trouble his own way. She
      saw that he felt himself distressingly young and inexperienced, and would not for the world
      have harassed him by over advice.
So she let him alone, and presently Robert threw the matter from him with a sigh.
'Let it be a while,' he said, with a shake of his long frame. 'I shall get morbid over it if
      I don't mind. I am a selfish wretch too. I know you have worries of your own, wifie.'
And he took her hand under the trees and kissed it with a boyish tenderness.
'Yes,' said Catherine, sighing, and then paused. 'Robert,' she burst out again, 'I am
      certain that man made love of a kind to Rose. He will never think of it again, but
      since the night before last she, to my mind, is simply a changed creature.'
'I don't see it,' said Robert doubtfully.


Catherine looked at him with a little angel scorn in her gray eyes. That men should make
      their seeing in such matters the measure of the visible!
'You have been studying the squire, sir—I have been studying Rose.'
Then she poured out her heart to him, describing the little signs of change and suffering
      her anxious sense had noted, in spite of Rose's proud effort to keep all the world, but
      especially Catherine, at arm's length. And at the end her feeling swept her into a
      denunciation of Langham, which was to Robert like a breath from the past, from those stern
      hills wherein he met her first. The happiness of their married life had so softened or masked
      all her ruggedness of character, that there was a certain joy in seeing those strong forces in
      her which had struck him first reappear.
'Of course I feel myself to blame,' he said when she stopped. 'But how could one foresee,
      with such an inveterate hermit and recluse? And I owed him—I owe him—so much.'
'I know,' said Catherine, but frowning still. It probably seemed to her that that old debt
      had been more than effaced.
'You will have to send her to Berlin,' said Elsmere after a pause. 'You must play off her
      music against this unlucky feeling. If it exists it is your only chance.'
'Yes, she must go to Berlin,' said Catherine slowly.
Then presently she looked up, a flash of exquisite feeling breaking up the delicate
      resolution of the face.
'I am not sad about that, Robert. Oh, how you have widened my world for me!'
Suddenly that hour in Marrisdale came back to her. They were in the woodpath. She crept
      inside her husband's arm and put up her face to him, swept away by an overmastering impulse of
      self-humiliating love.
The next day Robert walked over to the little market town of Churton, saw the discreet and
      long-established solicitor of the place, and got from him a complete account of the present
      state of the rural sanitary law. The first step clearly was to move the sanitary inspector; if
      that failed for any reason, then any bonâ fide inhabitant had an appeal to the local
      sanitary authority, viz. the board of guardians. Robert walked home pondering his information,
      and totally ignorant that Henslowe, who was always at Churton on market-days, had been in the
      market-place at the moment when the rector's tall figure had disappeared within Mr. Dunstan's
      office-door. That door was unpleasantly known to the agent in connection with some energetic
      measures for raising money he had been lately under the necessity of employing, and it had a
      way of attracting his eyes by means of the fascination that often attaches to disagreeable
      objects.
In the evening Rose was sitting listlessly in the drawing-room. Catherine was not there, so
      her novel was on her lap
       and her eyes were staring intently into a world whereof they only had the key.
      Suddenly there was a ring at the bell. The servant came, and there were several voices and a
      sound of much shoe-scraping. Then the swing-door leading to the study opened and Elsmere and
      Catherine came out. Elsmere stopped with an exclamation.
His visitors were two men from Mile End. One was old Milsom, more sallow and palsied than
      ever. As he stood bent almost double, his old knotted hand resting for support on the table
      beside him, everything in the little hall seemed to shake with him. The other was Sharland,
      the handsome father of the twins, whose wife had been fed by Catherine with every imaginable
      delicacy since Robert's last visit to the hamlet. Even his strong youth had begun to show
      signs of premature decay. The rolling gipsy eyes were growing sunken, the limbs dragged a
      little.
They had come to implore the rector to let Mile End alone. Henslowe had been over there in
      the afternoon, and had given them all very plainly to understand that if Mr. Elsmere meddled
      any more they would be all turned out at a week's notice to shift as they could. 'And if you
      don't find Thurston Common nice lying this weather, with the winter coming on, you'll know who
      to thank for it,' the agent had flung behind him as he rode off.
Robert turned white. Rose, watching the little scene with listless eyes, saw him towering
      over the group like an embodiment of wrath and pity.
'If they turn us out, sir,' said old Milsom, wistfully looking up at Elsmere with blear
      eyes, 'there'll be nothing left but the House for us old 'uns. Why, lor' bless you, sir, it's
      not so bad but we can make shift.'
'You, Milsom!' cried Robert; 'and you've just all but lost your grandchild! And you know
      your wife'll never be the same woman since that bout of fever in the spring. And——'
His quick eyes ran over the old man's broken frame with a world of indignant meaning in
      them.
'Ay, ay, sir,' said Milsom, unmoved. 'But if it isn't fevers, it's summat else. I can make a
      shilling or two where I be, speshally in the first part of the year, in the basket work, and
      my wife she goes charring up at Mr. Carter's farm, and Mr. Dodson, him at the farther farm, he
      do give us a bit sometimes. Ef you git us turned away it will be a bad day's work for all on
      us, sir, you may take my word on it.'
'And my wife so ill, Mr. Elsmere,' said Sharland, 'and all those childer! I can't walk three
      miles farther to my work, Mr. Elsmere, I can't nohow. I haven't got the legs for it. Let un
      be, sir. We'll rub along.'
Robert tried to argue the matter.
If they would but stand by him he would fight the matter through, and they should not
      suffer, if he had to get up a public subscription, or support them out of his own pocket all
      the
       winter. A bold front, and Mr. Henslowe must give way. The law was on their side,
      and every labourer in Surrey would be the better off for their refusal to be housed like pigs
      and poisoned like vermin.
In vain. There is an inexhaustible store of cautious endurance in the poor against which the
      keenest reformer constantly throws himself in vain. Elsmere was beaten. The two men got his
      word, and shuffled off back to their pestilential hovels, a pathetic content beaming on each
      face.
Catherine and Robert went back into the study. Rose heard her brother-in-law's passionate
      sigh as the door swung behind them.
'Defeated!' she said to herself with a curious accent. 'Well, everybody must have his turn.
      Robert has been too successful in his life, I think.—You wretch!' she added, after a minute,
      laying her bright head down on the book before her.
Next morning his wife found Elsmere after breakfast busily packing a case of books in the
      study. They were books from the Hall library, which so far had been for months the inseparable
      companions of his historical work.
Catherine stood and watched him sadly.
'Must you, Robert?'
'I won't be beholden to that man for anything an hour longer than I can help,' he answered
      her.
When the packing was nearly finished he came up to where she stood in the open window.
'Things won't be as easy for us in the future, darling,' he said to her. 'A rector with both
      squire and agent against him is rather heavily handicapped. We must make up our minds to
      that.'
'I have no great fear,' she said, looking at him proudly.
'Oh, well—nor I—perhaps,' he admitted, after a moment. 'We can hold our own. But I wish—oh,
      I wish'—and he laid his hand on his wife's shoulder—'I could have made friends with the
      squire.'
Catherine looked less responsive.
'As squire, Robert, or as Mr. Wendover?'
'As both, of course, but specially as Mr. Wendover.'
'We can do without his friendship,' she said with energy.
Robert gave a great stretch, as though to work off his regrets.
'Ah, but,' he said, half to himself, as his arms dropped, 'if you are just filled with the
      hunger to know, the people who know as much as the squire become very interesting to
      you!'
Catherine did not answer. But probably her heart went out once more in protest against a
      knowledge that was to her but a form of revolt against the awful powers of man's destiny.
'However, here go his books,' said Robert.
Two days later Mrs. Leyburn and Agnes made their appearance, Mrs. Leyburn all in a flutter
      concerning the event over
       which, in her own opinion, she had come to preside. In her gentle fluid mind all
      impressions were short-lived. She had forgotten how she had brought up her own babies, but
      Mrs. Thornburgh, who had never had any, had filled her full of nursery lore. She sat retailing
      a host of second-hand hints and instructions to Catherine, who would every now and then lay
      her hand smiling on her mother's knee, well pleased to see the flush of pleasure on the pretty
      old face, and ready, in her patient filial way, to let herself be experimented on to the
      utmost, if it did but make the poor foolish thing happy.
Then came a night when every soul in the quiet rectory, even hot, smarting Rose, was
      possessed by one thought through many terrible hours, and one only—the thought of Catherine's
      safety. It was strange and unexpected, but Catherine, the most normal and healthy of women,
      had a hard struggle for her own life and her child's, and it was not till the gray autumn
      morning, after a day and night which left a permanent mark on Robert, that he was summoned at
      last, and with the sense of one emerging from black gulfs of terror, received from his wife's
      languid hand the tiny fingers of his firstborn.
The days that followed were full of emotion for these two people, who were perhaps always
      over-serious, over-sensitive. They had no idea of minimising the great common experiences of
      life. Both of them were really simple, brought up in old-fashioned simple ways, easily
      touched, responsive to all that high spiritual education which flows from the familiar
      incidents of the human story, approached poetically and passionately. As the young husband sat
      in the quiet of his wife's room, the occasional restless movements of the small brown head
      against her breast causing the only sound perceptible in the country silence, he felt all the
      deep familiar currents of human feeling sweeping through him—love, reverence, thanksgiving—and
      all the walls of the soul, as it were, expanding and enlarging as they passed.
Responsive creature that he was, the experience of these days was hardly happiness. It went
      too deep; it brought him too poignantly near to all that is most real and therefore most
      tragic in life.
Catherine's recovery also was slower than might have been expected, considering her
      constitutional soundness, and for the first week, after that faint moment of joy when her
      child was laid upon her arm, and she saw her husband's quivering face above her, there was a
      kind of depression hovering over her. Robert felt it, and felt too that all his devotion could
      not soothe it away. At last she said to him one evening, in the encroaching September
      twilight, speaking with a sudden hurrying vehemence, wholly unlike herself, as though a
      barrier of reserve had given way,—
'Robert I cannot put it out of my head. I cannot forget it, the pain of the
      world!'


He shut the book he was reading, her hand in his, and bent over her with questioning
      eyes.
'It seems,' she went on, with that difficulty which a strong nature always feels in
      self-revelation, 'to take the joy even out of our love—and the child. I feel ashamed almost
      that mere physical pain should have laid such hold on me—and yet I can't get away from it.
      It's not for myself,' and she smiled faintly at him. 'Comparatively I had so little to bear!
      But I know now for the first time what physical pain may mean—and I never knew before! I lie
      thinking, Robert, about all creatures in pain—workmen crushed by machinery, or soldiers—or
      poor things in hospitals—above all of women! Oh, when I get well, how I will take care of the
      women here! What women must suffer even here in out-of-the-way cottages—no doctor, no kind
      nursing, all blind agony and struggle! And women in London in dens like those Mr. Newcome got
      into, degraded, forsaken, ill-treated, the thought of the child only an extra horror and
      burden! And the pain all the time so merciless, so cruel—no escape! Oh, to give all one is, or
      ever can be, to comforting! And yet the great sea of it one can never touch! It is a
      nightmare—I am weak still, I suppose; I don't know myself; but I can see nothing but jarred,
      tortured creatures everywhere. All my own joys and comforts seem to lift me selfishly above
      the common lot.'
She stopped, her large gray-blue eyes dim with tears, trying once more for that habitual
      self-restraint which physical weakness had shaken.
'You are weak,' he said, caressing her, 'and that destroys for a time the normal
      balance of things. It is true, darling, but we are not meant to see it always so clearly. God
      knows we could not bear it if we did.'
'And to think,' she said, shuddering a little, 'that there are men and women who in the face
      of it can still refuse Christ and the Cross, can still say this life is all! How can they
      live—how dare they live?'
Then he saw that not only man's pain, but man's defiance, had been haunting her, and he
      guessed what persons and memories had been flitting through her mind. But he dared not talk
      lest she should exhaust herself. Presently, seeing a volume of Augustine's
       Confessions, her favourite book, lying beside her, he took it up, turning over the
      pages, and weaving passages together as they caught his eye.
'Speak to me, for Thy compassion's sake, O Lord my God, and tell me what art Thou to me!
       Say unto my soul, "I am thy salvation!" Speak it that I may hear. Behold the ears of my
       heart, O Lord; open them and say unto my soul, "I am thy salvation!" I will follow after this
       voice of Thine, I will lay hold on Thee. The temple of my soul, wherein Thou shouldest enter,
       is narrow, do Thou enlarge it. It falleth into ruins—do Thou rebuild it!... Woe to that bold
       soul which hopeth, if it do but

let Thee go, to find something better than Thee! It turneth hither and thither, on this
       side and on that, and all things are hard and bitter unto it. For Thou only art rest!...
       Whithersoever the soul of man turneth it findeth sorrow, except only in Thee. Fix there,
       then, thy resting-place, my soul! Lay up in Him whatever thou hast received from Him. Commend
       to the keeping of the Truth whatever the Truth hath given thee, and thou shalt lost nothing.
       And thy dead things shall revive and thy weak things shall be made whole!'
She listened, appropriating and clinging to every word, till the nervous clasp of the long
      delicate fingers relaxed, her head dropped a little, gently, against the head of the child,
      and tired with much feeling she slept.
Robert slipped away and strolled out into the garden in the fast-gathering darkness. His
      mind was full of that intense spiritual life of Catherine's which in its wonderful
      self-containedness and strength was always a marvel, sometimes a reproach, to him. Beside her,
      he seemed to himself a light creature, drawn hither and thither by this interest and by that,
      tangled in the fleeting shows of things—the toy and plaything of circumstance. He thought
      ruefully and humbly, as he wandered on through the dusk, of his own lack of inwardness:
      'Everything divides me from Thee!' he could have cried in St. Augustine's manner. 'Books, and
      friends, and work—all seem to hide Thee from me. Why am I so passionate for this and that, for
      all these sections and fragments of Thee? Oh, for the One, the All! Fix there thy
      resting-place, my soul!'
And presently, after this cry of self-reproach, he turned to muse on that intuition of the
      world's pain which had been troubling Catherine, shrinking from it even more than she had
      shrunk from it, in proportion as his nature was more imaginative than hers. And Christ the
      only clue, the only remedy—no other anywhere in this vast universe, where all men are under
      sentence of death, where the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until
      now!
And yet what countless generations of men had borne their pain, knowing nothing of the one
      Healer. He thought of Buddhist patience and Buddhist charity; of the long centuries during
      which Chaldean or Persian or Egyptian lived, suffered, and died, trusting the gods they knew.
      And how many other generations, nominally children of the Great Hope, had used it as the mere
      instrument of passion or of hate, cursing in the name of love, destroying in the name of pity!
      For how much of the world's pain was not Christianity itself responsible? His thoughts
      recurred with a kind of anguished perplexity to some of the problems stirred in him of late by
      his historical reading. The strifes and feuds and violences of the early Church returned to
      weigh upon him—the hair-splitting superstition, the selfish passion for power. He recalled
      Gibbon's lamentation
       over the age of the Antonines, and Mommsen's grave doubt whether, taken as a whole,
      the area once covered by the Roman Empire can be said to be substantially happier now than in
      the days of Severus.
O corruptio optimi! That men should have been so little affected by that shining
      ideal of the New Jerusalem, 'descended out of Heaven from God,' into their very midst—that the
      print of the 'blessed feet' along the world's highway should have been so often buried in the
      sands of cruelty and fraud!
The September wind blew about him as he strolled through the darkening column, set thick
      with great bushes of sombre juniper among the yellowing fern, which stretched away on the
      left-hand side of the road leading to the Hall. He stood and watched the masses of restless
      discordant cloud which the sunset had left behind it, thinking the while of Mr. Grey, of his
      assertions and his denials. Certain phrases of his which Robert had heard drop from him on one
      or two rare occasions during the later stages of his Oxford life ran through his head.
'The fairy-tale of Christianity'—'The origins of Christian Mythology.' He could
      recall, as the words rose in his memory, the simplicity of the rugged face, and the melancholy
      mingled with fire which had always marked the great tutor's sayings about religion.
'Fairy Tale!' Could any reasonable man watch a life like Catherine's and believe
      that nothing but a delusion lay at the heart of it? And as he asked the question, he seemed to
      hear Mr. Grey's answer: 'All religions are true, and all are false. In them all, more or less
      visibly, man grasps at the one thing needful—self forsaken, God laid hold of. The spirit in
      them all is the same, answers eternally to reality; it is but the letter, the fashion, the
      imagery, that are relative and changing.'
He turned and walked homeward, struggling, with a host of tempestuous ideas as swift and
      varying as the autumn clouds hurrying overhead. And then, through a break in a line of trees,
      he caught sight of the tower and chancel window of the little church. In an instant he had a
      vision of early summer mornings—dewy, perfumed, silent, save for the birds, and all the soft
      stir of rural birth and growth, of a chancel fragrant with many flowers, of a distant church
      with scattered figures, of the kneeling form of his wife close beside him, himself bending
      over her, the sacrament of the Lord's death in his hand. The emotion, the intensity, the
      absolute self-surrender of innumerable such moments in the past—moments of a common faith, a
      common self-abasement—came flooding back upon him. With a movement of joy and penitence he
      threw himself at the feet of Catherine's Master and his own: 'Fix there thy resting-place,
       my soul!'


