
CHAPTER XIV
Catherine stopped beside the drawing-room window with a start, caught by something she saw
      outside.
It was nothing, however, but the figures of Rose and Langham strolling round the garden. A
      bystander would have been puzzled by the sudden knitting of Catherine's brows over it.
Rose held a red parasol, which gleamed against the trees; Dandie leapt about her, but she
      was too busy talking to take much notice of him. Talking, chattering, to that cold cynic of a
      man, for whom only yesterday she had scarcely had a civil word! Catherine felt herself a prey
      to all sorts of vague unreasonable alarms.
Robert had said to her the night before, with an odd look: 'Wifie, when I came in I found
      Langham and Rose had been spending the evening together in the study. And I don't know when I
      have seen Langham so brilliant or so alive as in our smoking talk just now!'


Catherine had laughed him to scorn; but, all the same, she had been a little longer going to
      sleep than usual. She felt herself almost as much as ever the guardian of her sisters, and the
      old sensitive nerve was set quivering. And now there could be no question about it—Rose had
      changed her ground towards Mr. Langham altogether. Her manner at breakfast was evidence enough
      of it.
Catherine's self-torturing mind leapt on for an instant to all sorts of horrors.
       That man!—and she and Robert responsible to her mother and her dead father! Never!
      Then she scolded herself back to common sense. Rose and he had discovered a common subject in
      music and musicians. That would be quite enough to account for the new-born friendship on
      Rose's part. And in five more days, the limit of Langham's stay, nothing very dreadful
       could happen, argued the reserved Catherine.
But she was uneasy, and after a bit, as that tête-à-tête in the garden still went
      on, she could not, for the life of her, help interfering. She strolled out to meet them with
      some woollen stuff hanging over her arm, and made a plaintive and smiling appeal to Rose to
      come and help her with some preparations for a mothers' meeting to be held that afternoon.
      Rose, who was supposed by the family to be 'taking care' of her sister at a critical time, had
      a moment's prick of conscience, and went off with a good grace. Langham felt vaguely that he
      owed Mrs. Elsmere another grudge, but he resigned himself and took out a cigarette, wherewith
      to console himself for the loss of his companion.
Presently, as he stood for a moment turning over some new books on the drawing-room table,
      Rose came in. She held an armful of blue serge, and, going up to a table in the window, she
      took from it a little work-case, and was about to vanish again when Langham went up to
      her.
'You look intolerably busy,' he said to her, discontentedly.
'Six dresses, ten cloaks, eight petticoats to cut out by luncheon time,' she answered
      demurely, with a countenance of most Dorcas-like seriousness, 'and if I spoil them I shall
      have to pay for the stuff!'
He shrugged his shoulders and looked at her, smiling, still master of himself and of his
      words.
'And no music—none at all? Perhaps you don't know that I too can accompany?'
'You play!' she exclaimed, incredulous.
'Try me.'
The light of his fine black eyes seemed to encompass her. She moved backward a little,
      shaking her head. 'Not this morning,' she said. 'Oh dear, no, not this morning! I am afraid
      you don't know anything about tacking or fixing, or the abominable time they take. Well, it
      could hardly be expected. There is nothing in the world'—and she shook her serge
      vindictively—'that I hate so much!'


'And not this afternoon, for Robert and I go fishing. But this evening?' he said, detaining
      her.
She nodded lightly, dropped her lovely eyes with a sudden embarrassment, and went away with
      lightning quickness.
A minute or two later Elsmere laid a hand on his friend's shoulder. 'Come and see the Hall,
      old fellow. It will be our last chance, for the squire and his sister come back this
      afternoon. I must parochialise a bit afterwards, but you shan't be much victimised.'
Langham submitted, and they sallied forth. It was a soft rainy morning, one of the first
      heralds of autumn. Gray mists were drifting silently across the woods and the wide stubbles of
      the now shaven cornfield, where white lines of reapers were at work, as the morning cleared,
      making and stacking the sheaves. After a stormy night the garden was strewn with
       débris, and here and there noiseless prophetic showers of leaves were dropping on
      the lawn.
Elsmere took his guest along a bit of common, where great black junipers stood up like
      magnates in council above the motley undergrowth of fern and heather, and then they turned
      into the park. A great stretch of dimpled land it was, falling softly towards the south and
      west, bounded by a shining twisted river, and commanding from all its highest points a
      heathery world of distance, now turned a stormy purple under the drooping fringes of the rain
      clouds. They walked downwards from the moment of entering it, till at last, when they reached
      a wooded plateau about a hundred feet above the river, the house itself came suddenly into
      view.
That was a house of houses! The large main building, as distinguished from the lower stone
      portions to the north which represented a fragment of the older Elizabethan house, had been in
      its day the crown and boast of Jacobean house-architecture. It was fretted and jewelled with
      Renaissance terra-cotta work from end to end; each gable had its lace work, each window its
      carved setting. And yet the lines of the whole were so noble, genius had hit the general
      proportions so finely, that no effect of stateliness or grandeur had been missed through all
      the accumulation of ornament. Majestic relic of a vanished England, the house rose amid the
      August woods rich in every beauty that site, and wealth, and centuries could give to it. The
      river ran about it as though it loved it. The cedars which had kept it company for well-nigh
      two centuries gathered proudly round it; the deer grouped themselves in the park beneath it,
      as though they were conscious elements in a great whole of loveliness.
The two friends were admitted by a housemaid who happened to be busy in the hall, and whose
      red cheeks and general breathlessness bore witness to the energy of the storm of preparation
      now sweeping through the house.
The famous hall to which Elsmere at once drew Langham's
       attention was, however, in no way remarkable for size or height. It told
      comparatively little of seignorial dignity, but it was as though generation after generation
      had employed upon its perfecting the craft of its most delicate fingers, the love of its most
      fanciful and ingenious spirits. Overhead, the stucco-work ceiling, covered with stags and
      birds and strange heraldic creatures unknown to science, had the deep creamy tint, the
      consistency and surface of antique ivory. From the white and gilt frieze beneath, untouched,
      so Robert explained, since the Jacobean days when it was first executed, hung Renaissance
      tapestries which would have made the heart's delight of any romantic child, so rich they were
      in groves of marvellous trees hung with red and golden fruits, in far-reaching palaces and
      rock-built citadels, in flying shepherdesses and pursuing shepherds. Between the tapestries,
      again, there were breadths of carved panelling, crowded with all things round and sweet, with
      fruits and flowers and strange musical instruments, with flying cherubs, and fair faces in
      laurel-wreathed medallions; while in the middle of the wall a great oriel window broke the dim
      venerable surfaces of wood and tapestry with stretches of jewelled light. Tables crowded with
      antiques, with Tanagra figures or Greek vases, with Florentine bronzes or specimens of the
      wilful vivacious wood-carving of seventeenth-century Spain, stood scattered on the Persian
      carpets. And, to complete the whole, the gardeners had just been at work on the corners of the
      hall, and of the great window, so that the hard-won subtleties of man's bygone handiwork, with
      which the splendid room was encrusted from top to bottom, were masked and relieved here and
      there by the careless easy splendour of flowers, which had but to bloom in order to eclipse
      them all.
Robert was at home in the great pile, where for many months he had gone freely in and out on
      his way to the library, and the housekeeper only met him to make an apology for her working
      dress, and to hand over to him the keys of the library bookcases, with the fretful comment
      that seemed to have in it the ghostly voice of generations of housemaids, 'Oh lor', sir, they
      are a trouble, them books!'
From the drawing-rooms, full of a more modern and less poetical magnificence, where Langham
      turned restless and refractory, Elsmere with a smile took his guest silently back into the
      hall, and opened a carved door behind a curtain. Passing through, they found themselves in a
      long passage lighted by small windows on the left-hand side.
'This passage, please notice,' said Robert, 'leads to nothing but the wing containing the
      library, or rather libraries, which is the oldest part of the house. I always enter it with a
      kind of pleasing awe! Consider these carpets, which keep out every sound, and look how
      everything gets older as we go on.'
For half-way down the passage the ceiling seemed to descend upon their heads, the flooring
      became uneven and woodwork
       and walls showed that they had passed from the Jacobean house into the much older
      Tudor building. Presently Robert led the way up a few shallow steps, pushed open a heavy door,
      also covered by curtains, and bade his companion enter.
They found themselves in a low immense room, running at right angles to the passage they had
      just quitted. The long diamond-paned window, filling almost half of the opposite wall, faced
      the door by which they had come in; the heavy carved mantelpiece was to their right; an open
      doorway on their left, closed at present by tapestry hangings, seemed to lead into yet other
      rooms.
The walls of this one were completely covered from floor to ceiling with latticed bookcases,
      enclosed throughout in a frame of oak carved in light classical relief by what appeared to be
      a French hand of the sixteenth century. The chequered bindings of the books, in which the
      creamy tints of vellum predominated, lined the whole surface of the wall with a delicate
      sobriety of colour; over the mantelpiece, the picture of the founder of the house—a Holbein
      portrait, glorious in red robes and fur and golden necklace—seemed to gather up and give voice
      to all the dignity and impressiveness of the room beneath him; while on the window side the
      book-lined wall was, as it were, replaced by the wooded face of a hill, clothed in dark lines
      of trimmed yews, which rose abruptly about a hundred yards from the house and overshadowed the
      whole library wing. Between the window and the hill, however, was a small old English garden,
      closely hedged round with yew hedges, and blazing now with every flower that an English August
      knows—with sun-flowers, tiger-lilies, and dahlias white and red. The window was low, so that
      the flowers seemed to be actually in the room, challenging the pale tints of the books, the
      tawny browns and blues of the Persian carpet, and the scarlet splendours of the courtier over
      the mantelpiece. The room was lit up besides by a few gleaming casts from the antique, by the
      'Diane Chasseresse' of the Louvre, by the Hermes of Praxiteles smiling with immortal kindness
      on the child enthroned upon his arm, and by a Donatello figure of a woman in marble, its
      subtle sweet austerity contrasting with the Greek frankness and blitheness of its
      companions.
Langham was penetrated at once by the spell of this strange and beautiful place. The
      fastidious instincts which had been half revolted by the costly accumulations, the overblown
      splendours of the drawing-room, were abundantly satisfied here.
'So it was here,' he said, looking round him, 'that that man wrote The Idols of the
       Market-place?'
'I imagine so,' said Robert; 'if so, he might well have felt a little more charity towards
      the human race in writing it. The race cannot be said to have treated him badly on the whole.
      But now look, Langham, look at these books—the most precious things are here.'

And he turned the key of a particular section of the wall, which was not only
      latticed but glazed.
'Here is A Mirror for Magistrates. Look at the title-page; you will find Gabriel
      Harvey's name on it. Here is a first edition of Astrophel and Stella, another of the
      Arcadia. They may very well be presentation copies, for the Wendover of that day is known to
      have been a wit and a writer. Imagine finding them in situ like this in the same
      room, perhaps on the same shelves, as at the beginning! The other rooms on this floor have
      been annexed since, but this room was always a library.'
Langham took the volumes reverently from Robert's hands into his own, the scholar's passion
      hot within him. That glazed case was indeed a storehouse of treasures. Ben Jonson's
       Underwoods with his own corrections; a presentation copy of Andrew Marvell's
       Poems, with autograph notes; manuscript volumes of letters, containing almost every
      famous name known to English literature in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the
      literary cream, in fact, of all the vast collection which filled the muniment room upstairs;
      books which had belonged to Addison, to Sir William Temple, to Swift, to Horace Walpole; the
      first four folios of Shakespeare, all perfect, and most of the quartos—everything that the
      heart of the English collector could most desire was there. And the charm of it was that only
      a small proportion of these precious things represented conscious and deliberate acquisition.
      The great majority of them had, as it were, drifted thither one by one, carried there by the
      tide of English letters as to a warm and natural resting-place.
But Robert grew impatient, and hurried on his guest to other things—to the shelves of French
      rarities, ranging from Du Bellay's Visions, with his autograph, down to the copy of
       Les Mémoires d'Outre-Tombe presented by Chateaubriand to Madame Récamier, or to a
      dainty manuscript volume in the fine writing of Lamartine.
'These,' Robert explained, 'were collected, I believe, by the squire's father. He was not in
      the least literary, so they say, but it had always been a point of honour to carry on the
      library, and as he had learnt French well in his youth he bought French things, taking advice,
      but without knowing much about them, I imagine. It was in the room overhead,' said Robert,
      laying down the book he held, and speaking in a lower key, 'so the old doctor of the house
      told me a few weeks ago, that the same poor soul put an end to himself twenty years ago.'
'What in the name of fortune did he do that for?'
'Mania,' said Robert quietly.
'Whew!' said the other, lifting his eyebrows. 'Is that the skeleton in this very magnificent
      cupboard?'
'It has been the Wendover scourge from the beginning, so I hear. Every one about here of
      course explains this man's eccentricities by the family history. But I don't know,' said
       Robert, his lip hardening, 'it may be extremely convenient sometimes to have a
      tradition of the kind. A man who knew how to work it might very well enjoy all the advantages
      of sanity and the privileges of insanity at the same time. The poor old doctor I was telling
      you of—old Meyrick—who has known the squire since his boyhood, and has a dog-like attachment
      to him, is always hinting at mysterious excuses. Whenever I let out to him, as I do sometimes,
      as to the state of the property, he talks of "inherited melancholy," "rash judgments," and so
      forth. I like the good old soul, but I don't believe much of it. A man who is sane enough to
      make a great name for himself in letters is sane enough to provide his estate with a decent
      agent.'
'It doesn't follow,' said Langham, who was, however, so deep in a collection of Spanish
      romances and chronicles that the squire's mental history did not seem to make much impression
      upon him. 'Most men of letters are mad and I should be inclined,' he added, with a sudden and
      fretful emphasis, 'to argue much worse things for the sanity of your squire, Elsmere, from the
      fact that this room is undoubtedly allowed to get damp sometimes, than from any of those
      absurd parochial tests of yours.'
And he held up a couple of priceless books, of which the Spanish sheepskin bindings showed
      traces here and there of moisture.
'It is no use, I know, expecting you to preserve a moral sense when you get among books,'
      said Robert with a shrug. 'I will reserve my remarks on that subject. But you must really tear
      yourself away from this room, Langham, if you want to see the rest of the squire's quarters.
      Here you have what we may call the ornamental sensational part of the library, that part of it
      which would make a stir at Sotheby's; the working parts are all to come.'
Langham reluctantly allowed himself to be dragged away. Robert held back the hangings over
      the doorway leading into the rest of the wing, and, passing through, they found themselves in
      a continuation of the library totally different in character from the magnificent room they
      had just left. The walls were no longer latticed and carved; they were closely packed, in the
      most business-like way, with books which represented the squire's own collection, and were in
      fact a chart of his own intellectual history.
'This is how I interpret this room,' said Robert, looking round it. 'Here are the books he
      collected at Oxford in the Tractarian Movement and afterwards. Look here,' and he pulled out a
      volume of St. Basil.
Langham looked, and saw on the title-page a note in faded characters: 'Given to me by
       Newman at Oxford, in 1845.'
'Ah, of course, he was one of them in '45; he must have left them very soon after,' said
      Langham reflectively.


Robert nodded. 'But look at them! There are the Tracts, all the Fathers, all the Councils,
      and masses, as you see, of Anglican theology. Now look at the next case, nothing but
      eighteenth century!'
'I see,—from the Fathers to the Philosophers, from Hooker to Hume. How history repeats
      itself in the individual!'
'And there again,' said Robert, pointing to the other side of the room, 'are the results of
      his life as a German student.'
'Germany—ah, I remember! How long was he there?'
'Ten years, at Berlin and Heidelberg. According to old Meyrick, he buried his last chance of
      living like other men at Berlin. His years of extravagant labour there have left marks upon
      him physically that can never be effaced. But that bookcase fascinates me. Half the great
      names of modern thought are in those books.'
And so they were. The first Langham opened had a Latin dedication in a quavering old man's
      hand, 'Amico et discipulo meo,' signed 'Fredericus Gulielmus Schelling.' The next bore the
      autograph of Alexander von Humboldt, the next that of Boeckh, the famous classic, and so on.
      Close by was Niebuhr's History, in the title-page of which a few lines in the historian's
      handwriting bore witness to much 'pleasant discourse between the writer and Roger Wendover, at
      Bonn, in the summer of 1847.' Judging from other shelves farther down, he must also have spent
      some time, perhaps an academic year, at Tübingen, for here were most of the early editions of
      the Leben Jesu, with some corrections from Strauss's hand, and similar records of
      Baur, Ewald, and other members or opponents of the Tübingen school. And so on, through the
      whole bookcase. Something of everything was there—Philosophy, Theology, History, Philology.
      The collection was a medley, and made almost a spot of disorder in the exquisite neatness and
      system of the vast gathering of which it formed part. Its bond of union was simply that it
      represented the forces of an epoch, the thoughts, the men, the occupations which had absorbed
      the energies of ten golden years. Every book seemed to be full of paper marks; almost every
      title-page was covered with minute writing, which, when examined, proved to contain a record
      of lectures, or conversations with the author of the volume, sometimes a string of anecdotes
      or a short biography, rapidly sketched out of the fulness of personal knowledge, and often
      seasoned with a subtle causticity and wit. A history of modern thinking Germany, of that
      'unextinguished hearth' whence the mind of Europe has been kindled for three generations,
      might almost have been evolved from that bookcase and its contents alone.
Langham, as he stood peering among the ugly, vilely-printed German volumes, felt suddenly a
      kind of magnetic influence creeping over him. The room seemed instinct with a harsh commanding
      presence. The history of a mind and soul was written upon the face of it; every shelf, as it
      were, was an auto
      biographical fragment, an 'Apologia pro Vita Mea.' He drew away from the books at
      last with the uneasy feeling of one who surprises a confidence, and looked for Robert. Robert
      was at the end of the room, a couple of volumes under his arm, another, which he was reading,
      in his hand.
'This is my corner,' he said, smiling and flushing a little, as his friend moved up
      to him. 'Perhaps you don't know that I too am engaged upon a great work.'
'A great work—you?'
Langham looked at his companion as though to find out whether his remark was meant seriously
      or whether he might venture to be cynical. Elsmere writing! Why should everybody write books?
      It was absurd! The scholar who knows what toll scholarship takes of life is always apt to
      resent the intrusion of the man of action into his domains. It looks to him like a kind of
      ridiculous assumption that any one d'un cœur lêger can do what has cost him his
      heart's blood.
Robert understood something of the meaning of his tone, and replied almost apologetically;
      he was always singularly modest about himself on the intellectual side.
'Well, Grey is responsible. He gave me such a homily before I left Oxford on the absolute
      necessity of keeping up with books, that I could do nothing less than set up a "subject" at
      once. "Half the day," he used to say to me, "you will be king of your world; the other half be
      the slave of something which will take you out of your world into the general world;" and then
      he would quote to me that saying he was always bringing into lectures—I forget whose it
       is—"The decisive events of the world take place in the intellect. It is the mission
      of books that they help one to remember it." Altogether it was striking, coming from one who
      has always had such a tremendous respect for practical life and work, and I was much impressed
      by it. So blame him!'
Langham was silent. Elsmere had noticed that any allusion to Grey found Langham less and
      less responsive.
'Well, what is the "great work"?' he said at last, abruptly.
'Historical. Oh, I should have written something without Grey; I have always had a turn for
      it since I was a child. But he was clear that history was especially valuable—especially
      necessary to a clergyman. I felt he was right, entirely right. So I took my Final Schools'
      history for a basis, and started on the Empire, especially the decay of the Empire. Some day I
      mean to take up one of the episodes in the great birth of Europe—the makings of France, I
      think, most likely. It seems to lead farthest and tell most. I have been at work now nine
      months.'
'And are just getting into it?'
'Just about. I have got down below the surface, and am beginning to feel the joys of
      digging;' and Robert threw back his head with one of his most brilliant enthusiastic smiles.
      'I
       have been shy about boring you with the thing, but the fact is, I am very keen
      indeed; and this library has been a godsend!'
'So I should think.' Langham sat down on one of the carved wooden stools placed at intervals
      along the bookcases and looked at his friend, his psychological curiosity rising a little.
'Tell me,' he said presently—'tell me what interests you specially—what seizes you—in a
      subject like the making of France, for instance?'
'Do you really want to know?' said Robert, incredulously.
The other nodded. Robert left his place, and began to walk up and down, trying to answer
      Langham's question, and at the same time to fix in speech a number of sentiments and
      impressions bred in him by the work of the past few months. After a while Langham began to see
      his way. Evidently the forces at the bottom of this new historical interest were precisely the
      same forces at work in Elsmere's parish plans, in his sermons, in his dealings with the poor
      and the young—forces of imagination and sympathy. What was enchaining him to this new study
      was not, to begin with, that patient love of ingenious accumulation which is the learned
      temper proper, the temper, in short, of science. It was simply a passionate sense of the human
      problems which underlie all the dry and dusty detail of history and give it tone and colour, a
      passionate desire to rescue something more of human life from the drowning, submerging past,
      to realise for himself and others the solidarity and continuity of mankind's long struggle
      from the beginning until now.
Langham had had much experience of Elsmere's versatility and pliancy, but he had never
      realised it so much as now, while he sat listening to the vivid, many-coloured speech getting
      quicker and quicker, and more and more telling and original as Robert got more absorbed and
      excited by what he had to say. He was endeavouring to describe to Langham the sort of book he
      thought might be written on the rise of modern society in Gaul, dwelling first of all on the
      outward spectacle of the blood-stained Frankish world as it was, say, in the days of Gregory
      the Great, on its savage kings, its fiendish women, its bishops and its saints; and then, on
      the conflict of ideas going on behind all the fierce incoherence of the Empire's decay, the
      struggle of Roman order and of German freedom, of Roman luxury and of German hardness; above
      all, the war of orthodoxy and heresy, with its strange political complications. And then,
      discontented still, as though the heart of the matter were still untouched, he went on,
      restlessly wandering the while, with his long arms linked behind him, 'throwing out' words at
      an object in his mind, trying to grasp and analyse that strange sense which haunts the student
      of Rome's decline as it once overshadowed the infancy of Europe, that sense of a slowly
      departing majesty, of a great presence just withdrawn, and still incalculably potent,
      traceable throughout in that humbling consciousness of Goth or
       Frank that they were but 'beggars hutting in a palace—the place had harboured
      greater men than they!'
'There is one thing,' Langham said presently, in his slow nonchalant voice, when the tide of
      Robert's ardour ebbed for a moment, 'that doesn't seem to have touched you yet. But you will
      come to it. To my mind, it makes almost the chief interest of history. It is just this.
      History depends on testimony. What is the nature and the value of testimony at given
      times? In other words, did the man of the third century understand, or report, or interpret
      facts in the same way as the man of the sixteenth or the nineteenth? And if not, what are the
      differences, and what are the deductions to be made from them, if any?' He fixed his keen look
      on Robert, who was now lounging against the books, as though his harangue had taken it out of
      him a little.
'Ah, well,' said the rector, smiling, 'I am only just coming to that. As I told you, I am
      only now beginning to dig for myself. Till now it has all been work at second hand. I have
      been getting a general survey of the ground as quickly as I could with the help of other men's
      labours. Now I must go to work inch by inch, and find out what the ground is made of. I won't
      forget your point. It is enormously important, I grant—enormously,' he repeated
      reflectively.
'I should think it is,' said Langham to himself as he rose; 'the whole of orthodox
      Christianity is in it, for instance!'
There was not much more to be seen. A little wooden staircase led from the second library to
      the upper rooms, curious old rooms, which had been annexed one by one as the squire wanted
      them, and in which there was nothing at all—neither chair, nor table, nor carpet—but books
      only. All the doors leading from room to room had been taken off; the old worm-eaten boards
      had been roughly stained; a few old French engravings had been hung here and there where the
      encroaching books left an opening; but otherwise all was bare. There was a curious charm in
      the space and air of these empty rooms, with their latticed windows opening on to the hill;
      and letting in day by day the summer sun-risings or the winter dawns, which had shone upon
      them for more than three centuries.
'This is my last day of privilege,' said Robert. 'Everybody is shut out when once he
      appears, from this wing, and this part of the grounds. This was his father's room,' and the
      rector led the way into the last of the series; 'and through there,' pointing to a door on the
      right, 'lies the way to his own sleeping room, which is of course connected with the more
      modern side of the house.'
'So this is where that old man ventured "what Cato did and Addison approved,"' murmured
      Langham, standing in the middle of the room and looking round him. This particular room was
      now used as a sort of lumber place, a receptacle for the superfluous or useless books
      gradually thrown off by the
       great collection all around. There were innumerable volumes in frayed or broken
      bindings lying on the ground. A musty smell hung over it all; the gray light from outside,
      which seemed to give only an added subtlety and charm to the other portions of the ancient
      building through which they had been moving, seemed here triste and dreary. Or
      Langham fancied it.
He passed the threshold again with a little sigh, and saw suddenly before him at the end of
      the suite of rooms, and framed in the doorways facing him, an engraving of a Greuze picture—a
      girl's face turned over her shoulder, the hair waving about her temples, the lips parted, the
      teeth gleaming, mirth and provocation and tender yielding in every line. Langham started, and
      the blood rushed to his heart. It was as though Rose herself stood there and beckoned to
      him.
