
CHAPTER VII
The following morning about noon, Rose, who had been coaxed and persuaded by Catherine, much
      against her will, into taking a singing class at the school, closed the school door behind her
      with a sigh of relief, and tripped up the road to Burwood.
'How abominably they sang this morning!' she said to herself with curving lip. 'Talk of the
      natural north-country gift for music! What ridiculous fictions people set up! Dear me, what
      clouds! Perhaps we shan't get our walk to Shanmoor after all, and if we don't, and if—if—' her
      cheek flushed with a
       sudden excitement—'if Mr. Elsmere doesn't propose, Mrs. Thornburgh will be
      unmanageable. It is all Agnes and I can do to keep her in bounds as it is, and if
       something doesn't come off to-day, she'll be for reversing the usual proceeding, and
      asking Catherine her intentions, which would ruin everything.'
Then raising her head she swept her eyes round the sky. The wind was freshening, the clouds
      were coming up fast from the westward; over the summit of High Fell and the crags on either
      side, a gray straight-edged curtain was already lowering.
'It will hold up yet awhile,' she thought, 'and if it rains later we can get a carriage at
      Shanmoor and come back by the road.'
And she walked on homewards meditating, her thin fingers clasped before her, the wind
      blowing her skirts, the blue ribbons on her hat, the little gold curls on her temples, in a
      pretty many-coloured turmoil about her. When she got to Burwood she shut herself into the room
      which was peculiarly hers, the room which had been a stable. Now it was full of artistic odds
      and ends—her fiddle, of course, and piles of music, her violin stand, a few deal tables and
      cane chairs beautified by a number of chiffons, bits of Liberty stuffs with the edges
      still ragged, or cheap morsels of Syrian embroidery. On the tables stood photographs of
      musicians and friends—the spoils of her visits to Manchester, and of two visits to London
      which gleamed like golden points in the girl's memory. The plastered walls were covered with
      an odd medley. Here was a round mirror, of which Rose was enormously proud. She had extracted
      it from a farmhouse of the neighbourhood, and paid for it with her own money. There a group of
      unfinished headlong sketches of the most fiercely impressionist description—the work and the
      gift of a knot of Manchester artists, who had fêted and flattered the beautiful little
      Westmoreland girl, when she was staying among them, to her heart's content. Manchester, almost
      alone among our great towns of the present day, has not only a musical, but a pictorial life
      of its own; its young artists dub themselves 'a school,' study in Paris, and when they come
      home scout the Academy and its methods, and pine to set up a rival art-centre, skilled in all
      the methods of the Salon, in the murky north. Rose's uncle, originally a clerk in a warehouse,
      and a rough diamond enough, had more or less moved with the times, like his brother Richard;
      at any rate he had grown rich, had married a decent wife, and was glad enough to befriend his
      dead brother's children, who wanted nothing of him, and did their uncle a credit of which he
      was sensible, by their good manners and good looks. Music was the only point at which he
      touched the culture of the times, like so many business men; but it pleased him also to pose
      as a patron of local art; so that when Rose went to stay with her childless uncle and aunt,
      she found long-haired artists and fiery musicians about the place, who excited and encouraged
      her musical gift, who sketched her while she played, and talked to the pretty, clever,
      unformed
       creature of London and Paris and Italy, and set her pining for that golden vie
       de Bohème which she alone apparently of all artists was destined never to know.
For she was an artist—she would be an artist—let Catherine say what she would! She came back
      from Manchester restless for she knew not what, thirsty for the joys and emotions of art,
      determined to be free, reckless, passionate; with Wagner and Brahms in her young blood; and
      found Burwood waiting for her—Burwood, the lonely house in the lonely valley, of which
      Catherine was the presiding genius. Catherine! For Rose, what a multitude of
      associations clustered round the name! To her it meant everything at this moment against which
      her soul rebelled—the most scrupulous order, the most rigid self-repression, the most
      determined sacrificing of 'this warm kind world,' with all its indefensible delights, to a
      cold other-world with its torturing inadmissible claims. Even in the midst of her stolen joys
      at Manchester or London, this mere name, the mere mental image of Catherine moving through
      life, wrapped in a religious peace and certainty as austere as they were beautiful, and asking
      of all about her the same absolute surrender to an awful Master she gave so easily herself,
      was enough to chill the wayward Rose, and fill her with a kind of restless despair. And at
      home, as the vicar said, the two sisters were always on the verge of conflict. Rose had enough
      of her father in her to suffer in resisting, but resist she must by the law of her nature.
Now, as she threw off her walking things, she fell first upon her violin, and rushed through
      a Brahms's 'Liebeslied,' her eyes dancing, her whole light form thrilling with the joy of it;
      and then with a sudden revulsion she stopped playing, and threw herself down listlessly by the
      open window. Close by against the wall was a little looking-glass, by which she often arranged
      her ruffled locks; she glanced at it now, it showed her a brilliant face enough, but drooping
      lips, and eyes darkened with the extravagant melancholy of eighteen.
'It is come to a pretty pass,' she said to herself, 'that I should be able to think of
      nothing but schemes for getting Catherine married and out of my way! Considering what she is
      and what I am, and how she has slaved for us all her life, I seem to have descended pretty
      low. Heigh ho!'
And with a portentous sigh she dropped her chin on her hand. She was half acting, acting to
      herself. Life was not really quite unbearable, and she knew it. But it relieved her to overdo
      it.
'I wonder how much chance there is,' she mused presently. 'Mr. Elsmere will soon be
      ridiculous. Why, I saw him gather up those violets she threw away yesterday on Moor
      Crag. And as for her, I don't believe she has realised the situation a bit. At least, if she
      has, she is as unlike other mortals in this as in
      everything else. But when she does——'
She frowned and meditated, but got no light on the problem. Chattie jumped up on the
      window-sill, with her usual stealthy aplomb, and rubbed herself against the girl's
      face.
'Oh, Chattie!' cried Rose, throwing her arms round the cat, 'if Catherine 'll only
      marry Mr. Elsmere, my dear, and be happy ever afterwards, and set me free to live my own life
      a bit, I'll be so good, you won't know me, Chattie. And you shall have a new collar, my
      beauty, and cream till you die of it!'
And springing up she dragged in the cat, and snatching a scarlet anemone from a bunch on the
      table, stood opposite Chattie, who stood slowly waving her magnificent tail from side to side,
      and glaring as though it were not at all to her taste to be hustled and bustled in this
      way.
'Now, Chattie, listen! Will she?'
A leaf of the flower dropped on Chattie's nose.
'Won't she? Will she? Won't she? Will—— Tiresome flower, why did Nature give it such a
      beggarly few petals? If I'd had a daisy it would have all come right. Come, Chattie, waltz;
      and let's forget this wicked world!'
And, snatching up her violin, the girl broke into a Strauss waltz, dancing to it the while,
      her cotton skirts flying, her pretty feet twinkling, till her eyes glowed, and her cheeks
      blazed with a double intoxication—the intoxication of movement, and the intoxication of
      sound—the cat meanwhile following her with little mincing perplexed steps, as though not
      knowing what to make of her.
'Rose, you madcap!' cried Agnes, opening the door.
'Not at all, my dear,' said Rose calmly, stopping to take breath. 'Excellent practice and
      uncommonly difficult. Try if you can do it, and see!'
The weather held up in a gray grudging sort of way, and Mrs. Thornburgh especially was all
      for braving the clouds and going on with the expedition. It was galling to her that she
      herself would have to be driven to Shanmoor behind the fat vicarage pony, while the others
      would be climbing the fells, and all sorts of exciting things might be happening. Still it was
      infinitely better to be half in it than not in it at all, and she started by the side of the
      vicarage 'man' in a most delicious flutter. The skies might fall any day now. Elsmere had not
      confided in her, though she was unable to count the openings she had given him thereto. For
      one of the frankest of men he had kept his secret, so far as words went, with a remarkable
      tenacity. Probably the neighbourhood of Mrs. Thornburgh was enough to make the veriest
      chatterbox secretive. But notwithstanding, no one possessing the clue could live in the same
      house with him these June days without seeing that the whole man was absorbed, transformed,
      and that the crisis might be reached at any moment. Even the vicar was eager and watchful, and
      playing up to his wife in fine style, and if the situation had so
       worked on the vicar, Mrs. Thornburgh's state is easier imagined than described.
The walk to Shanmoor need not be chronicled. The party kept together. Robert fancied
      sometimes that there was a certain note of purpose in the way in which Catherine clung to the
      vicar. If so it did not disquiet him. Never had she been kinder, more gentle. Nay, as the walk
      went on a lovely gaiety broke through her tranquil manner, as though she, like the others, had
      caught exhilaration from the sharpened breeze and the towering mountains, restored to all
      their grandeur by the storm clouds.
And yet she had started in some little inward trouble. She had promised to join this walk to
      Shanmoor, she had promised to go with the others on a picnic the following day, but her
      conscience was pricking her. Twice this last fortnight had she been forced to give up a
      night-school she held in a little lonely hamlet among the fells, because even she had
      been too tired to walk there and back after a day of physical exertion. Were not the world and
      the flesh encroaching? She had been conscious of a strange inner restlessness as they all
      stood waiting in the road for the vicar and Elsmere. Agnes had thought her looking depressed
      and pale, and even dreamt for a moment of suggesting to her to stay at home. And then ten
      minutes after they had started it had all gone, her depression, blown away by the winds,—or
      charmed away by a happy voice, a manly presence, a keen responsive eye?
Elsmere, indeed, was gaiety itself. He kept up an incessant war with Rose; he had a number
      of little jokes going at the vicar's expense, which kept that good man in a half-protesting
      chuckle most of the way; he cleared every gate that presented itself in first-rate Oxford
      form, and climbed every point of rock with a cat-like agility that set the girls scoffing at
      the pretence of invalidism under which he had foisted himself on Whindale.
'How fine all this black purple is!' he cried, as they topped the ridge, and the Shanmoor
      valley lay before them, bounded on the other side by line after line of mountain, Wetherlam
      and the Pikes and Fairfield in the far distance, piled sombrely under a sombre sky. 'I had
      grown quite tired of the sun. He had done his best to make you commonplace.'
'Tired of the sun in Westmoreland?' said Catherine, with a little mocking wonder. 'How
      wanton, how prodigal!'
'Does it deserve a Nemesis?' he said, laughing. 'Drowning from now till I depart? No matter.
      I can bear a second deluge with an even mind. On this enchanted soil all things are
      welcome!'
She looked up, smiling, at his vehemence, taking it all as a tribute to the country, or to
      his own recovered health. He stood leaning on his stick, gazing, however, not at the view but
      at her. The others stood a little way off laughing and chatter
      ing. As their eyes met, a strange new pulse leapt up in Catherine.
'The wind is very boisterous here,' she said, with a shiver. 'I think we ought to be going
      on.'
And she hurried up to the others, nor did she leave their shelter till they were in sight of
      the little Shanmoor inn, where they were to have tea. The pony carriage was already standing
      in front of the inn, and Mrs. Thornburgh's gray curls shaking at the window.
'William!' she shouted, 'bring them in. Tea is just ready, and Mr. Ruskin was here last
      week, and there are ever so many new names in the visitors' book!'
While the girls went in Elsmere stood looking a moment at the inn, the bridge, and the
      village. It was a characteristic Westmoreland scene. The low whitewashed inn, with its newly
      painted signboard, was to his right, the pony at the door lazily flicking off the flies and
      dropping its greedy nose in search of the grains of corn among the cobbles; to his left a gray
      stone bridge over a broad light-filled river; beyond, a little huddled village backed by and
      apparently built out of the great slate quarry which represented the only industry of the
      neighbourhood, and a tiny towered church—the scene on the Sabbath of Mr. Mayhew's
      ministrations. Beyond the village, shoulders of purple fell, and behind the inn masses of
      broken crag rising at the very head of the valley into a fine pike, along whose jagged edges
      the rain-clouds were trailing. There was a little lurid storm-light on the river, but, in
      general, the colour was all dark and rich, the white inn gleaming on a green and purple
      background. He took it all into his heart, covetously, greedily, trying to fix it there for
      ever.
Presently he was called in by the vicar, and found a tempting tea spread in a light upper
      room, where Agnes and Rose were already making fun of the chromo-lithographs and rummaging the
      visitors' book. The scrambling, chattering meal passed like a flash. At the beginning of it
      Mrs. Thornburgh's small gray eyes had travelled restlessly from face to face, as though to
      say, 'What—no news yet? Nothing happened?' As for Elsmere, though it seemed to him at
      the time one of the brightest moments of existence, he remembered little afterwards but the
      scene: the peculiar clean mustiness of the room only just opened for the summer season, a
      print of the Princess of Wales on the wall opposite him, a stuffed fox over the mantelpiece,
      Rose's golden head and heavy amber necklace, and the figure at the vicar's right, in a gown of
      a little dark blue check, the broad hat shading the white brow and luminous eyes.
When tea was over they lounged out on the bridge. There was to be no long lingering,
      however. The clouds were deepening, the rain could not be far off. But if they started soon
      they could probably reach home before it came down. Elsmere and Rose hung over the gray stone
      parapet, mottled with the green
       and gold of innumerable mosses, and looked down through a fringe of English
      maidenhair growing along the coping, into the clear eddies of the stream. Suddenly he raised
      himself on one elbow, and, shading his eyes, looked to where the vicar and Catherine were
      standing in front of the inn, touched for an instant by a beam of fitful light slipping
      between two great rain-clouds.
'How well that hat and dress become your sister!' he said, the words breaking, as it were,
      from his lips.
'Do you think Catherine pretty?' said Rose with an excellent pretence of innocence,
      detaching a little pebble and flinging it harmlessly at a water-wagtail balancing on a stone
      below.
He flushed. 'Pretty! You might as well apply the word to your mountains, to the exquisite
      river, to that great purple peak!'
'Yes,' thought Rose, 'she is not unlike that high cold peak!' But her girlish sympathy
      conquered her; it was very exciting, and she liked Elsmere. She turned back to him, her face
      overspread with a quite irrepressible smile. He reddened still more, then they stared into
      each other's eyes, and without a word more understood each other perfectly.
Rose held out her hand to him with a little brusque bon camarade gesture. He
      pressed it warmly in his.
'That was nice of you!' he cried. 'Very nice of you! Friends then?'
She nodded, and drew her hand away just as Agnes and the vicar disturbed them.
Meanwhile Catherine was standing by the side of the pony carriage, watching Mrs.
      Thornburgh's preparations.
'You're sure you don't mind driving home alone?' she said in a troubled voice. 'Mayn't I go
      with you?'
'My dear, certainly not! As if I wasn't accustomed to going about alone at my time of life!
      No, no, my dear, you go and have your walk; you'll get home before the rain. Ready,
      James.'
The old vicarage factotum could not imagine what made his charge so anxious to be off. She
      actually took the whip out of his hand and gave a flick to the pony, who swerved and started
      off in a way which would have made his mistress clamorously nervous under any other
      circumstances. Catherine stood looking after her.
'Now, then, right about face and quick march!' exclaimed the vicar. 'We've got to race that
      cloud over the Pike. It'll be up with us in no time.'
Off they started, and were soon climbing the slippery green slopes, or crushing through the
      fern of the fell they had descended earlier in the afternoon. Catherine for some little way
      walked last of the party, the vicar in front of her. Then Elsmere picked a stonecrop,
      quarrelled over its precise name with Rose, and waited for Catherine, who had a very close and
      familiar knowledge of the botany of the district.


'You have crushed me,' he said, laughing, as he put the flower carefully into his
      pocket-book; 'but it is worth while to be crushed by any one who can give so much ground for
      their knowledge. How you do know your mountains—from their peasants to their plants!'
'I have had more than ten able-bodied years living and scrambling among them,' she said,
      smiling.
'Do you keep up all your visits and teaching in the winter?'
'Oh, not so much, of course! But people must be helped and taught in the winter. And our
      winter is often not as hard as yours down south.'
'Do you go on with that night-school in Poll Ghyll, for instance?' he said, with another
      note in his voice.
Catherine looked at him and coloured. 'Rose has been telling tales,' she said. 'I wish she
      would leave my proceedings alone. Poll Ghyll is the family bone of contention at present. Yes,
      I go on with it. I always take a lantern when the night is dark, and I know every inch of the
      ground, and Bob is always with me; aren't you, Bob?'
And she stooped down to pat the collie beside her. Bob looked up at her, blinking with a
      proudly confidential air as though to remind her that there were a good many such secrets
      between them.
'I like to fancy you with your lantern in the dark,' he cried, the hidden emotion piercing
      through, 'the night wind blowing about you, the black mountains to right and left of you, some
      little stream, perhaps, running beside you for company, your dog guarding you, and all good
      angels going with you.'
She flushed still more deeply; the impetuous words affected her strangely.
'Don't fancy it at all,' she said, laughing. 'It is a very small and very natural incident
      of one's life here. Look back, Mr. Elsmere; the rain has beaten us!'
He looked back and saw the great Pike over Shanmoor village blotted out in a moving deluge
      of rain. The quarry opposite on the mountain side gleamed green and vivid against the
      ink-black fell; some clothes hanging out in the field below the church flapped wildly hither
      and thither in the sudden gale, the only spot of white in the prevailing blackness; children
      with their petticoats over their heads ran homewards along the road the walking party had just
      quitted; the stream beneath, spreading broadly through the fields, shivered and wrinkled under
      the blast. Up it came, and the rain mists with it. In another minute the storm was beating in
      their faces.
'Caught!' cried Elsmere, in a voice almost of jubilation. 'Let me help you into your cloak,
      Miss Leyburn.'
He flung it round her, and struggled into his own mackintosh. The vicar in front of them
      turned and waved his hand to them in laughing despair, then hurried after the others,
      evidently
       with the view of performing for them the same office Elsmere had just performed for
      Catherine.
Robert and his companion struggled on for a while in a breathless silence against the
      deluge, which seemed to beat on them from all sides. He walked behind her, sheltering her by
      his tall form and his big umbrella as much as he could. His pulses were all aglow with the joy
      of the storm. It seemed to him that he rejoiced with the thirsty grass over which the rain
      streams were running, that his heart filled with the shrunken becks as the flood leapt along
      them. Let the elements thunder and rave as they pleased. Could he not at a word bring the
      light of that face, those eyes, upon him? Was she not his for a moment in the rain and the
      solitude, as she had never been in the commonplace sunshine of their valley life?
Suddenly he heard an exclamation, and saw her run on in front of him. What was the matter?
      Then he noticed for the first time that Rose, far ahead, was still walking in her cotton
      dress. The little scatterbrain had, of course, forgotten her cloak. But, monstrous! There was
      Catherine stripping off her own, Rose refusing it. In vain. The sister's determined arms put
      it round her. Rose is enwrapped, buttoned up before she knows where she is, and Catherine
      falls back, pursued by some shaft from Rose, more sarcastic than grateful, to judge by the
      tone of it.
'Miss Leyburn, what have you been doing?'
'Rose had forgotten her cloak,' she said briefly. 'She has a very thin dress on, and she is
      the only one of us that takes cold easily.'
'You must take my mackintosh,' he said at once.
She laughed in his face.
'As if I should do anything of the sort!'
'You must,' he said, quietly stripping it off. 'Do you think that you are always to be
      allowed to go through the world taking thought of other people and allowing no one to take
      thought for you?'
He held it out to her.
'No, no! This is absurd, Mr. Elsmere. You are not strong yet. And I have often told you that
      nothing hurts me.'
He hung it deliberately over his arm. 'Very well, then, there it stays!'
And they hurried on again, she biting her lip and on the point of laughter.
'Mr. Elsmere, be sensible!' she said presently, her look changing to one of real distress.
      'I should never forgive myself if you got a chill after your illness!'
'You will not be called upon,' he said in the most matter-of-fact tone. 'Men's coats are
      made to keep out weather,' and he pointed to his own, closely buttoned up. 'Your dress—I can't
      help being disrespectful under the circumstances—will be wet through in ten minutes.'
Another silence. Then he overtook her.


'Please, Miss Leyburn,' he said, stopping her.
There was an instant's mute contest between them. The rain splashed on the umbrellas. She
      could not help it, she broke down into the merriest, most musical laugh of a child that can
      hardly stop itself, and he joined.
'Mr. Elsmere, you are ridiculous!'
But she submitted. He put the mackintosh round her, thinking, bold man, as she turned her
      rosy rain-dewed face to him, of Wordsworth's 'Louisa,' and the poet's cry of longing.
And yet he was not so bold either. Even at this moment of exhilaration he was conscious of a
      bar that checked and arrested. Something—what was it?—drew invisible lines of defence about
      her. A sort of divine fear of her mingled with his rising passion. Let him not risk too much
      too soon.
They walked on briskly, and were soon on the Whindale side of the pass. To the left of them
      the great hollow of High Fell unfolded, storm-beaten and dark, the river issuing from the
      heart of it like an angry voice.
'What a change!' he said, coming up with her as the path widened. 'How impossible that it
      should have been only yesterday afternoon I was lounging up here in the heat, by the pool
      where the stream rises, watching the white butterflies on the turf, and reading
      "Laodamia"!'
'"Laodamia"!' she said, half sighing as she caught the name. 'Is it one of those you like
      best?'
'Yes,' he said, bending forward that he might see her in spite of the umbrella. 'How superb
      it is—the roll, the majesty of it; the severe chastened beauty of the main feeling, the
      individual lines!'
And he quoted line after line, lingering over the cadences.
'It was my father's favourite of all,' she said, in the low vibrating voice of memory. 'He
      said the last verse to me the day before he died.'
Robert recalled it—

'Yet tears to human suffering are due,
And mortal hopes defeated and o'erthrown
Are mourned by man, and not by man alone
As fondly we believe.'

Poor Richard Leyburn! Yet where had the defeat lain?
'Was he happy in his school life?' he asked gently. 'Was teaching what he liked?'
'Oh yes—only—' Catherine paused and then added hurriedly, as though drawn on in spite of
      herself by the grave sympathy of his look, 'I never knew anybody so good who thought himself
      of so little account. He always believed that he had missed everything, wasted everything, and
      that anybody else would have made infinitely more out of his life. He was always blaming,
      scourging himself. And all the time he was the noblest,
      purest, most devoted——'
She stopped. Her voice had passed beyond her control. Elsmere was startled by the feeling
      she showed. Evidently he had touched one of the few sore places in this pure heart. It was as
      though her memory of her father had in it elements of almost intolerable pathos, as though the
      child's brooding love and loyalty were in perpetual protest, even now after this lapse of
      years, against the verdict which an over-scrupulous, despondent soul had pronounced upon
      itself. Did she feel that he had gone uncomforted out of life—even by her—even by
      religion?—was that the sting?
'Oh, I can understand!' he said reverently—'I can understand. I have come across it once or
      twice, that fierce self-judgment of the good. It is the most stirring and humbling thing in
      life.' Then his voice dropped. 'And after the last conflict—the last "quailing breath"—the
      last onslaughts of doubt or fear—think of the Vision waiting—the Eternal Comfort—

'"Oh, my only Light!
It cannot be
That I am he
On whom Thy tempests fell all night!"'

The words fell from the softened voice like noble music.
There was a pause. Then Catherine raised her eyes to his. They swam in tears, and yet the
      unspoken thanks in them were radiance itself. It seemed to him as though she came closer to
      him like a child to an elder who has soothed and satisfied an inward smart.
They walked on in silence. They were just nearing the swollen river which roared below them.
      On the opposite bank two umbrellas were vanishing through the field gate into the road, but
      the vicar had turned and was waiting for them. They could see his becloaked figure leaning on
      his stick through the light wreaths of mist that floated above the tumbling stream. The
      abnormally heavy rain had ceased, but the clouds seemed to be dragging along the very floor of
      the valley.
The stepping-stones came into sight. He leaped on the first and held out his hand to her.
      When they started she would have refused his help with scorn. Now, after a moment's hesitation
      she yielded, and he felt her dear weight on him as he guided her carefully from stone to
      stone. In reality it is both difficult and risky to be helped over stepping-stones. You had
      much better manage for yourself; and half way through Catherine had a mind to tell him so. But
      the words died on her lips which smiled instead. He could have wished that passage from stone
      to stone could have lasted for ever. She was wrapped up grotesquely in his mackintosh; her hat
      was all bedraggled; her gloves dripped in his; and in spite of all he could have vowed that
      anything so lovely as that delicately cut, gravely smiling face, swaying above the rushing
      brown water, was never seen in Westmoreland wilds before.


'It is clearing,' he cried, with ready optimism, as they reached the bank. 'We shall get our
      picnic to-morrow after all—we must get it! Promise me it shall be fine—and you will
      be there!'
The vicar was only fifty yards away waiting for them against the field gate. But Robert held
      her eagerly, imperiously,—and it seemed to her, her head was still dizzy with the water.
'Promise!' he repeated, his voice dropping.
She could not stop to think of the absurdity of promising for Westmoreland weather. She
      could only say faintly 'Yes!' and so release her hand.
'You are pretty wet!' said the vicar, looking from one to the other with a
      curiosity which Robert's quick sense divined at once was directed to something else than the
      mere condition of their garments. But Catherine noticed nothing; she walked on wrestling
      blindly with she knew not what till they reached the vicarage gate. There stood Mrs.
      Thornburgh, the light drizzle into which the rain had declined beating unheeded on her curls
      and ample shoulders. She stared at Robert's drenched condition, but he gave her no time to
      make remarks.
'Don't take it off,' he said with a laughing wave of the hand to Catherine; 'I will come for
      it to-morrow morning.'
And he ran up the drive, conscious at last that it might be prudent to get himself into
      something less spongelike than his present attire as quickly as possible.
The vicar followed him.
'Don't keep Catherine, my dear. There's nothing to tell. Nobody's the worse.'
Mrs. Thornburgh took no heed. Opening the iron gate she went through it on to the deserted
      rain-beaten road, laid both her hands on Catherine's shoulders, and looked her straight in the
      eyes. The vicar's anxious hint was useless. She could contain herself no longer. She had
      watched them from the vicarage come down the fell together, had seen them cross the stepping
      stones, lingeringly, hand in hand.
'My dear Catherine!' she cried, effusively kissing Catherine's glowing cheek under the
      shelter of the laurustinus that made a bower of the gate. 'My dear Catherine!'
Catherine gazed at her in astonishment. Mrs. Thornburgh's eyes were all alive, and swarming
      with questions. If it had been Rose she would have let them out in one fell flight. But
      Catherine's personality kept her in awe. And after a second, as the two stood together, a deep
      flush rose on Catherine's face, and an expression of half-frightened apology dawned in Mrs.
      Thornburgh's.
Catherine drew herself away. 'Will you please give Mr. Elsmere his mackintosh?' she said,
      taking it off; 'I shan't want it this little way.'
And putting it on Mrs. Thornburgh's arm she turned away, walking quickly round the bend of
      the road.


Mrs. Thornburgh watched her open-mouthed, and moved slowly back to the house in a state of
      complete collapse.
'I always knew'—she said with a groan—'I always knew it would never go right if it was
      Catherine! Why was it Catherine?'
And she went in, still hurling at Providence the same vindictive query.
Meanwhile Catherine, hurrying home, the receding flush leaving a sudden pallor behind it,
      was twisting her hands before her in a kind of agony.
'What have I been doing?' she said to herself. 'What have I been doing?'
At the gate of Burwood something made her look up. She saw the girls in their own room—Agnes
      was standing behind, Rose had evidently rushed forward to see Catherine come in, and now
      retreated as suddenly when she saw her sister look up.
Catherine understood it all in an instant. 'They, too, are on the watch,' she thought to
      herself bitterly. The strong reticent nature was outraged by the perception that she had been
      for days the unconscious actor in a drama of which her sisters and Mrs. Thornburgh had been
      the silent and intelligent spectators.
She came down presently from her room very white and quiet, admitted that she was tired, and
      said nothing to anybody. Agnes and Rose noticed the change at once, whispered to each other
      when they found an opportunity, and foreboded ill.
After their tea-supper, Catherine, unperceived, slipped out of the little lane gate, and
      climbed the stony path above the house leading on to the fell. The rain had ceased, but the
      clouds hung low and threatening, and the close air was saturated with moisture. As she gained
      the bare fell, sounds of water met her on all sides. The river cried hoarsely to her from
      below, the becks in the little ghylls were full and thunderous; and beside her over the smooth
      grass slid many a new-born rivulet, the child of the storm, and destined to vanish with the
      night. Catherine's soul went out to welcome the gray damp of the hills. She knew them best in
      this mood. They were thus most her own.
She climbed on till at last she reached the crest of the ridge. Behind her lay the valley,
      and on its further side the fells she had crossed in the afternoon. Before her spread a long
      green vale, compared to which Whindale with its white road, its church, and parsonage, and
      scattered houses, was the great world itself. Marrisdale had no road and not a single house.
      As Catherine descended into it she saw not a sign of human life. There were sheep grazing in
      the silence of the long June twilight; the blackish walls ran down and up again, dividing the
      green hollow with melancholy uniformity. Here and there was a sheepfold, suggesting the
      bleakness of winter nights; and here and there a rough stone barn for storing fodder. And
      beyond the vale, eastwards and northwards, Catherine looked
       out upon a wild sea of moors wrapped in mists, sullen and storm-beaten, while to
      the left the clouds hung deepest and inkiest over the high points of the Ullswater
      mountains.
When she was once below the pass, man and his world were shut out. The girl figure in the
      blue cloak and hood was absolutely alone. She descended till she reached a point where a
      little stream had been turned into a stone trough for cattle. Above it stood a gnarled and
      solitary thorn. Catherine sank down on a rock at the foot of the tree. It was a seat she knew
      well; she had lingered there with her father; she had thought and prayed there as girl and
      woman; she had wrestled there often with despondency or grief, or some of those subtle
      spiritual temptations which were all her pure youth had known, till the inner light had dawned
      again, and the humble enraptured soul could almost have traced amid the shadows of that
      dappled moorland world, between her and the clouds, the white stoles and 'sleeping wings' of
      ministering spirits.
But no wrestle had ever been so hard as this. And with what fierce suddenness had it come
      upon her! She looked back over the day with bewilderment. She could see dimly that the
      Catherine who had started on that Shanmoor walk had been full of vague misgivings other than
      those concerned with a few neglected duties. There had been an undefined sense of unrest, of
      difference, of broken equilibrium. She had shown it in the way in which at first she had tried
      to keep herself and Robert Elsmere apart.
And then; beyond the departure from Shanmoor she seemed to lose the thread of her own
      history. Memory was drowned in a feeling to which the resisting soul as yet would give no
      name. She laid her head on her knees trembling. She heard again the sweet imperious tones with
      which he broke down her opposition about the cloak; she felt again the grasp of his steadying
      hand on hers.
But it was only for a very few minutes that she drifted thus. She raised her head again,
      scourging herself in shame and self-reproach, recapturing the empire of the soul with a strong
      effort. She set herself to a stern analysis of the whole situation. Clearly Mrs. Thornburgh
      and her sisters had been aware for some indefinite time that Mr. Elsmere had been showing a
      peculiar interest in her. Their eyes had been open. She realised now with hot cheeks
      how many meetings and tête-à-têtes had been managed for her and Elsmere, and how
      complacently she had fallen into Mrs. Thornburgh's snares.
'Have I encouraged him?' she asked herself sternly.
'Yes,' cried the smarting conscience.
'Can I marry him?'
'No,' said conscience again; 'not without deserting your post, not without betraying your
      trust.'
What post? What trust? Ah, conscience was ready enough with the answer. Was it not just ten
      years since, as a girl of
       sixteen, prematurely old and thoughtful, she had sat beside her father's deathbed,
      while her delicate hysterical mother, in a state of utter collapse, was kept away from him by
      the doctors? She could see the drawn face, the restless melancholy eyes. 'Catherine, my
      darling, you are the strong one. They will look to you. Support them.' And she could see in
      imagination her own young face pressed against the pillows. 'Yes, father,
      always—always!'—'Catherine, life is harder, the narrow way narrower than ever. I die'—and
      memory caught still the piteous, long-drawn breath by which the voice was broken—'in much—much
      perplexity about many things. You have a clear soul, an iron will. Strengthen the others.
      Bring them safe to the day of account.'—'Yes, father, with God's help. Oh, with God's
      help!'
That long-past dialogue is clear and sharp to her now, as though it were spoken afresh in
      her ears. And how has she kept her pledge? She looks back humbly on her life of incessant
      devotion, on the tie of long dependence which has bound to her her weak and widowed mother, on
      her relations to her sisters, the efforts she has made to train them in the spirit of her
      father's life and beliefs.
Have those efforts reached their term? Can it be said in any sense that her work is done,
      her promise kept?
Oh, no—no! she cries to herself with vehemence. Her mother depends on her every day and hour
      for protection, comfort, enjoyment. The girls are at the opening of life,—Agnes twenty, Rose
      eighteen, with all experience to come. And Rose—— Ah! at the thought of Rose, Catherine's
      heart sinks deeper and deeper—she feels a culprit before her father's memory. What is it has
      gone so desperately wrong with her training of the child? Surely she has given love enough,
      anxious thought enough, and here is Rose only fighting to be free from the yoke of her
      father's wishes, from the galling pressure of the family tradition!
No. Her task has just now reached its most difficult, its most critical, moment. How can she
      leave it? Impossible.
What claim can she put against these supreme claims—of her promise, her mother's and
      sisters' need?
His claim? Oh, no—no! She admits with soreness and humiliation unspeakable that she
      has done him wrong. If he loves her she has opened the way thereto; she confesses in her
      scrupulous honesty that when the inevitable withdrawal comes she will have given him cause to
      think of her hardly, slightingly. She flinches painfully under the thought. But it does not
      alter the matter. This girl, brought up in the austerest school of Christian self-government,
      knows nothing of the divine rights of passion. Half modern literature is based upon them.
      Catherine Leyburn knew of no supreme right but the right of God to the obedience of man.
Oh, and besides—besides—it is impossible that he should care
       so very much. The time is so short—there is so little in her, comparatively, to
      attract a man of such resource, such attainments, such access to the best things of life.
She cannot—in a kind of terror—she will not, believe in her own love-worthiness, in
      her own power to deal a lasting wound.
Then her own claim? Has she any claim, has the poor bounding heart that she cannot
      silence, do what she will, through all this strenuous debate, no claim to satisfaction, to
      joy?
She locks her hands round her knees, conscious, poor soul, that the worst struggle is
       here, the quickest agony here. But she does not waver for an instant. And
      her weapons are all ready. The inmost soul of her is a fortress well stored, whence at any
      moment the mere personal craving of the natural man can be met, repulsed, slain.
'Man approacheth so much the nearer unto God the farther he departeth from all earthly
       comfort.'
'If thou couldst perfectly annihilate thyself and empty thyself of all created love,
       then should I be constrained to flow into thee with greater abundance of grace.'
'When thou lookest unto the creature the sight of the Creator is withdrawn from
       thee.'
'Learn in all things to overcome thyself for the love of thy Creator....'
She presses the sentence she has so often meditated in her long solitary walks about the
      mountains into her heart. And one fragment of George Herbert especially rings in her ears,
      solemnly, funereally—

'Thy Saviour sentenced joy!'

Ay, sentenced it for ever—the personal craving, the selfish need, that must be filled at any
      cost. In the silence of the descending night Catherine quietly, with tears, carried out that
      sentence, and slew her young new-born joy at the feet of the Master.
She stayed where she was for a while after this crisis in a kind of bewilderment and stupor,
      but maintaining a perfect outward tranquillity. Then there was a curious little epilogue.
'It is all over,' she said to herself tenderly. 'But he has taught me so much—he has been so
      good to me—he is so good! Let me take to my heart some counsel—some word of his, and obey it
      sacredly—silently—for these days' sake.'
Then she fell thinking again, and she remembered their talk about Rose. How often she had
      pondered it since! In this intense trance of feeling it breaks upon her finally that he is
      right. May it not be that he with his clearer thought, his wider knowledge of life, has laid
      his finger on the weak point in her guardianship of her sisters? 'I have tried to stifle her
      passion,' she thought, 'to push it out of the way as a hindrance. Ought I not rather to have
      taught her to make of it a step in
       the ladder—to have moved her to bring her gifts to the altar? Oh, let me take his
      word for it—be ruled by him in this one thing, once!'
She bowed her face on her knees again. It seemed to her that she had thrown herself at
      Elsmere's feet, that her cheek was pressed against that young brown hand of his. How long the
      moment lasted she never knew. When at last she rose stiff and weary, darkness was overtaking
      even the lingering northern twilight. The angry clouds had dropped lower on the moors; a few
      sheep beside the glimmering stone trough showed dimly white; the night wind was sighing
      through the untenanted valley and the scanty branches of the thorn. White mists lay along the
      hollow of the dale; they moved weirdly under the breeze. She could have fancied them a troop
      of wraiths to whom she had flung her warm crushed heart, and who were bearing it away to
      burial.
As she came slowly over the pass and down the Whindale side of the fell a clear purpose was
      in her mind. Agnes had talked to her only that morning of Rose and Rose's desire, and she had
      received the news with her habitual silence.
The house was lit up when she returned. Her mother had gone upstairs. Catherine went to her,
      but even Mrs. Leyburn discovered that she looked worn out, and she was sent off to bed. She
      went along the passage quickly to Rose's room, listening a moment at the door. Yes, Rose was
      inside, crooning some German song, and apparently alone. She knocked and went in.
Rose was sitting on the edge of her bed, a white dressing-gown over her shoulders, her hair
      in a glorious confusion all about her. She was swaying backwards and forwards dreamily
      singing, and she started up when she saw Catherine.
'Röschen,' said the elder sister, going up to her with a tremor of heart, and putting her
      motherly arms round the curly golden hair and the half-covered shoulders, 'you never told me
      of that letter from Manchester, but Agnes did. Did you think, Röschen, I would never let you
      have your way? Oh, I am not so hard! I may have been wrong—I think I have been wrong; you
      shall do what you will, Röschen. If you want to go, I will ask mother.'
Rose, pushing herself away with one hand, stood staring. She was struck dumb by this sudden
      breaking down of Catherine's long resistance. And what a strange white Catherine! What did it
      mean? Catherine withdrew her arms with a little sigh and moved away.
'I just came to tell you that, Röschen,' she said, 'but I am very tired and must not
      stay.'
Catherine 'very tired'! Rose thought the skies must be falling.
'Cathie!' she cried, leaping forward just as her sister gained the door. 'Oh, Cathie, you
      are an angel, and I am a nasty, odious little wretch. But oh, tell me, what is the
      matter?'


And she flung her strong young arms round Catherine with a passionate strength.
The elder sister struggled to release herself.
'Let me go, Rose,' she said in a low voice. 'Oh, you must let me go!'
And wrenching herself free, she drew her hand over her eyes as though trying to drive away
      the mist from them.
'Good-night! Sleep well.'
And she disappeared, shutting the door noiselessly after her. Rose stood staring a moment,
      and then swept off her feet by a flood of many feelings—remorse, love, fear, sympathy—threw
      herself face downwards on her bed and burst into a passion of tears.
