
CHAPTER XI.

'One thing is wanting in the beamy cup
   Of my young life! one thing to be poured in;
'Aye, and one thing is wanting to fill up
   The measure of proud joy, and make it sin.'F. W. F.

Hopes that Dr. May would ever have his mind free, seemed as fallacious as mamma's
      old promise to Margaret, to make doll's clothes for her whenever there should be no live dolls
      to be worked for in the nursery.
Richard and Ethel themselves had their thoughts otherwise engrossed. The last week before
      the holidays was an important one. There was an examination, by which the standing of the boys
      in the school was determined, and this time it was of more than ordinary importance, as the
      Randall scholarship of £100 a year for three years would be open in the summer to the
      competition of the first six boys. Richard had never come within six of the top, but had been
      past at every examination by younger boys, till his father could bear it no longer; and now
      Norman was too young to be likely to have much chance of being of the number. There were eight
      decidedly his seniors, and Harvey Anderson, a small, quick-witted boy, half a year older, who
      had entered school at the same time, and had always been one step below him, had, in the last
      three months, gained fast upon him.
Harry, however, meant Norman to be one of the six, and declared all the fellows thought he
      would be, except Anderson's party. Mr. Wilmot, in a call on Ethel and Flora, told them that he
      thought their brother had a fair chance, but he feared he was over-working himself, and should
      tell the Doctor so, whenever he could catch him; but this was difficult, as there was a great
      deal of illness just then, and he was less at home than usual.

All this excited the home party, but Norman only seemed annoyed by talk about it, and though
      always with a book in his hand, was so dreamy and listless, that Flora declared there was no
      fear of his doing too much—she thought he would fail for want of trying.
'I mean to try,' said Norman; 'say no more about it, pray.'
The great day was the 20th of December, and Ethel ran out, as the boys went to school, to
      judge of Norman's looks, which were not promising. 'No wonder,' said Harry, since he had
      stayed up doing Euripides and Cicero the whole length of a candle that had been new at
      bed-time. 'But never mind, Ethel, if he only beats Anderson, I don't care for anything
      else.'
'O, it will be unbearable if he does not! Do try, Norman, dear.'
'Never you mind.'
'He'll light up at the last moment,' said Ethel, consolingly, to Harry; but she was very
      uneasy herself, for she had set her heart on his surpassing Harvey Anderson. No more was heard
      all day. Tom went at dinner-time to see if he could pick up any news; but he was shy, or was
      too late, and gained no intelligence. Dr. May and Richard talked of going to hear the speeches
      and vivâ voce examination in the afternoon—objects of great interest to all
      Stoneborough men—but just as they came home from a long day's work, Dr. May was summoned to
      the next town, by an electric telegraph, and, as it was to a bad case, he did not expect to be
      at home till the mail-train came in at one o'clock at night. Richard begged to go with him,
      and he consented, unwillingly, to please Margaret, who could not bear to think of his 'fending
      for himself' in the dark on the rail-road.
Very long did the evening seem to the listening sisters. Eight, and no tidings; nine, the
      boys not come; Tom obliged to go to bed by sheer sleepiness, and Ethel unable to sit still,
      and causing Flora demurely to wonder at her fidgetting so much, it would be so much better to
      fix her attention to some employment; while Margaret owned that Flora was right, but watched,
      and started at each sound, almost as anxiously as Ethel.
It was ten, when there was a sharp pull at the bell, and down flew the sisters; but old
      James was beforehand, and Harry was exclaiming, 'Dux! James, he is Dux! Hurrah! Flossy, Ethel,
      Mary! There stands the Dux of Stoneborough! Where's papa?'
'Sent for to Whitford. But oh! Norman, Dux! Is he really?'
'To be sure, but I must tell Margaret;' and up he rushed, shouted the news to her, but could
      not stay for congratulation; broke Tom's slumber by roaring it in his ear, and dashed into the
      nursery, where nurse for once forgave him for waking the baby.
       Norman, meanwhile, followed his eager sister into the drawing-room, putting up
      his hand as if the light dazzled him, and looking, by no means, as if he had just achieved
      triumphant success.
Ethel paused in her exultation: 'But is it, is it true, Norman?'
'Yes,' he said, wearily, making his way to his dark corner.
'But what was it for? How is it?'
'I don't know,' he answered.
'What's the matter?' said Flora. 'Are you tired, Norman, dear; does your head ache?'
'Yes;' and the pain was evidently severe.
'Won't you come to Margaret?' said Ethel, knowing what was the greater suffering; but he did
      not move, and they forbore to torment him with questions. The next moment Harry came down in
      an ecstacy, bringing in, from the hall, Norman's beautiful prize books, and showing off their
      Latin inscription.
'Ah!' said he, looking at his brother, 'he is regularly done for. He ought to turn in at
      once. That Everard is a famous fellow for an examiner. He said he never had seen such a copy
      of verses sent up by a school-boy, and could hardly believe June was barely sixteen. Old
      Hoxton says he is the youngest Dux they have had these fifty years that he has known the
      school, and Mr. Wilmot said 'twas the most creditable examination he had ever known, and that
      I might tell papa so. What did possess that ridiculous old landlubber at Whitford, to go and
      get on the sick-list on this, of all the nights of the year? June, how can you go on sitting
      there, when you know you ought to be in your berth?'
'I wish he was,' said Flora, 'but let him have some tea first.'
'And tell us more, Harry,' said Ethel. 'Oh! it is famous! I knew he would come right at
      last. It is too delightful, if papa was but here!'
'Isn't it? You should have seen how Anderson grinned—he is only fourth—down below Forder,
      and Cheviot, and Ashe.'
'Well, I did not think Norman would have been before Forder and Cheviot. That is grand.'
'It was the verses that did it,' said Harry; they had an hour to do Themistocles on the
      hearth of Admetus, and there he beat them all to shivers. 'Twas all done smack; smooth,
      without a scratch, in Alcaics, and Cheviot heard Wilmot saying, 'twas no mere task, but had
      poetry, and all that sort of thing in it. But I don't know whether that would have done, if he
      had not come out so strong in the recitation; they put him on in Priam's speech to Achilles,
      and he said it—Oh! 'twas too bad papa did not hear him! Everyone held their breath and
      listened.'
'How you do go on!' muttered Norman; but no one heeded,
       and Harry continued: 'He construed a chorus in Sophocles without a blunder; but
      what did the business was this, I believe. They asked all manner of out-of-the-way
      questions—history and geography, what no one expected, and the fellows who read nothing they
      can help, were thoroughly posed. Forder had not a word to say, and the others were worse, for
      Cheviot thought Queen Elizabeth's Earl of Leicester was Simon de Montfort; and didn't know
      when that battle was, beginning with an E.—was it Evesham, or Edgehill?'
'O Harry, you are as bad yourself?'
'But anyone would know Leicester, because of Kenilworth,' said Harry; 'and I'm not sixth
      form. If papa had but been there! Everyone was asking for him, and wishing it. For Dr. Hoxton
      called me—they shook hands with me, and wished me joy of it, and told me to tell my father how
      well Norman had done.'
'I suppose you looked so happy, they could not help it,' said Flora, smiling at that honest
      beaming face of joy.
'Aye,' said Norman, looking up; 'they had something to say to him on his own score, which he
      has forgotten.'
'I should think not,' said Harry. 'Why, what d'ye think they said? That I had gone on as
      well as all the Mays, and they trusted I should still, and be a credit to my profession.'
'Oh! Harry! why didn't you tell us?' Oh! that is grand!' and, as the two elder girls made
      this exclamation, Mary proceeded to a rapturous embrace. 'Get along, Mary, you are throttling
      one. Mr. Everard inquired for my father and Margaret, and said he'd call to-morrow, and Hoxton
      and Wilmot kept on wishing he was there.'
'I wish he had been!' said Ethel; 'he would have taken such delight in it; but, even if he
      could have gone, he doubted whether it would not have made Norman get on worse from
      anxiety.'
'Well, Cheviot wanted me to send up for him at dinner-time,' said Harry; 'for as soon as we
      sat down in the hall, June turned off giddy, and could not stay, and looked so horrid, we
      thought it was all over with him, and he would not be able to go up at all.'
'And Cheviot thought you ought to send for papa!'
'Yes, I knew he would not be in, and so we left him lying down on the bench in the cloister
      till dinner was over.'
'What a place for catching cold!' said Flora.
'So Cheviot said, but I couldn't help it; and when we went to call him afterwards, he was
      all right. Wasn't it fun, when the names were called over, and May senior, at the head! I
      don't think it will be better when I am a post-captain myself! But Margaret has not heard half
      yet.'
After telling it once in her room, once in the nursery, in whispers like gusts of wind, and
      once in the pantry, Harry employed himself
       in writing—'Norman is Dux!' in immense letters, on pieces of paper, which he
      disposed all over the house, to meet the eyes of his father and Richard on their return.
Ethel's joy was sadly damped by Norman's manner. He hardly spoke—only just came in to wish
      Margaret good-night, and shrank from her affectionate sayings, departing abruptly to his own
      room.
'Poor fellow! he is sadly overdone,' said she, as he went.
'Oh!' sighed Ethel, nearly ready to cry, 'tis not like what I used to fancy it would be when
      he came to the head of the school!'
'It will be different to-morrow,' said Margaret, trying to console herself as well as Ethel.
      'Think how he has been on the strain this whole day, and long before, doing so much more than
      older boys. No wonder he is tired and worn out.'
Ethel did not understand what mental fatigue was, for her active, vigorous spirit had never
      been tasked beyond its powers.
'I hope he will be like himself to-morrow!' said she, disconsolately. 'I never saw him rough
      and hasty before. It was even with you, Margaret.'
'No, no, Ethel, you arn't going to blame your own Norman for unkindness on this of all days
      in the year. You know how it was, you love him better; just as I do, for not being able to
      bear to stay in this room, where—'
'Yes,' said Ethel, mournfully; 'it was a great shame of me! How could I? Dear Norman! how he
      does grieve—what love his must have been! But yet, Margaret,' she said, impatiently, and the
      hot tears breaking out, 'I cannot—cannot bear it! To have him not caring one but for all of
      us! I want him to triumph! I can't without him!'
'What, Ethel, you, who said you didn't care for mere distinction and praise? Don't you think
      dear mamma would say it was safer for him not to be delighted and triumphant?'
'It is very tiresome,' said Ethel, nearly convinced, but in a slightly petulant voice.
'And does not one love those two dear boys to-night!' said Margaret. 'Norman, not able to
      rejoice in his victory without her, and Harry in such an ecstacy with Norman's honours. I
      don't think I ever was so fond of my two brothers.'
Ethel smiled, and drew up her head, and said no boys were like them anywhere, and papa would
      be delighted, and so went to bed happier in her exultation, and in hoping that the holidays
      would make Norman himself again.
Nothing could be better news for Dr. May, who had never lost a grain of the ancient
      school-party-loyalty that is part of the nature of the English gentleman. He was a thorough
      Stoneborough
       boy, had followed the politics of the Whichcote foundation year by year all his
      life, and perhaps, in his heart, regarded no honour as more to be prized than that of Dux and
      Randall scholar. Harry was in his room the next morning as soon as ever he was stirring, a
      welcome guest—teased a little at first, by his pretending to take it all as a sailor's prank
      to hoax him and Richard, and then free to pour out to delighted ears the whole history of the
      examination, and of everyone's congratulations.
Norman himself was asleep when Harry went to give this narration. He came down late, and his
      father rose to meet him as he entered. 'My boy,' he said, 'I had not expected this of you.
      Well done, Norman!' and the whole tone and gesture had a heartfelt approval and joy in them,
      that Ethel knew her brother was deeply thrilled by, for his colour deepened, and his lips
      quivered into something like a smile, though he did not lift his eyes.
Then came Richard's warm greeting and congratulation, he, too, showing himself as delighted
      as if the honours were his own; and then Dr. May again, in lively tones, like old times,
      laughing at Norman for sleeping late, and still not looking well awake, asking him if he was
      quite sure it was not all a dream.
'Well, said Norman, 'I should think it was, if it were not that you all believe it.'
'Harry had better go to sleep next,' said Dr. May, 'and see what dreaming will make him. If
      it makes Dux of Norman, who knows but it may make Drakes of him? Ha! Ethel— 'O, give us for
      our Kings such Queens,    And for our Ducks such Drakes.' 
There had not been such a merry breakfast for months. There was the old confusion of voices;
      the boys, Richard, and the Doctor had much to talk over of the school doings of this week, and
      there was nearly as much laughing as in days past. Ethel wondered whether anyone but herself
      observed that the voice most seldom heard was Norman's.
The promised call was made by Dr. Hoxton, and MR. Everard, an old friend, and after their
      departure Dr. May came to margaret's room with fresh accounts, corroborating what Harry had
      said of the clear knowledge and brilliant talent that Norman had displayed, to a degree that
      surprised his masters, almost as much as the examiners. The copy of verses Dr. May brought
      with him, and construed them to Margaret, commenting all the way on their ease, and the
      fulness of thought, certainly remarkable in a boy of sixteen.
They were then resigned to Ethel's keeping, and she could not help imparting her admiration
      to their author, with some apology for vexing him again.

'I don't want to be cross,' said Norman, whom these words roused to a sense that he had been
      churlish last night; 'but I cannot help it. I wish people would not make such a fuss about
      it.'
'I don't think you can be well, Norman.'
'Nonsense. There's nothing the matter with me.'
'But I don't understand your not caring at all, and not being the least pleased.'
'It only makes it worse,' said Norman; 'I only feel as if I wanted to be out of the way. My
      only comfortable time yesterday was on that bench in the cool quiet cloister. I don't think I
      could have got through without that, when they left me in peace, till Cheviot and Harry came
      to rout me up, and I knew it was all coming.'
'Ah! you have overworked yourself, but it was for something. You have given papa such
      pleasure and comfort, as you can't help being glad of. That is very different from us foolish
      young ones and our trumpeting.'
'What comfort can it be? I've not been the smallest use all this time. When he was ill, I
      left him to Ernescliffe, and lay on the floor like an ass; and if he were to ask me to touch
      his arm, I should be as bad again. A fine thing for me to have talked all that arrogant stuff
      about Richard! I hate the thought of it; and, as if to make arrows and barbs of it, here's
      Richard making as much of this as if it was a double first class! He afraid to be compared
      with me, indeed!'
'Norman, indeed, this is going too far. We can't be as useful as the elder ones; and when
      you know how papa was vexed about Richard, you must be glad to have pleased him.'
'If I were he, it would only make me miss her more. I believe he only makes much of me that
      he may not disappoint me.'
'I don't think so. He is really glad, and the more because she would have been so pleased.
      He said it would have been a happy day for her, and there was more of the glad look than the
      sorry one. It was the glistening look that comes when he is watching baby, or hearing Margaret
      say pretty things to her. You see it is the first bright morning we have had.'
'Yes,' said Norman; 'perhaps it was, but I don't know. I thought half of it was din.'
'Oh Norman!'
'And another thing, Ethel, I don't feel as if I had fairly earned it. Forder or Cheviot
      ought to have had it. They are both more really good scholars than I am, and have always been
      above me. There was nothing I really knew better, except those historical questions that no
      one reckoned on; and not living at home with their sisters and books, they had no such chance,
      and it is very hard on them, and I don't like it.'

'Well, but you really and truly beat them in everything.'
'Aye, by chance. There were lots of places in construing, where I should have broken down if
      I had happened to be set on in them; it was only a wonder I did not in that chorus, for I had
      only looked at it twice; but Everard asked me nothing but what I knew; and now and then I get
      into a funny state, when nothing is too hard for me, and that was how it was yesterday
      evening. Generally, I feel as dull as a post,' said Norman, yawning and stretching; 'I could
      not make a nonsense hexameter this minute, if I was to die for it.'
'A sort of Berserkar fury!' said Ethel, 'like that night you did the coral-worm verses. It's
      very odd. Are you sure you are well, dear Norman?'
To which he answered, with displeasure, that he was as well as possible, ordered her not to
      go and make any more fuss, and left her hastily. She was unhappy, and far from satisfied; she
      had never known his temper so much affected, and was much puzzled; but she was too much afraid
      of vexing him, to impart her perplexity even to Margaret. However, the next day, Sunday, as
      she was reading to Margaret after Church, her father came in, and the first thing he said was,
      'I want to know what you think of Norman:'
'How do you mean?' said Margaret; 'in health or spirits?'
'Both,' said Dr. May. 'Poor boy! he has never held up his head since October, and, at his
      age, that is hardly natural. He goes moping about, has lost flesh and appetite, and looks
      altogether out of order, shooting up like a May-pole too.'
'Mind and body,' said Margaret, while Ethel gazed intently at her father, wondering whether
      she ought to speak, for Margaret did not know half what she did; nothing about the bad nights,
      nor what he called the 'funny state.'
'Yes, both. I fancied it was only his rapid growth, and the excitement of this examination,
      and that it would go off, but I think there's more amiss. He was lounging about doing nothing,
      when the girls were gone to school after dinner, and I asked him to walk down with me to the
      Almshouses. He did not seem very willing, but he went, and presently, as I had hold of his
      arm, I felt him shivering, and saw him turn as pale as a sheet. As soon as I noticed it, he
      flushed crimson, and would not hear of turning back, stoutly protesting he was quite well, but
      I saw his hand was quivering even when I got into Church. Why, Ethel, you have turned as red
      as he did.'
'Then he has done it!' exclaimed Ethel, in a smothered voice.
'What do you mean? Speak, Ethel.'
'He has gone past it—the place,' whispered she.

The Doctor made a sound of sorrowful assent, as if much struck; then said, 'you don't mean
      he has never been there since?'
'Yes,' said Ethel, 'he has always gone round Randall's alley or the garden; he has said
      nothing, but has contrived to avoid it.
'Well,' said Dr. May, after a pause, 'I hoped none of us knew the exact spot.'
'We don't; he never told us, but he was there.'
'Was he?' exclaimed her father; 'I had not notion of that. How came he there?'
'He went on with Mr. Ernescliffe, and saw it all,' said Ethel, as her father drew out her
      words, apparently with his eye; 'and then came up to my room so faint that he was obliged to
      lie on the floor ever so long.'
'Faint—how long did it last?' said her father, examining her without apparent emotion, as if
      it had been an indifferent patient.
'I don't know, things seemed so long that evening. Till after dark at least, and it came on
      in the morning—no, the Monday. I believe it was your arm—for talking of going to see you
      always brought it on, till Mr. Ward gave him a dose of brandy-and-water, and that stopped
      it.'
'I wish I had known this before. Derangement of the nervous system, no doubt—a susceptible
      boy like that—I wonder what sort of nights he has been having.'
'Terrible ones,' said Ethel; 'I don't think he ever sleeps quietly till morning; he has
      dreams, and he groans and talks in his sleep: Harry can tell you all that.'
'Bless me!' cried Dr. May, in some anger; 'what have you all been thinking about to keep
      this to yourselves all this time?'
'He could not bear to have it mentioned,' said Ethel, timidly; 'and I didn't know that it
      signified so much; does it?'
'It signifies so much, that I had rather have given a thousand pounds than have let him go
      on all this time, to be overworked at school, and wound up to that examination!'
'Oh dear! I am sorry!' said Ethel, in great dismay. 'If you had but been at home when
      Cheviot wanted Harry to have sent for you—because he did not think him fit for it!' And Ethel
      was much relieved by pouring out all she knew, though her alarm was by no means lessened by
      the effect it produced on her father, especially when he heard of the "funny state."'
'A fine state of things,' he said; 'I wonder it has not brought on a tremendous illness by
      this time. A boy of that sensitive temperament meeting with such a such a shock—never looked
      after—the quietest and most knocked down of all, and therefore the most neglected— his whole
      system disordered—and then driven to school to be
       harassed and overworked; if we had wanted to occasion brain fever we could not
      have gone a better way to set about it.' I should not wonder if health and nerves were damaged
      for life!'
'Oh! papa, papa!' cried Ethel, in extreme distress, 'what shall I do! I wish I had told you,
      but—'
'I'm not blaming you, Ethel, you knew no better, but it has been grievous neglect. It is
      plain enough there is no one to see after you,' said the Doctor, with a low groan.
'We may be taking it in time,' said Margaret's soft voice—'it is very well it has gone on no
      longer.'
'Three months is long enough,' said Dr. May.
'I suppose,' continued Margaret, 'it will be better not to let dear Norman know we are
      uneasy about him.'
'No, no, certainly not. Don't say a word of this to him. I shall find Harry, and ask about
      these disturbed nights, and then watch him, trusting it may not have gone too far; but there
      must be dreadful excitability of brain!'
He went away, leaving Margaret to comfort Ethel as well as she could, by showing her that he
      had not said the mischief was done, putting her in mind that he was wont to speak strongly;
      and trying to make her thankful that her brother would now have such care as might avert all
      evil results.
'But, oh,' said Ethel, 'his success has been dearly purchased!'
