<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Why Paul Ferroll Killed His Wife : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Clive, Caroline Wigley (1801-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1860</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
CHAPTER VII.
ELINOR accepted peace with Leslie gladly and gratefully. Nothing was said between
     them, but they resumed without words their former position. He did not want—from her at
     least—any show of spirit, or assertion of the rights of woman; the meek glad cordiality of the
     young gift was what enchanted him.
“I should have taken Leslie for Elinor’s lover, if you had not told me, Laura,” said her
     brother.
The word went like a dagger through her heart, but she smiled as though the thing were
     beneath notice, and said merely, “Oh! that little girl! he is good natured to
     her.” And Mr. Chanson was willing to
      adopt her view of the subject. Nevertheless he would have
     been glad the expected word should have been said, which plighted his guest and his sister; and
     one morning as they stood together, after breakfast, in front of a great dahlia bed, he broke
     out into words.
“This is all my sister’s doing, the whole of this garden; I know nothing of such matters, and
     it is very lucky for me to have a woman of so much taste and manner at the head of my
     establishment.”
Leslie had been profoundly meditating on Elinor, but roused himself to answer. “Indeed it is;
     we are glad enough of the result, but we don’t like the trouble of providing for it
     beforehand.”
“Laura is uncommonly clever about the management of one’s house,” said her brother, “indeed
     about everything. She looks well, don’t she, at the head of one’s table? I am proud of
     her.”
“With great reasons,” said Leslie.
Mr. Chanson was warmed by this agreement.

“And it is my good luck that a girl who might have her own house in London, and do what she
     likes—for she has all her mother’s property—she is only my half sister, you know, and her
     mother had Kitsal, you know, at her brother’s death.”
“Kitsal,” said Leslie, absently, but with a kind of wise voice, as though that word explained
     the whole matter.
“It was turned into money,” said the Squire. “If Laura should ever marry, I should try to
     keep her interested in the county by giving my influence to bring her husband into Parliament;
     I could do it, sir. They want a Whig, and at the next election, I could, and I would do
     it.”
“That’s an object worth every man’s ambition,” said Leslie. “I wonder you never put yourself
     in, you would surely have liked it.”
“No, no, it’s not the place for me; I was young once, but I never could hear anybody talk
     above ten minutes without falling asleep, and what should I do therefore in the House of
     Commons? I leave all that
      to the clever men and the fine gentlemen. It is not in
      me.”
Mr. Chanson was pleased with himself for this successful exposition of the advantages which
     an alliance with Laura held out, and when he saw Leslie in the course of the day talking with
     his sister, he repeated to himself with inward self applause “it works, it works!”
Sir Peter also tried to put in a good word for her; “Desperately fine shoulders my cousin
     has,” said he, looking at her in a becoming evening dress; “she is a fine creature, don’t you
     think so, yourself?”
“To be sure, everybody must; good colouring too—bright and clear.”
“Yes, very unlike that little pale sparrow,” said Sir Peter, designating Elinor.
“Sparrow! oh yes! she chirps nicely, don’t you think so, yourself?” said Leslie.
“What her singing? I am not very learned about music, but I was much indebted to her for
     obliging me so about that song the other night.”
Nobody ever caught Leslie wincing
      under a sudden attack, he answered readily. “Ay, she was
     conscientious in keeping her first engagement.”
Sir Peter laughed; “I doubt,” said he, “whether that would be uppermost in her thoughts.
     Conventual as she has been, she has no objection to learn the polite art of flirtation; you see
     that yourself?”
“Not I,” said Leslie, “I’ve something else to do; and I apprehend if I had not, that little
     sparrow would only chirp defiance at me.”
“I apprehend no such thing,” said Sir Peter, “I mean to have a walk and a talk
     with her to‐morrow morning; just keep my secret, and don’t spoil sport.”
“It is no matter of mine,” said Leslie.
“You have other views, perhaps,” said Sir Peter.
“What?” said Leslie, in a quite altered tone, which sounded very much like, “Don’t be
     impertinent.”
But Elinor! Leslie felt she did not love him, that her regard was one of respect and liking,
     such as she felt for the old
      Holy Mother in the convent, only tempered by the unholiness
     of his sex and conversation, and he did not know but what the giddy and prattling Sir Peter
     might succeed in inspiring those feelings of which she was hitherto ignorant. But
      he could have no intentions except those of amusing himself for the hour, and
     Leslie felt quite indignant that any man except himself, should entertain views which could
     interfere with her happiness. He resolved to warn her; and at dinner when a large party were
     all talking, he asked her what were her engagements for the next day. Elinor did not know that
     she had any.
“I said I would show Sir Peter where the stones with shells in them are to be found,” she
     added, after a pause.
“Why did you say you had no engagement, then?” said Leslie, abruptly.
His tone made her blush suddenly, for it alarmed her with the feeling of having unconsciously
     said what she ought not; but after two or three seconds she answered, “because I forgot
     it.”

Leslie did not believe her, he saw the rising blood, and interpreted it his own way; but the
     one truth told about her intended walk was enough effort, without requiring a second about her
     motive, and he went on, “Don’t do as you promised.”
“No?” said Elinor, astonished.
“Let older people show him the stones with shells in them,” said he, “you had better
     not.”
“Why?” asked Elinor, “I once showed them to you.”
“Yes—very true—but you know that as soon as you came to this new scene, you thought I could
     be useful in giving you an insight into it, and in advising you. I have done so to the best of
     my power, have I not? so that you can be sure your fast friend.”
“Indeed you are,” said Elinor.
“Now you are not so sure of everybody—and unless you wish it very much ......”
“Oh! no; besides he can easily find the way if I tell him.”

“Yes; and never mind saying much about it to anybody, that’s my advice. It will be better
     just not to do it.”
Elinor instantly agreed; and after this they talked on other subjects, about which, although
     Elinor laughed a great deal less than with Sir Peter, she was far more deeply interested, and
     forgot every one else, while his low voice, and her lower rejoinder was suffered to continue
     uninterrupted.
“Oh! that inveterate flirt!” said Sir Peter to Laura, by whose side he sat; and Laura with
     death in her heart, was cross to her cousin, and conveyed in obscure language, which had a
     clear meaning for him, that he did not help her, and was either clumsy or careless.
The boy was piqued at this, to strain his efforts for better success, and it was therefore
     with eagerness that he watched next morning, lest the promised walk should escape him; but,
     Leslie also had his attention alive, and in order to give Elinor a good excuse for not going
     out, he made
      use of a means, which no object less interesting could have
     induced him to bring into play. This was a literary effort of his own, a poem which he could
     willingly have read to a severe judge, who would have treated it according to its own faults or
     merits; but very unwillingly to an audience whose admiration was determined beforehand, by the
     fact that it was their guest and friend who wrote it.
Laura’s eagerness to accept his offer was based on exactly this reason.
“D’ailleurs tous nos parens sont sages, vertueux.”   BOILEAU.
“Oh! thanks, thanks, what a treat it will be! Peter, here’s such a pleasure for you, Mr.
     Leslie is going to read a poem of his own to us. Oh! I am all impatience—such a treat.”
“Nay,” said Leslie, “how can you know that beforehand. I want your opinion whether the thing
     is good or not.”
“Oh! there can be no doubt of that. Come to my morning room, where we shall not be
     interrupted; I could not endure any
      interruption. You don’t mind Elinor, do you, she is there
     already.”
“Not in the least,” said the candid Leslie. Accordingly, to this select committee, he about
     half an hour after this time unfolded his MS., and told them it was a few verses, which he had
     a mind to send to a magazine then in fashion, to see whether they would be accepted or not.
“Of course they must,” said Laura, “they will be only too happy to print anything
      you may write.”
“If they don’t,” said Leslie, “I shall be mortified that my verses should be worse than those
     which they do print—but a man cannot judge for himself. I like them, but that is
     no test; I shall learn their value from your decision.”
“I know THAT will be favourable,” said Laura.
“And you, Miss Ladylift?” said Leslie, to Elinor.
“I can tell if I like them, or not; but that’s all,” said Elinor.
Leslie smiled, and Laura flattered herself he was comparing the childish simplicity
      of the young girl, with her own confidence in his genius. It
     was a poem of some ten or twelve quatrains, beginning, “I stood within the graves o’ershadow’d
     vault,” verses which were afterwards sealed with public applause, and which delighted Leslie
     himself; but, he had no confidence that they would be approved by others. The approbation on
     this occasion was unbounded on the part of the mistress of the house; but the author was not at
     all touched by it, except so far as he considered it a homage to his own personal merits;
     indeed he thought none of them able to form any useful judgment, but he had a mind to hear what
     Elinor would say.
“It is too long, I think,” said Elinor.
“Good heavens, too long!” cried Laura, “I only wish it were ten times longer.”
Elinor coloured up to her eyes, at being thus convicted of misapprehension; but Leslie smiled
     brightly, and after a few seconds said she was quite right; as he read it, he had himself been
     struck by the necessity of cutting out some of the stanzas.

“It is very useful to read aloud what one has silently written,” said he; “which do you think
     I must take away?”
Elinor answered nothing at all to this, and Leslie had not expected she could.
The morning had worn on meantime, and when the party seemed likely to disperse, Elinor had
     withdrawn to her room, and it was plain to Sir Peter that his chance was over for the present.
     He took Laura into the conservatory just outside, and here their conversation soon began to
     break into gleeful laughter, and exclamations of capital! and then hush! and foolish boy!
     Leslie paid no attention, but went his way, with his verses in his hand, remodelling what he
     thought faulty, and intent on showing the approving answer of the magazine when it should
     arrive, to his late audience.
In no long time after, he was summoned to luncheon, and then to an expedition which had been
     arranged to a neighhouring lion. When the ladies had gone upstairs to get their cloaks and
     bonnets, hats
      and habits, Laura followed Elinor into her room, and in a
     friendly tone asked whether she particularly wished to go to Gilbert’s Glen.
“I should like it very much,” said Elinor, not sure what answer the question meant to
     get.
“Oh! then of course it is settled—it does not signify.”
“What does not? I am quite willing to stay at home.”
“What, really!” said Laura; “are you certain?”
“Quite, if you prefer it.”
“Nay, in that case, you could do me a service. I meant to have gone myself this morning, but
     Mr. Leslie’s interesting poem prevented me. I want some specimens from the Neenshill quarry to
     show Mr. Goell to‐night, and if you don’t mind staying, you could get them while I am
     away.”
“Is Sir Peter going to Neenshill?” said Elinor, speaking suddenly the thought that instantly
     occurred.

“Peter! no—he is to ride with me—what should take him there?”
Elinor coloured again, at her mistake, and willingly undertook Laura’s commission. Pleased at
     her success, Laura descended the staircase, and found the party assembled in the hall, some for
     riding, some for driving.
“Isn’t Miss Ladylift coming?” said Sir Peter.
“Well! do you know, she has changed her mind,” said Laura; “she says she thinks the day too
     hot, though I don’t know that it is hotter than it was. I can’t persuade her, she thinks she
     had better stay quietly in her room—her head aches she says.”
Thus glibly lying, Laura got into the phaeton, and the party set off.
Leslie had been appointed to drive Laura; therefore he saw nothing of the movements of the
     rest, till they arrived at the destined place, and assembled to walk up the glen; then both he
     and his companions missed Sir Peter.
“Oh! such a misfortune!” said one of the
      girls who had come on horseback, “that beautiful horse of
     Mr. Chanson’s, which Sir Peter was riding, fell lame.”
“Really,” cried Laura, “how annoyed my brother will be.”
“And Sir Peter thought best to ride it back gently, when we were about half‐way.”
“The best thing he could do,” said Laura.
Leslie meantime spoke to the groom who had accompanied the riding party. “What’s the matter
     with the horse?” said he, indifferently.
“Don’t think there’s nothing, sir,” said the groom; “but Sir Peter took it quite on
     his‐self.”
Leslie feared Sir Peter had taken more interesting matter on his‐self than conveying home a
     lame horse, and instantly he suspected Elinor of being a party to this pre‐arranged lameness of
     Rampage; and he resolved to know what it all meant.
He followed the party who had walked forward into the glen, and expressing his
      admiration of the scene to Laura, said he should like to
     climb the right side of the valley, where the rocks were steepest, and would join her again at
     the farthest outlet; but, if he should not be arrived by the time they reached it, they were
     not to wait. Laura gave an easy assent, which was more than he expected; but he had been
     prepared to disregard any remonstrance she might make, and therefore at once struck away into
     the wood, and having lost sight of the rest, turned, and came straight to the inn where the
     horses were being put up. The present of a sovereign convinced the groom that it could do the
     horse he had ridden no harm to turn round and carry Mr. Leslie home, and that he, the groom,
     was to return in the vacated seat of the phaeton. Accordingly Leslie mounted and riding gently
     away for the first quarter of a mile gradually increased his horse’s speed, till he was going
     at a good hand‐gallop back on the road to Chanson Wood. Had Sir Peter been cautiously riding a
     lame horse, Leslie must have over‐
      taken him, but he did no such thing, and this convinced him
     more and more that the sudden lameness was a mere fiction, fitting into the sudden headache
     which he believed to be equally fictitious.
When he came to the house, nobody was there—the servants knew nothing—had not seen Miss
     Ladylift go out or come in. Leslie had met with Rampage in the stableyard being led about quite
     cured of his lameness, but not yet of his perspiration; his own horse required similar cares,
     and the head groom uttered anathemas upon young gentlemen’s “hignorance of orses,” such as
     often follow upon young gentlemen’s excited passions which the grooms leave out of the account
     when they attribute all to “hignorance.”
Turning at once to the wood, Leslie strode along the path which led to the quarry, with all
     the feelings of an injured man, and in a very short time had reached the hill, the highest
     point of which contained the quarry. It was dotted with trees in natural clumps, growing from
     rocky ledges
      which broke out over the surface from top to bottom, and
     among these the path wound, appearing and disappearing in its descent to the level ground. He
     stood a moment at the bottom, feeling that his appearance in pursuit of his rival would not
     wear a very dignified aspect, and while this occurred to him, two figures emerged for a moment
     from the wood to an open space and again disappeared among the trees. Leslie’s eyes were fixed
     on the next opening, devouring the space beforehand; again the figures came and vanished, but
     nearer and plainer, and near and plain enough to know they were Elinor and Sir Peter. Leslie
     ground his teeth—to be deceived was one of the bitter feelings‐that a creature so guileless as
     she seemed should have deceived, and been believed by him, was
     another. He thought at first he would meet and confound her by mere silence—then he would have
     given much not to have returned, and not to be found out by her in such interest as to watch
     her.

Under this sudden thought he dashed into the thick of the wood, and there, from safe
     distances, again fixed his eyes on the path along which they must go. They passed very near,
     Sir Peter carrying her basket, and talking with great animation. Elinor’s face was hidden by
     her great hat and veil; she was saying nothing as she passed, but how could she when her
     companion was so loquacious? enough, enough, she was walking with him! They passed on, and
     Leslie strode away, burying himself in the woods till nearly dinner time, and then dressed
     furiously, and came down to the drawing‐room as placidly and calmly as if not one disturbed
     thought raged within.
“What became of you, Mr. Leslie?” said Laura; “did you lose your way in the glen?”
“No,” said Leslie; “but I got so entirely away from the place where we were to have met, that
     I resolved to borrow your groom’s horse, and ride home without waiting for you.”

Laura let the subject drop. “Look here,” she said, turning to the table; “Elinor has been so
     kind as to get me some fossils to show Mr. Goell this evening, and after all that tiresome man
     is not come. They are beautiful, are they not?”
“Very,” said Leslie, and turned to Elinor. “You got as far as the stone quarry then,” said
     he, in the blandest tone, “this hot day?”
Irreproachable as the voice was, it made her colour.
“Yes,” she said, in a low voice; “but ......” the disjunctive conjunction was indicated, not
     spoken through, and Leslie, taking up two or three in his hand, said “You must have had a great
     weight to carry. Your arm must ache, does it not?”
“No,” said Elinor; “for Si ......”
“I had the honour of sparing Miss Ladylift that trouble,” said Sir Peter.
“Oh—yes!” said Leslie, as if the explanation were most satisfactory, and he would not catch
     the eyes of Elinor, which he felt
      sought his, to explain or deprecate, or deceive—he thought
     the latter.
And now for the next few days Leslie behaved like a brute to Elinor; a polished brute,
     bringing her shawl, setting her chair, opening the door with frigid politeness, but never once
     looking her in the face; never coming near for a word of explanation, never entering into what
     she said or did; never including her in any project or employment. All the time he felt he was
     straightening, rather than loosing the bond between them, for he was aware she was intent upon
     explanation, and that at any moment by a return to kindliness he could open all the pent‐up
     feelings of that guileless heart; yes, guileless, for in his most secret thought he was
     convinced there was no guile in Elinor, though he chose to say, even to himself, there was.
Meantime, she was so unhappy that she sometimes rebelled against it; she seriously thought
     she would return to her convent, and hide herself from a world where plainly nobody cared for
     her. When all her efforts
      to speak to Leslie, and to conciliate him, failed—when he
     persevered in mortifying her, and in affecting unconsciousness of her presence, her heart rose
     quite full of tears, and seemed too swollen for her bosom.
“What right has he to make me so unhappy,” she said to herself, but Leslie did not melt,
     though he saw her eyes cloud with what he knew were tears, suppressed though they might be.
Laura saw all this and was delighted; she thought her plans were working their full effect;
     and Leslie’s attention to her, which was mostly aimed at vexing Elinor, she readily deceived
     herself into thinking was wholly to please herself. She was in great spirits; she looked very
     handsome, and did all that she could imagine would best please her favoured guest. His poem she
     continually brought forward till he dreaded the very mention of it. Every post, she remembered
     not to forget her interest about the expected answer, and each time she expressed her
     conviction that the editor would only not know how to give it
      sufficient welcome. Leslie felt confident enough of that
     also, but the pudeur of composition (when the author has
     written what he felt) made him shrink from so much talk about it. It was the fourth morning
     after his estrangement from Elinor that the letters as usual being brought round at breakfast,
     Laura’s inquiry again broke in on Leslie’s glance over those laid beside him. “Is there an
     answer yet?”—and he, breaking open the seal of a business‐like looking one, ran his eye down
     the page, and replied in rather an unnecessarily indifferent tone,
“Yes, they refuse it.” Laura had not much tact; instead of dropping so distasteful a subject,
     she could not let it alone.
“Impossible! how absurd! and the things they do take, yet refuse yours!—for my
     part I thought they would have seized upon it like a gold mine! Well they don’t know their own
     interest.”
“That is just what they do know,” said Leslie; “what is likely to please, they are
      certain to adopt,” and he folded each fold of the paper, and
     put it into his pocket.
“I only wish you would give it me,” said Laura; “I would print it, and show the world what
     poetry is.” So she went on, not conscious how this effort to show the author was not mortified,
     pressed on him the assurance that everybody saw he was.
Leslie, however, turned the matter into laughter, wished his enemy might write a book; and,
     in fact, took the rejection to heart very little after the first moment of making it public.
     But Elinor had seen that he was vexed for some instants, and when the ladies were lingering in
     the morning‐room before separating for their several avocations, she had heard Laura making
     much of it to the circle round her.
“Poor Mr. Leslie,” she said; “I’m sorry for Mr. Leslie, he bore it pretty well.”
In the innocence of her heart, Elinor deduced that he had suffered a great fall, that he was
     humbled, he who had been so proud and lofty in every way. She glided
      away, unnoticed; and with a beating heart reached the door
     of the library, where Leslie was reading, forgetful, probably of the whole matter; or, if he
     thought of it at all, merely resolving to annihilate the editor some day or other, by giving
     all his support to the rival magazine. He did not look up, though he saw in a mirror opposite
     that it was Elinor, and his heart quickened its throb in consequence; but he would not relax
     from his unkindness.
She had laid her little plan for doing him a sort of homage, in what she looked upon to be
     adverse circumstances, and in pursuance of it had already sought for, and found a book, the
     only circumstance about which that interested her, was that the text in one page was mixed with
     a certain number of Latin verses, which verses she meant to be her allies in her harmless
     stratagem. Yet she hesitated for a minute before carrying her plan into execution, and in the
     mirror he contrived to watch her, without attracting her observation. He saw her timid
     approach, he marked the pause she
      made, and how she lightly pressed her small white teeth upon
     her under lip, like one in perplexity about the thing she was going to do. Presently she
     resolved to come forward, and did so hastily; upon which, Leslie rose, and was ceremoniously
     placing a chair for her, when she broke in.
“No, I don’t want to sit down, I want to ask you if you will explain this Latin for me.”
He took the book a little surprised at her request, and read into English four lines
     beginning— 
“Pannonis haud aliter post ictum sævior Ursa.”

“Thank you,” said Elinor, looking him in the face, “you know everything, you can do
     everything. How pleasant to be so clever as you are.”
Leslie returned her look, trying to comprehend what this little scene meant.
“What book is it,” said he, “where you have found this passage?” and he turned to the title
     page of the little volume. Elinor
      did not know; she held out her hand for it.
“It is,” said she, “it is ......” and she tried to catch the title at the top of the page,
     Leslie saw in a moment that she knew nothing about it.
“Have you read it through, as far as this?” said he.
“Not quite,” said Elinor.
“It is a volume of Montaigne’s Essays,” said Leslie. “What would the Reverend
     Mother say, if she knew you had such a book in your hands?”
“Would she be angry?” said Elinor, in sincerest alarm.
“Nay, does not it strike you as you read, especially now this twentieth Essay,” (he knew
     perfectly well she had not read a word of it)—“that she would hardly have thought it a fit
     study for her pupil?”
“Would not she indeed,” said Elinor, “Oh! indeed I did but just look at it a very
     little.”
“If you had looked a very little more,” said Leslie, “I should not have had the pleasure
      of being your interpreter, for here is the Latin done into
     French at the bottom of the page.”
“Is there?” said Elinor, more embarrassed, “I did not think—that is I thought ......”
“You thought,” said Leslie, his whole manner changing to tenderness, “that I was vexed, and
     you came to raise my self‐esteem.”
“No, no, not vexed,” she murmured.
“Yes, indeed; do not deny it. I see it, like a glimpse of Paradise. How gentle, how
     womanly—all I could have aspired to, would have been forgiveness, for I have done very ill, but
     you no sooner fancy me humbled, than your generosity comes to put me higher than I was
     before.”
“Indeed,” said Elinor, “I wanted to know the meaning.”
“Indeed no,” said Leslie; “you had something better in view. You acted from the impulses of
     your noble heart. How inferior I am—despicable. If I might ever
      reach to your height—nay, do hear me, Elinor—I begin to know
     myself.”
“I know you are good and clever,” said Elinor.
“Good? alas! but I may become so. All good is possible in contact with such lovely goodness.
     Elinor! I cannot tell whether there is any feeling in your heart for me, beyond that which you
     would have for your father confessor; but in mine, there is a perfect love for you, which I did
     not know I was capable of. Love me! love me! Oh! Elinor, say you can love me enough to be my
     wife.”
Elinor stood speechless, puzzled by his change of manner, uncertain whether he was displeased
     at first, amazed at his earnest expressions, and perfectly bewildered by the prayer to which it
     all led.
“How can I tell,” she said, at last, and Leslie’s earnestness increased with his
     uncertainty.
“Is there no answer for me but that,” he said; “what does it mean, Elinor, am I such a
     stranger to all your thoughts, am I
      so indifferent to you, that you cannot tell whether you
     think kindly of me?”.
“Oh yes! I can tell that,” said Elinor, “you know you are my only friend.”
“And is not your only friend fit to ask you for his only friend, the nearest,
     dearest friend—his wife?”
“That only Mr. Chanson can tell,” said Elinor.
“Oh! your guardian? yes, I understand you now; but it is your answer, not his, that I want;
     Elinor, I am not asking your guardian to be my wife.”
Elinor smiled, and her bright, shy eyes were kindled almost to laughter, but she answered
     with a grave voice. “It is only he, who can determine for me about such things.”
“So they say in your convent,” said Leslie, “but consider how many things were told you
     there, which differ from what you have learned in the world. Think, most precious Elinor, is it
     he who can tell, or you, whether you would be pleased at dwelling always where I dwell, at being
      as certain that my heart is full of you, as that you say
     your daily prayers, at making my life, (and yours with mine) good and happy; at knowing all I
     know, no secret ever between us, and if we have any trouble, having it together, and knowing
     exactly the measure and weight of each other’s pain as well as pleasure?”
Elinor was silent, but she was listening to every word; her eyes had fallen from his, but her
     hand rested in the grasp of his two hands.
“Can any tell all this, except yourself? Can you not tell it now? answer me, only answer may
     I love you.”
“I thought I had made you angry,” said Elinor.
“Oh! never think that again—be my wife, and such thoughts could never come—there would be but
     one thought between us, neither you could doubt me, nor I you; would not there be a pleasure in
     that?”
“Yes,” said Elinor, thinking, “he will never suspect me again,” while through Leslie’s mind
     it glanced—

“She played me false about that rendezvous with Bicester, but never mind, I won’t tempt her
     to tell me stories.” Aloud he said, “Then tell me your own self you are mine. Say there is so
     much happiness for me in this world, land for you too, happiness—is it not—will it not be?” and
     now his hand unforbidden got round her waist. Elinor began to understand him.
“Yes—it is more happiness than I ever thought of,” she said; “but Mr. Chanson must say if I
     may.”
“No, no; not yet, at least, you have nothing to ask from him; it will be enough that he
     should be told by and by. This is our own concern, that the world’s. Why should they meddle,
     and whisper, and smile; to us it is serious, it is sacred? Why should every fool know our
     precious secret?”
Elinor was glad to be allowed silence, she would have felt it a painful task, to say anything
     so interesting to Mr. Chanson, to whom she never talked; or to Laura, of whom she was afraid;
     and she went out of
      that room full of a consciousness of the great thing that
     had happened, yet apparently as much the same quiet Elinor, as it was possible to be.
Leslie was equally self‐controlled, he wished beyond measure to keep his secret, and
     therefore succeeded; there was no covert thought prompting either of them to let it be
     discovered, and therefore there was a perfect simplicity and good faith in their manner of
     doing it.
The days following were a time of incredible happiness to Leslie. He had been vanquished by
     generous and good feelings suddenly getting the mastery over him, and he was lifted above the
     base purposes which he had entertained towards Elinor. He enjoyed his own better feelings, the
     nobler part of his nature took the place of the baser, and had an artistic attraction for him;
     he felt himself freer for great things than before, he had the pleasure of loving what was not
     himself, yet his own; and although he was unable to conceive the guileless purity of the young
     girl, he was
      more and more captivated by the degree of it, which he could
     not help discerning, as he became more intimate with her thoughts and ways. Elinor was
     awakening to the hopes and happiness of life; the Being under whose influence these prospects
     unfolded themselves, became her one interest, and identified himself with all her feelings. She
     opened her heart to his love, and mused upon his home, his society, their position together as
     dwellers under one roof, mused with the innocence of a child which hears many things, but has
     no interpreter within, by which to understand them. She would have been contented with this
     state of things for an indefinite length of time, but Leslie began to entertain some remorse as
     to the part he was playing by Laura.
“She must be told,” he said to himself. “It is due to her generous behaviour towards me, and
     my position as guest of her house. I will tell her, if nobody else.”
Accordingly, one morning, when he knew her to be alone in her sitting‐room, he bade
      Elinor make some pretence for going to her there, and when
     she had been in the room for a few minutes, he also knocked at the door, and on hearing
     permission, went in. Laura rose hastily, with a look of sudden wonder, and of some other
     emotion which prompted her to get rid of Elinor by all means.
“Have you found what you want, dear child,” she said; “there, yes, that’s it, is not it?
     ......” but Leslie interrupted her.
“Nay,” he said, “it was I who told—begged, that is, her to be here. We want your
     concurrence.” He observed, though without fixing his eyes on Laura’s face that there was a kind
     of horror in it, such as comes when an object of phantom‐like dread rises before one, and the
     mind refuses to believe it. He immediately finished his sentence. “This lady,” Leslie indicated
     Elinor, “consents to be my wife. I owe it to you that you should be the first informed.”
The blood forsook Laura’s lips; her heart it was plain had stopped, so far as a
      heart can stop which is to go again. The nerves relaxed, so
     that the strong will could hardly make instruments of them; but she did force them to act. She
     smiled as some one among us may have seen a dying man attempt to smile when the power over his
     muscles was half departed; she looked on both with eyes where were no tears, the
     conventionalities of society held them back. Leslie went on speaking, without appearing to
     observe her.
“And now we shall look to your kind offices for counsel and assistance in our project, and
     for making known to the world in general what we thought it right to bring first to the best
     friend of both.”
“Not yet,” said Laura, speaking with a steadily, uniform voice; “my brother has so little
     thought of such a thing, that he would, perhaps, throw obstacles in the way.”
“Obstacles!” said Leslie, carelessly.
“No, not that, but he might be angry with her I mean; it would so disturb him.”

“Believe me,” said Leslie; “we are both willing to leave it to you to make the discovery when
     you like. Neither of us shall interfere on that subject, if one way or another seems better to
     you.”
“It is merely your advantage I think of,” said Laura.
“Of that I am QUITE sure,” said Leslie: in order to convey some
     pleasant impression to Laura’s mind.
“And now,” he said, “I’ll leave my little betrothed with you to get some woman’s talk about
     fringe and so on. She wants a friend on all matters as you well know, and I humbly beg for one
     than whom she could not anywhere find a better.” Leslie drew back, courteously applying his
     compliment by a slight indication of his head, and quitted the room, after an encouraging
     glance at Elinor.
When he was gone, the agitation of the scene acted upon Elinor, and she could not restrain
     her tears, while she tried to possess herself of Laura’s hand, but Laura’s efforts were
     exhausted; she drew away her hand
      as if it had come in contact with a fester, or a nest of
     snakes, and forcing open the door to her bed‐room flung it behind her, and fell on the floor by
     her bed, totally giddy and beside herself for a brief time. In some people, their first thought
     under a sudden shock is, that the thing is not; or that it will cease to be. In the worst of
     her anguish this latter idea spread a gloomy light through the thick darkness, otherwise no
     strength of hers could have supported it. It was that which by degrees gave consistency to her
     thoughts, and upon which her mind as tenaciously laid hold, as the falling man, on the bush
     which grows over the edge of the precipice. She collected her senses and forced her mind into
     action, not with any view ever entertained for a moment of making the best for herself and
     others of what had taken place, but with the desperate purpose of destroying it at no matter
     what sacrifice.
The first thing was to gain time, and this her instinct had already prompted her to do, when
     she besought Leslie to keep
      the secret for awhile. What was to follow she ran over in
     her head, and sate in her tranquil room, among all, the pretty luxuries of toilette and
     draperied mirror, of flaçons and flowers, leaning her rounded
     cheek on her hand, while the natural folds of rich silk fell around her figure, and all this
     time was brooding the project which should immolate the innocent girl, and the beloved man to
     the idol enshrined in her own person.
To this end she laid her plan, and with farsighted anticipation she soon after sought her
     brother, and engaged him by gentle degrees in a conversation on his political interest, which
     had always a certain charm for him. There was some property at a little distance lately
     acquired by him, where the votes of the tenants were less their landlord’s than those which had
     longer felt his subject of discourse, and suggested the propriety of “at some future time, any
     leisure day,” cultivating their acquaintance and gaining a hold on their opinions.

Her brother assented, but complained of the tediousness of the operation. Laura hinted that
     he should lighten the disgust by taking a companion; some one, she said, who would do credit to
     the cause, and whom he might recommend to them whenever there was occasion.
“Why not speak out,” said Mr. Chanson; “there is one I should be glad enough to recommend, if
     you can tell me you wish it.”
“Nay, you know all I know about him,” said Laura.
“All?”
“Yes, and far more than any other human being ever can know.”
“Then I wish it were more, for my dear little Laura is not the woman to be trifled with.”
“No, no, don’t say such a word. I understand him, and so he does me. Only be best friends
     with him, and give him an interest among us.”
“I will do anything for you, sister,” said he; “you are as clever as you are hand‐
      some, and deserve the very best man wit and money can gain.
     I shall be sorry to part with you, that is all. But if you gain by it, I won’t think of
     myself.”
“Thank you, Lawrence,” said Miss Chanson, and the kindness breathed over her heart like dew
     upon some burning, arid plain. The tears came to her eyes, and she hid them on his
     shoulder.
“You are happy, Laura?” said he, inquiringly; “you are satisfied?”
“Yes,” said Laura; “oh, yes, I am.” It was very hard to form those words, but she
     succeeded.
She had provided in this manœuvre for securing the absence of Leslie whenever her plans
     should require such a movement to work out the present details. She had only her cousin Peter
     to help her, and in the late circumstances of apparent estrangement between Leslie and Elinor,
     he had been laid aside as not wanted. Now, however, he was her chief hope; and the day of his
     departure drawing very near, what he had to do must be done without delay.

“Peter,” she said, “we are all going to walk after luncheon. Now that little flirt will enjoy
     a tête‐à‐tête with you. I really think she begins to get an
     appetite for it.”
“Do you think so,” said her cousin; “well she shows it in an odd way. How uncommonly silent
     she is, except to Leslie.”
“Oh! she torments him to death,” said Laura, “he was saying to me this morning that he
     wished—wished—that is ......”
“What, Laura?”
“He came, Peter, to my room to speak to me; and she was there, and would not go away.”
“My dear Laura!”
“No, no, nonsense; I don’t know what he had to say, but with her in the room, and so
     determined to stay ......”
“Yes, yes; but during the walk this afternoon there may be a better opportunity. Well, cousin
     Laura, you know it will break my heart, but I devote myself, I cover my head with a white
     mantle, and stretch out my hands to the infernal gods.”

“What nonsense you talk, dear Peter.”
“Shall we take a gentle walk in the woods?” said Laura, to the party after luncheon, “the
     autumn colours are growing beautiful, and the day is neither too hot nor cold.”
Everybody agreed, and they assembled gradually under the portico, as they were ready,
     previous to the start. Leslie had gently driven Laura into a corner, and in the fulness of
     contentment with himself and others, was asking questions sufficiently embarrassing.
“Have you taught her, Miss Chanson, how to cut out cloaks and gowns; and what to do with a
     housekeeper?”
Laura commanded her voice, and made some trifling answer.
“You know it is to you only I can talk on the subject,” Leslie went on; “in the first place,
     I have no mind to let everybody into my affairs, and in the next, you bid me be silent for the
     present.”
“Oh yes! be silent,” said Laura, “I
      have more reasons than one for that request. Pray say
     nothing yet.”
“That you command me is sufficient reason,” said Leslie, who felt that he owed her some
     reparation.
“You yourself, perhaps, may find reason to thank me,” said Laura.
“Nay, I thank you already. The one point being gained, of security in the regard of that
     little lady, I am grateful for every evidence of interest in either her, or me.”
“How happy you are in a confiding, honest nature,” said Laura.
“People always despise those whom they call confiding” said Leslie, “and those despised
     persons always presume on their own particular clear‐sightedness, and say others may be taken
     in, but as for them it is impossible.”
“Heaven forbid, that it should happen to you!” said Laura, then hastily went on. “You talk so
     loftily about despising, and being despised, like one who knows
      there is no such word for him; but come, the party is all
     assembled now I think.”
She moved a step forward, and so did Leslie, and saw that Elinor was standing just within the
     door, and that the officious Sir Peter had offered her his arm for the walk. Laura eagerly
     watching also, perceived that Elinor lifted her eyes to Leslie, and that a slight glance of
     intelligence passed between them, after which Elinor demurely took the offered arm, and
     proceeded with Sir Peter. That look wrenched the dagger round in Laura’s heart; it was the
     thing which her imagination had represented as most intolerable, the familiar token which both
     understood, and from which all others were shut out; her insidious words had fallen useless,
     and now, friendly as Leslie might be, faithfully as he kept by her side, he did but confirm her
     anguish by a behaviour which was so friendly, merely because he had made her the confidant of
     his successful love for another. She could not play out her part to the end to‐day. She was
     obliged to
      complain of a headache before the walk was over, and sank
     into silence, which this excuse justified, and which with her throbbing head and dry lips, it
     was impossible for her to avoid. When they reached home again, she went straight to her room,
     and appeared no more, accepting Elinor’s timid offers of service, in order to keep her away
     from the society of Leslie.
For a time she preserved the impenetrable silence which her feelings dictated and which
     Elinor, frightened at the repulses she met, shrank into herself to observe; but at last, as she
     slowly won self‐command, she resolved to employ the time in preparing the ground for the scheme
     before her, and however odious to herself to enter into conversation with the happy young
     girl.
“How was this all arranged, dear?” she began, in an invalid tone, “tell me about it.”
Elinor was as little inclined as she to pour out confidences, but she hesitated not to
     answer.

“I was afraid he was angry,” she began ......
“Well,” said Laura, impatiently.
“I was afraid he was unhappy,” said Elinor.
“What do you mean?” again said Laura, hastily.
“He seemed angry.”
“Oh! nonsense—what stuff—what made him angry?”
“Your cousin ......” Elinor began, but was glad to be interrupted by her imperious
     sympathizer.
“By the by, I wanted to speak about Peter; he is a very young man, and you must not make
     mischief. You have been talking a great deal with him, you know that surely; and
     flirting, the world would say, and now that another man is going to marry you, that man may
     take fancies against Peter; you must say nothing against Peter, that’s the only reparation you
     can make.”
“I have never ...... ”
“Yes, you have—never mind that. Have
      you talked to Mr. Leslie about that time when you stayed at
     home on account of a bad headache you had, and then walked to the stone quarry?”
“Had I a bad headache?”
“Yes, of course, you can’t forget that.”
“I don’t think ......”
“Yes, very bad, you did not drive with me to the glen on account of it.”
Elinor was silent.
“Have you talked to him about it? I say.”
“No.”
“Oh! that’s very well, then do not. I know that you and Peter went together.”
“No ...... he ......”
“Well, came back together, from the stone quarry, and if you were to make a long story about
     it to Mr. Leslie, there is no knowing what might happen. It was foolish, perhaps thoughtless
     that is, in my dear cousin, but merely that, scarcely that; and Mr. Leslie is so proud, he
     might take the greatest offence, he might shoot him dead, my poor cousin.”

“Might he really?” said Elinor.
“So promise me one thing, never to say one word about that walk—now promise.”
“I never will, if I can help it.”
“Oh! you can help it of course. Promise.”
“I promise, as far as I can,” said Elinor.
“Can! ridiculous! however, that will do, and now pray let me be quiet. I really cannot talk
     any more, my poor head in such a state.”
And now putting her hand to her head, she leaned it down against the back of her easy chair,
     and there in anything but ease, she acted the motionless invalid, in which character she could
     escape further conversation, yet retain the young girl as nurse, and watch in her room. This
     lasted till bed time, and a severe trial it was.
When at last she had dismissed Elinor, with severe directions to go at once to her chamber,
     and had got rid of the importunate services of her maid, she was at liberty to start up, and
     walking through
      her room, to give vent to the bodily expressions of the
     tempest in her mind. The one fixed purpose was that the marriage of Elinor and Leslie should be
     prevented. She had ceased to justify that purpose to herself, and had reached the point when
     the right or wrong was cast aside, and the end only, kept resolutely in view. When all the
     house was quiet, when her brother had come, and tenderly stroked her hair, asking how his
     little Laura did now; when he was gone, carefully closing the door without noise behind him,
     Laura unlocked her desk, pressed the spring of the secret drawer within, and took out a slip of
     written paper, poor Elinor’s note to Leslie, which had fallen on the ground the night of their
     interview in the wood. And there in the early hours, between night and morning, when she ought
     to have been stretched in maiden slumber on her bed, when she ought to have been profiting by
     the safety and the indulgence of her prosperous position, Laura sat cold and weary, yet
     absorbed from such feelings, patiently
      effacing by the smallest advances one letter after another
     from the harmless billet, in order to replace them by others which should carry condemnation to
     the guiltless writer. Her brother’s name was the word she rubbed out; and then with a pen,
     prepared with the most delicate touches of the knife, and tried twenty times before it suited
     her, Leslie’s was the one she put in. Now it stood—
“I cannot come to‐night. Mr. Leslie forbids me to go out.—ELINOR LADYLIFT.”
This note thus altered, she purposed to convey to Sir Peter as coming from Elinor, and from
     him it should pass either by Sir Peter, or by Laura herself to Leslie, whom she trusted it
     would persuade of Elinor’s falsity, and by so doing wrench two hearts asunder. There were
     chances of an explanation between them, and that Laura saw with fearful
     distinctness; should it take place, her plot was ruined, and she herself with it—where should
     she be then?
“Hated, despised!” she cried to herself; “for ever parted from him. But so I am
      now. Can it be worse than to see her in my
     place. Oh! nothing is worse. Death were most dear in comparison ......” and as she said so,
     tears of self‐compassion broke from her eyes, and she laid her head on her arms and wept.
     Presently she rose from this position, and letting her dressing‐gown fall from her shoulders,
     put one knee on her luxurious bed, and laid herself down beneath the fine woollen, fine linen
     of the bed clothes.
“Alas!” she said to herself, “if the felicity which I labour through all obstacles to attain
     were mine by the gracious course of fortune and fate, how good I could be, how kind to others,
     how grateful myself!”
</div></body></text></TEI>