<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Why Paul Ferroll Killed His Wife : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Clive, Caroline Wigley (1801-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1860</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VIII.
THE next morning, after breakfast, Leslie contrived to say to Elinor, that he had
     been unjustly deprived of her society the previous evening, and that she must come out and walk
     with him.
“Miss Chanson can say nothing against it,” he added; “for you need only answer her that you
     are going with your affianced husband, and her brother won’t think of us one way or the
     other.”
“Besides,” said Elinor, “he will be at the stable for the next half hour, and Miss Chanson
     will have the housekeeper almost directly. I can come down the turret stair and out by the
     great Datura.”
“We are doing all we can to spoil the most guileless nature in the world,” said
      Leslie to himself; “when she came here, such a woman’s
     calculation as that was out of the reach of her imagination. Well, well, she is a creature of
     whom I am most unworthy, be she spoiled a little or not.”
In about a quarter of an hour Elinor did as she had proposed and joined him in the garden,
     and then seizing her hand he led her into the park and out thence to the fields, and soon they
     were quite away from all frequented track. It was an autumn day, the heavy mists were golden
     with the sun which was vigorously dispelling them from the valleys and brook courses, and
     lifting them up all gorgeously from the glowing earth. The red berries of the wild convolvulus
     hung in long festoons upon the hedges, and its yellow leaves shone like pale gold in the sun.
     The wild cherry trees were glowing with bright red, the birch all amber; the ferns dressed the
     hill sides with their rich shapes and colours, and the hills drew nearer than usual, with every
     white house and spire distinct on their intense blue. A fragrance of vegetation
      came and went on the breeze; perhaps it was the breath of
     dying Nature, but it pleased the lungs with its exciting draught.
“I feel my heart beating” said Elinor; “at seeing everything so beautiful. Why does it
     beat?”
“Because everything is so beautiful,” said Leslie, smiling.
“And you told me I might enjoy the pleasure,” said Elinor.
“Yes, it is fitted to give enjoyment. It is innocent; you feel no regret afterwards.”
“No, I don’t,” said Elinor; “but I should have done so in my convent, because I was taught to
     fear the things I liked. It was you who taught me differently.”
“Yes; but at all events do whatever you think is right,” said Leslie. “I only meant to say
     that whatever is good and pleasant you may do.”
“I think” said Elinor, “that walking through this autumn country, and my hand held by yours
     is both.”
“Both, both,” said Leslie; “and it will soon be our right for ever. We shall be
      never parted, Elinor; never, not at all, together always,
     and it will be right to be so; do you understand?”
“Yes,” said Elinor, her calm, maidenly face looking straight forward; “there will be no
     stranger to interrupt our talk, no necessity to ask anybody’s leave to walk with you. I may sit
     in the room where you write, and work without talking; when you like, I may sing what you only
     like; if you are tired you can sleep without caring whether I am there or not, and I
      shall be there watching that neither the sun nor the flies disturb you. I have
     been thinking of all those things.”
Leslie was silent. It was a new, strange pleasure to hear the meditations of that innocent
     heart. He believed at that hour what so very few men have the enjoyment of believing, the
     purity and guilelessness there can be, and is, in many young girls. His pleasure was like that
     of a man who gets sight of an unsunned treasure, which the earthly air and light he lets in
     will soon crumble away; but which is there and has

been there in perfection, for all the time before he discovered it. The loveliness
     of the day, the accidents of the scene gave scope to the easy happiness they were enjoying. It
     grew hot, and Elinor untied her bonnet in the shade, and Leslie took it from her to carry,
     maltreating the ribbons as he talked and walked, and then laughing with Elinor at his male
     ignorance of their nature and wants. They came to a steep slope, and beginning to move quicker
     and quicker down it, ended by running at the top of Elinor’s speed, so that laughing, and the
     blood mounting in her cool cheek, she came to the bottom holding tight by Leslie’s arm, while
     he kept her safely on her feet, and laughed with her at nothing but their own spirits, and
     their own active frames.
There, as they coasted along a high bank with an irregular hedge on the crest, Elinor’s eye
     was caught by something hounding about in the fern, and in a moment they saw it was a leveret
     which seemed at play so near them. Elinor paused
      to look, but Leslie saw how it was, and said it was caught
     in a noose, and the string was tightening round its neck.
“Oh! how cruel, how wicked!” said Elinor; “who could! loose it do, pray.” Leslie, to obey
     Elinor, went up the bank and tried to lay hold of the leveret, which, half dead as it was,
     still sprang about to avoid him.
“It will die,” cried Elinor, the tears almost running over; “oh! do catch it,” and she also
     scrambled up, and helped Leslie to try to lay hold of it. At last they succeeded. Then Leslie,
     with one hand upon the suffocated little beast, searched his waistcoat pocket for a knife, and
     gave it to Elinor to open, and to insinuate it between the leveret’s neck and the string in
     order to set it free. He watched her earnest face, all given over to pity and interest; her
     fear to give pain, her resolution to venture it, her disgust at suffering inflicted; and she,
     thinking of nothing but the leveret, most delicately, most skilfully got in the knife, and
     drawing the sharp edge across the string released it. The poor leveret,
      under the sudden revulsion of blood to its natural course,
     lost all active power, and lay motionless.
“Poor brute, it’s all over,” said Leslie, putting it on the grass; but Elinor was not so
     indifferent. She raised its head upon a little tussock, stroked it gently, pitied it, while her
     lover stood by smiling at the pretty picture; and at last the leveret began to move, and Elinor
     was relieved and delighted.
“Oh! I’ll carry it home,” she said, breaking off a great burdock leaf, and placing the little
     body upon it; then carefully set it on her arms, and Leslie held her by the elbow, to get her
     safely down the bank. “I’ll get what they call a whisket for it,” said Elinor, pleased like a
     fresh child with the imaginary details of the leveret’s life; “and keep it in my room, and give
     it leaves. What does it like best?”
“Flowers, I think,” said Leslie; “any fresh, tender annuals out of the garden. It will eat up
     the verbenas with the greatest pleasure.”

“Do you think you can get some?” said Elinor.
“Oh yes, every morning; but I must take care Miss Chanson does not see me.”
“Oh! you must not hurt her garden.”
“Well, well; we will take the hare away with us, when you and I go away ourselves, and it
     shall have all the flowers at the Tower to itself, if you like.”
Elinor looked at Leslie, and smiled. “Yes, thank you; it shall live on the eastern terrace
     you told me of, and have a wooden house of some kind to go into at night.”
“That will be the very place,” said Leslie.
At this moment the leveret, which had recovered its senses, but kept the recovery to itself
     watching its opportunity, made so sudden a spring, that before Elinor could utter the little
     cry its movement provoked, it was out of her arms, and scudding away to the copse.
“Oh dear!” said Elinor, looking at her empty leaf.

Leslie laughed.
“Never mind, I can have your hand again; so all is for the best,” said he.
And thus they walked, by the hedgerow sides of the corn fields, across banky meadows cropped
     by sheep, along woodland paths, which descended to the brook courses; where they were crossed
     by gray large stepping‐stones; within the edges of the wood, where with trees for a natural
     colonnade, they looked out upon the silent, sunny country; hand in hand they walked, healthy,
     beautiful, good. It was Adam and Eve moving through the Garden of Eden.
They had scarcely met a human being, the country was thinly inhabited, and they had
     unconsciously sought the least frequented parts; but some hours after they first began their
     walk, the forest silence was disturbed by a distant voice, uttering a loud “mark!” and then was
     fired a gun as distant, and before long both sounds came nearer; nay, they presently saw a towering
      pheasant hit by the discharge from the loud gun, and
     tumbling over and over in the air, fall with hanging wings, and dropped head, out of sight in
     the underwood.
The next moment, Sir Peter Bicester, and a gamekeeper, and couple of beaters came in view; he
     immediately left off his pursuit, and came up to Elinor, hoping he had not frightened her, and
     so on. Leslie had dropped Elinor’s hand; till she was declared his promised wife, he did not
     wish to claim any intimacy with her; but Elinor was unconscious of such scruples, and replied
     in the simplest way to the young man’s apologies.
“But we are going home now,” she said, “so do not stop your amusement for me. Thank you for
     thinking of it.” And she moved on.
“Shan’t you come out, Leslie?” said Sir Peter.
“No, not I; if there’s anything better to do, I don’t care for a gun.”

“And there is something it seems,” said Sir Peter.
“Well! that is as it may be,” answered Leslie, and followed Elinor, whom he speedily
     overtook.
</div></body></text></TEI>