
CHAPTER FOUR
Lord and Lady Chesterford were expected home on the 6th of December. The marriage took place
      late in August, and they had gone off on the yacht directly afterwards, in order to spend a
      few warm months in the Mediterranean. Dodo had written home occasionally to Mrs. Vane, and now
      and then to Jack. To Jack her letters had never been more than a word or two, simply saying
      that they were enjoying themselves enormously, and that Jack had been hopelessly wrong. Mrs.
      Vane also had much reason to be satisfied. She had spent her autumn in a variety of
      fashionable watering-places, where her dresses had always been the awe and wonder of the town;
      she had met many acquaintances, to whom she had poured out her rapture over Dodo's marriage;
      had declared that Chesterford was most charming, and that he and Dodo were quite another Adam
      and Eve in Paradise, and that she was really quite jealous of Dodo. When they left England,
      they had intended to spend the winter abroad and not come back till February, but early in
      December a telegram had arrived at Winston, Lord Chesterford's country house, saying that they
      would be back in ten days. About the same time Jack received a letter, saying that their
      change of plans was solely owing to the fact that Dodo was rather tired of the sea, and the
      weather was bad, and that she had never been so happy in her life. Dodo's eagerness to assure
      Jack of this struck him as being in rather bad taste. She ought to have entirely ignored his
      warnings. The happiness of a newly-married woman ought to be so absorbing, as to make her be
      unaware of the existence of other people; and this consciousness in Dodo of her triumphant
      superiority of knowledge, led him to suppose he was right rather than wrong. He was
      unfeignedly sorry not to be sure that she had been right. When he told Dodo that he wished to
      be jealous of Chesterford, he was quite sincere. Since he could not have Dodo himself, at any
      rate let her make someone happy. Dodo also informed him that they were going to have a
      house-party that Christmas and that he must come, and she had asked Mrs. Vivian, to show that
      she wasn't afraid of her any longer, and that Maud was coming, and she wished Jack would marry
      her. Then followed a dozen other names belonging to Dodo's private and particular set, who had
      all been rather disgusted at her marrying what they chose to call a Philistine. It had been
      quite hoped that she would marry Jack. Jack was not a Philistine at all, though the fact of
      his having proposed to her remained a secret. Maud, on the other hand, was a Philistine; and
      it was one of Dodo's merits that she did not drop those who originally had claims on her, when
      she became the fashion. She was constantly trying to bring Maud into notice, but Maud resisted
      the most well-meant shoves. She had none of Dodo's vivacity and talents; in fact, her talents
      lay chiefly in the direction of arranging the places at a dinner-party, and in doing a great
      deal of unnecessary worsted work. What happened to her worsted work nobody ever knew. It was
      chiefly remarkable for the predominance of its irregularities, and a suggestion of damaged
      goods about it, in consequence of much handling. To Dodo it seemed an incredible stupidity
      that anyone should do worsted work, or, if they did do it, not do it well. She used to tell
      Maud that it was done much more cheaply in shops, and much better. Then Maud would drop it for
      a time, and take to playing the piano, but that was even more oppressively stupid to Dodo's
      mind than the worsted work. Maud had a perfect genius for not letting her right hand know what
      her left hand was doing, a principle which was abhorrent to Dodo in every application. The
      consequence of all this was, that Dodo was apt to regard her sister as a failure, though she
      still, as in the present instance, liked giving Maud what she considered a helping hand. It
      must be confessed that Dodo's efforts were not altogether unselfish. She liked her environment
      to be as great a success as herself, as it thus added to her own completeness, just as a
      picture looks better in a good frame than in a shabby one. Maud, however, had no desire to be
      a success. She was perfectly happy to sit in the background and do the worsted work. She
      longed to be let alone. At times she would make her escape to the iron works and try to
      cultivate the domestic virtues in attending to her father. She thought with a kind of envy of
      the daughters of country clergymen, whose mediocre piano-playing was invaluable to penny
      readings and village concerts, and for whose worsted work there was a constant demand, in view
      of old women and almshouses. She had hoped that Dodo's slumming experiences would bring her
      into connection with this side of life, and had dispensed tea and buns with a kind of rapture
      on the occasion of Dodo's tea-party, but her sister had dropped her slums, as we have seen, at
      this point, and Maud was too shy and uninitiative to take them up alone. She had an excellent
      heart, but excellent hearts were out of place in Mrs. Vane's establishment. Dodo had confessed
      her inability to deal with them.
Dodo's general invitation to Jack was speedily followed by a special one from Winston,
      naming the first week in January as the time of the party. Jack was met on his arrival by
      Chesterford, and as they drove back the latter gave him particulars about the party in the
      house.
"They are chiefly Dodo's friends," he said. "Do you know, Jack, except for you, I think I am
      rather afraid of Dodo's friends, they are so dreadfully clever, you know. Of course they are
      all very charming, but they talk about character. Now I don't care to talk about character. I
      know a good man when I see him, and that's all that matters as far as I can judge. Dodo was
      saying last night that her potentiality for good was really much stronger than her
      potentiality for evil, and that her potentiality for evil was only skin deep, and they all
      laughed, and said they didn't believe it. And Dodo said, 'Ask Chesterford if it isn't,' and
      God only knows what I said."
Jack laughed.
"Poor old fellow," he said, "you and I will go to the smoking-room, and talk about nothing
      at all subtle. I don't like subtleties either."
"Ah, but they expect great things of you," said Chesterford ruefully. "Dodo was saying you
      were an apostle. Are you an apostle, Jack?"
"Oh, that's only a nickname of Dodo's," he said, smiling. "But who are these dreadfully
      clever people?"
"Oh, there's Ledgers—you know him, I suppose—and a Miss Edith Staines, and a girl whom I
      don't know, called Miss Grantham, whom Ledgers said, when she was out of the room last night,
      that he had 'discovered.' What he meant Heaven knows. Then there's Maud, who is a nice girl.
      She went round to the keeper's with me this afternoon, and played with the baby. Then there's
      Bertie Arbuthnot, and I think that's all."
Jack laughed.
"I don't think we need mind them," he said. "We'll form a square to resist cavalry.".
"Bertie's the best of the lot," said Chesterford, "and they laughed at him rather, I think.
      But he is quite unconscious of it."
They drove on in silence a little way. Then. Chesterford said,—
"Jack, Dodo makes me the happiest of men. I am afraid sometimes that she is too clever, and
      wishes I was more so, but it makes no difference. Last night, as I was in the smoking-room she
      sent to say she wanted to see me, and I went up. She said that she wanted to talk to me, now
      she had got rid of all those tiresome people, and said so many charming things that I got
      quite conceited, and had to stop her. I often wonder, Jack, what I have done to deserve her.
      And she went on talking about our yachting, and those months in London when we were first
      engaged, and she told me to go on smoking, and she would have a cigarette too. And we sat on
      talking, till I saw she was tired, and then I went away, though he would hardly let me."
This communication had only the effect of making Jack rather uncomfortable. Knowing what he
      did, he knew that this was not all genuine on Dodo's part. It was obviously an effort to keep
      it up, to use a vulgar term. And since it was not all genuine, the doubt occurred as to
      whether any of it was. Jack had a profound belief in Dodo's dramatic talents. That the need
      for keeping it up had appeared already was an alarming symptom, but the real tragedy would
      begin on that day when Dodo first failed to do so. And from that moment Jack regarded his
      prophecy as certain to be fulfilled. The overture had begun, and in course of time the curtain
      would rise on a grim performance.
They drove up to the door, and entered the large oak-panelled hall, hung all round with
      portraits of the family. The night was cold, and there was a fire sparkling in the wide, open
      grate. As they entered, an old collie, who was enjoying the fruits of a well-spent life on the
      hearthrug, stretched his great, tawny limbs, and shoved a welcoming nose into Chesterford's
      hand. This produced heartburnings of the keenest order in the mind of a small fox-terrier pup,
      who consisted mainly of head and legs, which latter he evidently considered at present more as
      a preventive towards walking than an aid. Being unable to reach his hand the puppy contented
      himself with sprawling over his boots, and making vague snaps at the collie. It was
      characteristic of Chesterford that all animals liked him. He had a tender regard for the
      feelings of anything that was dependent on him. Dodo thought this almost inexplicable. She
      disliked to see animals in pain, because they usually howled, but the dumb anguish of a dog
      who considers himself neglected conveyed nothing to her. From within a door to the right, came
      sounds of talking and laughter.
There was something pathetic in the sight of this beautiful home, and its owner standing
      with his back to the fire, as Jack divested himself of his coat. Chesterford was so completely
      happy, so terribly unconscious of what Jack felt sure was going on. He looked the model of the
      typical English gentleman, with his tall stature and well-bred face. Jack remembered passing
      on the road a labourer who was turning into his cottage. The firelight had thrown a bright ray
      across the snow-covered road, and inside he had caught a momentary glimpse of the wife with a
      baby in her arms, and a couple of girls laying the table-cloth. He remembered afresh Dodo's
      remark about waiting until the chimney smoked, and devoutly hoped that the chimney of this
      well-appointed house was in good order.
Chesterford led the way to the drawing-room door, and pushed it open for Jack to enter. Dodo
      was sitting at the tea-table, talking to some half-dozen people who were grouped round
      her.
As Jack entered, she rose and came towards him with a smile of welcome.
"Ah, Jack," she said, "this is delightful; I am tremendously glad to see you! Let's see,
      whom do you know? May I introduce you to Miss Grantham? Mr. Broxton. I think you know
      everybody else. Chesterford, come here and sit by me at once. You've been an age away. I
      expect you've been getting into mischief." She wheeled a chair up for him, and planted him
      down in it. He looked radiantly happy.
"Now, Jack," she went on, "tell us what you've been doing all these months. It's years since
      we saw you. I think you look all right. No signs of breaking down yet. I hoped you would have
      gone into a rapid consumption, because I was married, but it doesn't seem to have made any
      difference to anybody except Chesterford and me. Jack, don't you think I shall make an
      excellent matron? I shall get Maud to teach me some of her crochet-stitches. Have you ever
      been here before? Chesterford, you shut it up, didn't you, for several years, until you
      thought of bringing me here? Sugar, Jack? Two lumps? Chesterford, you mustn't eat sugar,
      you're getting quite fat already. You must obey me, you know. You promised to love, honour and
      obey. Oh, no; I did that. However, sugar is bad for you."
"Dodo keeps a tight hand on me, you see," said Chesterford, from the depths of his chair.
      "Dodo, give me the sugar, or we shall quarrel."
Dodo laughed charmingly.
"He would quarrel with his own wife for a lump of sugar," said Dodo dramatically; "but she
      won't quarrel with him. Take it then."
She glanced at Jack for a moment as she said this, but Jack was talking to Miss Grantham,
      and either did not see, or did not seem to. Jack had a pleasant impression of light hair, dark
      grey eyes, and a very fair complexion. But somehow it produced no more effect on him than do
      those classical profiles which are commoner on the lids of chocolate boxes than elsewhere. Her
      "discoverer" was sitting in a chair next her, talking to her with something of the air of a
      showman exhibiting the tricks of his performing bear. His manner seemed to say, "See what an
      intelligent animal." The full sublimity of Lord Ledgers' remark had not struck him till that
      moment.
Miss Grantham was delivering herself of a variety of opinions in a high, penetrating
      voice.
"Oh, did you never hear him sing last year?" she was saying to Lord Ledgers. "Mr. Broxton,
      you must have heard him. He has the most lovely voice. He simply sings into your inside. You
      feel as if someone had got hold of your heart, and was stroking it. Don't you know how some
      sounds produce that effect? I went with Dodo once. She simply wept floods, but I was too far
      gone for that. He had put a little stopper on my tear bottle, and though I was dying to cry, I
      couldn't."
"I always wonder how sorry we are when we cry," said Lord Ledgers in a smooth, low voice.
      "It always strikes me that people who don't cry probably feel most."
"Oh, you are a horrid, unfeeling monster," remarked Miss Grantham; "that's what comes of
      being a man. Just because you are not in the habit of crying yourself, you think that you have
      all the emotions, but stoically repress them. Now I cultivate emotions. I would walk ten miles
      any day in order to have an emotion. Wouldn't you, Mr. Broxton?"
"It obviously depends on what sort of emotion I should find when I walked there," said Jack.
      "There are some emotions that I would walk further to avoid."
"Oh, of course, the common emotions, 'the litany things,' as Dodo calls them," said Miss
      Grantham, dismissing them lightly with a wave of her hand. "But what I like is a nice little
      sad emotion that makes you feel so melancholy you don't know what to do with yourself. I don't
      mean deaths and that sort of thing, but seeing someone you love being dreadfully unhappy and
      extremely prosperous at the same time."
"But it's rather expensive for the people you love," said Jack.
"Oh, we must all make sacrifices," said Miss Grantham. "It's quite worth while if you
      gratify your friends. I would not mind being acutely unhappy, if I could dissect my own
      emotions, and have them photographed and sent round to my friends."
"What a charming album we might all make," said Lord Ledgers. "Page 1. Miss Grantham's heart
      in the acute stage. Page 2. Mortification setting in. Page 3. The lachrymatory gland
      permanently closed by a tenor voice."
"Poor old Chesterford," thought Jack, "this is rather hard on him."
But Chesterford was not to be pitied just now, for Dodo was devoting her exclusive
      conversation to him in defiance of her duties as hostess. She was recounting to him how she
      had spent every moment of his absence at the station. Certainly she was keeping it up
      magnificently at present.
"And Mrs. Vivian comes to-morrow," she was saying. "You like her, don't you, Chesterford?
      You must be awfully good to her, and take her to see all the drunken idlers in the village.
      That will be dear of you. It's just what she likes. She has sort of passion for drunken
      cabmen, who stamp on their wives. If you stamped on me a little every evening, she would
      cultivate you to any extent. Shall I lie down on the floor for you to begin?"
Chesterford leant back in his chair in a kind of ecstasy.
"Ah, Dodo," he said, "you are wonderfully good to me. But I must go and write two notes
      before dinner; and you must amuse your guests. I am very glad Jack has come. He is a very good
      chap. But don't make him an apostle."
Dodo laughed.
"I shall make a little golden hoop for him like the apostles in the Arundels, and another
      for you, and when nobody else is there you can take them off, and play hoops with them. I
      expect the apostles did that when they went for a walk. You couldn't wear it round your hat,
      could you?"
Miss Grantham instantly annexed Dodo.
"Dodo," she said, "come and take my part. These gentlemen say you shouldn't cultivate
      emotions."
"No, not that quite," corrected Jack. "I said it was expensive for your friends if they had
      to make themselves miserable, in order to afford food for your emotions."
"Now, isn't that selfish?" said Miss Grantham, with the air of a martyr at the stake. "Here
      am I ready to be drawn and quartered for anyone's amusement, and you tell me you are sorry for
      your part, but that it costs too much. Maud, come off that sofa, and take up the daggers for a
      too unselfish woman."
"I expect I don't know much about these things," said Maud.
"No; Maud would not go further than wrapping herself in a winding-sheet of blue worsted,"
      remarked Dodo incisively.
Maud flushed a little.
"Oh, Dodo!" she exclaimed deprecatingly.
"It's no use hitting Maud," said Dodo pensively. "You might as well hit a feather bed. Now,
      if you hit Jack, he will hit back."
"Well, I'd prefer you hit me," said Jack, "than that you should hit anyone who can't hit
      back."
"Can't you see that I have determined not to hit feather beds," said Dodo in a low tone.
      "Really, Jack, you do me an injustice."
Jack looked up at her quickly.
"Do you say that already?" he asked.
"Oh, if you are going to whisper, I shall whisper too," remarked Miss Grantham calmly. "Lord
      Ledgers, I want to tell you a secret."
"I was only telling. Jack he was stupid," said Dodo. "I thought I would spare him before you
      all, but I see I have to explain. Have you seen Bertie yet, Jack? He's in the smoking-room, I
      think. Edith Staines is probably there too. She always smokes after tea, and Chesterford
      doesn't like it in the drawing-room. You know her, don't you? She's writing a symphony or
      something, and she's no use except at meal-times. I expect she will play it us afterwards. We
      must make Bertie sing too. There's the dressing-bell. I'm going to be gorgeous to-night in
      honour of you, Jack."
Jack found himself making a quantity of reflections, when he retired to his room that night.
      He became aware that he had enjoyed himself more that evening than he had done for a very long
      time. He questioned himself as to when he had enjoyed himself so much, and he was distinctly
      perturbed to find that the answer was, when he had last spent an evening with Dodo. He had
      formed an excellent habit of being exactly honest with himself, and he concluded that Dodo's
      presence had been the cause of it. It was a very unpleasant blow to him. He had accepted her
      refusal with an honest determination to get over it. He had not moped, nor pined, nor striven,
      nor cried. He had no intentions of dying of a broken heart, but the stubborn fact remained
      that Dodo exercised an unpleasantly strong influence over him. He could have repeated without
      effort all she had said that night. She had not said anything particularly remarkable, but
      somehow he felt that the most striking utterances of other men and women would not have
      produced any such effect on him. It really was very inconvenient. Dodo had married a man who
      adored her, for whom she did not care two pins' heads, and this man was one of his oldest
      friends. Decidedly there was something left-handed about this particular disposition of
      destiny. And the worst of it was that Chesterford was being hopelessly duped. About that he
      felt no doubt. Dodo's acting was so remarkably life-like, that he mistook it at present for
      reality. But the play must end some time, and the sequel was too dark and involved to be
      lightly followed out. He could not conceive why this elaborate drama on Dodo's part did not
      disgust him more. He wished he had been deceived by it himself, but having been behind the
      scenes, he had seen Dodo, as it were, in the green-room, putting on the rouge and powder. But
      failing that, he wished that a wholesome impulse of disgust and contempt had superseded his
      previous feelings with regard to her. But he believed with her that under the circumstances it
      was the best thing to do. The marriage was a grand mistake, true, but given that, was not this
      simply so many weeks of unhappiness saved? Then he had an immense pity for Dodo's original
      mistake. She had told him once that she was no more responsible for her philosophy than for
      the fact that she happened to be five foot eight in height, and had black eyes and black hair.
      "It was Nature's doing," she had said; "go and quarrel with her, but don't blame me. If I had
      made myself, I should have given myself a high ideal; I should have had something to live up
      to. Now, I have no ideal. The whole system of things seems to me such an immense puzzle, that
      I have given up trying to find a solution. I know what I like, and what I dislike. Can you
      blame me for choosing the one, and avoiding the other? I like wealth and success, and society
      and admiration. In a degree I have secured them, and the more I secure them the more reason I
      have to be satisfied. To do otherwise would be like putting on boots that were too large for
      me—they are excellent for other people, but not for me. I cannot accept ideals that I don't
      feel. I can understand them, and I can sympathise with them, and I can and do wish they were
      mine; but, as Nature has denied me them, I must make the best of what I have."
Jack felt hopeless against this kind of reasoning, and angry with himself for letting this
      woman have such dominion over him. In a measure he felt himself capable of views bounded by a
      horizon not so selfishly fatalistic, and the idea of the smoking chimney in the cottage did
      not seem to matter, provided that Dodo was sitting on the other side of the hearthrug. He
      would willingly have sacrificed anything else, to allow himself to give full reins to his
      thought on this point. But the grand barrier which stood between him and Dodo, was not so much
      her refusal of him, but the existence of her husband. At this Jack pulled himself up sharp.
      There are certain feelings of loyalty that still rank above all other emotions. Miss Grantham
      would certainly have classed such among the litany things. There was nothing heroic about it.
      It simply consisted in a sturdy refusal to transgress, even in vaguest thought, a code which
      deals with the most ordinary and commonplace virtues and vices. There is nothing heroic in a
      street boy passing by the baker's cart without a grab at the loaves, and it sounds almost
      puritanical to forbid him to cast a glance at them, or inhale a sniff of their warm fragrance.
      "Certainly this side of morality is remarkably dull," thought Jack; and the worst of it is,
      that it is not only dull but difficult. With practice most of us could become a Simeon
      Stylites, provided we are gifted with a steady head, and a constitution that defies showers.
      It is these commonplace acts of loyalty, the ordinary and rational demands of friendship and
      society, that are so dreadfully taxing to most of us who have the misfortune not to be born
      saints. Then Jack began to feel ill-used. "Why the deuce should Chesterford be born a marquis
      and not I? What has he done to have a title and fortune and Dodo that I have been given the
      chance to do?" It struck him that his reflections were deplorably commonplace, and that his
      position ought to be made much more of. He wondered whether this sort of situation was always
      so flat. In novels there is always a touch of the heroic in the faithful friend who is loyal
      to his cousin, and steadily avoids his cousin's wife; but here he is in identically the same
      situation, feeling not at all heroic, but only discontented and quarrelsome with this
      ill-managed world. Decidedly he would go to bed.
Owing to a certain habit that he had formed early in life he slept soundly, and morning
      found him not only alive, but remarkably well and hearty, and with a certain eagerness to
      follow up what he had thought out on the previous night. He was in an excellently managed
      household, which imposed no rules on its inhabitants except that they should do what they felt
      most inclined to do; he was in congenial company, and his digestion was good. It is
      distressing how important those material matters are to us. The deeper emotions do but form a
      kind of background to our coarser needs. We come down in the morning feeling rather miserable,
      but we eat an excellent breakfast, and, in spite of ourselves, we are obliged to confess that
      we feel distinctly better.
As Jack crossed the hall, he met a footman carrying a breakfast tray into the drawing-room.
      The door was half open, and there came from within the sounds of vigorous piano-playing, and
      now and then a bar or two of music sung in a rich, alto voice. These tokens seemed to indicate
      that Miss Edith Staines was taking her breakfast at the piano. Jack found himself smiling at
      the thought; it was a great treat to find anyone so uniformly in character as Miss Staines
      evidently was. He turned into the dining-room, where he found Miss Grantham sitting at the
      table alone. Dodo was lolling in a great chair by the fire, and there were signs that Lord
      Chesterford had already breakfasted. Dodo was nursing a little Persian kitten with immense
      tenderness. Apparently she had been disagreeing with Miss Grantham on some point, and had made
      the kitten into a sort of arbitrator.
"Oh, you dear kitten," she was saying, "you must agree with me, if you think it over. Now,
      supposing you were very fond of a tom-cat that had only the woodshed to lie in, and another
      very presentable torn belonging to the Queen came—Ah, Jack, here you are. Chesterford's
      breakfasted, and there's going to be a shoot to-day over the home covers. Edith is composing
      and breakfasting. She says she has—an idea. So Grantie and I are going to bring you lunch to
      the keeper's cottage at half-past one."
"And Bertie?" asked Jack.
"Oh, you must get Edith to tell you what Bertie's going to do. Perhaps she'll want him to
      turn over the pages for her, or give her spoonfuls of egg and bacon, while she does her music.
      He's in the drawing-room now. Edith's appropriated him. She usually does appropriate somebody.
      We told Chesterford to get Bertie to come if possible, but Edith's leave is necessary. Maud is
      going to meet Mrs. Vivian, who comes this afternoon, and, as she has some shopping to do, she
      will lunch in Harchester, and drive out afterwards; Ledgers has had a telegram, and has made a
      blasphemous departure for town. He comes back this evening."
"Well, Dodo," remarked Miss Grantham, "now let's go on with what we were discussing. Mr.
      Broxton will make a much better umpire than the kitten."
"Oh, shut up, Grantie," said Dodo, with fine candour, "Jack agrees with neither of us."
"Tell me what it is," said Jack, "and then I'll promise to agree with somebody."
"I don't care about your agreeing with me," said Miss Grantham. "I know I'm right, so it
      doesn't signify what anybody else thinks."
Miss Grantham, it may be noticed, showed some signs of being ruffled:
"Oh, now, Grantie's angry," said Dodo. "Grantie, do be amiable. Call her Grantie, Jack," she
      added with feeling.
"Dodo, darling," said Miss Grantham, "you're really foolish, now and then. I'm perfectly
      amiable. But, you know, if you don't care for a man at all, and he does care for you a great
      deal, it's sure to be a failure. I can't think of any instance just now, but I know I'm
      right."
Dodo looked up and caught Jack's eye for a moment. Then she turned to Miss Grantham.
"Dear Grantie, please shut up. It's no use trying to convince me. I know a case in point
      just the other way, but I am not at liberty to mention it. Am I, Jack?"
"If you mean the same as the case I'm thinking of, certainly not," said Jack.
"Well, I'm sure this is very pleasant for me," said Miss Grantham, in high, cool tones.
At this moment a shrill voice called Dodo from the drawing-room.
"Dodo, Dodo," it cried, "the man brought me two tepid poached eggs! Do send me something
      else. Is there such a thing as a grilled bone?"
These remarks were speedily followed up by the appearance of Miss Staines at the dining-room
      door. In one hand she held the despised eggs, in the other a quire of music paper. Behind her
      followed a footman with her breakfast-tray, in excusable ignorance as to what was required of
      him.
"Dear Dodo," she went on, "you know when I'm composing a symphony I want something more
      exciting than two poached eggs. Mr. Broxton, I know, will take my side. You couldn't eat
      poached eggs at a ball—could you? They might do very well for a funeral march or a nocturne,
      but they won't do for a symphony, especially for the scherzo. A brandy-and-soda and a grilled
      bone is what one really wants for a scherzo, only that would be quite out of the
      question."
Edith Staines talked in a loud, determined voice, and emphasised her points with little
      dashes and nourishes of the dish of poached eggs. At this moment one of them flew on to the
      floor and exploded. But it is an ill wind that blows nobody any good, and at any rate this
      relieved the footman from his state of indecision. His immediate mission was clearly to remove
      it.
Dodo threw herself back in her chair with a peal of laughter.
"Go on, go on," she cried, "you are too splendid. Tell us what you write the presto on."
"I can't waste another moment," said Edith. "I'm in the middle of the most entrancing motif,
      which is working out beautifully. Do you mind my smoking in the drawing-room? I am awfully
      sorry, but it makes all the difference to my work. Burn a little incense there afterwards. Do
      send me a bone, Dodo. Come and hear me play the scherzo later on. It's the best thing I've
      ever done. Oh, by the way, I telegraphed to Herr Truffen to come to-morrow—he's my conductor,
      you know. You can put him up in the village or the coal-hole, if you like. He's quite happy if
      he gets enough beer. He's my German conductor, you know. I made him entirely. I took him to
      the Princess the other day when I was at Aix, and we all had beer together in the verandah of
      the Beau Site. You'll be amused with him."
"Oh, rather," said Dodo; "that will be all right. He can sleep in the house. Will he come
      early to-morrow? Let's see—to-morrow's Sunday. Edith, I've got an idea. We'll have a dear
      little service in the house—we can't go to church if it snows—and you shall play your Mass,
      and Herr What's-his-name shall conduct, and Bertie, and Grantie, and you and I will sing.
      Won't it be lovely? You and I will settle all that this afternoon. Telegraph to Truffler, or
      whatever his name is, to come by the eight-twenty. Then he'll be here by twelve, and we'll
      have the service at a quarter past."
"Dodo, that will be grand," said Edith. "I can't wait now. Good-bye. Hurry up my
      breakfast—I'm awfully sharp-set."
Edith went back to the drawing-room, whistling in a particularly shrill manner.
"Oh, did you ever!" said Dodo, who was laughing feebly in her chair. "Edith really
      is splendid. She is so dreadfully sure of herself, and she tells you so. And she does talk so
      loud—it goes right through your head like a chirping canary. Chesterford can't bear her."
Jack laughed.
"She was giving him advice about the management of his kennels at dinner last night," he
      said. "I heard her say to him impressively, as she left the room, 'Try brimstone.' It took
      Chesterford at least five minutes to recover. He was dreadfully depressed."
"He must take Mrs. Vivian in to-night," said Dodo. "You'll hear them talking about slums,
      and over-crowding, and marriage among minors, and the best cure for dipsomaniacs. The other
      night they were talking about someone called 'Charlie,' affectionately but gravely, and I
      supposed they meant your brother, Jack, but it was the second laundress's young man. Oh, they
      shook their heads over him."
"I don't think common people are at all interesting," said Miss Grantham. "They only think
      about things to eat, and heaven, and three aces, and funerals."
She had by this time finished her breakfast, and stood warming her back in a gentlemanly
      manner by the fire.
The door opened and Lord Chesterford came in.
"Morning, Jack," he said, "what a lazy chap you are. It's half-past ten, and you're still
      breakfasting. Dodo, what a beastly smell of smoke."
"Oh, it's Edith," remarked Dodo. "You mustn't mind her, dear. You know she's doing a
      symphony, and she has to smoke to keep the inspiration going. Dear old boy, you are so sweet
      about these things; you've never made a fuss since I knew you first. You look very nice this
      morning. I wish I could dress in a homespun Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers. Grantie and I
      are going to bring you lunch. What should you like? You'd better have some champagne. Don't
      step in that egg, dear; it will make your nice brown boots all beastly. It's awfully cold.
      You'd better have two bottles. Tell Raikes to send you two. Chesterford, I wish you'd tell
      Raikes to cut off the end of his nose. I'm always afraid he'll hit me with it when he hands
      things. He might have it grafted into his chin, you know; he hasn't got any chin. Jack, have
      you finished? Yes, you'd better start. We'll meet you at the bothy. I'll go and ask Edith if
      she can spare Bertie."
"What does she want Bertie for?" said Chesterford.
"Oh, I expect she'll let him come," remarked Dodo; "she's really busy this morning. She's
      been composing since a quarter past eight."
Dodo went across the hall and opened the drawing-room door. Edith was completely absorbed in
      her work. The grilled bone lay untouched on a small table by the piano. Bertie was sitting
      before the fire.
"Bertie," said Dodo, "are you coming shooting?"
This woke Edith up.
"Oh, it's splendid," she said. "Dodo, listen to this."
She ran her hands over the piano, and then broke out into a quick, rippling scherzo. The
      music flew on, as if all the winds of heaven were blowing it; then it slowed down, halted a
      moment, and repeated itself till Dodo burst out: "Oh, Edith, it's lovely! I want to dance."
      She wheeled a table out of the way, kicked a chair across the room, and began turning and
      twisting with breathless rapidity. Her graceful figure looked admirable in the quick movements
      of her impromptu dance. Bertie thought he had never seen anything so deliciously fresh. Dodo
      danced with peculiar abandon. Every inch of her moved in perfect time and harmony to the
      music.
She had caught up a thin, Indian shawl from one of the sofas, and passed it behind her back,
      round her head, this way and that, bending, till at one moment it swept the ground in front of
      her, at another flew in beautiful curves high above her head, till at last the music stopped,
      and she threw herself down exhausted in an arm-chair.
"Oh, that was glorious," she panted. "Edith, you are a genius. I never felt like that
      before. I didn't dance at all, it was the music that danced, and pulled me along with it."
"That was the best compliment my music has ever received," said Edith. "That scherzo was
      meant to make you want to dance. Now, Dodo, could I have done that after eating two poached
      eggs?"
"You may have grilled bones seven times a day," said Dodo, "if you'll compose another
      scherzo."
"I wanted a name for the symphony," said Edith, "and I shall call it the 'Dodo.' That's a
      great honour, Dodo. Now, if you only feel miserable during the 'Andante,' I shall be
      satisfied. But you came about something else, I forget what."
"Oh, about Bertie. Is he coming shooting?".
"I wish it was right for women to shoot," said Edith. "I do shoot when I'm at home, and
      there's no one there. Anyhow I couldn't to-day. I must finish this. Dodo, if you are going to
      take lunch with them, I'll come with you, if you don't go too early. You know this music makes
      me perfectly wild, but it can't be done on poached eggs. Now set me down at the Handel
      Festival, and I'll be content with high, tea—cold meat and muffins, you know. Handel always
      reminds me of high tea, particularly the muffins. He must have written the 'Messiah' between
      tea and dinner on Sunday evening, after an afternoon service in summer. I've often thought of
      taking the Salvation Army hymn-book and working the tunes up into fugual choruses, and
      publishing them as a lost work of Handel's, Noah, or Zebedee's children, or the Five Foolish
      Virgins. I don't believe anyone would know the difference."
Dodo was turning over the leaves of Edith's score book.
"I give it up," she said at last; "you are such a jumble of opposites. You sit down and
      write a Sanctus, which makes one feel as if one wants to be a Roman Catholic archbishop, and
      all the time you are smoking cigarettes and eating grilled bone."
"Oh, everyone's a jumble of opposites," said Edith, "when you come to look at them. It's
      only because my opposites are superficial, that you notice them. A Sanctus is only a form of
      expression for thoughts which everyone has, even though their tastes appear to lie in the
      music-hall line; and music is an intelligible way of expressing these thoughts. Most people
      are born dumb with regard to their emotions, and you therefore conclude that they haven't got
      any, or that they are expressed by their ordinary actions."
"No, it's not that," said Dodo. "What I mean is that your Sanctus emphasises an emotion I
      should think you felt very little."
"I!" said Edith with surprise. "My dear Dodo, you surely know me better than that. Just
      because I don't believe that grilled bones are necessarily inconsistent with deep religious
      feeling, you assume that I haven't got the feeling."
Dodo laughed.
"I suppose one associates the champions of religion with proselytising," she said. "You
      don't proselytise, you know."
"No artist does," said Edith; "it's their business to produce—to give the world an
      opportunity of forming conclusions, not to preach their own conclusions to the world."
"Yes; but your music is the expression of your conclusions, isn't it?"
"Yes, but I don't argue about it, and try to convert the world to it. If someone says to me,
      'I don't know what you mean! Handel seems to me infinitely more satisfactory, I can understand
      him,' I simply say, 'For Heaven's sake, then, why don't you go to hear Handel? Why leave a
      creed that satisfies you?' Music is a conviction, but Handel's music has nothing to do with my
      convictions, nor mine with Handel's."
Edith sat down sternly, and buried herself in heir convictions.
