
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Picture to yourself, or let me try to picture for you, a long, low, rambling house, covering
      a quite unnecessary area of ground, with many gables, tall, red-brick chimneys, unexpected
      corners, and little bow windows looking out from narrow turrets-a house that looks as if it
      had grown, rather than been designed and built. It began obviously with that little grey stone
      section, which seems to consist of small rooms with mullion windows, over which the ivy has
      asserted so supreme a dominion. The next occupant had been a man who knew how to make himself
      comfortable, but did not care in the least what sort of appearance his additions would wear to
      the world at large; to him we may assign that uncompromising straight wing which projects to
      the right of the little core of grey stone. Then came a series of attempts to screen the
      puritanical ugliness of the offending block. Some one ran up two little turrets at one end,
      and a clock tower in the middle; one side of it was made the main entrance of the house, and
      two red-tiled lines of building were built at right angles to it to form a three-sided
      quadrangle, and the carriage drive was brought up in a wide sweep to the door, and a sun-dial
      was planted down in the grass plot in the middle, in such a way that the sun could only peep
      at it for an hour or two every day, owing to the line of building which sheltered it on every
      side except the north. So the old house went on growing, and got more incongruous and more
      delightful with every addition.
The garden has had to take care of itself under such circumstances, and if the house has
      been pushing it back in one place, it has wormed itself in at another, and queer little lawns
      with flower beds of old-fashioned, sweet-smelling plants have crept in where you least expect
      them. This particular garden has always seemed to me the ideal of what a garden should be. It
      is made to sit in, to smoke in, to think in, to do nothing in. A wavy, irregular lawn forbids
      the possibility of tennis, or any game that implies exertion or skill, and it is the home of
      sweet smells, bright colour, and chuckling birds. There are long borders of mignonette,
      wallflowers and hollyhocks, and many old-fashioned flowers, which are going the way of all old
      fashions. London pride, with its delicate spirals and star-like blossoms, and the red drooping
      velvet of love-lies-a-bleeding. The thump of tennis balls, the flying horrors of ring-goal,
      even the clash of croquet is tabooed in this sacred spot. Down below, indeed, beyond that
      thick privet hedge, you may find, if you wish, a smooth, well-kept piece of grass, where, even
      now—if we may judge from white figures that cross the little square, where a swinging iron
      gate seems to remonstrate hastily and ill-temperedly with those who leave these reflective
      shades for the glare and publicity of tennis—a game seems to be in progress. If you had
      exploring tendencies in your nature, and had happened to find yourself, on the afternoon of
      which I propose to speak, in this delightful garden, you would sooner or later have wandered
      into a low-lying grassy basin, shut in on three sides by banks of bushy rose-trees. The faint,
      delicate smell of their pale fragrance would have led you there, or, perhaps, the light
      trickling of a fountain, now nearly summer dry. Perhaps the exploring tendency would account
      for your discovery. There, lying back in a basket-chair, with a half-read letter in her hand,
      and an accusing tennis racquet by her side, you would have found Edith Staines. She had waited
      after lunch to get her letters, and going out, meaning to join the others, she had found
      something among them that interested her, and she was reading a certain letter through a
      second time when you broke in upon her. After a few minutes she folded it up, put it back in
      the envelope, and sat still, thinking. "So she's going to marry him," she said half aloud, and
      she took up her racquet and went down to the tennis courts.
Ten days ago she had come down to stay with Miss Grantham, at the end of the London season.
      Miss Grantham's father was a somewhat florid baronet of fifty years of age. He had six feet of
      height, a cheerful, high-coloured face, and a moustache, which he was just conscious had
      military suggestions about it—though he had never been in the army—which was beginning to grow
      grey. His wife had been a lovely woman, half Spanish by birth, with that peculiarly crisp
      pronunciation that English people so seldom possess, and which is almost as charming to hear
      as a child's first conscious grasp of new words. She dressed remarkably well; her reading
      chiefly consisted of the Morning Post, French novels, and small books of morbid
      poetry, which seemed to her very chic, and she was worldly to the tips of her
      delicate fingers. She had no accomplishments of any sort, except a great knowledge of foreign
      languages. She argued, with much reason, that you could get other people to do your
      accomplishments for you. "Why should I worry myself with playing scales?" she said. "I can
      hire some poor wretch" (she never could quite manage the English "r") "to play to me by the
      hour. He will play much better than I ever should, and it is a form of charity as well."
Edith had made great friends with her, and disagreed with her on every topic under the sun.
      Lady Grantham admired Edith's vivacity, though her own line was serene elegance, and respected
      her success. Success was the one accomplishment that she really looked up to (partly, perhaps,
      because she felt she had such a large measure of it herself), and no one could deny that Edith
      was successful. She had enough broadness of view to admire success in any line, and would have
      had a vague sense of satisfaction in accepting the arm of; the best crossing-sweeper in London
      to take her in to dinner. She lived in a leonine atmosphere, and if you did not happen to meet
      a particular lion at her house, it was because "he was here on Monday, or is coming on
      Wednesday"; at any rate, not because he had not been asked.
Edith, however, felt thoroughly pleased with her quarters. She had hinted once that she had
      to go the day after to-morrow, but Nora Grantham had declined to argue the question. "You're
      only going home to do your music," she said. "We've got quite as good a piano here as you
      have, and, we leave you entirely to your own devices. Besides, you're mother's lion just
      now—isn't she, mother?—and you're not going to get out of the menagerie just yet. There is
      going to be a big feeding-time next week, and you will have to roar." Edith's remark about the
      necessity of going had been dictated only by a sense of duty, in order to give her hosts an
      opportunity of getting rid of her if they wished, and she was quite content to stop. She
      strolled down across the lawn to the tennis courts in a thoughtful frame of mind, and met Miss
      Grantham, who was coming to look for her.
"Where have you been, Edith?" she said. "They're all clamouring for you. Mother is sitting
      in the summer-house wondering why anybody wants to play tennis. She says none of them will
      ever be as good as Cracklin, and he's a cad."
"Grantie," said Edith, "Dodo's engaged."
"Oh, dear, yes," said Miss Grantham. "I knew she would be. How delightful. Jack's got his
      reward at last. May I tell everyone? How funny that she should marry a Lord Chesterford twice.
      It was so convenient that the first one shouldn't have had any brothers, and Dodo won't have
      to change her visiting cards; or have new handkerchiefs or anything. What a contrast,
      though!"
"No, it's private at present," said Edith. "Dodo has just written to me; she told me I might
      tell you. Do you altogether like it?"
"Of course I do," said Miss Grantham. "Only I should like to marry Jack myself. I wonder if
      he asked Dodo, or if Dodo asked him."
"I suppose it was inevitable," said Edith. "Dodo says that Chesterford's last words to her
      were that she should marry Jack."
"That was so sweet of him," murmured Miss Grantham. "He was very sweet and dear and
      remembering, wasn't he?"
Edith was still grave and doubtful.
"I'm sure there was nearly a crash," she said. "Do you remember the Brettons' ball?
      Chesterford didn't like that, and they quarrelled, I know, next morning."
"Oh, how interesting," said Miss Grantham. "But Dodo was quite right to go, I
      think. She was dreadfully bored, and she will not stand being bored. She might have done
      something much worse."
"It seems to be imperatively necessary for Dodo to do something unexpected," said Edith. "I
      wonder, oh, I wonder—Jack will be very happy for a time," she added inconsequently.
Edith's coming was the signal for serious play to begin. She entirely declined to play
      except with people who considered it, for the time being, the most important thing in the
      world, and naturally she played well.
A young man, of military appearance on a small scale, was sitting by Lady Grantham in the
      tent, and entertaining her with somewhat unfledged remarks.
"Miss Staines does play so arfly well, doesn't she?" he was saying. "Look at that stroke,
      perfectly rippin' you know, what?"
Mr. Featherstone had a habit of finishing all his sentences with "what?" He pronounced it to
      rhyme with heart.
Lady Grantham was reading Loti's book of pity and death. It answered the double purpose of
      being French and morbid.
"What book have you got hold of there?" continued Featherstone. "It's an awful bore reading
      books, dontcherthink, what? I wish one could get a feller to read them for me, and then tell
      one about them."
"I rather enjoy some books," said Lady Grantham. "This, for instance, is a good one," and
      she held the book towards him.
"Oh, that's French, isn't it?" remarked Featherstone. "I did French at school; don't know a
      word now. It's an arful bore having to learn French, isn't it? Couldn't I get a feller to
      learn it for me?"
Lady Grantham reflected.
"I daresay you could," she replied. "You might get your man—tiger—how do you call him?—to
      learn it. It's capable of comprehension to the lowest intellect," she added crisply.
"Oh, come, Lady Grantham," he replied, "you don't think so badly of me as that, do you?"
Lady Grantham was seized with a momentary desire to run her parasol through his body,
      provided it could be done languidly and without effort. Her daughter had come up, and sat down
      in a low chair by her. Featherstone was devoting the whole of his great mind to the end of his
      moustache.
"Nora," she said, quietly, "this little man must be taken away. I can't quite manage him.
      Tell him to go and play about."
"Dear mother," she replied, "bear him a little longer. He can't play about by himself."
Lady Grantham got gently up from her chair, and thrust an exquisite little silver
      paper-knife between the leaves of her book.
"I think I will ask you to take my chair across to that tree opposite," she said to him,
      without looking at him.
He followed her, dragging the chair after him. Halfway across the lawn they met a footman
      bringing tea down into the ground.
"Take the chair," she said. Then she turned to her little man. "Many thanks. I won't detain
      you," she said, with a sweet smile. "So good of you to have come here this afternoon."
Featherstone was impenetrable. He lounged back, if so small a thing can be said to lounge,
      and sat down again by Miss Grantham.
"Fascinatin' woman your mother is," he said. "Arfly clever, isn't she? What? Knows French
      and that sort of thing. I can always get along all right in France. If you only swear at the
      waiters they understand what you want all right, you know."
Two or three other fresh arrivals made it possible for another set to be started, and Mr.
      Featherstone was induced to play, in spite of his protestations that he had quite given up
      tennis for polo. Lady Grantham finished her Loti, and moved back to the tea-table, where Edith
      was sitting, fanning herself with a cabbage leaf, and receiving homage on the score of her
      tennis-playing. Lady Grantham did not offer to give anybody any tea; she supposed they would
      take it when they wanted it, but she wished someone would give her a cup.
"What's the name of the little man and his moustache?" she asked Edith, indicating Mr.
      Featherstone, who was performing wild antics in the next court.
Edith informed her.
"How did he get here?" demanded Lady Grantham.
"Oh, he's a friend of mine. I think he came to see me," replied Edith. "He lives somewhere
      about. I suppose you find him rather trying. It doesn't matter; he's of no consequence."
"My dear Edith, between your sporting curate, and your German conductor, and your Roman
      Catholic cure, and this man, one's life isn't safe."
"You won't see the good side of those sort of people," said Edith. "If they've got rather
      overwhelming manners, and aren't as silent and bored as you think young men ought to be, you
      think they're utter outsiders."
"I only want to know if there are any more of that sort going to turn up. Think of the
      positions you put me in! When I went into the drawing-room yesterday, for instance, before
      lunch, I find a Roman Catholic priest there, who puts up two fingers at me, and says
      'Benedicite.'"
Edith lay back in her chair and laughed.
"How I should like to have seen you! Did you think he was saying grace, or did you tell him
      not to be insolent?"
"I behaved with admirable moderation," said Lady Grantham. "I even prepared to be nice to
      him. But he had sudden misgivings, and said, 'I beg your pardon, I thought you were Miss
      Staines.' I saw I was not wanted, and retreated. That is not all. Bob told me that I had to
      take a curate in to dinner last night, and asked me not to frighten him. I suppose he thought
      I wanted to say 'Bo,' or howl at him. The curate tried me. I sat down when we got to the
      table, and he turned to me and said, 'I beg your pardon'—they all beg my pardon—'but I'm going
      to say grace.' Then I prepared myself to talk night schools and district visiting; but he
      turned on me, and asked what I thought of Orme's chances for the St. Leger."
"Oh, dear! oh, dear!" cried Edith; "he told me afterwards that you seemed a very serious
      lady."
"I didn't intend to encourage that," continued Lady Grantham; "so I held on to district
      visiting. We shook our heads together over dissent in Wales. We split over Calvinism—who was
      Calvin? We renounced society; and I was going to work him a pair of slippers. We were very
      edifying. Then he sang comic songs in the drawing-room, and discussed the methods of cheating
      at baccarat. I was a dead failure."
"Anyhow, you're a serious lady," said Edith.
"That young man will come to a bad end," said Lady Grantham; "so will your German conductor.
      He ordered beer in the middle of the morning, to-day—the second footman will certainly give
      notice—and he smoked a little clay pipe after dinner in the dining-room. Then this afternoon
      comes this other friend of yours. He says, 'Arfly rippin' what.'"
"He said you were arfly fascinatin' what," interpolated Miss Grantham, "when you went away
      to read your book. You were very rude to him."
Sir Robert Grantham had joined the party. He was a great hand at adapting his conversation
      to his audience, and making everyone conscious that they ought to feel quite at home. He
      recounted at some length a series of tennis matches which he had taken part in a few years
      ago. A strained elbow had spoiled his chances of winning, but the games were most exciting,
      and it was generally agreed at the time that the form of the players was quite first-class. He
      talked about Wagner and counterpoint to Edith. He asked his vicar abstruse questions on the
      evidence of the immortality of the soul after death; he discussed agriculture and farming with
      tenants, to whom he always said "thank ye," instead of "thank you," in order that they might
      feel quite at their ease; he lamented the want of physique in the English army to Mr.
      Featherstone, who was very short, and declared that the average height of Englishmen was only
      five feet four. As he said this he drew himself up, and made it quite obvious that he himself
      was six feet high, and broad in proportion.
A few more cups of tea were drunk, and a few more sets played, and the party dispersed.
      Edith was the only guest in the house, and she and Frank, the Oxford son, stopped behind to
      play a game or two more before dinner. Lady Grantham and Nora strolled up through the garden
      towards the house, while Sir Robert remained on the ground, and mingled advice, criticism, and
      approbation to the tennis players; Frank's back-handed stroke, he thought, was not as good as
      it might be, and Edith could, certainly put half fifteen on to her game if judiciously
      coached. Neither of the players volleyed as well as himself, but volleying was his strong
      point, and they must not be discouraged. Frank's attitude to his father was that of
      undisguised amusement; but he found him very entertaining.
They were all rather late for dinner, and Lady Grantham was waiting for them in the
      drawing-room. Frank and his father were down before Edith, and Lady Grantham was making
      remarks on their personal appearance.
"You look very, hot and red," she was saying to her son, "and I really wish you would brush
      your hair better. I don't know what young men are coming to, they seem to think that
      everything is to be kept waiting for them."
Frank's attitude was one of serene indifference.
"Go on, go on," he said; "I don't mind."
Edith was five minutes later. Lady Grantham remarked on the importance of being in time for
      dinner, and hoped they wouldn't all die from going to bed too soon afterwards. Frank
      apologised for his mother.
"Don't mind her, Miss Staines," he said, "they're only her foreign manners. She doesn't know
      how to behave. It's all right. I'm going to take you in, mother. Are we going to have
      grouse?"
That evening Miss Grantham and Edith "talked Dodo," as the latter called it, till the small
      hours.
She produced Dodo's letter, and read extracts.
"Of course, we sha'n't be married till after next November," wrote Dodo. "Jack wouldn't hear
      of it, and it would seem very unfeeling. Don't you think so? It will be odd going back to
      Winston again. Mind you come and stay with us at Easter."
"I wonder if Dodo ever thinks with regret of anything or anybody," said Edith. "Imagine
      writing like that—asking me if I shouldn't think it unfeeling."
"Oh, but she says she would think it unfeeling," said Miss Grantham. "That's so sweet and
      remembering of her."
"But don't you see," said Edith, "she evidently thinks it is so good of her to have feelings
      about it at all. She might as well call attention to the fact that she always puts her shoes
      and stockings on to go to church."
"There's a lot of women who would marry again before a year was out if it wasn't for
      convention," said Miss Grantham.
"That's probably the case with Dodo," remarked Edith. "Dodo doesn't care one pin for the
      memory of that man. She knows it, and she knows I know it. Why does she say that sort of thing
      to me? He was a good man, too, and I'm not sure that he wasn't great. Chesterford detested me,
      but I recognised him."
"Oh, I don't think he was great," said Miss Grantham. "Didn't he always strike you as a
      little stupid?"
"I prefer stupid people," declared Edith roundly. "They are so restful. They're like nice;
      sweet, white bread; they quench your hunger as well as pâté de foie gras, and they
      are much better for you."
"I think they make you just a little thirsty," remarked Miss Grantham. "I should have said
      they were more like cracknels. Besides, do you think that it's an advantage to associate with
      people who are good for you? It produces a sort of rabies in me. I want to bite them."
"You like making yourself out worse than you are, Grantie," said Edith.
"I think you like making Dodo out worse than she is," returned Nora. "I always used to think
      you were very fond of her."
"I am fond of her," said Edith; "that's why I'm dissatisfied with her."
"What a curious way of showing your affection," said Miss Grantham. "I love Dodo, and if I
      was a man I should like to many her."
"Dodo is too dramatic," said Edith. "She never gets off the stage; and sometimes she plays
      to the gallery, and then the stalls say, 'How cheap she's making herself.' She has the
      elements of a low comedian about her."
"And the airs of a tragedy queen, I suppose," added Miss Grantham.
"Exactly," said Edith; "and the consequence is that she as a burlesque sometimes: She is her
      own parody."
"Darling Dodo," said Grantie with feeling. "I do want to see her again."
"All her conduct after his death," continued Edith, "that was the tragedy queen; she shut
      herself up in that great house, quite alone, for two months, and went to church with a large
      prayer-book every morning, at eight. But it was burlesque all the same. Dodo isn't sorry like
      that. The gallery yelled with applause."
"I thought it was so sweet of her," murmured Grantie. "I suppose I'm gallery too."
"Then she went abroad," continued Edith, "and sat down and wept by the waters of Aix. But
      she soon took down her harp. She gave banjo parties on the lake, and sang coster songs."
"Mrs. Vane told me she recovered her spirits wonderfully at Aix," remarked Miss
      Grantham.
"And played baccarat, and recovered other people's money," pursued Edith. "If she'd taken
      the first train for Aix after the funeral, I should have respected her."
"Oh, that would have been horrid," said Miss Grantham; "besides, it wouldn't have been the
      season."
"That's true," said Edith. "Dodo probably remembered that."
"Oh, you sha'n't abuse Dodo any more," said Miss Grantham. "I think it's perfectly horrid of
      you. Go and play me something."
Perhaps the thought of Chesterford was in Edith's mind as she sat down to the piano, for she
      played a piece of Mozart's "Requiem," which is the saddest music in the world.
Miss Grantham shivered a little. The long wailing notes, struck some chord, within her,
      which disturbed her peace of mind.
"What a dismal thing," she said, when Edith had finished. "You make me feel like Sunday
      evening after a country church."
Edith stood looking out of the window. The moon was up, and the great stars were wheeling in
      their courses through the infinite vault. A nightingale was singing loud in the trees, and the
      little mysterious noises of night stole about among the bushes. As Edith thought of
      Chesterford she remembered how the Greeks mistook the passionate song of the bird for the
      lament of the dead, and it did not seem strange to her. For love, sometimes goes hand-in-hand
      with death.
She turned back into the room again.
"God forgive her," she said, "if we cannot."
"I'm not going to bed with that requiem in my ears," said Miss Grantham. "I should dream of
      hearses."
Edith went to the piano, and broke into a quick, rippling movement.
Miss Grantham listened, and felt she ought to know what it was.
"What is it?" she said, when Edith had finished.
"It is the scherzo from the 'Dodo Symphony,'" she said. "I composed it two years ago at
      Winston."
