
CHAPTER VIII.
STEPHEN AND THE GAMEKEEPER.
Martha's exclamation of surprise and delight at seeing the leveret was the
                         first sound that Stephen heard in the morning; but he preserved a sullen
                         silence as to his absence the previous night, and Martha was too shrewd to
                         press him with questions. They had not been unused to such fare during
                         their father's lifetime; and it was settled between them that she should
                         come down from the bilberry-plain early in the afternoon to make a feast of
                         the leveret by the time of Stephen's return from the pit.
All day long Stephen found himself treated with marked distinction and favour
                         by Black Thompson and his comrades, to some of whom he heard him say, in a
                         loud whisper, that 'Stephen 'ud show himself a chip of the old block yet.'
                         At dinner they invited him to sit within their circle, where he laughed and
                         talked with the best of them, and was listened to as if he were already a
                         man. How different to his usually hurried meal beside the horses, that
                         worked like himself in the dark, close passages, but did not, like him,
                         ascend each evening to the grassy fields and the pure air of the upper
                         earth! Stephen had a true tenderness in his nature towards these dumb
                         fellow-labourers, and they loved the sound of his voice, and the kindly
                         patting of his hand; but somehow he felt as if they knew how he had left
                         his faithful old Snip unburied on the open hillside, where Black Thompson
                         had found him in his passion the evening before. He was not sorry for what
                         he had done; he would avenge himself on the gamekeeper again whenever there
                         was an opportunity. Even now, he promised Black Thompson, when they were
                         away from the other colliers, to show him the haunts of the scarce black
                         grouse, which would be so valuable to the gamekeeper; and he enjoyed Black
                         Thompson's applause. But there was a sore pang in his heart, as he
                         remembered dead Snip, unburied on the hillside.
Supper was ready when he reached home; and what a savoury smell came through
                         the open door, quite down to the wicket! Of course Snip was not watching
                         for him; and little Nan also, instead of looking out for him as usual, was
                         waiting eagerly to be helped; for, as soon as Stephen was seen over the
                         brow of the hill, Martha poured her dainty stew into a large brown dish,
                         and she had already portioned out a plateful for the grandfather. Few words
                         were uttered, for Martha was hot, and rather testy; and Stephen felt a
                         sullen weight hanging upon his spirits. Only every now and then the old
                         grandfather, chuckling and mumbling over the uncommon delicacy, would call
                         Stephen by his father's name of James, and thank him for his rare
                         supper.
'Good evening,' said Miss Anne's voice, and as the light from the doorway was
                         darkened, all the party looked up quickly, and Stephen felt himself growing
                         hot and cold by turns. 'Your supper smells very nice, Martha; there has
                         been some good cooking done to-day.'
'Oh, Miss Anne,' cried Martha, colouring up with excitement and fear, 'it is
                         a young leveret Mrs. Jones, the gamekeeper's wife, gave me for some
                         knitting I'd done for her; she said it 'ud be a treat for grandfather. I've
                         been cooking it all evening, ma'am, and it's very toothsome. If you'd only
                         just taste a mouthful, it 'ud make me ever so proud.'
'Thank you, Martha,' said Miss Anne, smiling; 'I am quite hungry with
                         climbing the hill, and if it is as good as the bread you gave me the other
                         day, I shall enjoy having my supper with you.'
Stephen scarcely heard what Miss Anne said to him, while he watched Martha
                         bustling about to reach out a grand china plate, which was one of the great
                         treasures of their possessions; and he looked on silently as she chose the
                         daintiest morsels of the stew; but when she moved the little table nearer
                         to the door, and laid the plate and knife and fork upon it, before Miss
                         Anne, he started to his feet, unable to sit still and see her partake of
                         the food which he had procured in such a manner.
'Don't touch it! don't taste it, Miss Anne!' he cried excitedly. 'Oh, please
                         to come out with me to the bent of the hill, and I'll tell you why. But
                         don't eat any of it!'
He darted out at the door before Martha could stop him, and ran down the
                         green path to a place where he was out of sight and hearing of his home,
                         waiting breathlessly for Miss Anne to overtake him. It was some minutes
                         before she came, and her face was overcast and troubled; but she listened
                         in silence, while, without concealment, but with many bitter and passionate
                         words against the gamekeeper, and excuses for his own conduct, he confessed
                         to her all the occurrences of the night before. Every moment his agitation
                         increased under her quiet, mournful look of reproach, until, as he came to
                         the close, he cried out in a sorrowful but defiant tone, 'Oh, Miss Anne, I
                         could not bear it!'
'Do you remember,' she asked, in a low and tender voice, 'how poor Snip used
                         to follow me down to this very spot, and sit here till I was out of sight?
                         I was very fond of poor old Snip, Stephen!' Yes, her voice trembled, and
                         tears were in her eyes. The proud bulwark which Stephen had been raising
                         against his grief was broken down in a moment. He sank down on the turf at
                         Miss Anne's feet; and, no longer checking the tears which had been burning
                         in his eyes all day, he wept and sobbed vehemently, until his passion had
                         worn away.
'And now,' said Miss Anne, sitting down beside him, 'I must tell you that,
                         though I am not surprised, I am very, very grieved, Stephen. If you knew
                         your Bible more, you would have read this verse in it, "God is faithful,
                         who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with
                         the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it."
                         Did no way of escape open to you, Stephen?'
Then Stephen remembered how he had heard dear little Nan calling piteously to
                         him as he passed Fern's Hollow with Black Thompson; and how his heart
                         yearned to go to her, though he had resisted and conquered this saving
                         impulse.
'You do not know much,' continued Miss Anne, 'but if you had followed out all
                         you do know, instead of poaching with Black Thompson that you might revenge
                         yourself for Snip being killed, you would have been praying for them that
                         persecute you. The Bible says that not a sparrow falls to the ground
                         without our Father. So God knew that poor Snip was shot.'
'But why did He not hinder it?' asked Stephen, speaking low and
                         indistinctly.
'Stephen,' said Miss Anne earnestly, 'suppose that I lived in a very grand
                         palace, where there were many things that you had never seen, and I wanted
                         little Nan to come and live with me, not as a servant, but as my dear
                         child; would it be unkind of me to send her first to a school, where she
                         could learn how to read the books, and understand the pictures, and play
                         the music she would find in my palace? Even if the lessons were often hard,
                         and some of her schoolfellows were cruel and unkind to her, would it not be
                         better for her to bear it for a little while, until she was made ready to
                         live with me as my own child?'
The young lady paused for a few minutes, while Stephen pictured to himself
                         the grand palace, and little Nan being made fit to live in it; and when at
                         last he raised his brown eyes to hers, bright with the pleasant thought,
                         she went on in a quiet, reverential tone:
'Perhaps we could not understand any of the things of heaven, so our Father
                         which is in heaven sends us to school here; we are learning lessons all our
                         life long. There is not a single trouble that comes to us but it is to
                         teach us the meaning of something we shall meet with there. We should not
                         be happy to hear the angels singing a song which we could not understand,
                         because we had missed our lessons down here.'
'Oh, Miss Anne,' cried Stephen, 'I feel as if I could bear anything when I
                         think of that! Only I wish I was as strong as an angel.'
'Patience is better than strength,' said Miss Anne, in a tone as if she were
                         speaking to herself: 'patiently to bear the will of God, and patiently to
                         keep His commandments, is greater and more glorious than the strength of an
                         angel.'
'Black Thompson was so kind to me all to-day,' said Stephen, sighing; 'and
                         now he'll be ten times worse if I go back from telling him where the black
                         game is.'
'You must do right,' replied Miss Anne, with a glance that brought back true
                         courage to the boy's heart; 'and remember that "blessed are they which are
                         persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."
                         Now, good-night, Stephen. Go and bury poor Snip while there is daylight, in
                         some quiet place where you can go and think and read and play
                         sometimes.'
Stephen returned to the hut for a spade, and then went, with a strange
                         blending of grief and gladness, to the place where he had left his poor
                         dog. He chose a solitary yew tree on the hill for the burial ground, and
                         dug as deep a grave as he could among the far-spreading roots. It was
                         strange, only such things do happen now and then, that while he was working
                         away hard and fast, with the dead dog lying by under the trunk of the yew
                         tree, the gamekeeper himself passed that way. He had been in a terrible
                         temper all day, for he had discovered the mischief done down in the
                         fir-coppice, and the loss of his carefully-preserved covey. The sight of
                         Stephen and dead Snip irritated him; though a feeling of shame crept over
                         him as he saw how tear-stained the boy's face was.
'Mr. Jones,' said Stephen, 'I've something to say to you.'
'Be sharp, then,' replied the gamekeeper, 'and mind what you're about. I'll
                         not take any impudence from a young rascal like you.'
'It's no impudence,' answered Stephen; 'only I know to some black game, and I
                         wanted to tell you about them.'
'Black game!' he said contemptuously. 'A likely story. There's been none
                         these half-dozen years.'
'It's four years since,' answered Stephen; 'I remember, because grandfather
                         and I saw them the day mother died, when little Nan was born. I couldn't
                         forget them or mistake them after that. They are at the head of the Black
                         Valley, where the quaking noise begins. I'm sure I'm right, sir.'
'You are not making game of me?' asked Jones, laughing heartily at his own
                         wit. 'Well, my lad, if this is true, it will be worth something to me. Hark
                         ye, I'm sorry about your dog, and you shall choose any one of mine you
                         like, if you'll promise to keep him out of mischief.'
'I couldn't have another dog in Snip's place,' replied Stephen in a choked
                         voice; 'at any rate not yet, thank you, sir.'
'Well,' said the gamekeeper, shouldering his gun, and walking off, 'I'll be
                         your friend, young Fern, when it does not hurt myself.'
