<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER VI.</t:head>
<t:head>THE RED GRAVEL PIT.</t:head>
<t:p>At the entrance of the lane leading down to the works at Botfield there stood
                         a small square building, which was used as the weighing-house for the coal
                         and lime fetched from the pits, and as the pay-office on the reckoning
                         Saturday, which came once a fortnight. Upon the Saturday evening after his
                         interview with the master, Stephen loitered in the lane with a very heavy
                         heart, afraid of facing Mr. Wyley, lest he should receive the sentence of
                         dismission from the pit. He did not know what he could turn his hand to if
                         he should be discharged from what had been his work since he was eight
                         years old; for even if he could get a place in one of the farmhouses about
                         as waggoner's boy, he would not earn more than three shillings a week; and
                         how very little that would do towards providing food for the three mouths
                         at home! Fearful of knowing the worst, he lingered about the office until
                         all the other workmen had been in and come out again jingling their
                         wages.</t:p>
<t:p>But the master and his brother Thomas had been taking counsel together about
                         the matter. Mr. Wyley was for turning the boy off at once, and reducing him
                         to the utmost straits of poverty; but his more prudent brother was opposed
                         to this plan.</t:p>
<t:p>'Look here, brother James,' he said; 'if we drive the young scamp to
                         desperation, there's no telling what he will do. Ten to one if he does not
                         go and tell a string of lies to some of the farmers about here, or perhaps
                         to the parson at Longville, and they may make an unpleasant disturbance.
                         Nobody knows and nobody cares about him as it is; but he is a determined
                         young fellow, or I'm mistaken. Better keep him at work under your own eye,
                         and make the place too hot for him by degrees. Before long you will catch
                         him poaching with his dog, and if he is let off for a time or two because
                         of his youth, and goes at it again, we can make out a pretty case of
                         juvenile depravity, without any character from his employer, you know; and
                         so he will be sent out of the way, and boarded at the expense of the
                         country for a few years or so.'</t:p>
<t:p>'Well,' said the master, 'I'll try him once again. If he'd go out quietly,
                         nobody else has any claim upon the cottage; and I want to set to work there
                         quickly.'</t:p>
<t:p>So when Stephen entered the office with trembling limbs and a very pale face
                         under its dusky covering, it happened that he met with a very different
                         reception to what he expected. The master sat behind a small counter, upon
                         which lay Stephen's twelve shillings, the only little heap of money left;
                         and as he gathered them nervously into his hand, he wondered if this would
                         be the last time. But his master's face was not more threatening than
                         usual; and he muttered his 'Thank you, sir,' and was turning away with a
                         feeling of great relief, when Mr. Wyley's harsh voice brought him back
                         again, trembling more than ever.</t:p>
<t:p>'Have you thought any more of my offer, Fern?' he asked. 'I shouldn't mind,
                         as you are an orphan, and have two sisters depending upon you, if I made
                         the ten pounds into fifteen; and you may leave the money at interest with
                         me till you are older.'</t:p>
<t:p>'And I've been thinking, Stephen,' added Thomas Wyley, who sat at a high desk
                         checking the accounts, 'that, as you seem set against being separated,
                         instead of taking your grandfather into the House, I'd get him two
                         shillings a week allowed him out of it; and that would pay the rent of a
                         nice two-roomed cottage down in Botfield, close to your work. Come, that
                         would make all of you comfortable.'</t:p>
<t:p>'You should bear in mind, Stephen,' said the master, 'that the place does not
                         of right belong to you at all; and the lord of the manor is coming to shoot
                         over the estate in September; and then I shall have orders to remove you by
                         force. So you had better take our offer.'</t:p>
<t:p>'Please, sir,' said Stephen, bowing respectfully, 'don't be angered with me,
                         but I can't go from what I said afore. Father told me never to give up
                         Fern's Hollow; and maybe he'd hear tell of it in heaven if I broke my word
                         to him. I can't do it, sir.'</t:p>
<t:p>'Well, wilful will have his way,' said Mr. Thomas, nodding at the master; and
                         as neither of them addressed Stephen again, he left the office, amazed to
                         find that he was not forbidden to return to work on the following
                         Monday.</t:p>
<t:p>The Red Gravel Pit, where Miss Anne had promised to meet her scholars on
                         Sunday morning, was a quarry cut out of the side of one of the hills, from
                         which the stones were taken for making and mending the roads in the
                         neighbourhood. The quarry had been hollowed out into a kind of enclosed
                         circle, only entered by the road through which the waggons passed. All
                         along the edge of the red rocks high overhead there was a coppice of green
                         hazel-bushes and young oaks, where the boys had spent many a Sunday
                         searching for wild nuts, and hunting the squirrels from tree to tree.
                         Stephen and Tim met half an hour earlier than the time appointed by Miss
                         Anne, and by dint of great perseverance and strength rolled together five
                         large stones, under the shadow of an oak tree; and placed four of them in a
                         row before the largest one, as Tim had once seen the children sitting in
                         the village school at Longville, when he had taken a donkey-load of coals
                         for the schoolmaster. Martha came in good time with little Nan, both in
                         their new black bonnets and clean cotton shawls; and all were seated
                         orderly in a row when Miss Anne entered the Red Gravel Pit by the waggon
                         road.</t:p>
<t:p>I need not describe to you how Miss Anne heard Stephen read his chapter, and
                         taught Tim and Martha, and even little Nan herself, the first few letters
                         of the alphabet; after which she made them all repeat a verse of a hymn,
                         and, when they could say it correctly, sang it with them over and over
                         again, in her sweet and clear voice, until Stephen felt almost choked with
                         a sob of pure gladness, that would every now and then rise to his lips. Tim
                         sang loudly and lustily, getting out of tune very often. But little Nan was
                         a marvel to hear, so soft and sweet were her childish tones, so that Miss
                         Anne bade her sing the verse alone, which she did perfectly. Martha, too,
                         was full of admiration of the lady's lilac silk dress and the white ribbon
                         on her bonnet.</t:p>
<t:p>That was the first of many pleasant Sunday mornings in the Red Gravel Pit.
                         When the novelty was worn away, Martha discovered that she had too much to
                         do at home to be able to leave it so early in the day; and Tim sometimes
                         overslept himself on a Sunday, when most of his comrades spent the whole
                         morning in bed. But Stephen and little Nan were always there, and their
                         teacher never failed to meet them. Nor did Miss Anne confine her care of
                         the orphan children to a Sunday morning only. Sometimes she would mount the
                         hill during the long summer evenings, and pay their little household a
                         visit, giving Martha many quiet hints about her management and her outlay
                         of Stephen's wages; hints which Martha did not always receive as graciously
                         as they were given. Miss Anne would read also to the blind old grandfather,
                         choosing very simple and easy portions of the Bible, especially about the
                         lost sheep being found, as that pleased the old shepherd, and he could
                         fully understand its meaning. In general, Miss Anne was very cheerful, and
                         she would laugh merrily at times; but now and then her face looked pale and
                         sad, and her voice was very mournful while she talked and sang with them.
                         Once, even, when she bade Stephen 'good evening,' an exceedingly sorrowful
                         expression passed across her face, and she said to him, 'I find it quite as
                         hard work to serve God really and truly as you do, Stephen. There is only
                         one Helper for both of us; and we can only do all things through Christ
                         which strengtheneth us.'</t:p>
<t:p>But Stephen could not believe that good, gentle Miss Anne found it as hard to
                         be a Christian as he did. Everything seemed against him at the works. The
                         short indulgence from hard words and hard blows granted him after his
                         father's death was followed by what appeared to be a very tempest of
                         oppression. It was very soon understood that the master had a private
                         grudge against the boy; and though the workpeople were ground down and
                         wronged in a hundred ways by him, so as to fill them with hatred and
                         revenge, they were not the less willing to take advantage of his spite
                         against Stephen. His work underground, which had always been distasteful to
                         him compared with a shepherd's life on the hills, was now made more
                         toilsome and dangerous than ever, while Black Thompson followed him
                         everywhere and all day long with oaths and blows. Stephen's evident
                         superiority over the other boys was of course very much against him; for he
                         had never been much associated with them, as his distant home had separated
                         him from them excepting during the busy hours of labour. Now, when, through
                         his own self-satisfaction and Tim's loud praises, his accomplishments
                         became known, it is no wonder that a storm of envy and jealousy raged round
                         him; for not only the boys themselves, but their fathers also, felt
                         affronted at his wonderful scholarship. To be sure, Tim never deserted him,
                         and his partisanship was especially useful on the bank, before he went down
                         and after he came up from the pit. But below, in the dark, dismal passages
                         of the pit, many a stripe, unmerited, fell upon his bruised shoulders,
                         which he learned to bear the more patiently after Miss Anne had taught and
                         explained to him the verse, 'But He was wounded for our transgressions, He
                         was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon Him;
                         and with His stripes we are healed.' Still Stephen, feeling how hard it was
                         to continue in the right way, and knowing how often he failed, to his own
                         sore mortification and the rude triumph of his comrades, wondered
                         exceedingly how it was possible for Miss Anne to find it as hard to be a
                         follower of Christ as he did.</t:p>
</t:div>