
CHAPTER XVI.
SOFTENING THOUGHTS.
But God had not forsaken Stephen; though, for a little time, He had left him
                         to the working of his own sinful nature, that he might know of a certainty
                         that in himself there dwelt no good thing. God looks down from heaven upon
                         all our bitter conflicts; and He weighs, as a just Judge, all the events
                         that happen on earth. From the servant to whom He has given but one talent,
                         He does not demand the same service as from him who has ten talents.
                         Stephen's heavenly Father knew exactly how much understanding and strength
                         he possessed, for He Himself had given those good gifts to the boy, and He
                         knew in what measure He had bestowed them. When the right time was come,
                         'He sent from above, He took him, He brought him out of many waters. He
                         brought him forth also into a large place; He delivered him, because He
                         delighted in him.'
After the great tribulation of those days Stephen fell into a long and severe
                         illness. For many weeks he was delirious and unconscious, neither knowing
                         what he said nor who was taking care of him. When Miss Anne sat beside him,
                         soothing him, as she sometimes could do, with singing, he would talk of
                         being in heaven, and listening to little Nan among the angels. Bess shared
                         many of Martha's weary hours of watching: and so deeply had the child's
                         death affected them, that now all their thoughts and talk were about the
                         things that Miss Anne diligently taught them concerning Jesus and His
                         salvation. It was not much they knew; but as in former times a very small
                         subject was sufficient for a long gossip, so now the little knowledge of
                         the Scriptures that was lodged in either of their minds became the theme of
                         fluent, if not very learned conversation. Sometimes Stephen, as if their
                         words caught some floating memory, would murmur out a verse or two in his
                         delirious ramblings, or sing part of a hymn. Tim, also, who came for an
                         hour or two every evening, was always ready to read the few chapters he had
                         learned, and to give the girls his interpretation of them.
There was no pressing want in the little household, though their bread-winner
                         was unable to work. The miners made up Stephen's wages among themselves at
                         every reckoning, for Stephen had won their sincere respect, though they had
                         often been tempted to ill-treat him. Miss Anne came every day with dainties
                         from the master's house, without meeting with any reproof or opposition,
                         though the name of Stephen Fern never crossed Mr. Wyley's lips. Still he
                         used to listen attentively whenever the doctor called upon Miss Anne, to
                         give her his opinion how the poor boy was going on.
When Stephen was recovering, his mind was too weak for any of the violent
                         passions that had preceded his illness. Moreover, the bounty of his
                         comrades, and the humble kindness of Martha and Bess, came like healing to
                         his soul; for very often the tenderness of others will seem to atone for
                         the injuries of our enemies, and at least soften our vehement desire for
                         revenge. Yet, in a quiet, listless sort of way, Stephen still longed for
                         God to prove His wrath against the master's wrong-doing. It appeared so
                         strange to hear that all this time nothing had befallen him, that he was
                         still strong and healthy, and becoming more and more wealthy every day.
                         Like Asaph, the psalmist, when he considered the prosperity of the wicked,
                         Stephen was inclined to say, 'How doth God know? and is there knowledge
                         with the Most High? Behold, these are the ungodly that prosper in the
                         earth; they increase in riches. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain,
                         and washed my hands in innocency. For all the day long have I been plagued,
                         and chastened every morning.'
'Why does God let these things be?' he inquired of Miss Anne one day, after
                         he was well enough to rise from his bed and sit by the fire. He was very
                         white and thin, and his eyes looked large and shining in their sunken
                         sockets; but they gazed earnestly into his teacher's face, as if he was
                         craving to have this difficulty solved.
'You have asked me a hard question,' said Miss Anne; 'we cannot understand
                         God's way, for "as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are His ways
                         than our ways." But shall we try to find out a reason why God let these
                         things be for little Nan's sake?'
'Yes,' said Stephen, turning away his eyes from her face.
'Our Lord Jesus Christ had one disciple, called John, whom He loved more than
                         the rest; and before John died he was permitted to see heaven, and to write
                         down many of the things shown to him, that we also might know of them. He
                         beheld a holy city, whose builder and maker is God, and having the glory of
                         God. It was built, as it were, of pure gold, and the walls were of all
                         manner of precious stones; the gates of the city were of pearl, and the
                         streets of gold, as clear and transparent as glass. There was no need of
                         the sun nor of the moon to shine in it; for the glory of God doth lighten
                         it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. He saw, too, the throne of God, and
                         above it there was a rainbow of emerald, which was a sign of His covenant
                         with the people upon earth. And round about the throne, nearer than the
                         angels, there were seats, upon which men who had been ransomed from this
                         world of sin and sorrow were sitting in white robes, and with crowns upon
                         their heads. There came a pure river of water of life out of the throne,
                         and on each side of the river, in the streets of the city, there was a tree
                         of life, the leaves of which are for the healing of all nations. Before the
                         throne stood a great multitude, which no man could number, clothed in white
                         robes, and with palms in their hands. And as John listened, he heard a
                         sound like the voice of many waters; then, as it became clearer, it seemed
                         like the voice of a great thunder; but at last it rang down into his opened
                         ears as the voice of many harpers, singing a new song with their harps. And
                         he heard a great voice out of heaven, proclaiming the covenant of God with
                         men: "Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with
                         them, and they shall be His people; and God Himself shall be with them, and
                         be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
                         shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be
                         any more pain." The disciple whom Jesus loved saw many other things which
                         he was commanded to seal up; but these things were written for our
                         comfort.'
'And little Nan is there,' murmured Stephen, as the tears rolled down his
                         cheeks.
'Our Lord says of little children, "I say unto you, That in heaven their
                         angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven,"'
                         continued Miss Anne. 'Stephen, do you wish her to be back again in this
                         sorrowful world, with Martha and you for companions, instead of the
                         angels?'
'Oh no!' sobbed Stephen.
'And now, why has God sent so many troubles to you, my poor Stephen? As I
                         told you before, we cannot understand His ways yet. But do not you see that
                         sorrow has made you very different to the other boys about you? Have you
                         not gained much wisdom that they do not possess? And would you change your
                         lot with any one of them? Would you even be as you were yourself twelve
                         months ago, before these afflictions came? We are sent into this world for
                         something more than food and clothing, and work and play. Our souls must
                         live, and they are dead if they are not brought into submission to God's
                         will. Even our own Lord and Saviour, "though He were a son, yet learned He
                         obedience by the things which He suffered." How much more do we need to
                         suffer before we learn obedience to the will of God!
'Then there is Martha,' continued Miss Anne, after a pause; 'she and Bess are
                         both brought to repentance by the death of our little child. Surely I need
                         not excuse God's dealings to you any more, Stephen.'
'But there comes no judgment upon the master,' said Stephen in a low
                         voice.
A flush of pain passed over Miss Anne's face as she met Stephen's eager gaze,
                         and saw something of the working of his heart in his flashing eye.
'Our God will suffer no sin to go unpunished for ever,' she answered
                         solemnly. '"Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." Listen,
                         Stephen: when our Lord spoke those "blessings" in your chapter, He implied
                         that on the opposite side there were curses corresponding to them. But He
                         did not leave this matter uncertain; I will read them to you from another
                         chapter: "But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your
                         consolation. Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you
                         that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and lament."'
'That is the master,' said Stephen, his face glowing with satisfaction, 'for
                         he is rich and full, and he laughs now!'
'Yes, who can tell but that these woes will fall upon my uncle,' said Miss
                         Anne, and her head drooped low, and Stephen saw the tears streaming down
                         her cheeks; 'all my prayers and love for him may be lost. His soul, which
                         is as precious and immortal as ours, may perish for ever!'
Stephen looked at her bitter weeping with a longing desire to say something
                         to comfort her, but he could not speak a word: for her grief was caused by
                         the thought of the very vengeance he was wishing for. He turned away his
                         head uneasily, and gazed deep down into the glowing embers of the fire.
'Not my prayers and love only,' continued Miss Anne, 'but our Saviour's also;
                         all His griefs and sorrows may prove unavailing, as far as my uncle is
                         concerned. Perhaps He will say of him, "I have laboured in vain, I have
                         spent My strength for nought, and in vain." O my Saviour! because I love
                         Thee, I would have every immortal soul saved for Thy eternal glory.'
'And so would I, Miss Anne,' cried the boy, sinking on his knees. 'Oh, Miss
                         Anne, pray to Jesus that I may love all my enemies for His sake.'
When Miss Anne's prayer was ended, she left Stephen alone to the deep but
                         gentler thoughts that were filling his mind. He understood now, with a
                         clearness that he had never had before, that 'love is of God; and every one
                         that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.' He must love his enemies
                         because they were precious, as he himself had been, in all their sin and
                         rebellion, to their Father in heaven. Not only did God send rain and
                         sunshine upon the evil and unjust, but He had so loved them as to give His
                         only begotten Son to die for them; and if they perished, so far it made the
                         cross of Christ of none effect. Henceforth the bitterness of revenge died
                         out of his heart; and whenever he bent his knees in prayer, he offered up
                         the dying petition of his namesake, the martyr Stephen, in behalf of all
                         his enemies, but especially of his master: 'Lord, lay not this sin to their
                         charge.'
