
CHAPTER I.
THE HUT IN THE HOLLOW.
Just upon the border of Wales, but within one of the English counties, there
                         is a cluster of hills, rising one above the other in gradual slopes, until
                         the summits form a long, broad tableland, many miles across. This tableland
                         is not so flat that all of it can be seen at once, but here and there are
                         little dells, shaped like deep basins, which the country folk call hollows;
                         and every now and then there is a rock or hillock covered with yellow gorse
                         bushes, from the top of which can be seen the wide, outspread plains, where
                         hundreds of sheep and ponies are feeding, which belong to the farmers and
                         cottagers dwelling in the valley below. Besides the chief valley, which
                         divides the mountains into two groups, and which is broad enough for a
                         village to be built in, there are long, narrow glens, stretching up into
                         the very heart of the tableland, and draining away the waters which gather
                         there by the melting of snow in the winter and the rain of thunderstorms in
                         summer. Down every glen flows a noisy mountain stream, dashing along its
                         rocky course with so many tiny waterfalls and impatient splashes, that the
                         gurgling and bubbling of brooks come up even into the quietness of the
                         tableland and mingle with the singing of the birds and the humming of the
                         bees among the heather. There are not many paths across the hills, except
                         the narrow sheep-walks worn by the tiny feet of the sheep as they follow
                         one another in long, single lines, winding in and out through the clumps of
                         gorse; and few people care to explore the solitary plains, except the
                         shepherds who have the charge of the flocks, and tribes of village children
                         who go up every summer to gather the fruit of the wild and hardy bilberry
                         wires.
The whole of this broad tableland, as well as the hills, are common pasture
                         for the inhabitants of the valleys, who have an equal right to keep sheep
                         and ponies on the uplands with the lord of the manor. But the property of
                         the soil belongs to the latter, and he only has the power of enclosing the
                         waste so as to make fields and plant woods upon it, provided always that he
                         leaves a sufficient portion for the use of the villagers. In times gone by,
                         however, when the lord of the manor and his agent were not very watchful,
                         it was the practice of poor persons, who did not care how uncomfortably
                         they lived, to seek out some distant hollow, or the farthest and most
                         hidden side of a hillock, and there build themselves such a low, small hut,
                         as should escape the notice of any passer-by, should they chance to go that
                         way. Little by little, making low fences which looked like the surrounding
                         gorse bushes, they enclosed small portions of the waste land, or, as it is
                         called, encroached upon the common; and if they were able to keep their
                         encroachment without having their hedges broken down, or if the lord of the
                         manor neglected to demand rent for it for the space of twenty years, their
                         fields and gardens became securely and legally their own. Because of this
                         right, therefore, are to be found here and there little farms of three or
                         four fields a-piece, looking like islands, with the wide, open common
                         around them; and some miles away over the breezy uplands there is even a
                         little hamlet of these poor cottages, all belonging to the people who dwell
                         in them.
Many years ago, even many years before my story begins, a poor woman—who was
                         far worse off than a widow, for her husband had just been sentenced to
                         transportation for twenty-one years—strayed down to these mountains upon
                         her sorrowful way home to her native place. She had her only child with
                         her, a boy five years of age; and from some reason or other, perhaps
                         because she could not bear to go home in shame and disgrace, she sought out
                         a very lonely hiding-place among the hills, and with her own hands reared
                         rough walls of turf and stones, until she had formed such a rude hut as
                         would just give shelter to her and her boy. There they lived, uncared for
                         and solitary, until the husband came back, after suffering his twenty-one
                         years' punishment, and entered into a little spot of land entirely his own.
                         Then, with the assistance of his son, a strong, full-grown young man, he
                         rebuilt the cottage, though upon a scale not much larger or much more
                         commodious than his wife's old hut.
Like other groups of mountains, the highest and largest are those near the
                         centre, and from them the land descends in lower and lower levels, with
                         smaller hills and smoother valleys, until at length it sinks into the
                         plain. Then they are almost like children's hills and valleys; the slopes
                         are not too steep for very little feet to climb, and the rippling brooks
                         are not in so much hurry to rush on to the distant river, but that boys and
                         girls at play can stop them for a little time with slight banks of mud and
                         stones. In just such a smooth, sloping dell, down in a soft green basin,
                         called Fern's Hollow, was the hiding-place where the convict's sad wife had
                         found an unmolested shelter.
This dwelling, the second one raised by the returned convict and his son, is
                         built just below the brow of the hill, so that the back of the hut is
                         formed of the hill itself, and only the sides and front are real walls.
                         These walls are made of rubble, or loose, unhewn stones, piled together
                         with a kind of mortar, which is little more than clay baked hard in the
                         heat of the sun. The chimney is a bit of old stove-pipe, scarcely rising
                         above the top of the hill behind; and, but for the smoke, we could look
                         down the pipe, as through the tube of a telescope, upon the family sitting
                         round the hearth within. The thatch, overgrown with moss, appears as a
                         continuation of the slope of the hill itself, and might almost deceive the
                         simple sheep grazing around it. Instead of a window there is only a square
                         hole, covered by a shutter when the light is not urgently needed; and the
                         door is so much too small for its sill and lintels as to leave large
                         chinks, through which adventurous bees and beetles may find their way
                         within. You may see at a glance that there is but one room, and that there
                         can be no up-stairs to the hut, except that upper storey of the broad, open
                         common behind it, where the birds sleep softly in their cosy nests. Before
                         the house is a garden; and beyond that a small field sown with silver oats,
                         which are dancing and glistening in the breeze and sunshine; while before
                         the garden wicket, but not enclosed from the common, is a warm, sunny
                         valley, in the very middle of which a slender thread of a brook widens into
                         a lovely little basin of a pool, clear and cold, the very place for the
                         hill ponies to come and drink.
Looking steadily up this pleasant valley from the threshold of the cottage,
                         we can just see a fine, light film of white smoke against the blue sky. Two
                         miles away, right down off the mountains, there is a small coal-field and a
                         quarry of limestone. In a distant part of the country there are large
                         tracts of land where coal and iron pits are sunk on every side, and their
                         desolate and barren pit-banks extend for miles round, while a heavy cloud
                         of smoke hangs always in the air. But here, just at the foot of these
                         mountains, there is one little seam of coal, as if placed for the express
                         use of these people, living so far away from the larger coal-fields. The
                         Botfield lime and coal works cover only a few acres of the surface; but
                         underground there are long passages bored beneath the pleasant pastures and
                         the yellow cornfields. From the mountains, Botfield looks rather like a
                         great blot upon the fair landscape, with its blackened engine-house and
                         banks of coal-dust, its long range of limekilns, sultry and quivering in
                         the summer sunshine, and its heavy, groaning water-wheel, which pumps up
                         the water from the pits below. But the colliers do not think it so, nor
                         their wives in the scattered village beyond; they do not consider the lime
                         and coal works a blot, for their living depends upon them, and they may
                         rightly say, 'As for the earth, out of it cometh bread: and under it is
                         turned up as it were fire.'
Even Stephen Fern, who would a thousand times rather work out on the free
                         hillside than in the dark passages underground, does not think it a pity
                         that the Botfield pit has been discovered at the foot of the mountains. It
                         is nearly seven o'clock in the evening, and he is coming over the brow of
                         the green dell, with his long shadow stretching down it. A very long shadow
                         it is for so small a figure to cast, for if we wait a minute or two till
                         Stephen draws nearer, we shall see that he is no strong, large man, but a
                         slight, thin, stooping boy, bending rather wearily under a sack of coals,
                         which he is carrying on his shoulders, and pausing now and then to wipe his
                         heated forehead with the sleeve of his collier's flannel jacket. When he
                         lifts up the latch of his home we will enter with him, and see the inside
                         of the hut at Fern's Hollow.
