
CHAPTER VII.
MR. MORTON'S STORY.—A CONFESSION.—A YOUNG PLEADER.—GENEROSITY NOT ALWAYS JUSTICE.
"Do you remember, Emmeline, a Mr. Morton, who officiated for Mr. Howard at Aveling, five or
      six weeks ago?" asked Mr. Hamilton of his wife, on the Saturday morning after Herbert's
      mysterious excursion. The family had not yet left the breakfast-table.
"Perfectly well," was the reply; "poor young man! his appearance and painful weakness of
      voice called for commiseration too deeply not to be remembered."
"Is he not deformed?" inquired Miss Harcourt; "there was something particularly painful
      about his manner as he stood in the pulpit."
"He is slightly deformed now; but not five years ago he had a graceful, almost elegant
      figure, though always apparently too delicate for the fatiguing mental duties in which he
      indulged. He was of good family, but his parents were suddenly much reduced, and compelled to
      undergo many privations to enable him to go to Oxford. There he allowed himself neither
      relaxation nor pleasure of the most trifling and most harmless kind; his only wish seemed to
      be to repay his parents in some degree the heavy debt of gratitude which he felt he owed them.
      His persevering study, great talent, and remarkable conduct, won him some valuable friends,
      one of whom, as soon as he was ordained, presented him with a rich living in the North. For
      nine months he enjoyed the most unalloyed happiness. His pretty vicarage presented a happy,
      comfortable home for his parents, and the comforts they now enjoyed, earned by the worth of
      their son, amply repaid them for former privations.—One cold snowy night he was summoned to a
      poor parishioner, living about ten miles distant. The road was rugged, and in some parts
      dangerous; but he was not a man to shrink from his duty for such reasons. He was detained
      eight hours, during which time the snow had fallen incessantly, and it was pitchy dark. Still
      believing he knew his road, he proceeded, and the next morning was found lying apparently dead
      at the foot of a precipice, and almost crushed under the mangled and distorted carcass of his
      horse."
An exclamation of horror burst from all the little group, except from Percy and Herbert; the
      face of the former was covered with his hands, and his brother seemed so watching and feeling
      for him, as to be unable to join the general sympathy. All, however, were so engrossed with
      Mr. Hamilton's tale, that neither was observed.
"He was so severely injured, that for months his very life was despaired of. Symptoms of
      decline followed, and the inability to resume his ministerial duties for years, if ever again,
      compelled him to resign his rich and beautiful living in Yorkshire; and he felt himself once
      more a burden on his parents, with scarcely any hope of supporting them again. Nor was this
      all; his figure, once so slight and supple, had become so shrunk and maimed, that at first he
      seemed actually to loathe the sight of his fellows. His voice, once so rich and almost
      thrilling, became wiry, and almost painfully monotonous; and for some months the conflict for
      submission to this inscrutable and most awful trial was so terrible that he nearly sunk
      beneath it. This was, of course, still more physical than mental, and gradually subsided, as,
      after eighteen months' residence in Madeira, where he was sent by a benevolent friend, some
      portion of health returned. The same benefactor established his father in some humble but most
      welcome business in London; and earnestly, on his return, did his parents persuade him to
      remain quietly with them, and not undertake the ministry again; but this he could not do, and
      gratefully accepted a poor and most miserable parish on the moor, not eight miles from
      here."
"But when did you become acquainted with him, papa?" asked Caroline; "you have never
      mentioned him before."
"No, my dear; I never saw him till the Sunday he officiated for Mr. Howard; but his
      appearance so deeply interested me, I did not rest till I had learned his whole history, which
      Mr. Howard had already discovered. He has been nearly a year in Devonshire, but so kept aloof
      from all but his own poor parishioners, dreading the ridicule and sneers of the more worldly
      and wealthy, that it was mere accident which made Mr. Howard acquainted with him. Our good
      minister's friendship and earnest exhortations have so far overcome his too great
      sensitiveness, as sometimes to prevail on him to visit the Vicarage, and I trust in time
      equally to succeed in bringing him here."
"But what is he so afraid of, dear papa?" innocently asked Emmeline. "Surely nobody could be
      so cruel as to ridicule him because he is deformed?"
"Unfortunately, my dear child, there are too many who only enter church for the sake of the
      sermon and the preacher, and to criticise severely and uncharitably all that differs from
      their preconceived ideas; to such persons Mr. Morton must be an object of derision. And now I
      come to the real reason of my asking your mother if she remembered him."
"Then you had a reason," answered Mrs. Hamilton, smiling; "your story has made me wonder
      whether you had or not."
"I must tax your memory once more, Emmeline, before my cause is told. Do you recollect, for
      a fortnight after the Sunday we heard him, he preached twice a week at Torrington, to oblige a
      very particular friend?"
"Yes, and that you feared the increased number of the congregation proceeded far more from
      curiosity than kindliness or devotion."
"I did say so, and my fears are confirmed: some affairs brought Morton to Torrington for two
      or three days this week, and yesterday I called on him, and had some hours' interesting
      conversation. He was evidently even more than usually depressed and self-shrinking, if I may
      use the word, and at length touched, it seemed, by my sympathy, he drew my attention to a poem
      in Harris's 'Weekly Magazine.'"
"'It is not enough that it has pleased my God to afflict me,' he said, 'but my
      fellow-creatures must unkindly make me the subject of attacks such as these. There is indeed
      no name, but to none else but me will it apply.' I could not reply, for I really felt too
      deeply for him. It was such a cruel, wanton insult, the very talent of the writer, for the
      verses though few in number were remarkably clever, adding to their gall."
"I wonder Harris should have published them," observed Miss Harcourt; "his paper is not in
      general of a personal kind."
"It is never sufficiently guarded; and it would require a person of higher principles than I
      fear Harris has, to resist the temptation of inserting a satire likely to sell a double or
      treble number of his papers. I spoke to him at once, and bought up every one that remained;
      but though he expressed regret, it was not in a tone that at all satisfied me as to his
      feeling it, and of course, as the paper has been published since last Saturday evening, the
      circulation had nearly ceased. If I could but know the author, I think I could make him feel
      the excessive cruelty, if not the actual guilt, of his wanton deed."
"But, dear papa, the person who wrote it might not have known his story," interposed
      Caroline, to Edward's and Ellen's astonishment, that she had courage to speak at all; for
      their uncle's unusual tone and look brought back almost more vividly than it had ever done
      before their mother's lessons of his exceeding and terrible sternness.
"That does not excuse the ridicule, my dear child; it only confirms the lesson I have so
      often tried to teach you all, that any thing tending by word or deed to hurt the feelings of a
      fellow-creature, is absolutely wrong—wrong in the thing itself, not according to the greater
      or less amount of pain it may excite."
"But, my dear husband, the writer may not have been so taught. Satire and ridicule are
      unhappily so popular, that these verses may have been penned without any thought of their evil
      tendency, merely as to the éclat they would bring their author. We must not be too
      severe, for we do not know—"
"Mother! mother! do not—do not speak so, if you have ever loved me!" at length exclaimed
      poor Percy, so choked with his emotion, that he could only throw himself by her side, bury his
      face in her lap, and sob for a few minutes like a child. But he recovered himself with a
      strong effort, before either of his family could conquer their anxiety and alarm, and,
      standing erect, though pale as marble, without in the least degree attempting excuse or
      extenuation, acknowledged the poem as his, and poured out his whole story, with the sole
      exception of how he had disposed of the money, with which the second time of receiving his
      allowance he had intended to discharge his debt; and the manner in which he told that part of
      his tale, from the fear that it would seem like an excuse or a boast, was certainly more
      calculated to call for doubt than belief. Herbert was about to speak, but an imploring glance
      from Percy checked him.
Mr. Hamilton was silent several minutes after his son had concluded, before he could reply.
      Percy was so evidently distressed—had suffered so much from the consequence of his own
      errors—felt so intensely the unintentional publication of his poem—for his father knew his
      truth far too well to doubt his tale, and there was something so intrinsically noble in his
      brave confession, that to condemn him severely he felt as if he could not.
"Of willful cruelty toward Mr. Morton, your story has certainly exculpated you," he said, as
      sternly as he could; "but otherwise you must be yourself aware that it has given me both grief
      and pain, and the more so, because you evidently shrink from telling me in what manner you
      squandered away that money which would have been sufficient to have fully discharged your debt
      six weeks ago; I must therefore believe there is still some deed of folly unrevealed. I
      condemn you to no punishment—you are old enough now to know right from wrong, and your own
      feelings must condemn or applaud you. Had you been firm, as I had hoped you were, example
      would not so have worked upon you, as to tempt even the composition of your satire; as it is,
      you must reap the consequences of your weakness, in the painful consciousness that you have
      deeply wounded one, who it would seem had been already sufficiently afflicted, and that
      confidence must for the time be broken between us. Go, sir, the hour of your attendance on Mr.
      Howard is passed."
Mr. Hamilton rose with the last words, and somewhat hastily quitted the room. Percy only
      ventured one look at his mother, she seemed so grieved—so sad—that he could not bear it; and
      darting out of the room, was seen in less than a minute traversing the grounds in the
      direction of the vicarage, at such a rate that Edward, fleet as in general he was, could not
      overtake him. Herbert lingered; he could not bear that any part of Percy's story should remain
      concealed, and so told at once how his second allowance had been expended.
Mrs. Hamilton's eyes glistened. Percy's incoherence on that one point had given her more
      anxiety than any thing else, and the relief the truth bestowed was inexpressible. Imprudent it
      was; but there was something so lovable in such a disposition, that she could not resist going
      directly to her husband to impart it.
"You always bring me comfort, dearest!" was his fond rejoinder; "anxious as that boy's
      thoughtlessness must make me (for what are his temptations now to what they will be?) still I
      must imbibe your fond belief, that with such an open, generous, truthful heart, he can not go
      far wrong. But what are we to do about that unfortunate poem? I can not associate
      with Morton, knowing the truth, and yet permit him to believe I am as ignorant of the author
      as himself."
"Let me speak to Percy before we decide on anything, my dear Arthur. Is Mr. Morton still at
      Torrington?"
"No; he was to return to Heathmore this morning."
Mrs. Hamilton looked very thoughtful, but she did not make any rejoinder.
In the hour of recreation Emmeline, declaring it was much too hot for the garden, sought her
      mother's private sitting-room, with the intention of asking where she could find her father.
      To her great delight, the question was arrested on her lips, for he was there. She seated
      herself on his knee, and remained there for some minutes without speaking—only looking up in
      his face with the most coaxing expression imaginable.
"Well, Emmeline, what great favor are you going to ask me?" said Mr. Hamilton, smiling;
      "some weighty boon, I am quite sure."
"Indeed, papa, and how do you know that?"
"I can read it in your eyes."
"My eyes are treacherous tell-tales then, and you shall not see them any more," she replied,
      laughing, and shaking her head till her long bright ringlets completely hid her eyes and
      blushing cheeks. "But have they told you the favor I am going to ask?"
"No," replied her father, joining in her laugh; "they leave that to your tongue."
"I can read more, I think," said Mrs. Hamilton; "I am very much mistaken, if I do not know
      what Emmeline is going to ask."
"Only that—that—" still she hesitated, as if afraid to continue, and her mother added—
"That papa will not be very angry with Percy; Emmeline, is not that the boon you have no
      courage to ask?"
A still deeper glow mounted to the child's fair cheek, and throwing her arms round her
      father's neck, she said, coaxingly and fondly—
"Mamma has guessed it, dear papa! you must, indeed, you must forgive him—poor fellow! he is
      so very sorry, and he has suffered so much already—and he did not throw away his
      money foolishly, as you thought; he gave it to some very poor people—and you are always
      pleased when we are charitable; pray forget every thing else but that, and treat him as you
      always do, dear papa—will you not?"
"I wonder which is most certain—that mamma must be a witch, or Emmeline a most eloquent
      little pleader," said Mr. Hamilton, caressingly stroking the ringlets she had disordered, "and
      suppose, after to-day, I do grant your request—what then?"
"Oh, you will be such a dear, darling, good papa!" exclaimed Emmeline, almost suffocating
      him with kisses, and then starting from his knee, she danced about the room in a perfect
      ecstasy of delight; "and Percy will be happy again, and we shall all be so happy. Mamma, dear
      mamma, I am sure you will be glad too."
"And now, Emmeline, when you have danced yourself sober again, come back to your seat, for
      as I have listened to and answered you, you must listen to and answer me."
In an instant she was on his knee again, quite quiet and attentive.
"In the first place, do you think Percy was justified making Mr. Morton an object of satire
      at all, even if it should never have left his own portfolio?"
"No, papa, and I am quite sure, if he had not been rather more excited—and—and heedless than
      usual—which was very likely he should be, you know, papa, after such a day of nothing but
      pleasure—he would never have done such a thing: I am sure he did not think of hurting Mr.
      Morton's feelings; he only wanted to prove that he was quite as clever as his companions, and
      that was very natural, you know, when he is so clever at such things. But my brother Percy
      willingly ridicule a clergyman! no, no, dear papa, pray do not believe it."
"Well defended, my little girl; but how do you justify his disobeying my commands, and
      incurring a debt?"
Emmeline was silent. "He was very wrong to do that, papa; but I am sure, when he ordered the
      engravings, he did not intend to disobey you, and you know he is naturally very—I mean a
      little impatient."
"Still on the defensive, Emmeline, even against your better judgment. Well, well, I must not
      make you condemn your brother; does he know what an eloquent pleader he has in his
      sister?"
"No, papa; and pray do not tell him."
"And why not?"
"Because he might think it was only for my sake you forgave him, and not for his own; and I
      know I should not like that, if I were in his place."
"He shall know nothing more than you desire, my dear little girl," replied her father,
      drawing her closer to him, with almost involuntary tenderness. "And now will you try and
      remember what I am going to say. You wish me only to think of Percy's kind act in giving his
      money to the poor people; but I should have been better pleased in this case, had he been more
      just, and not so generous. I know it is not unfrequently said by young persons, when
      they think they are doing a charitable act, and can only do it by postponing the payment of
      their debts—'Oh, Mr. So and so has plenty of business, he can afford to wait for his money,
      but these poor creatures are starving.' Now this is not generosity or charity, but actual
      injustice, and giving away money which is literally not their own. I do not believe Percy
      thought so, because I have no doubt he forgot Mr. Harris, at the time, entirely; but still, as
      it was a mere impulse of kindness, it does not please me quite so much as it does you."
"But it was charity, papa, was it not? You have said that whenever we are kind and good to
      the poor, God is pleased with us; and if Percy did not intend to wrong Mr. Harris, and only
      thought about relieving the poor family, was it not a good feeling?"
"It was; but it might have been still worthier. Suppose Percy had encountered this case of
      distress when on his way to order his engravings, and to enable him to relieve it as he
      wished, he had given up the purchasing them. That he found he could not afford the
      two, and so gave up the one mere individual gratification, to succor some
      unhappy fellow-creatures: would not that have been still worthier? and by the conquest of his
      own inclinations rendered his charity still more acceptable to God? Do you quite understand
      me, Emmy?"
"I think I do, dear papa; you mean that, though God is so good, He is pleased whenever we
      are charitable, He is still better pleased when to be so gives us a little pain."
"Very well explained, my little girl; so you see in this instance, if Percy had been just
      before he was generous, and then to be generous, had denied himself some pleasure, his conduct
      would not have given us or himself any pain, but have been quite as worthy of all the praise
      you could bestow. And now I wonder how mamma could have discovered so exactly what favor you
      had to ask?"
"Oh, mamma always knows all my feelings and wishes, almost before I know them myself, though
      I never can find out how."
"Shall I tell you, Emmeline? Your mother has devoted hours, weeks, months, and years to
      studying the characters of all her children; so to know them, that she may not only be able to
      guide you in the path of good, but to share all your little joys and sorrows, to heighten the
      one and guard you from the other. Ought you not to be very grateful to your Father in Heaven
      for giving you such a mother?"
His child made no answer in words, but she slipped from his knee, and darting to her mother,
      clasped her little arms tight round her neck, and hid her glowing cheeks and tearful eyes in
      her bosom. And from that hour, as she felt her mother's fond return of that passionate
      embrace, her love became religion, though she knew it not. Her thoughts flew to her cousins
      and many others, who had no mother, and to others whose mothers left them to nurses and
      governesses, and seemed always to keep them at a distance. And she felt, How could she thank
      and love God enough? Nor was it the mere feeling of the moment, it became part of her being,
      for the right moment had been seized to impress it.
