<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="33">
CHAPTER XV.
Dear little Sally's letter gave me the greatest delight. It was all in
                            round hand, and had taken at least a week to write, and she must have
                            washed her hands almost every time. There were no stops in it, but I
                            have put some. The spelling was wonderfully good for her, but here and
                            there I have shaped it to the present fashion.
"Please Miss Clara dear, father and mother and I begs their most
                            respectable duty and love and they hopes no offence and will you be so
                            kind as to have this here little hamper and wishes it was ten times as
                            much but hopes you will excuse it and please to eat it all yourself
                            Miss. All the pegmate be our own doctrine, and very wholesome, and we
                            have took all the hair off, please Miss, because you said one time you
                            didn't like it. Likely you'll remember, Miss, the young black sow as
                            twisted her tail to the left, her as Tim was ringing the day as I wrote
                            first copy, and the other chillers ran out, well most of it be she,
                            Miss. Father say as he don't think they ever see butter in London town,
                            but Beany Dawe says yes for they makes a plenty out of red herrings and
                            train oil.
Please Miss, Tabby Badcock would go on the ice in the old saw-pit last
                            Sunday, by the upper linhay when I told her it would not bear, and so
                            her fell through and would have been drownded at last, only our little
                            Jack crawled over the postesses and give her his heel to hold on by, and
                            please Miss it would have done your heart good, mother says, to see how
                            Tim Badcock dressed her when he come home from church for getting her
                            best frock all of a muck.
Please Miss, Beany Dawe come when you was gone, and made a poem about
                            you, and father like it so much he give him free of the cider and as he
                            was going home he fell into a bit of a ditch down Breakneck hill, and
                            when he come to himself the road had taken to run the wrong way Beany
                            don't know how for the life of him, so he come back here 'nolus wolus'
                            he saith and that be the way to spell it and no mistake, and here he
                            have been ever since a-making of poems and sawing up hellums out of the
                            lower cleeve, and he sleepth in the onion loft and Suke can't have no
                            rest of nights for the noise he makes making verses. Mother tell Suke to
                            pote him down stairs and too good for him, but father say no, he be a
                            fine chap for sure and airneth his meat and drink, let alone all the
                            poetry.
Please Miss he wanted to larn me to write, but father say no I had got
                            better learning than hisn, and I say he may learn Tabby Badcock if he
                            will, but he shan't learn me. No tino."
How she tossed her pretty curls when she wrote this I'll be bound. I
                            wished that I could see her.
"Please Miss I be forced to write this when he be away, or he'd a made it
                            all in poetry; and Tim Badcock tell me to be sure to tell you as how at
                            the wrastling to Barnstaple fair, week after you was gone, father was so
                            crule unkid that in playing off the ties he heaved a Cornisher up
                            through the chandelier, and a come down with a candle stuck so fast down
                            his throat doctor was forced to set it a-fire and blow with a pair of
                            bellises afore he could put him to rights. Cornisher be all right again
                            now, Tim saith, but he have a made up his mind not to wrastle no more in
                            Devonshire.
Please Miss, father saith before this here goes he'll shoot the old hare
                            as sits in the top of the cleeve if Queen Victoria transports him for it
                            with hard labour. Tim have made four pops at her, but he say the powder
                            were crooked.
Please Miss Clara, all the eggs as my little black hen have laid, since
                            the last of the barley was housed, is to be sewed up inside the Turkey
                            with the black comb; he be strutting about in the court and looking at
                            me now as peart as a gladdy; but her have not laid more than a dozen to
                            now, though I have been up and whistled to her in the tall at every
                            morning and evening same as we used to do when you was in good spirits.
                            But the other hens has not laid none at all.
Please Miss, father say as how he have sold such a many beasties, he be
                            afeared to keep all the money in the house, and he have told mother to
                            sew up the rent for next Ladyday in the turkey with the white comb when
                            he be killed and he humbly hope no offence.
Please Miss Clara, us has had three letters from you, and I reads them
                            all to father and mother every Sunday evening, and Joe the Queen's boy
                            don't know but what he lost another one in leathering the jackass across
                            the brook after the rain. Joe tells as he can't say for certain, because
                            why he baint no scholar the same as us be, and Joe only knows the
                            letters by the pins they sticks in his sleeve afore he leaves Martinhoe.
                            Whoever 'twas for he thinks there was crockery in it by reason it sunk
                            so quick. Anyhow mother give him a little tap with a mop on the side of
                            his head, to make him mind the Queen's business, and didn't he holler a
                            bit, and he flung down the parson's letters all in the muck, but us
                            washed them in a bucket and let parson have them on Sunday. Joe Queen's
                            boy haven't been nigh us since, and they did say to Martinhoe us
                            shouldn't have no more letters, but father say if he don't he will show
                            the man there what a forehip mean pretty smart.
Please Miss Clara, us would have written afore, but mother say no, not
                            till I finish twelve copybooks one every week, that the folks to London
                            town might see the way as they ought to write and spell. Father say
                            London be in Gloucestershire, but I am most sure it baint, and Beany
                            Dawe shake his head and won't tell, and mother believe he don't
                            know.
Please Miss, there be a new babby come a month agone and better, and
                            mother find out as how it be a girl, and please if you have no objection
                            Miss, and if you don't think as it would be a liberty, us has all made
                            up our minds upon having it christened Clara, and please to say Miss if
                            it be too high, or any way unfitty. Father be 'most afeared that it
                            sound too grand for the like of us, but mother says as the Huxtables was
                            thought brave things on, to Coom and Parracombe a hundred years
                            agone.
Please Miss, father heard to Coom market last week, as there's going to
                            be a French invasion, and they be sure to go to London first, and he beg
                            you to let him know as soon as ever there be one, and he come up at once
                            with the big ash-stick and the ivy on it as growed in Challacombe wood,
                            and see as they doesn't hurt you, Miss.
Please Miss, the young chap as saved you from the great goyal come here
                            to ask for you, day after you was gone, and mother believes he baint
                            after no good, by token he would not come in nor drink a drop of
                            cider.
Please Miss, father say it make his heart ache every night, to think of
                            you all to yourself in the wicked London town, and he go down the lane
                            to the white gate every evening in the hope to see you acoming, and
                            mother say if you be a selling red and blue picturs her hope you will
                            send for they as father gave the hog's puddens for, and us wont miss
                            them at all.
And Miss Clara dear, I expect you'll be mazed to see how I writes and
                            spells, father say it must be in the family, and I won't write no more
                            till I have finished another dozen of copy books; and oh dear how I do
                            wish that you were come back again, but father say to me to say no more
                            about it for fear to make you cry, Miss. All the little childers except
                            the new babby who have not seen you yet, sends their hearts' loves and
                            duty and a hundred kisses, and father and mother the same, and Timothy
                            Badcock, and Tabby, and Suke, and Beany Dawe, now he knows it.
I remain, Miss Clara dear, your thankful and loving scholar to
                            command,
SARAH HUXTABLE.
Signed all this here papper scrawl in the settle by the fire.
JOHN HUXTABLE his mark X
                            HONOR HUXTABLE hern X."
</div></body></text></TEI>