<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="71">
CHAPTER XVII. EDGAR VAUGHAN's STORY CONTINUED. 
Instead of enraging or maddening me, as the writer perhaps expected,
                            this execrable letter did me a great deal of good. I determined to lower
                            that insufferable arrogance; and brought all my thoughts to bear upon
                            one definite object, the recovery of my darlings and the punishment of
                            that murderer. I did not believe that he had destroyed them, or was
                            likely to do so; for had not their mother's spirit referred to them as
                            living?
Without delay, my yacht was prepared for a lengthened cruise; the tower
                            committed to Marcantonia and the gray sentinel; and with Petro for my
                            skipper, I sailed on the following day. Alas, the three months now
                            elapsed during my delirium, had they not like the sea itself closed
                            across the track? All the neighbours knew was this, the felucca had
                            passed Point Girolata, and had been seen in the early morning, standing
                            away due south. All the villagers, and even the men from the mountain,
                            thronged the shore as I embarked, and there invoked Madonna's blessing
                            on poor Signor Valentine, so basely robbed of wife and children.
When we had rounded Girolata, we bore away due south, and in less than
                            fifteen hours made the Sardinian shore in the gulf of Asinara. Here we
                            coasted along the curve, inquiring at every likely place whether any
                            such vessel had been sighted as that which we were seeking. But we could
                            learn nothing of her until we were off the Gypsum Cape; where some
                            fishermen told us, that at or about the time we spoke of, a swift
                            felucca, built and manned exactly as we had described, glided by them
                            and bore up for the town of Alghero. We too bore up for Alghero, and
                            soon discovered that the roving vessel had undoubtedly been there: even
                            Lepardo, the captain, was described by the keen Sardinians. But she had
                            only lain to for a few hours, and cleared again for Cagliari. For
                            Cagliari we made sail as hard as the sticks could carry, and arrived
                            there on the fourth day from Cape Girolata.
The pirates, if such they were, had offered their vessel for sale at
                            Cagliari; but, failing of a satisfactory price had sailed away again,
                            and after much trouble I found out that their destination was Valetta.
                            To Valetta also we followed, feeling like a new boy at school who is
                            mystified by the experts—innocent of much Greek themselves—with a game
                            which means in English, "send the fool on further."
When at length we reach the Maltese capital—where I was not sorry to hear
                            once more my native tongue—we found the felucca snugly moored near the
                            "Merchant's Yard," and being refitted as a pleasure-boat for a wealthy
                            Englishman. This gentleman knew a good deal about ships, but not quite
                            enough. Pleased with the graceful lines and clean run of the felucca, he
                            had given nearly twice her value for her; as he soon perceived when the
                            ship-carpenters set to work. He was in the vein to afford all possible
                            information, being thoroughly furious with the condemnable pirates—as he
                            called them, without the weakness of the composite verb—who had robbed
                            him so shamefully of his money. He told me that my children had been
                            ashore, and Harry was much admired and kissed in the Floriana. One thing
                            the sailors did which would have surprised a man unacquainted with the
                            Corsicans, or perhaps I should say the islanders of the Mediterranean.
                            They decked my little babe with flowers and ribands, and bore her in
                            procession to the church of St. John of Jerusalem; and there they had
                            her baptized, for Lepardo had found out that she had never undergone the
                            ceremony. I was anxious to see the record, but was not allowed to do so;
                            therefore I do not know what the little darling's name is, if she be
                            still alive: but they told me that the surname entered was not Vaughan,
                            but Della Croce. It was said that the sailors had become very fond of
                            her, the little creature being very sweet-tempered and happy, and a
                            pleasing novelty to them. Very likely they named her after their own
                            felucca.
The crew being now dispersed, some to their homes, and some on board
                            ships which had sailed, I was thrown completely off the scent. All I
                            could learn, at a house which they had frequented, was that Lepardo, the
                            commander, had long ago left the island. Whither, or in what ship, he
                            had sailed, they could not or would not tell me: he had always plenty of
                            money, they said, and he spent it like a prince. But Petro, who was a
                            much better ferret than I, discovered, or seemed to have done so, that
                            the kidnapper and murderer had taken passage for Naples. My heart fell
                            when I heard it; almost as easily might I have tracked him in London. At
                            Naples I had spent a month, and knew the lying ingenuity, the laziness
                            in all but lies, of its swarming thousands. However, the little yacht
                            was again put under way, and, after a tedious passage, we saw the Queen
                            of cities. Here, as I expected, the pursuit was baffled.
I will not weary you with my wanderings, off more often than on the
                            track, up and down the Mediterranean, and sometimes far inland. If I
                            marked them on a map, however large the scale, you would have what
                            children call a crinkly crankly puzzle, like Lancashire in Bradshaw.
                            Once, indeed, I rested at the ancient tower, near my Lily's grave, which
                            I always visited twice in every year. I have some vague idea, now in my
                            old age, that though we Vaughans detest any display of feeling—except
                            indeed at times when the heart is too big for the skin—we are in
                            substance, without knowing it, a most romantic race. Whether we are
                            that, or not, is matter of small moment; one thing is quite certain, we
                            are strutted well and stable. We are not quick of reception, but we are
                            most retentive. Never was there man of us who ever loved a woman and
                            cast her off through weariness; never was there woman of our house who
                            played the jilt, when once she had passed the pledge of love. And after
                            all I have seen of the world, and through my dark misfortune few men
                            have seen more, it is my set conclusion that strong tenacity is the
                            foremost of all the virtues. My enemy has it, I freely own, and through
                            all his wickedness it saves him from being contemptible.
For a time, as I said before, I paused from my continual search, and
                            abode in the old gray tower. That search now appeared so hopeless, that
                            I was half inclined to believe no better policy could be found than
                            this. Some day or other the robber would surely return and lay claim to
                            the lands of the Della Croce. At present he durst not do it, while under
                            the ban of piracy and the suspicion of his uncle's murder. Moreover, I
                            thought it my duty to see to the welfare of my children's property.
                            Under the deed-poll of the old Signor, his friend at Prato and myself
                            were trustees and guardians. But I could not live there long: it was too
                            painful for me to sit alone in the desolate rooms where my children
                            ought to be toddling, or to wander through the shrubberies and among the
                            untended flowers, every one of them whispering "Lily." Formerly I had
                            admired and loved that peculiar stillness, that rich deep eloquent
                            solitude, which mantles in bucolic gray the lawns and glades of Corsica.
                            But when I so admired and loved, I was a happy man, a man who had
                            affection near him, and could warm himself when he pleased. Now though I
                            had no friends or friendship, neither cared for any, solitude struck me
                            to the bones, because it seemed my destiny.
After striving for half a year to do my duty as a hermit Signor, I found
                            myself, one dreary morning, fingering my pistols gloomily, and fitting a
                            small bullet into my ear. My thumb caught in the guard of the Signor's
                            locket, and jerked it up my waistcoat. It was the same which the poor
                            old man had pressed to his dying lips. There was Lily's hair and
                            Harry's, and a tiny wisp of down since added, belonging to baby—name
                            unknown. Looking at them and seeing how Lily's bound them together and
                            to me, I felt ashamed of my cowardly gloom, and resolved to quit myself
                            like a man in my duty towards the three. I rode at once to Prato, and
                            persuaded Count Gaffori to come and live at the tower. Like his old
                            friend the Signor, he had only himself and his lovely daughter to think
                            of; but unlike Signor Dezio he had lost nearly all his paternal
                            property, through political troubles. Therefore it was for him no little
                            comfort and advantage to be placed at the head of a household again, and
                            restored to some worldly importance. Nevertheless, his sense of honour
                            was so nice and exacting, that I thought I should never succeed in
                            bringing him to my views; and indeed I must have failed but for his
                            daughter's assistance. A very sweet elegant girl she was, and she had
                            been a great friend of my Lily's. If I could ever have loved again, I
                            should have loved that maiden: but the thing was impossible.
The old Count promised to come and settle at Veduta tower—which name, in
                            light days, I had corrupted into "Vendetta"—and living there to assume
                            the management of the estates, in trust for my lost infants, as soon as
                            his arrangements could be made. I saw nothing that need have delayed him
                            a day; however, he declared that he must have a month to get ready, and
                            he was plainly a man whom nature meant not to be pushed. So I employed
                            the interval in having my dear old "Lilyflower" overhauled at
                            Marseilles, coppered, and thoroughly painted. I could not bear to alter
                            our little love-boat, as my darling called it, even in outward
                            appearance; but like our love she had laboured through many a tempest;
                            unlike it, she needed repairs. However, I saved from the painter's brush
                            our favourite quarter-deck bench, whereon through the moonlight watches
                            my Lily seemed still to recline.
And so my life for some years wandered on, a worthless, unsettled,
                            forlorn existence, only refreshed at intervals by return to the scenes
                            of past happiness. If I had really wronged Lepardo Della Croce, he could
                            hardly have wished for a better revenge. But in truth I had never
                            wronged him. Even if I had never come near his betrothed, it is quite
                            certain she would not have accepted him. And he, by his own desertion,
                            had left her free to choose.
Late in the autumn of 1812, when I had abandoned all hope of ever
                            recovering my little ones, except by one of those eddies of Providence,
                            which we men call accidents, and in which I place my confidence to this
                            hour, at that season, I say, I landed at Gibraltar, being wind-bound in
                            the straits. We were making for Lisbon, where I was to ship some English
                            watches, guns, and fine cutlery for Ajaccio. What a loss of rank for the
                            "Lilyflower," to turn her into a trading smack! Well, I could not see it
                            so; and I am sure her late mistress, who with all her sweet romance was
                            an excellent hand at a bargain, would have thought it far more below my
                            dignity for me to sponge on our children. There was plenty of money in
                            hand at Veduta tower; but having retired from stewardship, I did not
                            feel myself justified in drawing upon my children. Therefore, and for
                            the sake of the large acquaintance and great opportunities gained, I had
                            renewed my connection with the firm of Green, Vowler, and Green.
                            Somehow, I could not bear to revisit the shores of England; otherwise I
                            am sure that with the knowledge I now possessed of the Mediterranean
                            ports, and a house of such standing and enterprise to back me, I should
                            quickly have made my fortune. My vessel, moreover, was much too small
                            for the fruit-trade, even if I could have lowered her to an uncleanly
                            freight; but she was just the craft for valuable goods in small compass.
                            I knew the Corsican fondness for arms and first-rate cutlery; and the
                            tools the poor Signor Dezio meant to astonish me with, certainly did
                            astonish me by their wonderful badness. True, the material was good, but
                            all the waters of the Restonica will not convert a hammer into a
                            handsaw. Although hardware was not at all in his line of business, Peter
                            Green most kindly undertook to send me a cargo of first-rate Sheffield
                            and Birmingham goods, by a return fruit-schooner. These, consigned to
                            his Lisbon agent, I could fetch away, as I pleased, or wanted them.
                            Having arranged with a shrewd merchant of Ajaccio to take my goods
                            wholesale, and save the dignity of all the Vogheni from haggling, I had
                            already made six trips, and in spite of the most tyrannical douane
                            perhaps in all the world, I as a Corsican, importing goods in a Corsican
                            bottom, had cleared very nearly three hundred per cent. on my outlay. We
                            were now on our seventh voyage, to reship the last of the second English
                            consignment, when a violent gale from the west met us right in the
                            teeth, and we were forced to bear up for the anchorage. A first-rate
                            sea-boat the "Lilyflower" was, although she had been built for racing,
                            and for two or three years had beaten all competitors, whenever there
                            was wind enough for a cat to stand on the sheets. But one hot June day
                            she got beaten in a floating match, when the lightest bung went fastest,
                            and her prig of a "noble owner" sold her in disgust, and built a thing
                            that drew as much water as a nautilus. In her he was happily upset, and
                            could hardly find a sheet of paper to hold on by. Knowing some little
                            about yachts, from my pool and reach experiences, I bought the famous
                            racing cutter at about a quarter her value; and even in these, her olden
                            days, she could exhibit her taffrail to the smartest fruit-clipper—the
                            name was then just invented—that ever raced for the Monument. Her
                            register was fifty tons, but she carried eighty.
Landing at Gibraltar, I kept clear of my countrymen, not that I dislike
                            them, but because—well I cannot tell why; and strolled away to the
                            Spanish and Moorish quarters.
It was a windy evening, and in front of a low refreshment house some
                            sailors and Spanish girls were dancing. A squabble arose among them;
                            something I think it was about a young girl's dress. Knives were drawn,
                            and two men were stabbed in less than the time I am speaking. I just
                            saved the life of one, just saved it by half an inch. A fine-looking
                            Spaniard lay under a Moor, who had tripped him up in their quick way.
                            The point of the knife had flashed through the Spaniard's shirt and his
                            flesh was cut, before the swing of my stick—upwards luckily—had jerked
                            the Moor off his body. If I had struck downwards, or a millionth part of
                            a second later, the blade would have stood in the heart. But I knew
                            those fellows by this time. The Moor lay senseless from the quick
                            upper-cut on his temples, and the knife was quivering where the impulse
                            had failed it.
Now if Petro and I held deliberate choice—"proairesis" Oxford calls
                            it—not to be turned into knife-sheaths, our only chance of developing
                            into action that undeniable process of "nous," was to be found in the
                            policy, vulgarly called "cut and run." At a shrill signal, from ship and
                            from shore, the Moors came swarming silently and swiftly. Their yellow
                            slippers and coffee-coloured legs seemed set upon springs by excitement.
                            Some of the Spaniards stood bravely by us, and with their aid we hurried
                            the wounded man into our boat, and pushed off just in time. Unlike the
                            Corsican peasants, our pursuers carried no fire-arms, and before they
                            could get any, we were at safe distance.
Having sent for an English surgeon, we kept the poor sailor on board the
                            yacht, until he was quite out of danger. We Britons are not, as a
                            general rule, an over-grateful race; we hate to be under an obligation,
                            and too often illustrate the great philosopher's saying, that the doer
                            feels more good will than the receiver of a kindness. Moreover, the
                            Spaniards, in the neighbourhood of the Rock, could hardly be expected to
                            love us, even if we were accustomed, which it is needless to say we are
                            not, to treat them with decent courtesy. Therefore I was surprised at
                            the deep and warm gratitude of this wounded man. A thing that enhanced
                            his debt to me—for life, in my opinion, is very little to owe—was that
                            he loved a young girl, the one over whom they had quarrelled, and he was
                            about to marry her.
Discovering who I was, for he knew nothing of me at first, he saw that he
                            could be of no little service to me. The only obstacle was a solemn
                            oath; but from this, he believed, he could soon obtain release. With an
                            Englishman's honest and honourable repugnance to any breach of faith, I
                            was long reluctant to encourage this absolution. But the thought of my
                            helpless children, robbed of their inheritance, and, still worse, of a
                            father's love, and dependant on the caprice of a superstitious villain,
                            this, and the recollection of my desolating wrongs, overpowered all
                            scruples. And is it not a wiser course, and more truly Christian, to
                            port the helm than to cross the bows of another man's religion, at any
                            rate so long as it be Christian also, though frogged in a pensioner's
                            coat?
Being duly absolved—for which he would not allow me to pay—the Spanish
                            sailor told me all he knew. He had been Lepardo's mate, on many a
                            smuggling run, and in many an act of piracy off the coast of Barbary.
                            But he had never liked his captain, no one ever did; though all the crew
                            admired him as the cleverest man in the world. After the felucca was
                            sold and her crew dispersed, the mate had followed for a while the
                            fortunes of Lepardo. He told me things about him which I knew not how to
                            believe. However, I will not repeat them, because they do not seem to
                            bear upon my story. The name of my little girl he could not remember,
                            for he was not at the christening, and she was always called the baby.
                            Being a good-natured man he took kindly to the children, and told me
                            anecdotes of them which brought the tears to my eyes.
After two or three months spent at Naples, they all left suddenly for
                            Palermo, on account, as the mate believed, of my unexpected arrival; and
                            here he lost sight of his commander, for tired by this time of an idle
                            life, and seeing no chance of any more roving adventures, he accepted a
                            berth in a brig bound for the Piræus, and now after many shifts and
                            changes was first mate of a fruit vessel sailing from Zante to London.
                            The most important part to me of all his communication was that, on
                            their previous voyage, they had carried to England Lepardo Della Croce
                            and my two dear children. That murderer and kidnapper had taken the lead
                            in some conspiracy against the government of the Two Sicilies, and
                            through the treachery of an accomplice had been obliged to fly for his
                            life. Disguising himself he contrived to reach Gibraltar, and took
                            refuge on English ground. He was now very poor and in great distress,
                            but still clung to the children, of whom he appeared to be fond, and who
                            believed him to be their father. The "Duo Brachiones" touching there, as
                            usual, for supplies, Lepardo met his old mate ashore; and begged for a
                            passage to England. They took him to London, and there of course lost
                            sight of him. He was greatly altered, the mate said, from the Lepardo of
                            old. Morose and reserved he had always been; but now misfortune had
                            covered him with a skin-deep philosophy. But his eyes contracted and
                            sparkled as of yore, whenever my name was mentioned; and the mate knew
                            what his intention was, in case he should find me a happy man. The
                            simple mate was still more surprised at the alteration in my children;
                            as pretty a pair, he said, as ever he set eyes on. But they were kept
                            most jealously from the notice of the crew, and even from their ancient
                            friend's attentions; they were never allowed to be on the deck, except
                            when the berths were being cleaned. They seemed to fear their reputed
                            father, a great deal more than they loved him.
Upon hearing this last particular I seized the mate by the hand, and felt
                            something rise in my throat: I was so delighted to learn that the pirate
                            had not succeeded in carrying nature by boarding. The next day I left
                            Petro to see to the hardware business—to which we were bound by
                            charter—while I set sail in the "Duo Brachiones" for the arms of my
                            darling little ones.
</div></body></text></TEI>