<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="53">
CHAPTER XVII.
How vast the rooms appeared to me, how endless the main passages, after
                            the dimensions long familiar at Tossil's Barton, and Mrs. Shelfer's. I
                            even feared to lose the way, where my childish feet had measured every
                            step. First I hurried to my own snug room, or rooms—for I had parlour
                            and bedroom adjoining—in the western wing, where mother used to live.
                            Everything there was in beautiful order, a lamp and a good fire lighted;
                            and Matilda Jenkins met me at the door.
Directly after our departure for Devonshire, Mr. Vaughan had thought fit
                            to discharge all the old servants, except the housekeeper and Matilda.
                            They were all in league against him, for they could not bear that the
                            "rightful owners," whom they had known so long, should be ejected.
                            Moreover, his discipline was far more stern than ours; for my father and
                            mother had always ruled by love. The housekeeper, a great friend of
                            mine, was retained from respect and policy, and poor Tilly (who entered
                            life through a dust-bin) from contempt of her insignificance. By that
                            time she had risen to the rank of scullery-maid and deputy dishwasher;
                            now she had climbed in the social scale to the position of
                            under-housemaid.
"Why, Matilda, how well you look, and how smart! I declare you are
                            getting quite tall. I suppose the new times agree with you better than
                            the old."
"Oh don't say that, Miss Clara, please don't! I'd tear the gownd off my
                            back"—looking savagely at the neat print—"if I thought it make you think
                            that. No, I gets a little more wages, but a deal more work, and I never
                            gets a kind word. Oh it does my heart good to see you here again, in
                            your own house, Miss Clara dear, and evil to them as drove you out"—and
                            she lifted the corner of her new white muslin apron;—"and I have tended
                            your rooms all myself, though it wasn't in my part, and never let no one
                            else touch them, ever since I was took from the kitchen, and always a
                            jug full of flowers, Miss, because you was so fond of them."
"Thank you, Matilda. How kind of you, to be sure!"
"Many's the time I've cried over them, Miss, and the new shilling you
                            give me, when we was little girls together. But please to call me
                            'Tilly,' Miss, the same as you always used."
"I can't stop to talk to you now, Tilly; how is Mrs. Fletcher?"
"Quite hearty, Miss, all but the rheumatics. Ah, she do suffer terrible
                            from them. Us both waited up, Miss, and I to and fro the door, till the
                            carriage come home; and then she went off to bed, and I was up with her,
                            and never knowed when you come. But she's getting up now, Miss, to come
                            here to see you."
"Go and stop her, at once. I will see her to-morrow. Stop, show me first
                            your master's room; knock gently and bring out the nurse. The doctor is
                            gone I believe."
"Yes, Miss, he left here at eight o'clock, for he had a long way to
                            drive, and he couldn't do nothing more. But you must not go, Miss, oh
                            pray, Miss, don't go there!"
We went along the passage, until we came to the door. I was surprised to
                            see a new door across the lobby, very closely fitted. There was an inner
                            door also, and the nurse did not seem very wakeful. Instead of knocking
                            again, Matilda retreated hastily. At last the nurse appeared, and I
                            found her to be a very respectable woman, who had been with my mother,
                            through several attacks of illness. A dark suspicion, which I had
                            scarcely confessed to myself, was partly allayed hereby. After
                            whispering for a few moments, she led me into the dimly lighted room,
                            and to my uncle's bed.
I started back in terror. Prepared as I was for a very great change, what
                            I saw astounded me. The face so drawn and warped aside, withered and yet
                            pulpy, with an undercast of blue; the lines of the mouth so trenched and
                            livid, that the screwed lips were like a bull's-eye in a blue diamond
                            pane; and the hair, so dark and curly when last I saw him, now shredded
                            in patches of waxy gray. The only sign of life I saw, was a feeble
                            twitching of the bed-clothes, every now and then. The poor eyes were
                            closed, hard, and wrinkled round; one wasted arm lay on the quilt, the
                            hand bent up at the wrist, the fingers clutched yet flabby, and as cold
                            as death. It was a sight for human pride to cower at, and be
                            quelled.
"Is he like this always?"
"No," she replied, "but he has been so now for ten hours and more:
                            generally he is taken with pain and thirst, every six hours; and it
                            makes my heart ache to hear him moan and cry."
"Does he say anything particular then?"
God knows I was not pursuing my own fell purpose in asking this. Thank
                            Him, I was not such a fiend as that. All I wished was to relieve him
                            whom I pitied so.
"Yes, he opens his eyes and stares, and then he always says, and he tries
                            to shake his head only he isn't strong enough, 'My fault, ah me, my
                            fault, and to rob them too! If I could but see her, if I could but see
                            her, and die!' He always says that first, and then that exhausts him so,
                            he can hardly say 'water' after, and then he moans so melancholy, and
                            then he goes off again."
The tears stood in her eyes, for she had a tender heart. I burst into my
                            usual violent flood, for I never have any half-crying.
"Have you any medicine to give him?"
"No, Miss, no more; he has taken a shopful already, though he can only
                            swallow at the time he wakes up. The doctor said to-night he could do no
                            more; this awful black fever must end in mortification; no medicine
                            moves it at all."
"Did the doctor call it black fever?"
"Yes, the very worst form of typhus of the real Irish type, such as they
                            have had once or twice in Manchester. It has settled most on the
                            stomach, but all the blood is poisoned."
And she sprinkled herself, and the bed again, with disinfecting fluid,
                            and threw some over me.
"Excuse me, Miss, you wouldn't allow me, so I am bound not to ask you.
                            You know you came in dead against my will, and dead against all
                            orders"—this was what the whispering had been about—"and if anything
                            happens to you, Miss Vaughan, who is to have all the property, but that
                            bad Mrs. Daldy?"
Oh! In a moment I saw the whole; though it was too black for belief,
                            blacker than any fever that festers the human heart. This was the
                            purpose with which that woman had sent for me. She had lied to me as to
                            the character of the disease. She had opposed me, because she knew it
                            the surest way to urge me. She had brought me too at night, when fevers
                            are doubly infectious.
"You see, Miss, we are forced to keep the three windows open, and the
                            passage doors all closed. It's a wonder I had any of the fluid left, for
                            they never sent it up this afternoon; but I had a drop put by, no thanks
                            to them for the same. Mrs. Daldy brought the first nurse, but she ran
                            clean away when the fever took the turn; and they were forced to send
                            for me, for nobody else would come near him. But my poor old man has no
                            work, and I've minded as bad a case as this, and they say I be
                            fever-proof. But you, Miss, you; I should never forgive myself, if
                            anything happened to you, and in your youth and bloom. Though I could
                            not stop you, you know I did my best. And they say you catch things most
                            when you come off a journey."
"Jane, whatever happens, you are not to blame. I have no fear whatever;
                            and now I am here, I will stay. It is safer so, both for myself and
                            others."
"Well, Miss, so I have heard say. Once in for it, keep to the air. But
                            come into this little room, if you want to talk to me, Miss. We can hear
                            the poor gentleman move, or even sigh; and the air is a little fresher
                            there. But we must keep the window open."
She led me into the dressing room; but even there the same crawling
                            creeping smell pervaded, as if a grave had been opened, when the ground
                            was full of gas. Instead of talking to the nurse, I began to think. It
                            broke upon me vaguely, that I had heard of some very simple remedy for a
                            fever of this nature, and that my dear mother, who in her prosperous
                            times was the village doctoress, had been acquainted with the case. But
                            in the whirl of my brain, I could not bring to mind what it was. Oh what
                            would I give, only to think of it now! Though not, I am sorry to say, at
                            all of a pious turn (at least if Mrs. Daldy is so), in the strong
                            feeling of the moment, I fell upon my knees, and prayed for help. So had
                            my mother taught me, and Mother Nature taught me now. I will not be so
                            daring as to say that my prayer was answered. Perhaps it was only that
                            it calmed my mind.
"Jane, have they been brewing lately?" Alas the bathos! But I can't help
                            it.
"Yes, Miss; last Thursday and Friday. They won't let me go near the
                            kitchen part: but I know it all the same."
"Go and get me a nice jug of fresh yeast. I will watch your master."
She stared, and hesitated; but saw that I was in earnest.
"I don't know where to find it, Miss; and none of them will come near me;
                            and they'll stop me too if they can. Why they won't bring my food to the
                            door, but put it half-way down the passage. They wanted to lock me in,
                            only I wouldn't stand that; and they break all the plates and dishes,
                            and to-day they sent word that my dinner must come in at the window
                            to-morrow."
"Low cowards and zanies! Now find the yeast, Jane, if you have to search
                            for an hour. They must all be gone to bed now, except Matilda Jenkins;
                            and she dare not stop you if you say you have my orders."
"Bless you, Miss; she'll run away as if I was a ghost."
"Then call to her, that I say she must go to bed directly."
After a few more words, Jane went her way stealthily, like a
                            thorough-bred thief; and I was left alone with my poor dying uncle.
                            Wonderful as it seemed to me, I felt now a tender affection for him, I
                            the resolute, the consistent, the bitter Clara Vaughan. Even if he had
                            told me that moment, that he had plotted my father's death, I would have
                            perilled my life for his; because I should have known that he was sorry.
                            Yet I was full of cold fear, lest he should awake to consciousness, and
                            utter that awful cry, while I alone was with him, in the dead hour of
                            night.
Sooner than I expected, the nurse came back with a jug of beautiful
                            yeast, smelling as fresh as daybreak. We put it outside the window on
                            the stone sill, to keep it cool and airy. She had seen no one except
                            Matilda, who was waiting for me, and crying dreadfully, predicting my
                            certain death, and her own too; if she should have to attend me. She
                            kept at a most respectful distance from Jane; and, with all her
                            affection, was glad to be clear of me for the night.
For nearly two hours, the nurse and I sat watching, with hardly a spoken
                            word, except that I asked one question.
"How often has Mrs. Daldy been to see my uncle?"
"She would hardly leave his bedside, until the fever declared itself.
                            Since then she has not been once."
Broad awake at that strange hour, and in that strange way, I began to
                            pass through the stereoscope of my brain the many strange slides of my
                            life. Of all of these, the last for the moment seemed the strangest.
                            Suddenly we heard a low feeble moan. Running into the bedroom, there we
                            saw the poor sick one with his eyes wide open, vainly attempting to
                            rise. I put my arms around him, and raised him on the pillow. He tried
                            to say 'thank you,' for he was always a gentleman in his manners; then
                            he gazed at me with hazily wondering eyes. Then he opened his mouth in a
                            spasmodic way, and began that bitter cry.
Ere he closed his mouth again, I poured well into his throat a
                            table-spoonful of yeast, handed to me by Jane. To my great pleasure, it
                            glided beyond the black tongue; and I gave him two more spoonfuls, while
                            he was staring at me with a weak and rigid amazement.
"No water, Jane, not a drop of water! It will work far better alone. He
                            doesn't know what it is, and he thinks he has had his water. Keep him
                            thirsty that he may take more."
As he lay thus in my arms, I felt that one side was icily cold, and the
                            other fiery hot. His face looked most ghastly and livid, but there was
                            not that mystical gray upon it, like the earth-shine on the moon, which
                            shows when the face of man is death's mirror, and the knee of death on
                            man's heart. In a minute he slid from my grasp, down on the pillow
                            again, and, with a long-drawn sigh, became once more stiff and
                            insensible. My hope was faint indeed, but still it was hope: if he had
                            hope's vitality, he might yet be saved.
The rest of that night was passed by the nurse and myself in heavy yet
                            broken sleep. Jane assured me that there was no chance of my poor uncle
                            becoming conscious again, for at least six hours. I was loth to forego
                            my watch, and argued that the dose we had given might cut short this
                            interval; but lo—while I kept repeating at weary and weary periods, that
                            I could do no harm, since the physician gave up, and I might do
                            good—sleep, the lover of repetition, laid his hand alike on my formula
                            and myself. Dear Judy's howl was in my dream, and Mrs. Shelfer's never
                            ceasing prattle.
</div></body></text></TEI>