<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="61">
CHAPTER VII.
Next day when I showed my uncle the two sealed packets which I had
                            rescued, and told him all that had happened, at first he was overcome
                            with terror and amazement. His illness seemed to have banished all his
                            satirical humour, and that disdainful apathy which is the negative form
                            of philosophy. He took the parcels with a trembling hand, and began to
                            examine the seals.
"All safe," he said at last, "all safe, to my surprise. Dear child, I owe
                            you more than life this time. You have defeated my worst enemy. To your
                            care only will I commit these papers, one of which, I hope will soon be
                            of little value. It is my will; and by it your father's estates are
                            restored to you, while the money which I have saved by my own care and
                            frugality is divided into two portions, one for you, and the other, upon
                            certain events, for that worthless Mrs. Daldy. This must be altered at
                            once. When you have heard my story, you may read the will, if you like.
                            Indeed I wish you to do so, because it will prove that in spite of all
                            our estrangement, I have meant all along to act justly towards you. But
                            that you may understand things properly, I will tell you my strange
                            history. Only one thing you must promise before I begin."
"What is it, uncle dear?"
"That you will forgive me for my one great error. Although it was the
                            cause of your dear father's death."
I could not answer, for a minute. Then I took his hand and kissed it, as
                            he turned his face away.
"My darling, I am not quite strong enough now after all you have been
                            telling me. Although I had dark suspicions yesterday that some plot was
                            in action; for I had observed that things in the study were not as I had
                            left them; and I had other reasons too. But take me, my precious child,
                            to the sunny bank this afternoon, and please God, I will at least begin
                            my tale."
I begged him in vain to defer it: there was a weight upon his mind, he
                            said, which he must unload. So in the early afternoon, I wheeled him
                            gently to the sheltered nook. There, with the breezes way-lost among new
                            streets of verdure, tall laburnum dangling chains of gold around us, and
                            Giudice stretching out his paws in sunny yawns of glory, I listened to
                            my uncle's tale, and was too young to understand the sigh which
                            introduced it. How few may tell the story of their lives without
                            remembering how they played with life! Alas the die thrown once for all,
                            but left to roll unwatched, and lie uncounted!
Though I cannot tell the story in his impressive way, I will try to
                            repeat it, so far as my memory serves, in his words, and with his
                            feelings. Solemnly and sadly fell the history from his lips, for his
                            mind from first to last was burdened with the knowledge that the end was
                            nigh at hand, that nothing now remained, except to wait with resignation
                            the impending blow.
STORY OF EDGAR VAUGHAN.
"I have always been, as you know, of a roving unsocial nature. My father
                            being dead before I was born, and my mother having married again before
                            I could walk, there was little to counteract my centrifugal tendencies.
                            I seemed to belong to neither family; though I always clung to the
                            Vaughans, and disliked the Daldys. The trustees of my mother's
                            settlement were my virtual guardians; for all the Vaughan estates being
                            most strictly entailed, my father had nothing to dispose of, and
                            therefore had made no will. My mother's settlement comprised only
                            personal estate, for no power had been reserved under the entail to
                            create any charges upon the land. The mortgages, of which no doubt you
                            have heard, as paid off by your father, were encumbrances of long
                            standing.
"The estates, I need not tell you, were shamefully mismanaged, during
                            your father's long minority. An agent was appointed under the Court of
                            Chancery, and an indolent rogue he was. Meanwhile your father and myself
                            went through the usual course of education, no difference being made in
                            that respect between us. Although we were only half-brothers, we were
                            strongly attached to each other, especially after a thorough drubbing
                            which your good papa found it his duty to administer to me at Eton. It
                            did me a world of good; before that, I had rather despised him for the
                            gentleness of his nature. At Oxford, after your father had left, I kept
                            aloof both from the great convivial and from the thinly peopled reading
                            set, and lived very much by myself. Soon as the humorous doings, whose
                            humour culminates in the title 'lectures,' soon as these were over, I
                            was away from the freckled stones, punting lazily on the Cherwell, with
                            French and Italian novels; or lounging among the gipseys on the steppes
                            of Cowley. Hall I never frequented, but dined at some distant tavern,
                            and spent the evening, and often the night till Tom-curfew, in riding
                            through the lonely lanes towards Otmoor, Aston Common, or Stanlake. It
                            was strange that I never fell in love, for I had plenty of small
                            adventures, and fell in with several pretty girls, but never one I cared
                            for. Gazing on the wreck I am, it is no conceit to say that in those
                            times I was considered remarkably good-looking. Of course I was not
                            popular; that I never cared for; but nobody had reason to dislike me. I
                            affected no peculiarity, gave myself no airs, behaved politely to all
                            who took the trouble to address me; and the world, which I neither
                            defied nor courted, followed its custom in such cases, and let me have
                            my way.
"At Lincoln's Inn, my life was much the same, except that wherries
                            succeeded punts, and evening rides were exchanged for moonlight walks in
                            the park. It was reported at home, as it is of most men who are called
                            to the Bar, that I was likely to do great things. There never was a
                            chance of it. Setting aside the question of ability, I had no
                            application, no love of the law, no idea whatever of touting; and still
                            more fatal defect, my lonely habits were darkening into a shy dislike of
                            my species.
"You have heard that I was extravagant. As regards my early career, the
                            charge is quite untrue. Money, I confess, was never much in my thoughts,
                            nor did I ever attempt to buy things below their value; but my wants
                            were so few, and my mode of life so ungenial, that I never exceeded the
                            moderate sum allotted to me as a younger son. Afterwards this was
                            otherwise, and for excellent reasons.
"During the height of the London season I was always most restless and
                            misanthropic. Not that I looked with envy on the frivolous dust of
                            fashion, and clouds of sham around me; but that I felt myself lowered as
                            an Englishman by the cringing, the falsehood, the small babooneries,
                            which we call 'society.' I longed to be, if I could but afford it, where
                            men have more manly self-respect, and women more true womanhood.
"Your parents were married, my darling Clara, at the end of December,
                            1826, six years before your birth. Upon that occasion, your dear father,
                            the only man in the world for whom I cared a fig, made me a very
                            handsome present. In fact he gave me a thousand pounds. He would have
                            given me a much larger sum, for he was a most liberal man, but the
                            estates had suffered from long mismanagement, and were seriously
                            encumbered. I do not hesitate to say that the gross income of this
                            property is now double what it was when your father succeeded to it, and
                            the net income more than quadruple. During the four years which elapsed
                            between that event and his marriage, he had devoted all he could spare
                            to the clearance of encumbrances and therefore, as I said, the present
                            he made me was a most generous one. More than this, he invited and
                            pressed me to come and live on the estate, and offered to set me up in a
                            farm which I might hold from him on most advantageous terms. Upon my
                            refusal, he even begged me to accept, at a most liberal salary, the
                            stewardship of the property, and the superintendence of great
                            improvements, which he meant to effect. I remember, as if it were
                            yesterday, the very words he used. He took my hand in his, and with that
                            genial racy smile, which very few could resist,
"'Come, Ned,' he cried, 'there are but two of us; there's room for both
                            in the old nest; and you are big enough to thrash me now.'"
At the sweet recollection of his Eton drubbing, as he called it, my poor
                            uncle's eyes grew moist.
"So you see, my child, instead of grudging your father the property, I
                            had every reason to love and revere him. However, I refused this as well
                            as the other offer; but I accepted his present, and invested it rather
                            luckily. After spending a pleasant month at home—as I always called it—I
                            returned to London early in April, 1827. There are no two minds alike,
                            any more than there are two bodies; and yet how little variety exists in
                            polite society! Surely it were more reasonable to wedge the infant face
                            into a jelly-mould, to flute its ears and cheeks like collared head, and
                            grow the nose and lips and eyebrows into rosettes and grapes and acorns,
                            than to bow and cramp and squeeze a million minds into one set model.
                            Yet here I find men all alike, Dane and Saxon, Celt and Norman, like
                            those who walk where snow is deep, or Alpine travellers lashed to a
                            rope, trudging each in other's footprint, swinging all their arms in
                            time, looking neither right nor left, and so on through life's
                            pilgrimage, a file some million deep. Who went first they do not know,
                            why they follow they cannot tell, what it leads to they never ask. I was
                            marked and scorned at once, because I dared to adopt a hat that did not
                            scalp me in half-an hour, and a cravat that did not throttle me; and
                            even had the hardihood to dine when I felt hungry. How often I longed
                            for a land of freedom and common sense, where it is no disgrace to carry
                            a barrel of oysters, or shake hands with a tradesman. I know what you
                            are smiling at, Clara. You are thinking to yourself, 'how different you
                            are now, my good uncle; and wern't you a little inconsistent in
                            sanctioning all this livery humbug here?' Yes, I am different now. I am
                            older and wiser than to expect to wipe away with my coat-sleeve the
                            oxide of many centuries. As for the livery, it makes them happy: it is
                            an Englishman's uniform. And I have seen and suffered so bitterly from
                            the violence of an untamed race, that I admire less what I used to call
                            the unlassoed arch of the human neck. I have seen a coarse line
                            somewhere,

"'And freedom made a deal too free with me,'

which expresses briefly the moral of my life.
                            However, at the time I speak of, nursing perhaps a younger son's bias
                            against the social laws, and fresh from the true simplicity and
                            unaffected warmth of your father's character and the gentle sweetness of
                            your mother's, I could not sit on the spikes of fashion's hackney coach,
                            as becomes a poor Briton, till the driver whips behind. Finding of
                            course that no one cared whether I sat there or not, and that all I got
                            at the side of the road was pea-shots from cads in the dickey, I did
                            what thousands have done before me, and will probably do again, I voted
                            my fellow-Britons a parcel of drivelling slaves, and longed to be out of
                            the gang. Perhaps I should never have made my escape, for like most of
                            my class, I spent all my energy in small eccentricity, if it had not
                            been for what we idlers entitle the force of circumstances. At a time
                            when my life was flowing on calmly enough though babbling against its
                            banks, it came suddenly on an event which drove it into another and
                            rougher channel.
"Early one afternoon in the month of April, 1829, I launched my little
                            boat from the Temple-stairs, where I kept it, and feeling more than
                            usually saturnine and moody, resolved on a long expedition. So I
                            victualled my ship like Robinson Crusoe, and took some wraps and
                            coverings. It was then slack water, just at the height of the flood. I
                            meant to have gone to Richmond, but being far too indolent to struggle
                            against the tide, I yielded to nature's good pleasure, and pulled away
                            down stream. In a few minutes a rapid ebb tide was running, and I made
                            up my mind to go with it as far as ever it chose, and to return with the
                            flood whenever that pleased to meet me.
"After rowing steadily for several hours, I found myself a long way past
                            my customary Cape Turn-again. With a strong ebb tide as well as a
                            land-fresh in the river, I had got beyond Barking Reach, and as far as
                            the Dagenham marshes. Here some muddy creeks, pills, and sluggish
                            channels wind and welter among the ooze-lands on the north side of the
                            Thames. All around them stretches and fades away a dreary flat
                            monotonous waste; no dot of a house, no jot of a tree, to vary the dead
                            expanse; except that by the river-side one or two low cabooses, more
                            like hoys than houses, are grounded among the slime. This, so far as my
                            memory serves, was the state of these Essex marshes in the year 1829:
                            how it is now I cannot say.
"It was high time for me to turn: row as I would, I could hardly get back
                            to my haven by midnight. Outrigger skiffs were not yet known; and an
                            oarsman could not glide along at the rate of ten miles an hour. Just as
                            I was working round, a steam packet, which had been moored a short way
                            below, crippled perhaps in her engines, now at the turn of the tide
                            passed up, and was quickly out of sight. As she passed me I hailed for a
                            tow-rope; but either they could not hear, or they did not choose to
                            notice me. There was nothing for it but to bend my back to the oars, and
                            keep a sharp look out. Presently the flood began to make strongly up the
                            river, and I gave way with a will, my paddles bending and the water
                            gleaming in the early starlight. It was a lonely and melancholy scene.
                            The gray mist returning from some marshy excursion, and hugging the warm
                            sea-water, floated along in dull folds, with a white flaw of steam here
                            and there curdling over the current. Not a ship, not a barge was in
                            sight; no voice of men or low of cattle broke the foggy silence: but the
                            wash of the stream on its sludgy marge, or on some honey-combed
                            mooring-post, surged every now and then betwixt the jerks of my
                            rowlocks. The loneliness and the sadness harmonised with my sombre mind.
                            All is transient, all is selfish, all is a flux of melancholy. If we
                            toss and dance we are only boats adrift; we are nothing more than crazy
                            tide-posts, if we be philosophers.
"Suddenly a clear loud cry broke my vacant musings. It startled me so
                            that I caught a crab, ceased rowing, and gazed around. At first I could
                            not tell whence it came, till my boat, with the way she had on her, shot
                            round a low spit of the Essex shore, which from the curve of the river I
                            was nearing rapidly. Louder and louder the cry was twice repeated, and I
                            heard in the still spring evening the oaths of men and the scuffling of
                            feet. Within fifty yards of me was an ill-looking house, made of
                            battens, and raised on piles above high water mark. A tattered sign hung
                            on a pole, and a causeway led to the steps. While I was hesitating, two
                            figures crossed a lattice window, as if in violent struggle, and a heavy
                            crash resounded. Three strong strokes of my oars, and the keel grated on
                            the causeway. Out I leaped with the boat-hook, threw the painter over a
                            post, and rushed up the slimy jetty, and the narrow wooden steps. The
                            door was fastened, I pushed it with all my force, but in vain. One faint
                            scream reached my ears, as of some one at length overpowered. Swinging
                            the boat-hook with both hands, I struck the old door with the butt, and
                            broke it open. In the lower room there was no one, but a moaning and
                            trampling sounded over head. Upstairs I ran, and into the room where the
                            villany was doing. A poor girl lay on the floor at the last gasp of
                            exhaustion. Two ruffians with a rope were bending over her. Down went
                            one, at a blow of my boat-hook, flat beside his victim: the other leaped
                            at my throat. I saw and soon felt that he was a powerful man, but in
                            those days I was no cripple. We were most evenly matched. I wrenched his
                            hand from my throat, but twice he got me under him, twice I writhed from
                            his grasp like a python from a tiger's jaw. Clutched and locked in each
                            other's arms, in vain we tugged to get room for a blow. Throttle, and
                            gripe, and roll—which should be first insensible? An accident gave me
                            the mastery. For a moment we lay face to face, glaring at each other,
                            drawing the strangled breath, loosing the deadly grip, panting,
                            throbbing, and watching. My boat-hook lay on the floor, my enemy spied
                            and made a sudden dash at it. Instead of withholding, I jobbed him
                            towards it with all my might, and as he raised it, the point entered one
                            of his eyes. With a yell of pain and fury, he sank beneath me
                            insensible. Shaking and quaking all over after the desperate struggle, I
                            bound him and his mate, hand and foot, with the twisted tarry junk,
                            which they had meant for the maiden.
"At length I had time to look round. On a low truckle bed at the end of
                            the long dark room, in which a ship-lamp was burning, there lay an
                            elderly lady in a perfect stupor of fright and illness. Upon the floor
                            with her head thrown back against the timbers, and her black eyes wide
                            open and fixed on me, sat a girl of remarkable beauty, though her cheeks
                            were as white as death. A magnificent ring, for which she had fought
                            most desperately, was wrenched from its place on her finger and hung
                            over the opal nail, for her hands were clenched, and her arms quite
                            stiff, in the swoon of utter exhaustion. Both ladies were in deep
                            mourning.
"For the rest a few words will suffice. The poor ladies revived at last,
                            after chafing of hands and sprinkling, and told me where to find the
                            woman of the house, who had been locked up in another room by her
                            husband and brother. There was no one else on the premises. How came the
                            ladies there, what was their destination, and why were they so outraged?
                            They were on their return to London from the Continent, being called
                            home by tidings of death, and had sailed from Antwerp two days and
                            a-half before, in the steamer which I had seen lying to. Steamers were
                            then heavy lumbering things, and all that time Mrs. Green and her
                            daughter had been knocking about on a pecky sea. No wonder that the poor
                            mother had cried out feebly, to be landed anywhere, anywhere in the
                            world, where things would leave off going round. And before they came to
                            that tedious halt in the river, fair Adelaide, who had enjoyed her meals
                            throughout, renewed and completed her poor mamma's excavation, by
                            inquiring calmly with her mouth full of pickled pork, where the
                            peas-pudding was. Now too Miss Adelaide soon recovered from her fearful
                            battle for honour and life. She was what is called now-a-days a girl of
                            "splendid organisation." If she had not been so, she would have lain ere
                            now with her mother at the bottom of Barking Reach. The two scoundrels
                            of that lonesome hostelry had been ordered to send to Barking for a
                            conveyance. But they only pretended to do so; for they had cast foul
                            covetous eyes on the wealth of their unknown guests and on brave
                            Adelaide's beauty. Beyond a doubt both ladies would have been murdered,
                            but for the gallant resistance, the vigour, and presence of mind of
                            Adelaide.
"Having restored their watches, and scattered trinkets, and led the poor
                            things from the scene of the combat, I was quite at a loss for means to
                            convey them home. Barking was a long way off, and the marshy track
                            unknown to me, and not likely to be found in the dark. Moreover, there
                            must be some hazard in leaving them still in that villanous den, no
                            matter how their cowardly foes might be bound. At last, and with great
                            difficulty, I embarked the two ladies in my shallop, and wrapped them
                            warmly from the night air; then after relashing my prisoners, and
                            locking them up in separate rooms, and the woman downstairs, I pulled
                            away stoutly for Woolwich. Here I obtained a carriage, and started my
                            convoy for London, and then returned with two policemen to the "Old Row
                            Barge," as the low caboose was called. But both our birds were flown, as
                            I was inclined to expect. Most likely the woman had contrived to get
                            out, and release them. At any rate the "Old Row Barge" had no crew, and
                            the deserters had set it on fire. The flames, as we rowed away, after
                            vainly searching the marshes, cast a lurid glow on the mud-banks, and on
                            the slackening tide; a true type it was of what soon befell me—the
                            burning of my caboose. The two men were caught long afterwards by the
                            Thames Police, and transported for life on a conviction for river
                            piracy. At least, I was told that they were the men."
"And of course, dear uncle, you fell deeply in love with the beautiful
                            Adelaide Green."
"Of course, my dear, a young lady would conclude so. But at present I
                            must not talk any more." I had several times tried to stop him. "And
                            what I have next to relate is matter of deeper feeling. By Jove, to
                            think how I battled with that strong man! And now your little fist,
                            Clara, would floor me altogether."
He sighed, and I sighed for him. Then I thought of Mr. Shelfer, and
                            gloried in my prowess, as I wheeled my uncle home.
</div></body></text></TEI>