<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
CHAPTER V.
When Isola came on the Thursday, and I obtained some little glimpse of
                            her, she expressed her joy in a thousand natural ways, well worth
                            feeling and seeing, not at all worth telling. I loved her for them more
                            and more. I never met a girl so warm of heart. Many women can sulk for
                            days; most women can sulk for an hour; I believe that no provocation
                            could have made Isola sulky for two minutes. She tried sometimes (at
                            least she said so), but it was no good.
And yet she felt as keenly as any of the very sulkiest women can do; but
                            she had too much warmth of heart and imagination to live in the folds of
                            that cold-blooded snake. Neither had she the strong selfishness, on
                            which that serpent feeds.
In the afternoon, as we still sat together, in rushed Mrs. Shelfer with
                            her bonnet on, quite out of breath, and without her usual ceremony of
                            knocking at the door. I could not think where she had been all the day;
                            and she had made the greatest mystery of it in the morning, and wanted
                            to have it noticed. Up she ran to me now, and pushed Isola out of the
                            way.
"Got 'em at last, Miss. Got 'em at last, and no mistake. No more Dr.
                            Franks, nor bandages, nor curtains down, nor nothing. Save a deal of
                            trouble and do it in no time. But what a job I had to get them to be
                            sure; if the cook's mate hadn't knowed Charley, they would not have let
                            me had 'em, after going all the way to Wapping." She holds up something
                            in triumph.
"What is it, Mrs. Shelfer? I am sorry to say I cannot see."
"And right down glad of it, I am, my good friend. Yes, yes. Or I should
                            have had all my journey for nothing. But Miss Idols knows, I'll be bound
                            she does, or it's no good going to College."
"Let me look at it first," says Isola, "we learn almost everything at
                            college, Mrs. Shelfer; but even we senior sophists don't know every
                            thing without seeing it yet."
"Then put your pretty eyes on them, Miss Idols; I'll be bound it will
                            make them caper. I never see such fine ones, nor the cook's mate either.
                            Why they're as big as young whelks."
"Mollusca, or Crustacea, or something!" exclaims Isola, with more pride
                            than accuracy, "what queer little things. I must take them to my
                            papa."
"Now, young ladies," cried Mrs. Shelfer in her grandest style, "I see I
                            must explain them to you after all. Them's the blessed shells the poor
                            sailors put in their eyes to scour them out, and keep them bright, and
                            make them see in the dark against the wind. Only see how they crawls.
                            There now, Miss Valence, I'll pick you out two big lively fellows, and
                            pop one for you in the corner of each eye; the cook's mate showed me how
                            to lift your eyelids."
"How kind of him, to be sure!'
"And it will crawl about under the lid, you must not mind its hurting a
                            bit; and it won't come out till to-morrow when the clock strikes twelve,
                            and then it will have eaten up every bit, and your eyes will be brighter
                            than diamonds. Charley has seen them do it ever so many times, and he
                            says it's bootiful, and they don't mind giving five shillings a piece
                            for them, when they are scarce."
"Did Mr. Shelfer ever try them? His eyes are so sharp: perhaps that is
                            the reason."
"No. I never heard that he did, Miss. But bless you he never tells me
                            half he does; no, nor a quarter of half." At this recollection, she
                            fetches a little short sigh, her nearest approach to melancholy, for she
                            is not sentimental. "Care killed the cat," is her favourite
                            aphorism.
"Then when he comes home, Mrs. Shelfer, pop one of these shells, a good
                            big one, into each of his eyes; and let us know the effect to-morrow
                            morning, and I'll give you a kiss, if you do it well."
This is the bribe Isola finds most potent with everybody.
"Lor, Miss Idols, bless your innocent heart, do you suppose he would let
                            me? Why he thinks it a great thing to let me tie his shoe, and he won't
                            only when he has had a good dinner."
"Well," cries Isola, "I am astonished! Catch me tying my husband's shoes!
                            I shall expect him to tie mine, I know; and he shall only do that when
                            he is very good."
With a regal air, she puts out the prettiest foot ever seen. Mrs. Shelfer
                            laughs.
"Lor, Miss, it's all very well for girls to talk; and they all does it,
                            till they knows better. Though for the likes of you, any one would do
                            anything a most. Pray, Miss Idols, if I may make so bold, how many
                            offers of marriage have you received?"
"Let me think! Oh I know! it's one more than I am years old. Eighteen
                            altogether, Mrs. Shelfer; if you count the apothecary's boy, and the
                            nephew of the library; but then they were all of them boys, papa's
                            pupils and that, a deal too young for me. They were all going to die,
                            when I refused them; but they are all alive so far, at any rate. Isn't
                            it too bad of them?"
"Well, Miss Idols, if you get as good a husband as you deserve, and that
                            is saying a deal, he'll tie your shoe may be for a month, and then he'll
                            look for you to tie his."
"And long he may look, even if he has shellfish in his eyes. Why look,
                            Mrs. Shelfer, they're all crawling about!"
"Bootiful, isn't it? Bootiful! I wish Miss Valence could see them. And
                            look at the horns they goes routing about with! How they must tickle
                            your eyelids. And what coorious eyes they has! Ah, I often think, Miss
                            Idols, I likes this sort of thing so much, what a pity it is as I wasn't
                            born in the country. I should never be tired of watching the snails, and
                            the earywigs, and the tadpoles. Why, I likes nothing better than to see
                            them stump-legged things come to table in the cabbage. I have not seen
                            one now for ever so long. Oh that Charley, what dreadful lies he do
                            tell!"
"What about, Mrs. Shelfer?"
"Why, my good friend, he says them green things with stripes on, and ever
                            so many legs, turns to live butterflies, after they be dead. But I was
                            too many for him there. Yes, yes. The last one as I boiled, I did not
                            say a word about it to him, but I put it by in a chiney-teacup, with the
                            saucer over, in case it should fly away. Bless your heart, young ladies,
                            there it is now, as quiet as anything, and no signs of a butterfly. And
                            when he tells me any lies, about where he was last night, I just goes to
                            the cupboard, and shows him that; and never another word can he say. And
                            so, Miss Valence, you won't try these little snails, after my journey
                            and all!"
"Of course I won't, Mrs. Shelfer. But I am sincerely obliged to you for
                            your trouble, as well as for all your kind nursing, which I can never
                            forget. Now let me buy those shellfish from you, and Miss Isola will
                            take them as a present to her papa."
"No, no, unless he will put them in his eyes, Miss. I won't have them
                            wasted. Charley will sell them again in no time. He knows lots of
                            sailors. Most likely he'll get up a raffle for them, and win them
                            himself."
Away she hurries to take off the bonnet she has been so proud of, for the
                            last two and twenty years. Though I declined the services of the
                            ophthalmist snails, my sight returned very rapidly. How delicious it was
                            to see more and more every day! Plenty of cold water was the present
                            regimen. Vision is less a vision, every time I use it. In a week more, I
                            can see quite well, though obliged to wear a shade.
One morning, dear Isola runs upstairs, out of breath as usual; but, what
                            is most unusual, actually frowning. Has Cora tyrannised, or what?
                            Through the very shade of her frown, comes her sunny smile, as she
                            kisses me.
"Oh, I am so vexed. I have brought him to the door; and now he won't come
                            in!"
"Who, my darling?"
"Why, Conny, to be sure. My brother Conrad. I had set my heart on showing
                            him to you, directly you could see."
"Why won't he come in?"
"Because he thinks that you ought not to see strangers, until you are
                            quite well. He has not got to the corner yet. I can run like a deer.
                            Send word by me, that you are dying to see him."
"Not quite that. But say how glad I shall be."
"I'll say that you won't get well till you do."
"Say what you like. He will know it's only your nonsense."
Off she darts; she is quick as light in her movements, and soon returns
                            with her brother.
I lift my weak eyes to his bright ones, and recognise at once the
                            preserver of my mother and myself. But I see, in a moment, that he has
                            not the faintest remembrance of me. My whole face is altered by my
                            accident, and even my voice affected by the long confinement. When he
                            met me in the wood, he seemed very anxious not to look at me; when he
                            saved my life from the rushing mountain, he had little opportunity. Very
                            likely he would not have known me, under another name; even without this
                            illness. So let it be. I will not reveal myself. I thanked him once, and
                            he repulsed me; no doubt he had a reason, for I see that he is a
                            gentleman. Let that reason hold good: I will not trespass on it.
He took my hand with a smile, the counterpart of Isola's. He had heard of
                            me so constantly, that I must excuse the liberty. A dear friend of his
                            sister's could be no stranger to him. A thrill shot through me at the
                            touch of his hand, and my eyes were weak. He saw it, and placed a chair
                            for me further from the light. On his own face, not the sun, for the
                            "drawing-room" windows look north, but the strong reflection of the
                            noon-day light was falling.
How like he is to Isola, and yet how different! So much stronger, and
                            bolder, and more decided, so tall and firm of step. His countenance open
                            as the noon, incapable of concealment; yet if he be the same (and, how
                            can I doubt it?), then at least there seemed to be some mystery about
                            him.
Isola, with the quickness of a girl, saw how intently I observed him, and
                            could not hide her delight.
"There now, Clara dear, I knew you would like him. But you must not look
                            at him so much, or your poor eyes will be sore."
Little stupid! As I felt my pale cheeks colouring, I could almost have
                            been angry, even with my Isola. But she meant no harm. In spite of
                            lectures and "college," she was gentle nature personified; and no
                            Professors could make anything else of her. All these things run in the
                            grain. If there is anything I hate, I am sure I hate affectation. But
                            there is a difference between us.
Probably it is this: I am of pure English blood, and she is not. That I
                            know by instinct. What blood she is of, I am sure I cannot tell. Gentle
                            blood at any rate, or I could not have loved her so. How horribly
                            narrow-minded, after all my objectivity! Well, what I mean is, that I
                            can like and love many people who are not of gentle, but (I suppose) of
                            ferocious blood; still, as a general rule, culture and elegance are
                            better matches for nature, after some generations of training. My father
                            used to say so about his pointers and setters. The marvel is that I, who
                            belong to this old streak, seem to have got some twist in it. My
                            grandmother would have swooned at the names of some people I love more
                            than I could have loved her. My mother would not. But then she was a
                            Christian. Probably that is the secret of my twist.
All this has passed through my mind, before I can frown at Isola. And now
                            I cannot frown at all. Dear little thing, she is not eighteen, and she
                            knows no better. I have attained that Englishwoman's majority three
                            weeks ago; and I am sorry for Isola.
To break the awkwardness, her brother starts off into subjects of art. He
                            has heard of my drawings, may he see them some day? I ask him about the
                            magnificent stag. Yes, that is his, and I have no idea how long it took
                            him to do. He speaks of it with no conceit whatever; neither with any
                            depreciation, for the purpose of tempting praise. As he speaks, I
                            observe some peculiarity in his accent. Isola's accent is as pure as
                            mine, or purer. Her brother speaks very good English, and never
                            hesitates for a word; but the form of his sentences often is not
                            English; especially when he warms to his subject; and (what struck me
                            first, for I am no purist as to collocation of words) his accent, his
                            emphasis is not native. The difference is very slight, and quite
                            indescribable; but a difference there is. Perhaps it is rather a
                            difference of the order of thought than of language, as regards the cast
                            of the sentence; but that will not account for the accent; and if it
                            would, it still shows another nationality.
There is a loud knock at the door. I am just preparing (with Isola's
                            help) my little hospitalities. If London visits mean much talk and no
                            food, I hold by Gloucestershire and Devon. I have a famous North Devon
                            ham, and am proud of its fame. Surely no more visitors for me.
No; but one for Mrs. Shelfer. The Professor has heard of the eyeshells;
                            and what politeness, humanity, love of his daughter failed to do,
                            science has effected. He is come to see and secure them. His children
                            hear his voice. Of course, we must ask him to come up. Mr. Conrad rises.
                            Isola runs to fetch her father. Isola loves everybody. I do believe she
                            loves old Cora. Conrad is of sterner stuff: but surely he loves his
                            father. As for me—we were just getting on so well—I wanted no Professor.
                            Isola's brother will not tell a lie. He does not remember, all at once,
                            any pressing engagement. He holds out his hand, saying simply,
"Miss Valence, I heartily beg your pardon for leaving so suddenly; and
                            just when we were giving you so much trouble. It would be impertinence
                            for me to tell you the reason. It is a domestic matter. I trust you will
                            believe me, that no light reason would make me rude. May I come again
                            with Isola, to see your drawings soon?"
He meets the Professor on the stairs. The latter enters the room, under
                            evil auspices for my good opinion.
</div></body></text></TEI>