<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="73">
CHAPTER I.
At this time and place, I, Clara Vaughan, leap from the pillion of my
                            Uncle's pensive mule, and am upon the curb-stone of my own strange life
                            again. How I wandered with him through the olive groves of Corsica, how
                            I wept for his loving Lily, that ancient Signor, and the stolen babes;
                            and how, beyond the vomito of words, I loathed that fiend who had
                            injured whom or what most I know not, unless it were his own soul, if he
                            had any, and for God's sake I hope he had—all this, though I am too weak
                            of language, will, perhaps, be understood.
To myself I would hardly confess the interest I could not discard in the
                            pure and constant love of that impassioned pair; for what had I any
                            longer to do with Pyramus and Thisbe? No more of love for me. You will
                            not see me droop, and fret, and turn to a mossy green. No nonsense of
                            that sort for me: I have a loop at either side entitled self-respect,
                            which will keep my skirt from draggling. Neither will I rush into the
                            opposite extreme, pronounce all love a bubble because my own has burst,
                            take to low-necked dresses, and admire cats more than babies. No; I am
                            only eighteen, not yet eighteen and a half; I have loved with all my
                            heart, and a free true heart it is, albeit a hot and haughty one; if it
                            be despised, outraged, and made nothing of, though I can never transfer,
                            I will not turn it sour. The world is every whit as fair, children are
                            quite as pretty, flowers have as rich a scent, and goodness as pure a
                            charm, as if that silly maiden Clara had not leaped before she looked.
                            And yet how I wish that I could only think so.
Before I go on with my tale, I must recur to one or two little matters,
                            that everything may be as clear as it lies in my power to make it. For
                            although I am but a "female," as Inspector Cutting observed, I am doing
                            my best to make everything as clear as if told by a male.
In the first place then, when my Uncle had recovered from the exertion of
                            telling his tale, I acquainted him with my discovery of the letters upon
                            the bed-hangings. They confirmed his account of the fearful Vendetta
                            usages, and explained the point which had been to him most
                            mysterious.
Secondly, as to the anonymous letter which had led me first to London;
                            like the detective policeman, he now attached but little importance to
                            it. He had done his best, at the time, to trace the writer and follow
                            the clue, if there were any. But he had met with no success. His reason
                            for passing it on to me, was that he hoped to create some diversion of
                            my thought, some break in the clouds of my sorrow.
Next, to show the full meaning of Mrs. Daldy's manoeuvres. Through her
                            connexion—which she had carefully cultivated, when it began to seem
                            worth her while—with her husband's kindred near Genoa, she had learned
                            some portions of my poor Uncle's history; for, as he himself observed,
                            the islanders are much addicted to gossip, as indeed all islanders are,
                            and continentals too for that matter, especially in hot climates. Now
                            there is no lack of intercourse between the Balagna and Genoa. Of course
                            our chastened hypocrite made the most of her knowledge in a hundred
                            ways, and by her sham sympathy and pretended aid—for up to the time of
                            his illness the desolate father still sought and sought—she even secured
                            some little influence over her brother-in-law. How often is it so:
                            though we know people to be false, we do not believe, when our hearts
                            are concerned, that they are so false to us. Moreover, when she found
                            him shattered in body and mind by paralysis, she commenced an active
                            bombardment, pulling out the tompions from every gun of mock religion.
                            But, as in her treatment of me, she displayed, in spite of all her
                            experience and trials, a sad ignorance of unregenerate human nature. My
                            Uncle was not the man, palsied or no, to be terrified by a Calvinist:
                            and he knew too much of her early days, and certain doings at Baden, to
                            identify her at present with the angel that stands in the sun. And this
                            prison-eyed mole made another mistake. Not content with one good
                            gallery, she must needs work two runs, side by side, in a very mealy
                            soil. The result was of course that they ran into one, and she had to
                            dig her way out. If she had worked, heart and soul, for my Uncle's money
                            only, which he rightly regarded as his own, and at his own disposal, I
                            believe she might have got most of it. At any rate, under the will which
                            I caught her carrying off, she was to take half of the large sum which
                            he had laid by; I mean if his children did not come to light, and prove
                            their legitimacy. But twenty-five thousand pounds would be nothing to
                            her dear son, who had inherited his father's extravagance, or to
                            herself, who loved high play. Therefore, believing me out of the field,
                            she began to plot for the Vaughan estate as well, and furthermore for
                            the magnificent property in Corsica. Of the Vaughan estates she had no
                            chance—albeit she had the impudence to propose a compromise with me—of
                            Veduta tower she had some prospect, if the right heirs, the poor
                            children, should never appear, or establish their claim, and if she
                            could procure the outlawry of Lepardo.
Believing my Uncle to be dying by inches, she made a bold stroke for
                            possession of the most important documents; and, but for Giudice and me,
                            no doubt she would have succeeded. But she had dashed far out of her
                            depth, and had little chance now of reaching the coveted land. I hope
                            she felt that everything was ordered for her good.
Another point which seems to require some explanation, is the discovery
                            by the assassin of the secret entrance, an access quite unknown to the
                            family, the servants, or any other person, except, at a later time, Mrs.
                            Daldy. The house, as I said before, was built upon the site and partly
                            embodied the fabric of a still more ancient structure. Probably these
                            narrow stairs, now enclosed in the basement of the eastern wall, had
                            saved many a ripe priest from reeling, in the time of the Plantagenets.
                            They led, I think, from the ancient chapel, long since destroyed, to the
                            chaplain's room, and perhaps had been reopened secretly during the great
                            rebellion, when the Vaughans were in hot trouble. Beatrice Vaughan, the
                            cavalier's child, who was now supposed to begin her ghost walk at the
                            eastern window, glided probably down this staircase, when, as the legend
                            relates, she escaped mysteriously from the house, in her father's
                            absence, roused the tenants, and surprised the Roundhead garrison in
                            their beds. The house was soon retaken, and Beatrice, in her youthful
                            beauty, given up to the brutal soldiers. She snapped a pistol at the
                            Puritan officer, and flew like a bird along this corridor. At the end,
                            while trying perhaps to draw the old oak slide—though nothing was said
                            of this—she was caught by the gloating fanatics, and stabbed herself on
                            the spot rather than yield to dishonour. The poor maiden's tomb is in
                            the church, not far from the chancel arch, with some lines of quaint
                            Latin upon it. Her lover, Sir William Desborough, slit that Puritan
                            officer's nose and cut off both his ears. I wonder that he let him off
                            so lightly; but perhaps it was all he was worth. Major Cecil Vaughan
                            married again, and the direct line was re-established.
The chapel well, as it was called, dark and overhung with ivy, was a
                            spring of limpid icy crystal, spanned by and forming a deep alcove in
                            the ancient chapel wall, which, partly for its sake, and partly as a
                            buttress for the east end of the house, had been left still standing.
                            This old well had long time been disused, hiding, as it did, in a wild
                            and neglected corner out of sight from the terrace walk; and the
                            gardeners, who found the pump less troublesome, had condemned the water
                            as too cold for their plants. The mouth, with its tangled veil of ivy
                            and periwinkle, was also masked by a pile of the chapel ruins, now
                            dignified with the name of a rockwork. Some steps of jagged stone led
                            through the low black archway to the crouching water, which was so clear
                            that it seemed to doubt which was itself and which was stone.
This peaceful, cold, unruffled well, formed the antechamber to the
                            murderer's passage. For on the right-hand side, not to be seen in the
                            darkness, and the sublustrous confusion, by any common eye, was a small
                            niche and footing-place not a yard above the water. It needed some nerve
                            and vigour to spring from the lowest stepping-stone sideways to this
                            scarcely visible ledge. None, of the few whose eyes were good enough to
                            espy it, would be tempted to hazard the leap, unless they knew or
                            suspected that the facing would yield to the foot, that it was in fact a
                            small door purposely coloured and jointed like the slimy green of the
                            masonry. In this well the murderer must have lurked; and he might have
                            done so from one year's end to another. There with the craft of his
                            devilish race—my Uncle may admire them, but not I—and with their
                            wonderful powers of sight, he must have found this entrance, and
                            rejoiced in his hellish heart.
As for Mrs. Daldy, she found it out at the other end, most likely. Unless
                            my memory fails me, I spoke long ago of some boards which sounded hollow
                            to the ring of my childish knuckles. These were in the skirting—if that
                            be the proper name for it—under the centre of the great oriel window.
                            The oak slides, when pressed from below, ran in a groove with but little
                            noise, and without much force being used: but it required some strength
                            to move them on the side of the corridor. It was the sound of these
                            sliding boards which had first drawn Judy's notice: but as they were in
                            deep shadow, I neither perceived the opening, nor gave him the
                            opportunity. That woman would never have dreamed of the thing, if she
                            had not surprised me one day when I was prying about there; she must
                            have returned alone, and being, as we have seen, a superior
                            cabinet-maker, discovered the secret which baffled me. As I did not want
                            Judy to catch cold by watching there any longer, I had this horrible
                            passage walled up at either end, and built across in the middle.
Having thus made good my arrears, I am at liberty to proceed. When my
                            Uncle had paused from his many sorrows, which he did with a mellow
                            dignity not yet understood by me; and when I, in the fervour of youth,
                            had offered much comfort kindly received, but far better let alone, I
                            asked him for one thing only:—the most minute and accurate description
                            he could give of that Lepardo Della Croce. His answer was as
                            follows:—
"My dear, I have seen him once only, and that more than twenty years ago,
                            and in an interview of some excitement"—I should think so indeed, when
                            one tried to kill the other—"but I will describe him to the best of my
                            recollection. He is rather a tall man, at least of about my own height,
                            but more lightly built than myself. His hands and feet are remarkably
                            small and elegant. His face is of the true Italian type, a keen oval
                            with a straight nose, and plenty of width between the eyes, which are
                            large and very dark. His forehead is not massive, but well-formed, and
                            much whiter than the rest of his face. The expression of his countenance
                            is that of shrewdness and versatility, with a quickness eager to save
                            both you and himself from the trouble of completing your sentence. But
                            all this is common enough. One thing I saw, or fancied, which is not
                            quite so common. As I dealt him that blow with my fist, my eyes for one
                            flash met his, and his leaped towards one another, as if he had a strong
                            cast in them. Before that, and afterwards too, there was no appearance
                            of any distortion: if there were any at that moment, it arose from the
                            start of terror or fury jerking the muscles awry. His voice is flexible
                            and persuasive, and soft as a serpent-charmer's. I think he must be a
                            most arrogant man; profoundly convinced of his own abilities, but seldom
                            caring to vindicate them. Just the man to get on in the world, if he
                            were only what is called respectable. Just the man to break a woman's
                            heart, and crush the spirit of a meek and humble child. Ah, I would
                            forgive him his sins against me, though not his wrongs towards you, if I
                            could only learn that he had been kind to my children."
This description dwelt on my mind for days and days of thinking. It did
                            not altogether apply to the man whom I had observed so closely at the
                            meeting of the conspirators. That man was of middle height, and though
                            his face was oval, there was scarcely the average width between the
                            eyes. And he did not seem to me like an arrogant man, cold except when
                            excited; but rather of a hasty, impassioned nature, sure to do its
                            utmost in trifles. Could it be that I had watched and hated the wrong
                            man? It might be so; and it was not unlikely that Mr. Cutting himself
                            knew not which was the guilty one. Like most of the London policemen—my
                            Uncle had taught me this—he was too proud of his sagacity to be in truth
                            very sagacious. Experience he had, and all that; but he would not have
                            done in Paris. The real depth, that goes below, and yet allows for the
                            depth of another, must be in the nature, can rarely exist in a small
                            one, and in a large one is seldom worked but for theoretical purposes.
                            Therefore shallow men overreach in daily life, and fancy they have
                            blinded those who know them thoroughly, and know themselves as well.
So far as my experience goes, large-natured men abhor cunning so much,
                            that they fear to work the depth of their own intelligence, because it
                            seems akin to it. So they are cheated every day, as a strong man yields
                            to the push of a child; and the fools who cheat them chuckle in the idea
                            that they have done it by fine sagacity, and without the victim's
                            knowledge.
</div></body></text></TEI>