<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER IX.
At this particular time of my life, many things began to puzzle me, but
                            nothing was a greater puzzle than the character of my guardian. Morose
                            or moody he was not, though a stranger might have thought him so; nor
                            could I end with the conviction that his heart was cold. It rather
                            seemed to me as if he felt that it ought to be so, and tried his best to
                            settle down as the inmate of an icehouse. But any casual flush of love,
                            any glow of native warmth from the hearts around him, and taken by
                            surprise he wavered for one traitor moment, and in his eyes gleamed some
                            remembrance, like firelight upon frozen windows. But let any one attempt
                            to approach him then with softness, to stir kind interest and feeling
                            into benevolent expression, and Mr. Vaughan would promptly shut himself
                            in again, with a bar of irony, or a bolt of sarcasm. Only to my mother
                            was his behaviour different; towards her his manner was so gentle, and
                            his tone so kind, that but for my conviction that remorse lay under it,
                            I must have come to like him. True, they did not often meet, for dear
                            mother confined herself (in spite of Mrs. Daldy) more and more closely
                            to her own part of the house, and rarely had the spirits now to share in
                            the meals of the family. Therefore, I began at once to take her place,
                            and would not listen to Mrs. Daldy's kind offer to relieve me. This had
                            led quite recently to a little outbreak. One day I had been rather late
                            for dinner, and, entering the room with a proud apology, found to my
                            amazement Mrs. Daldy at the head of the table. For me a seat was placed,
                            as for a good little girl, by the side of Master Clement. At first I had
                            not the presence of mind to speak, but stood by my rival's chair,
                            waiting for her to rise. She affected not to understand me, and began,
                            with her hand on the ladle, and looking me full in the face: "I fear,
                            darling Clara, the soup is cold; but your uncle can give you a very nice
                            slice of salmon. Have you offered thanks for these mercies?"
"Thank you, I will take soup. Allow me to help myself. I am sorry to have
                            troubled you."
And I placed my hand on the back of her chair, presuming that she would
                            get up; but she never stirred one inch, and actually called for a plate
                            to help me. My guardian was looking at both of us, with a dry smile of
                            amusement, and Clement began to simper and play with his fork.—Now for
                            it, or never, thought I. "Mrs. Daldy, you quite mistake me, or pretend
                            to do so. Have the goodness to quit my
                            chair."
She had presumed on my dread of an altercation before the servants, but
                            only Thomas Henwood happened to be in the room. Had there been a dozen
                            present, I would still have asserted my right. At last she rose in her
                            stateliest manner, but with an awkward smile, and a still more awkward
                            sneer.
"Your use, my poor child, of the possessive pronoun is far more emphatic
                            than your good breeding is."
"Who cares for your opinion?" Not a hospitable inquiry; but then she was
                            not my visitor.
In grand style she marched to the door, but soon thought better of it,
                            and came to her proper place with the sigh of a contrite spirit.
"Poor creature! It is a rebuke to me, for my want of true faith in the
                            efficacy of prayer."
And after all this, she made a most excellent dinner.
About that woman there was something of a slimy pride, no more like to
                            upright prickly self-respect than macerated bird-lime is to the stiff
                            bright holly. Yet no one I ever knew possessed such wiry powers of
                            irritation. Whenever my mother and my guardian met, she took care to be
                            in the way, and watched them both, and appealed to me with all her
                            odious pantomime of sorrow, sympathy, wonder, loving superiority, and
                            spiritual yearnings. And all the time her noisome smile, like the smell
                            of a snake, came over us. She knew, and rejoiced in the knowledge, how
                            hard set I was to endure it, and every quick flash of my eyes only lit
                            up her unctuous glory.
For all I know, it was natural that my antipathy to that woman should, by
                            reaction, thaw sometimes my coldness towards my uncle. Though
                            self-respect had at length compelled him to abandon his overtures to my
                            friendship, now and then I detected him looking at me with a pitying
                            regard. In self-defence, I began to pity him, and ceased to make faces
                            or sneer when the maids—those romantic beings—declared that he must have
                            been crossed in love. At this conclusion, long ago, all the servants'
                            hall had arrived; and even little Tilly Jenkins, not admitted as yet to
                            that high conclave, remarkable only for living in dust-bins, and too
                            dirty to cause uneasiness to the under-shoeboy's mother—even that Tilly,
                            I say, ran up to me one morning (when I went to see my dear pony) and
                            beat out her dust, and then whispered:
"Oh, please, Miss Clara, to give my very best wishes to Master. What a
                            terrible blight to the heart be unrequited love!" And Tilly sighed a
                            great cloud of brick-dust.
"Terrible, Tilly: I hope you have not fallen in love with the weeding
                            boy!"—a smart young lad, ten stairs at least above her.
"Me, miss? Do you think I would so demean myself?" And Tilly caught up
                            her dust-pan arrogantly.
This little anecdote proves a fact which I never could explain, viz. that
                            none of the servants were ever afraid of me.
To return to the straight line of history. My guardian came home rather
                            late that evening, and some hours after the hasty exit of Mrs. and
                            Master Daldy. While I was waiting in some uneasiness, it struck me that
                            he had kept out of the way on purpose, lest he should seem too anxious
                            about the plot. Mrs. Daldy, as I found afterwards, had written to him
                            from the inn, describing my "frenzied violence, and foaming Satanic
                            fury"—perhaps I turned pale, no more—and announcing her intention to
                            remain at Malvern, until she should be apprised whether uncle or niece
                            were the master. In the latter case she demanded—not that she cared for
                            mammon, but as a humble means for the advancement of the Kingdom—the sum
                            of 300*l.*; that being the lowest salary conscience allowed her to
                            specify for treading the furnace of affliction, to save the lost sheep
                            of the house of Israel. I forgot to say that, before she left the house,
                            she had tried to obtain an interview with my mother, hoping, no doubt,
                            to leave her in the cataleptic state. But this had been sternly
                            prevented by Thomas Kenwood, who performed quite a labour of love in
                            ministering the expulsion. All the servants hated her as a canting sneak
                            and a spy.
That night when I received Mr. Edgar Vaughan's short missive—"Clara, I
                            wish to see you immediately in my study," my heart began to flutter
                            provokingly, and the long speech I had prepared flew away in shreds of
                            rhetoric. Not that I meant for an instant to bate one tittle of what I
                            had done and would do: but I had never asserted my rights as yet in
                            direct opposition to him, nor taken upon my own shoulders the
                            guardianship of myself. But the dreary years of dark preparation and
                            silent welding of character had braced a sensitive, nervous nature with
                            some little self-reliance.
With all the indifference I could muster, I entered the gloomy room, and
                            found him leaning upon the high desk where he kept the accounts of his
                            stewardship. The position was chosen well. It served at once to remind
                            me of his official relation, and to appeal to the feelings as betokening
                            an onerous wardship. Of late his health had been failing him, and after
                            every long absence from home, he returned more jaded and melancholy. Now
                            a few silver hairs—no more than a wife would have quickly pulled
                            out—were glistening among his black locks; but though he was weary and
                            lonesome, he seemed to want none to love him, and his face wore the
                            wonted sarcastic and travelled look.
As our glances met, we both saw that the issue was joined which should
                            settle for life the mastery. He began in a light and jocund manner, as
                            if I were quite a small thing.
"Well done, Miss Clara, you are asserting
                            yourself. Why, you have dismissed our visitors with very scant
                            ceremony."
"To be sure I have; and will again, if they dare to come back."
"And don't you think that you might have consulted your mother or
                            me?'
"Most likely I should have done so, in an ordinary case."
"Then your guardian was meant for small matters! But what was the wonder
                            to-day?"
"No wonder at all. Mrs. Daldy insulted my father, and I sent her out of
                            his house."
"What made her insult my brother?"
"My refusal to marry her puppet and puppy."
"Clement Daldy! Did she propose such a thing? She must think very highly
                            of you!'
"Then I think very lowly."
"And you declined, did you, Clara?"
"No. I refused."
"Very good. No one shall force you; there is plenty of time to consider
                            the subject."
"One moment is too much."
"Clara, I have long noticed in you a rude, disrespectful, and I will say
                            (in spite of your birth) a low and vulgar manner towards me, your uncle
                            and guardian. Once for all, I will not permit it, child."
"Child you call me, do you? Me, who am just
                            seventeen, and have lived seven such years as I have, and no one
                            else!"
He answered quite calmly, and looking coldly at me:
"I never argue with women. Much less with girls. Mrs. Daldy comes back
                            to-morrow. You will beg her pardon, as becomes a young lady who has
                            forgotten herself. The other question may wait."
"I thought, sir, that you had travelled far, and in many countries."
The abrupt inquiry startled him, and his thoughts seemed to follow the
                            memory.
"What if I have?" he asked, at length, and with a painful effort.
"Have you always found women do just what you chose?"
He seemed not to listen to me; as if he were out of hearing: then laughed
                            because I was looking at him.
"Clara," he said, "you are an odd girl, and a Vaughan all over. I would
                            rather be your friend than your enemy. If you cannot like me, at least
                            forget your dislike of me, and remember that I am your uncle, and have
                            tried to make you love me."
"And what if I do not?"
"Then I must keep you awhile from the management of this property. My
                            dear brother would have wished it, until you recover your senses; and
                            not an acre of it is legally yours."
This he said so slowly, and distinctly, and entirely without menace,
                            that, knowing his manner, I saw it was the truth, at least in his
                            opinion. Strange as it may seem, I began at once to revolve, not the
                            results of dispossession and poverty on myself, or even on my mother,
                            but the influence which the knowledge of this new fact must have on my
                            old suspicions, surmises, and belief.
"Will the property pass to you?" I asked.
"Yes, if I choose: or at any rate the bulk of it."
"What part will be yours? Do you mean to say the house?—"
"Never mind now. I would rather leave things as they are, if you will
                            only be more sensible."
"I will not disguise my opinions for a hundred Vaughan Parks, or a
                            thousand Vaughan Palaces; no, nor even to be near my father's
                            bones."
"Very well," he said, "just as you like. But for your mother's sake, I
                            give you till Christmas to consider."
"If you bring back Mrs. Daldy, I shall leave the door as she enters
                            it."
"I have no wish to hurry you," he replied, "and therefore she shall not
                            return at present. Now take these papers with you. You may lay them
                            before any lawyer you please. They are only copies, but may be compared
                            with the originals, which I have. They will quickly prove how totally
                            you are at my discretion."
"The money and the land may be so, but not I. Before I go, answer me one
                            question. Did you know of these things, whatever they may be, before my
                            father's death?"
He looked at me clearly and calmly, with no withdrawal, or conscious
                            depth in his eyes, and answered:
"No. As a gentleman, I did not."
I felt myself more at a loss than ever, and for the moment could not
                            think.
</div></body></text></TEI>