<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="67">
CHAPTER XIII. EDGAR VAUGHAN's STORY CONTINUED. 
At first I thought a great deal more of the pain than the
                            danger of my wound; but when I showed it to the French surgeon at
                            Ajaccio, he surprised me by shrugging his shoulders formidably, and
                            declaring that it was the good God if I kept my foot. Being of a
                            somewhat sceptical turn, I thought at first that he only wanted to gild
                            the frame of his work; but when I began to consider it, I found that he
                            was quite right. The fact was, that I had thought much more of my bride
                            than of my metatarsals. Two of these were splintered where the bullet
                            passed between them, and it was a question whether it had not been
                            poisoned. Many of the mountaineers are skilled in deadly drugs, and use
                            them rarely for the bowl, not so rarely for the sword and gun.
At one time there were symptoms even of mortification, and my wife, who
                            waited hand and foot upon me, joined the surgeon in imploring me to
                            submit to amputation.
"Sweetest mine! do you suppose that I shall love you any the less because
                            you walk on crutches, and all through your love of me? And what other
                            difference can it make to either of us? I shall cry a great deal at
                            first, for I love your little toe-nails more than I do my own eyes; but,
                            darling, we shall get over it."
As she loved my toes so much, I resolved to keep them, if it was only for
                            her sake; and, after a narrow crisis, my foot began to get better. To
                            her care and tenderness I owed my recovery, far more than to the skill
                            of the clever surgeon. Six months elapsed before I could walk again, and
                            our little yacht was sent to Calvi to explain the long delay. Fond as I
                            was of the "Lily-flower," I was anxious now to sell her; but my darling
                            nurse, although she knew before our marriage that I was not a wealthy
                            man, would not listen to the scheme at all; for the doctor ordered me,
                            as I grew stronger, to be constantly on the water.
"Not by any means, my own, will we sell our little love-boat. I should
                            cry after it like a baby; and another thing, far more important, you can
                            bear no motion except on board our Lily. Papa has
                            got great heaps of money, and he never can refuse me anything when I
                            coax in earnest."
Conscious as I was of my vile deceit, I would rather have died than apply
                            to Signor Dezio, albeit I am quite sure that he would soon have forgiven
                            me. So I wrote again to my good-natured brother and banker, and told him
                            all that had happened, but begged him not to impart it even to your
                            mother. I have strong reason for suspecting that he did not conceal it
                            from her; but as I never alluded to the subject before her, she was too
                            much a lady ever to lead me towards it. My motive for this reserve was
                            at first some ill-defined terror lest my fraud upon Signor Dezio should
                            come to light prematurely. Also I hate to be talked about among people
                            whom I despise. Afterwards, as you will perceive, I had other and far
                            more cogent reasons.
I need not say that your father—dear Clara, I ought to love you, if only
                            on his account!—your father wrote me a kind and most warm-hearted
                            letter, accompanied by a most handsome gift—no loan this time, but a
                            wedding-gift, and a very noble one. Also he pressed me to come home with
                            my bride the moment I could endure the voyage. Ah! if I had only obeyed
                            him, not Lily and Henry, but myself would have been the victim.
We returned as soon as possible to Vendetta tower, and found the good
                            Signor in excellent spirits, delighted to see his sweet daughter again,
                            and still more delighted by hope of a little successor to the gray walls
                            and the olive groves. When this hope was realized, and a lusty young
                            grandson was laid in his arms, he became so wild in his glory, that he
                            went about boasting all over the commune, feasting all who came near
                            him, forgetting the very name of the blood-revenge. Many a time we
                            reminded and implored him to be more careful. He replied, that his life
                            was of no importance now; he had come to his haven among his own dear
                            ones, and was crowning the old ship with flowers. Moreover, he knew that
                            the De' Gentili were of a nobler spirit than to shed the blood of a
                            gray-haired man, when institution did not very loudly demand it. And so
                            I believe they were.
Alas! the poor old man!—a thorough and true gentleman as one need wish to
                            see—choleric albeit, and not too wide of mind; but his heart was in the
                            right place, and made of the right material, and easy enough to get at.
                            He was free to confess his own failings, and could feel for a man who
                            was tempted. Deeply thankful I am that, before his white beard was laid
                            low, I acknowledged to him my offence, and obtained his hearty
                            forgiveness. Little Henry was on his lap, going off into smiles of
                            sleep, with his mother's soft finger in his mouth. At first my
                            confession quite took the poor Signor aback; for I did not attempt to
                            gloss the dishonour of what I had done; but I told him truly that the
                            meanness was not in my nature, and although I had won my pet Lily, the
                            road ran through hemlock and wormwood. And now I perceived how
                            uncalled-for and stupid the fraud had been.
When the old man recovered a little from the shock caused by the
                            dishonesty—towards which recovery the tears of his daughter and the
                            smiles of his grandson contributed—he was really glad to find that I was
                            not a landed Signor. He rubbed his hands and twitched his beard with
                            delight, for now his little Enrico would never be taken away to the
                            barbarous English island. Was he not rightful successor to the lands of
                            the Della Croce? and what more could he possibly want? What could he
                            care for the property in Gloisterio? However, he made us promise that if
                            the present remarkable baby, Master Henry Vaughan, should ever enjoy the
                            property in the unpronounceable county, Lily's second child, if she had
                            one, should take the Corsican lordships; for his great fear was, that
                            the Malaspina and Della Croce estates should become a servient tenement
                            to the frozen fields of the North. To express and ensure his wishes, he
                            had a deed-poll prepared according to his own fancy, read it to us and
                            some witnesses, then signed, sealed, and enrolled it. This was one of
                            the documents which you, my brave Clara, rescued from that vile,
                            stealthy ghost.
And now, for a short time, we enjoyed deep, quiet, delicious happiness.
                            The crime which had haunted me was confessed and forgiven. Amply
                            possessed of the means, and even the abundance of life, I was blessed
                            with strong health again, and freedom among the free. Richest and best
                            of all blessings, I had a sweet, most lovely, and most loving wife, and
                            loved her once and for all. No more beautiful vision has any poet
                            imagined than young Lily Vaughan sitting under the vine-leaves, her form
                            more exquisite than ever, her soft-eyed infant in her lap wondering at
                            his mother's beauty, while her own deep-lustred eyes carried to her
                            husband's, without the trouble of thinking, all that flowed into her
                            heart—joy at belonging to him, hope of bliss to come, fear of
                            over-happiness, pride in all the three of us, and shame at feeling
                            proud. Then a gay coquettish glance, as quick youth warms the veins, and
                            some humorous thought occurs, a tickle for the baby, and a feint of
                            cold-shouldering me. But, jealous as I was, desperately jealous, for my
                            love was more passionate than ever, I can honourably state that Lily's
                            one and only trial to arouse my jealousy was an ignominious failure,
                            recoiling only on the person of the dear designer. However exacting
                            little Harry might be, I never grudged him his double share of
                            attention. In the first place I looked upon him as a piece of me, still
                            holding on; and, in the next place, I knew that all he laid claim to was
                            only a loan to him, and belonged in fee simple to his father.
At this time I wrote to my brother again, announcing the birth of our
                            boy, and that we had made him his namesake; dispensing, too, with all
                            further reserve on the subject of our marriage. This letter was never
                            delivered to your dear father. That much I know, for certain; and at one
                            time I strongly suspected that our cold-blooded, crafty foe contrived to
                            intercept it. But no; if he had, he would have known better
                            afterwards.
After that cowardly onslaught upon my bride and myself, I had of course
                            learned all I could of the history of this Lepardo. He was the only son
                            of the Signor's only brother, but very little was known of him in the
                            neighbourhood, as he came from Vescovato on the east side of the island.
                            He was said to have great abilities and very great perseverance, and
                            under the guardianship of his uncle had been intended and partly
                            educated for the French Bar. But his disposition was most headstrong and
                            sullen; and at an early age he displayed a ferocity unusual even in a
                            Corsican. Neither had he the great redeeming trait of the islanders, I
                            mean their noble patriotism. One good quality, however, he did possess,
                            and that was fidelity to his word. With one of the contradictions so
                            common in human nature, he would even be false in order to be true: that
                            is, he would be treacherous wherever he was unpledged, if it assisted
                            him towards a purpose to which he was committed. While he was yet a boy,
                            his intended career was cut short by an act of horrible violence. He
                            disliked all the lower animals, horses and mules especially; and one day
                            he was detected by a master of the Paoli College, screaming, and yelling
                            at, and lashing, from a safe distance, a poor little pony whom he had
                            tied to a fence. The master, an elderly man, very humane and benevolent,
                            rebuked him in the most cutting manner, and called him a low coward. The
                            young villain ran off, with his eyes flashing fire, procured a stiletto,
                            and stabbed the poor man in the back. Then he leaped on the horse he had
                            been ill-treating, and pricking him with the dagger, rode away furiously
                            in the direction of Bastia. The pursuers could not trace him through the
                            wild mountain district, but it was believed that he reached the town and
                            took refuge in an English brig, which was lying off the harbour, and
                            sailed for Genoa that evening. The pony was found dead, lying by the
                            roadside with the brute's dagger in its throat. No wonder Lily, who told
                            me all this, with true Corsican rage in her eyes, no wonder my Lily
                            hated him. Even as a little girl, for she was but ten years old when he
                            disappeared, she always felt a strong repugnance towards him. He was
                            about six years older than Fiordalisa, and four years younger than I; so
                            when he shot at Lily, he must have been three-and-twenty. It was
                            reported that after his disappearance he took to a sea-faring life, and
                            made himself very useful, by his knowledge of languages, in the English
                            merchant service. Quarrelling with his employers, he was said to have
                            resorted to smuggling in the Levant, if not to downright piracy.
Clara, for reasons I cannot explain, I wish you to follow my story step
                            by step in its order, noting each landing-place. To do this with
                            advantage, you must have the dates carved upon each of the latter:
                            therefore I beg you to copy them as you pass.
I arrived in Corsica, as you heard, during the month of May, 1829. On the
                            12th of August in that same year I first beheld my Lily. That day I
                            remember, beside other reasons, because I had wondered, as I rode idly
                            along, whether my brother was opening his usual Highland campaign, and
                            whether he would like to shoot the muffrone. Lily and I were married on
                            the 21st of March, 1830, when I was twenty-seven years old: and our
                            little Henry first saw the light on the 24th of December following, more
                            than two years before your birth. Your father having no children as yet,
                            I looked upon my Harry as heir presumptive to these estates. Although
                            your birth appeared to divest him of the heirship, it has since, through
                            causes then unknown to me, proved otherwise; and if he were living now,
                            he would in strict law be entitled to this property after my death. But
                            if he were alive, he never should have an inch of it, that is if I could
                            prevent it; because in strict righteousness all belongs to you. And now
                            I hold the property in fee simple, under an Act which abolishes fines
                            and recoveries; for I have suffered so much from remorse, ever since
                            your dear mother's death, that even before you saved my life, dearest
                            child, I enrolled a deed in Chancery, which gives me disposing powers;
                            and as I think you know, I made thereupon a will devising the lands to
                            you. This also was one of the documents you caught that vile hypocrite
                            stealing.
To return to the old Signor. He was now as happy as the day was long, and
                            desirous, as an old man often is, to set on foot noteworthy schemes,
                            which might survive his time. Of this desire I took advantage to
                            inoculate him with some English views. It was rather late to learn
                            another catechism, at threescore years and five; but a green old age was
                            his, hale and hearty as could be. "Why should all those noble olives
                            shed, and rot upon the ground, all those grapes of divers colours be of
                            no more use than rainbows? Why should all the dazzling marbles slumber
                            in the quarry, the porphyry of Molo, the verde antique of Orezza, the
                            Parian of Cassaconi, the serpentine near Bastia, and the garnets of
                            Vizzavona—nay even the matchless white alabaster—
"Mother of our Lord, I have got such pretty stuff in my cavern on the
                            gulf of Porto. Some one told me it was the very finest alabaster. But
                            then it would require cutting out." The last thought seemed a poser.
"Well, father"—so I called him now—"when Harry has finished his tooth,
                            suppose we go all together in the yacht and see it."
And so we did; and it was worth a voyage all the way from London only to
                            look at it. Pillars of snow, pellucid, and fancifully veined, like a
                            glacier shot with sea-weed; clean-working moreover, and tough, and of
                            even texture, as I proved to my Lily's delight. There is now a small
                            piece in the drawer of my walnut-wood desk. But I took home a square
                            block with me, and under my wife's most original criticisms, worked it
                            into a rough resemblance of the baby Henry. Perhaps I have a natural
                            turn for sculpture, perhaps it was a wife's flattery; but at any rate
                            the young mother was so charmed with it, that in one of her pensive
                            moments she even made me promise, that if she died soon and alone, I
                            would have the little recumbent figure laid upon her breast.
Meanwhile the Signor was gayer than ever: he told us to have no anxiety
                            about anything less than a score of children; to such effect would he
                            work his great olive grounds, quarries, and vineyards. Some ingenious
                            plan he formed, which delighted him hugely, but was past my
                            comprehension. As fast as he quarried his alabaster, he would plant
                            young vines in the holes, and every one knew how the vine delighted to
                            run away over the rocks. So at once he must set off for Corte, the
                            central town of the island, to procure a large stock of tools
                            well-tempered in the Restonica. That turbulent little river possesses a
                            magic power. Its water is said to purify steel so highly that it never
                            can rust again. I have even heard that the cutlers of Northern Italy
                            import it, for the purpose of annealing their choicest productions. For
                            my part, little as I knew of commerce, I strongly recommended that
                            arrangements for shipping and selling the alabaster should be made,
                            before it was quarried. But the Signor scorned the idea.
Having in prospect all the riches of Croesus, and in possession enough to
                            make us happy, and having worked, as we thought, uncommonly hard, we all
                            four indulged in a tour through Sicily and Italy, proposing to visit and
                            criticise the principal marble quarries. By the time we had done all
                            this and enjoyed it thoroughly—dear me, how my wife was admired in the
                            sculptor's studio!—and by the time we had fallen to work again, surveyed
                            and geologised all the estates, taken, or rather listened to, long
                            earfuls of advice, settled all our plans summarily over the Rogliano,
                            and reopened them all the next morning, by this time, I say, nearly
                            three years of bliss had slipped by, since my recovery from the
                            lingering wound; and it was now the summer of 1833. My loving wife was
                            twenty years old, and we were looking forward to the birth of a brother
                            or sister for Harry. Meanwhile we had heard of your birth, which
                            delighted us all, especially my Lily. She used to talk, in the fond way
                            mothers discover, to Harry, now gravely perched up on a stool, about his
                            little sweetheart away in the dark north country.
It was in the month of July 1833 that the Signor found he could no longer
                            postpone his visit to Corte. Alone he would go, riding his favourite
                            jennet, as sure-footed as a mule, and as hardy as a mustang. Behind him
                            he slung his trusty fusil, with both barrels loaded, for he had to
                            traverse a desert and mountainous district haunted by banditti. He was
                            to travel through by-ways to Novella, and so on to the bridge where the
                            roads from Calvi and Bastia meet, put up in rude quarters there for the
                            night, and follow the steep descent to the town of Corte next day. In
                            vain we begged him to take some escort, or at least to let me go with
                            him. No, I must stop to guard the Lily and the little snow-drop; could
                            he possibly take me at such a time from home, and did I think a Della
                            Croce was afraid of bandits? It was a Monday morning when he left the
                            tower, and he would be back on Saturday in good time for supper. He
                            kissed and blessed his Lily, and the little snow-drop as he called young
                            Harry, who cried at his departure; and then he gave me too an earnest
                            trembling blessing. By this time he and I had come to love each other,
                            as a father and a son.
I went with him quite to the borders of the commune; and there, in a
                            mountain defile, I lit for him his cigar. With some dark foreboding, I
                            waited till I saw him reach and pass the gap at the summit of the rise.
                            There he turned in the saddle to wave his last adieu, and his beard,
                            like a white cloud, floated on the morning sky.
</div></body></text></TEI>