<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="68">
CHAPTER XIV. EDGAR VAUGHAN's STORY CONTINUED. 
On the Saturday night, an excellent supper was ready: the Signor's own
                            particular plate was at the head of the table, and by it gleamed, in a
                            portly bottle, his favourite Rogliano. Little Harry, who could say
                            anything he was told, and knew right well what was good, or at least
                            what tasted good—that beloved child was allowed to stop up, that
                            grandpapa might kiss him; this was a sovereign specific, believed in the
                            nursery creed, to ensure sweet sleep for both.
That silver beard never kissed the chubby cheek again. All night we
                            waited and wondered: Harry was sent to bed roaring; no grandpapa
                            appeared. The olives rustled at midnight, and out I ran; the doors
                            creaked afterwards, and I opened them, all in vain; the sound of hoofs
                            came up the valley before the break of day; but no step or voice of man,
                            no bark of his favourite mountain hound, no neigh of the jennet to her
                            sleepy brother-horses.
All Sunday we remained in terrible uneasiness, trying to cheer each other
                            with a hundred assurances that the dear old man must have turned aside
                            to see an ancient friend living now at Prato. When Monday morning came,
                            but brought no tidings of him, I set off, amid a shower of tears, to
                            seek the beloved father. The old fusileer was left on guard, and I took
                            two young and active men, well acquainted with the mountain passes. All
                            well mounted, and well armed, we purposed to ride hard, and search the
                            track quite up to the town of Corte. There, if indeed he had ever
                            arrived, we should be sure to hear of him. But it proved unnecessary to
                            go so far from home.
Along that dreary mountain road, often no more than a shepherd's walk
                            difficult to descry, we found no token of any traveller either living or
                            dead, until we came to the Ponte Leccia, where the main roads meet. Here
                            our fears were doubled, and the last hope nearly quenched; for on asking
                            at the shepherd's hut, where Signor Dezio meant to put up, we found that
                            he had slept there on the Friday night, as he was returning from the
                            town. The shepherd's wife, who had known him for years, assured us that
                            he was in wonderful spirits and health, insisted upon her supping with
                            them—which is contrary to Corsican usage—and boasted much of the great
                            things he would do, and still more of his beautiful grandson. His
                            goatskin wallet was full of sample tools, which were to astonish his
                            English son, and he had a toy gun no bigger than the tail of a dog, with
                            which he intended to teach the baby to shoot. Telling us all these
                            little things, and showing us her presents, the poor woman cried at the
                            thought of what must have happened to him. Right early on Saturday
                            morning he set off, as impatient as a child, to see his beloved ones
                            again, and exhibit all his treasures. For love of the Della Croce her
                            husband had groomed the mare thoroughly, and she neighed merrily down
                            the hill at thought of her stable friends. Moreover, the shepherd's wife
                            told us that there had been in those parts no bandit worth the name,
                            since the death of the great Teodoro, king of the mountains, whose baby
                            still received tribute.
After resting our horses awhile, with heavy hearts we began to retrace
                            our steps through that awful wilderness. Instead of keeping together, as
                            we had done in the morning, we now rode in parallel lines, right and
                            left of the desert track, wherever the ground permitted it. All this
                            district is very barren and rugged, and the way winds up and down, often
                            along the brink of crags, or through narrow mountain gorges. The
                            desolation and loneliness grew more oppressive, as the shadows
                            lengthened.
We had thoroughly searched two-thirds of the distance homeward, and had
                            crossed some granite heights whence the sea was visible; the sun was low
                            over Cape Bevellata, and the vapours from the marsh were crouching at
                            the mountain's foot. Here as I rode to the left of my two companions, I
                            heard the faint bay of a dog far down a deep ravine, that trended
                            leftward from our course. Putting my jaded animal to his utmost speed, I
                            made for the hollow which echoed the dismal sound—a feeble bark
                            prolonged into a painful howl. Turning the corner sharply I scared two
                            monstrous vultures, who were hovering over and craning at a dog. The dog
                            so gaunt and starved, that at every bark the ribs seemed bursting the
                            skin, still was fighting past despair with his loathsome enemies. He
                            stood across the breast of the noble Signor Dezio. There lay that
                            gallant cavalier, stark and rigid, with his eyes wide open, and his
                            white beard tipped with crimson. There he lay upon his back, his kingly
                            head against a rock, his left hand on his clotted breast and glued
                            thereto with blood; his right hand hung beside his chin whence it had
                            slipped in death, and in it still securely grasped was a trinket newly
                            made, containing a little sheaf of the baby's flossy hair tied with a
                            black wisp of the mother's. The poor old man had dragged himself thither
                            to die, and died with that keepsake on his lips. The fatal shot had been
                            fired from above, and passed completely through his body. It pierced his
                            lungs, and I believe that he felt little pain, but gasped his simple
                            life away. Near him was his wallet, with the tools still in it; I think
                            he had been playing with the toy gun when he received the wound; at any
                            rate it lay separate from the rest, and at the old man's side.
Examining by the waning light, with icy awe upon me, the scene of this
                            damned atrocity, I found that the hoary traveller must have dismounted
                            here, to eat his frugal dinner. A horn cup and a crust of bread were on
                            a rocky shelf, and a little spring welled down the dingle, with the mark
                            of the dog's feet here and there. The craven foe had been sneaking along
                            behind, and took advantage of the old man's position, as he sat upon a
                            stone to make certain of him from the granite loophole. We found the
                            very place where the murderer must have crouched, but the cliff-side
                            kept no footprint. The victim's gun was gone, and so was the Spanish
                            mare: no other robbery seemed to have been committed.
This glen led to a shorter but more difficult track towards home, which
                            the Signor, in his impatience, must have resolved to try. Reverently we
                            laid him on the freshest horse; while I with the faithful mountain dog
                            on my saddle—for he was too exhausted to walk—rode on to break the
                            melancholy news, and send assistance back.
To break bad news—the phrase is a failure, the attempt it implies a much
                            worse one. Lily knew all in a moment, and in her delicate state she
                            received so appalling a shock, that for a week she lay on the very
                            threshold of death. At the end of that time, and three days after the
                            old man's funeral—at which for his daughter's sake I allowed no wailings
                            or voceros—a lively little girl was born, who seemed to be none the
                            worse for her mother's bitter sufferings. Her innocent caresses, or some
                            baby doings optimised by her mother—though even as a new-born babe she
                            seemed a most loving creature—all those soft endearing ways, which I
                            could not understand, did more to bring my Lily's spirit back than even
                            my fond attentions.
But as yet, though able to walk again, and nurse her child, whom she
                            would not commit to another, my wife remained in a fearfully sensitive
                            and tremulous condition. The creak of a door, the sound of a foot, the
                            rustle of the wind—and she, so brave and proud of yore, started like a
                            cicale, and shook like a forest shadow. In everything she feared the
                            ambush of that sleuth cold-blooded reptile, on whom alone, truly or not
                            God knows, she charged the blood of her venerable father. But still she
                            had the comfort of a husband's love, a husband even fonder than when the
                            flowers fell on his path; and still she had the joy of watching, with a
                            mother's tender insight, the budding promise of two sweet infants.
                            Infants I call them, why Master Harry was now a thorough chatterbox!
                            With all this love around her, she by far the loveliest, the pride and
                            glory of all, was sure to find her comfort soon upon the breast of time,
                            even as small Lily found it in her own sweet bosom. Deeply and long we
                            mourned that ancient Signor, chivalrous and true gentleman, counsellor
                            of all things. Every day we missed him; but could talk of it more as
                            time flowed on. Rogliano had no sparkle, Luri not the tint of old: never
                            could I pour out either from his favourite flagon, without a thought of
                            him who taught us the proper way to do it; who ought to be teaching us
                            still, but was lying foully murdered in his lonely grave at St.
                            Katharine's on the Cliff.
We had done our utmost to avenge him: soon as I could leave my wife, I
                            had scoured all the neighbourhood. The Sbirri too had done their best,
                            but discovered nothing. Brave fellows they are, when it comes to
                            fighting, but very poor detectives. Only two things we heard that seemed
                            at all significant. One of these was that a Spanish jennet, like the
                            Signor's favourite "Marana," but dreadfully jaded and nearly starved,
                            had been sold on the Friday after the murder, being the very day of the
                            funeral, at the town of Porto Vecchio on the south-eastern coast. I sent
                            my coxswain Petro, an intelligent and trusty Corsican, to follow up this
                            clue; for I durst not leave my wife as yet. Petro discovered the man who
                            had bought the mare, and re-purchased her from him, as I had directed:
                            but the description of the first seller did not tally with my
                            recollections of Lepardo. However, it proved to be the true Marana; and
                            glad she was to get home once more.
The other report, that seemed to bear upon the bloody mystery, was that a
                            swift felucca, flush-built and banked for triple sweeps, had been seen
                            lying close in shore near point Girolata, during the early part of the
                            week in which the Signor left home. And it was even said that two
                            Maltese sailors, belonging to this felucca, had encamped on shore in a
                            lonely place near Otta, and were likely to be found there still.
Lily being stronger now, I determined to follow this last clue myself;
                            and so I put the little yacht into commission again, and manned her with
                            Calvi men, for all my English crew had been dismissed long ago. Leaving
                            my wife and children under the care of the old fusileer, away I sailed
                            from St. Katharine's, intending to return in three days' time. All this
                            coast I now knew thoroughly, and Otta was not far beyond the poor
                            Signor's cave of alabaster. It is a wild and desert region, far away
                            from any frequented road, and little visited except by outlaws.
We found no trace of any tent, no sign of any landing, and an aged
                            fisherman, whom we met, declared that no felucca or vessel of any sort
                            had lately been near the bay. I began to fear that, for some dark
                            purpose, I had been beguiled from home, and despatched upon a fool's
                            errand. The dreary coast was still the home of solitude, the alabaster
                            cave untouched since our pic-nic survey; the marks of which were
                            undisturbed except by wind and weather. So I crowded sail, and hurried
                            back to St. Katharine's, with a strange weight on my heart. To add to my
                            vexation, a strong north wind set in, and smartly as our cutter sailed,
                            we were forced to run off the land. When at last we made the cove, it
                            was unsafe for the yacht to anchor, and so I was compelled to send her
                            on to Calvi.
It was nearly midnight on the 2d of October, when Petro and myself
                            plodded up the wooded hill on which the old tower stands. Weary and
                            dispirited, though glowing every now and then with the thought of all my
                            darlings, in vain I called myself a fool for fearing where no fear was.
                            When we reached the brow of the hill, my vague alarm was doubled. The
                            rude oil-lamps that marked the entrance, why were they unlighted? I had
                            especially ordered that they should be kindled every night, and Lily had
                            promised to see to it herself. No challenge from the watchman, no click
                            of the musket hammer, even the vinea was not in its place. In vain we
                            knocked and knocked at the old chesnut doors; no one answered, no one
                            came to open. None of the loopholes showed a light; the house was dark
                            and silent as the ivy. Wild with terror I ran to the little side-door,
                            whence first my Lily met me. This too was locked, or fastened somehow;
                            and only the echo of my knock was heard. Petro and I caught up a great
                            bough of ilex, which myself had lopped last week, rushed at the door
                            with the butt, and broke it in with one blow. Shrieking for Lily, Lily,
                            I flew from room to room, tumbling over the furniture, blundering at the
                            doorways. No voice of wife, no cry of child, no answer of domestic; all
                            as silent as if ten fathoms under water.
Having dashed through every room, I turned to rush off to the hamlet,
                            when my foot struck something—something soft and yielding; was it a sack
                            or bolster? I stooped to feel it; it was Lily, laid out, stiff and cold
                            Dead, my Lily dead! Oh, God can never mean it; would He let me love her
                            so?
For all intents of actual life, for all that we are made for, for all the
                            soul's loan of this world, I died that very moment; and yet a mad life
                            burned within me, the flare of hope that will not die. How I forced her
                            clenched hands open, bowed her rigid arms around me, threw myself upon
                            her, breathed between her lips and listened, tore her simple dress
                            asunder and laid my cheek upon her heart; feeling not a single throb,
                            flooded her cold breast with tears, and lay insensible awhile. Then, as
                            if awaking, felt that she was with me, but somehow not as usual; called
                            her all our names of love, and believed we were in heaven. But there
                            stood Petro with a light, sobbing, and how his beard shook!—What right
                            had he in heaven? Would they let him in without shaving? I rose to order
                            him out; when he restored my wits awhile by pointing with his
                            finger.
"Look, look, Signor! She is not dead, I saw her eyelid tremble."
Wide she opened those glorious eyes, looked at me with no love in them,
                            shuddered, and closed them again.
Mad with rapture, I caught her up, sent Petro headlong lamp and all, and
                            kissed her enough to kill her. She was not dead, my Lily, my pet of
                            eternal ages. There she fell trembling, fluttering, nestling in my arms,
                            her pale cheek on my breast, her white hand on my shoulder; then
                            frightened at her nest shrunk back, and gazed with unutterable reproach,
                            where love like the fallen lamp was flickering: then clung to me once
                            more, as if she ought to hate, but could not yet help loving. She died
                            the next morning. Clara, I can't tell you any more now.
</div></body></text></TEI>