<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="44">
CHAPTER VIII.
Vigorous and elastic as I am, I cannot deny that the air and weather have
                            great dominion over me. It was always so with my own dear father. Two
                            days spent indoors, without any real exercise, would make him feel as
                            uneasy as a plant in a cellaret. Crusty and crabbed, nothing could ever
                            make him—not even gout I believe, if he had lived long enough for it—but
                            when he had lost his fishing, or shooting, or bit of gardening, too
                            long, he was quite unlike himself. It was a bad time then to coax for
                            anything—no song, no whistling, no after-dinner nap.
I too am not of a sedentary nature, though upon due occasion I can sit
                            writing or drawing for some hours together. But how fine a thing all the
                            while to see any motion outside—a leaf that can skip, or a cloud that
                            can run! How we envy a sparrow his little hop, even across the gutter.
                            It is now a long month since I have been out of doors, except just to
                            sniff the air, without any bonnet on. I have never been boxed and
                            pannelled so long since first I crawled out of my cradle. It is a sharp
                            bright frost—it seems to freeze harder in London than in the west of
                            Gloucestershire, but not half so cleanly.
Isola comes, like a tea-china rose bedded in poplin and ermine. Her
                            close-drawn bonnet of velvet, mazarin blue, is freaked with snowdrops,
                            nod, nod, nodding, not too many of them. I hail the omen of spring, and
                            my spirits rise already. Idols is up for a lark (as the junior sophists
                            express it) and she has set her heart upon leading me such a dance.
                            Shall she ever set that sweet heart upon anything, and not obtain it at
                            once? Who knows? Never, I am quite sure, when another heart is the
                            object.
"Come, you grave old Grandmother. You are younger than me, I believe, in
                            spite of all your stories; and you are old enough in your ways, for old
                            mother Hubbard that lived in a cupboard. Oh my tippets and furbelows, if
                            I wore as tall as you, and half as long in the waist, what a dress I
                            would have. Fifteen guineas at least. Come along, you bed-ridden dump of
                            a Clara; it's freezing like bricks and silica, and I am in such spirits,
                            and Giudice is frightening Tom out of his life in the kitchen."
She danced round my little room, like a leaf when the wind is rising. The
                            Pixie-king of my gordit could not have been lighter of foot, nor half so
                            lovely of form. How she managed to spin so between the "sticks," none
                            but herself can tell. What would poor Mrs. Shelfer have said? In spite
                            of her fears for the furniture, she would have laughed, I believe, and
                            blessed the pretty feet.
"Come along, Clara child. Do you think I am going to stand still here all
                            day?"
"If you call that standing still, pray give me the senior sophist's
                            definition of motion."
"Oh I want to skate, so dreadfully. And Pappy and Conrad won't let me.
                            They say it isn't becoming. But what on earth can be more so? Wouldn't I
                            skim on one foot? I'll skate, in spite of them, Clara, if you'll only
                            keep me in countenance."
"Can you imagine me skating?"
"No. I know you won't do it, you are so fearfully grave. But there's more
                            fun in you, when you like, or when you can't help yourself, as I've seen
                            you once or twice, than there is in a hundred such Merry-Andrews as me.
                            At any rate we'll go and see them. On with your bonnet now, I cannot
                            wait a minute. Have something to cover your eyes. Conny '11 be there I
                            know."
On went my bonnet, nothing loth to have an airing again. It was fading in
                            the box.
"Now lots of warm things, darling. You have no idea how cold it is, and
                            scarcely sun enough to thaw the long frost in your eyes. Let me look at
                            them, Donna. Oh if mine were half as bright. You can't have got them in
                            England."
"Now, Idols, don't talk nonsense. Every inch of me is English, and not an
                            inch of you; although your eyes are so blue. You are Scotch all over, or
                            else you are all Swiss."
For answer she began singing "the Merry Swiss Boy," and was going to
                            dance to her song, when I danced her off down stairs. Giudice was in the
                            kitchen, with Tom, from the top of the coffee-mill, sputtering anathemas
                            at him. A magnificent dog he was, of the race of Maltese bloodhounds,
                            now so scarce, fawn-coloured, long in the flank, deep in the jowl,
                            pouch-eared, and grave of eye. He regarded Tom no more than if he had
                            been an old hat brushed the wrong way; and the birds, who were all in a
                            flutter, he took for British butterflies. He came leisurely to me,
                            walking one side at a time, and solemnly deposited his great moist nose
                            in my hand. I knew him then as the friend who addressed me, long since,
                            in the Villa Road.
"Why, you graven images"—a popular person always has fifty nicknames;
                            Isola had a hundred at least, and she liked them all—"what depth of
                            secresy and statecraft is this! You know how I love dogs, and you never
                            even told me of this splendid fellow's existence!"
"Well, Donna dear, don't look so indignant. He doesn't belong to me, and
                            he won't come with me unless he is told, and then he makes such a favour
                            of it. See his long supple stride. He walks just like a leopard—don't
                            you, you pious panther? I wonder he took to you so. He is not fierce at
                            all, except when he ought to be; but he hardly ever makes friends."
"Whose dog is he?'
"Conrad's to be sure. And I do believe Conny thinks more of him than he
                            does of me. Get along, you yellow mammoth! Why he would keep his head
                            there all day?"
"All dogs love me, Idols. It was so when I was a child. They know how
                            honest I am."
"Well, I believe you are, Donna; and too honest sometimes. But I am
                            honest enough, and Giudice does not appreciate it. Come along, Judy. Are
                            you going to stick there all day?"
Away we went, and the great dog walked behind, keeping his head most
                            fairly adjusted between us, never shifting its place an inch, whether we
                            walked or ran—as we did where the street was empty, and when we got into
                            the Park.
Oh the cold air of heaven, fresh from the clear North Pole, where the
                            Great Bear stalks round the Little Bear with the vigilance of a mother,
                            how it tightens the clip of the joints, puts a sting into every step,
                            flushes the cheeks with Aurora, and sparkles in young eyes! For the
                            nonce we forget who we are, never think how our clothes blow about, our
                            spirits are on the north wind, what are we more than snow flakes, let us
                            glisten and lift on the air.
Crossing the Park (lightly furrowed with snow at the drains, like our
                            hair when we part it) we came to a broad sheet of ice. We had heard a
                            long way off a crisp musical hollow sound, like tapping a box with a
                            hole in it. The ice was not like the old ice at Vaughan Park, but seamed
                            and channeled, and up and down, and powdered light grey with scrapings
                            from skates and shoes. Thousands of people were on it, some skating,
                            some sliding, some rushing about and playing hot game with crooked
                            sticks, some sweeping away with short brooms, some crying things for
                            sale and offering skates for hire, many standing still and wistfully
                            eyeing the land; but all in the height of good humour, laughing,
                            chaffing, holloaing, drinking, and ordering more. Every now and then
                            some great performer (in his own eyes) would sail by the women grandly
                            (like a ship heeling over), with his arms folded and foot over foot, and
                            a long cigar in his mouth. For these one devoutly desired a fall. The
                            skaters of real eminence scorned this common show-off, and each had his
                            special admirers forming a ring around him, where he had cut his own
                            circus of smoother and greener ice.
Along the brink of firm land, stood nurses and children innumerable; the
                            maids on the giggle at every challenge borne to them from the glazed
                            waters, the little ones tugging, and kicking, and frantic to get on. The
                            background of all the cold scene, whiter as it receded, and broken by
                            gliding figures, was formed by some low fringed islets, with open water
                            around them, and crane-necked wild fowl wheeling about, and warning
                            boards, and icemen pushing flat-bottomed boats along. In the far
                            distance, to the right, were two or three canvas tents, where they kept
                            the range of the mercury, and the list of the accidents. The long vista
                            was closed now and then, as high as hats and bonnets, by scuds of the
                            drifting ice and snow.
Here as we stood on the bank, Giudice forsook us shamefully, and bounded
                            over the ice, with a levity quite scandalous for a serious-minded dog,
                            towards one of the charmed circles, where eminent skaters whirled, like
                            peg-tops full of steam-engines. Was it likely that we, two girls of
                            spirit, would halt ignobly there? First on the ice went I, holding
                            Isola's hand, and tempting her nothing loth. In spite of her boast about
                            skating, Idols was frightened at first, and held very tightly by me, and
                            wanted to run back. But the little feet grew braver at every step, and
                            she ventured even to clap her hands and dance. To me the thing was no
                            novelty, except from the number of people, and the puckering of the ice.
                            I had even the courage to slide with one foot, but never with both at a
                            time. As for the cracking and bending when some heavy man scoured by, on
                            purpose, I dare say, to frighten us, I laughed with my heart in my
                            mouth. Isola was amazed. She never could have conceived that I had so
                            much effrontery. What cared I, if a hundred people stared at me? I was
                            doing nothing unseemly, and dozens of ladies were there. The scene, and
                            the air, and the spirits of youth set my blood all on the bound, and oh,
                            blessing of blessings, my blessed sight was come back. How manly, and
                            stirring, to feel, that a slip—and a limb may be broken; a crack—and one
                            may be drowned.
But, as usual, I suffered for my temerity. First we followed Giudice, and
                            found him in the centre of the ring, where the greatest throng was
                            gathered, the dog skating with his master, who was one of the very best
                            skaters in the world. Giudice was graver than ever, but wistfully
                            glanced as he whirled round, at every point of escape. With his heavy
                            fore feet on his master's shoulders, and his tongue lolling out, and his
                            eyes rolling sadly at each reluctant caper, and his poor tail between
                            his jerked legs, it was impossible not to see that his dignity and
                            self-respect were suffering. So when Conrad came to speak to us, I
                            earnestly begged that Giudice might be set free, which was done in a
                            moment, to the great disappointment of the bystanders, and the boundless
                            delight of the dog, who came and gratefully kissed my hand.
"Why, Donna," cried Isola in a small pet, "Giudice takes you for his
                            mistress: he would never do that to me, if I coaxed him a hundred
                            years."
Through, the colour the north wind had spread on my cheeks, I felt the
                            warm blood rushing, and bent over the dog to hide it; then much as I
                            longed to see Isola's brother skate, I dragged her off rather rudely
                            towards the rougher part of the ice. Conrad looked rather surprised and
                            hurt, but resumed his figuring with much apparent philosophy.
Idols and I, with the flush in our cheeks, and the flash in our eyes, and
                            our forms all buoyant with innocent fun, came suddenly round a corner on
                            a party of low-looking men, who were casting flat stones, bowling, or
                            curling, or playing at drake, with a great tin can for their mark. We
                            turned and were off in a moment; but we had been observed by the
                            sharpest and slyest eyes in London. A man gave chase in half-skating
                            fashion, having bones tied under his boots, in lieu of skates. We could
                            easily have escaped, in spite of his bones; but was I going to run away,
                            like a skittish servant-maid? I drew up Miss Isola sharply, whether she
                            would or no, and confronted the enemy. It was Mr. Shelfer himself, the
                            man so modest and bashful, who could never bear to look at me. Though a
                            dozen more came after him, I felt no alarm at all, knowing his wonderful
                            shyness and diffidence. But his first address amazed me.
"Now's your time, lads. At 'em, I say. Here's the two prettiest gals in
                            London."
The low scoundrel! I saw that he was quite tipsy. But frightened as I
                            was, for none but they were near, I could hardly help laughing at him.
                            He had his usual slouch, and the long sly nose, and the pent-house gleam
                            of the eye, and his gaunt cheeks drawn as if he was always sucking them,
                            and the chimneypot hat, that had once belonged to some steady going
                            Churchman, with the crown flapping in, like the gills of a fish. All
                            this was balanced by the skill and comical courage of Bacchus, upon a
                            pair of grating marrow-bones. Behind him his countless pockets yawned
                            and looked brown on the wind. And this was the being bowed down to by
                            Mrs. Shelfer!
"Clara dear, stop, Clara!" the impudent sot cried out.
I had stopped without that, and was already facing him. For a moment he
                            was abashed, for my eyes were full upon his; but the others were coming
                            up.
"Now this is what I calls harmony, dashed if it isn't. Why look at the
                            trees and the bushes. There's harmony in them trees, ay in every one on
                            'em. Fine trees and pretty gals, them's the jockeys for me. That's what
                            I calls natur' and something like. Houses! Lor, there's no harmony in
                            houses and pantiles. Fine trees is all harmony, and so is lovely woman.
                            Don't tell the old gal at home. She never would understand. Why Idols
                            there is a pretty duck as ever swam on the ice. But Clara's a —— fine
                            swan, and no mistake. Ducks is all very well, but a swan is the jockey
                            for me. There's something to lay hold on there. Give me a swan I say,
                            and the harmony of them trees. Bob Ridley, I'll lay you a tanner I
                            kisses that there swan. Ever see such eyes, Bob, and look at the way she
                            stands. Wonder there's a bit of ice left here."
The low rogue had a long pipe "in his head,"—as Farmer Huxtable expressed
                            it,—and at every leering sentence blew out a puff of smoke.
"Bet you a tanner, Charley, you don't kiss that stunnin' gal," cried his
                            friend, as drunk as himself.
"Here goes, neck or nothing;" and the niddering made a dash at me. I drew
                            my clenched hand from my muff, where it had been tingling in my glove,
                            and in his tipsy rush, his face came full against it. It was a very odd
                            thing, and I know not how it happened. He reeled on his bones from the
                            collision, and staggered in staring amazement. Before he had time to
                            recover, Conrad dashed up like a hawk at an owl; by some wonderful
                            back-stroke he stopped in an instant, wrung Shelfer's crooked stick from
                            his hand, hooked him under the collar, struck out again, and towed the
                            poor wretch away backward, at the speed of a mile in a minute. The fire
                            flew from his skates as he dashed towards the open water. Giudice, at
                            full gallop behind, tried in vain to keep up. Every man and woman there
                            turned to watch the issue. Shelfer threw out his hands wildly, and
                            screamed: he was utterly helpless, his teeth rattled more than the bones
                            on his boots. At the edge of the open water, three hundred yards away,
                            Conrad stopped suddenly, like an engine in collision, unhooked Mr.
                            Shelfer, and let him go with full impetus. Sprawling and yelling in
                            vain, he flung up his arms, and fell backward into the water headlong.
                            The icemen came running with boats, and ropes, and grapnels. But before
                            the first splash was over, another was seen; Giudice, at a sign from his
                            master, plunged in, drew the poor man of harmony out, and laid him high
                            and wet on the ice. He was taken at once to the tent; where, as I
                            afterwards heard, he made a fine afternoon of it with the society's men;
                            most of whom, it is needless to say, he knew. Be that as it may, the
                            lesson did him good. He never insulted a lady again, or (what is still
                            worse) a poor honest girl, with no education, and no one to defend her.
                            As for me, I really believe he never durst blink his sly eyes in my
                            direction again.
I love good justice, in or out of the pod. The bean is as sweet to me
                            from the rough air of heaven as from a juryman's pocket. But I thought
                            Master Conrad had overdone it this time. He had no right to risk the
                            poor man's life. And so I told him when he came back, as calm as if he
                            had cut a spread eagle. He assured me that he had not risked the man's
                            life at all. He knew the depth of the water there by the island. It was
                            five feet and no more. Then I felt all of a glow and longed to give him
                            the kiss which had cost Mr. Shelfer so much. The next minute I felt
                            humiliated, and burst into a passion of tears, to think what my father
                            would say at his pet of grace and luxury being insulted like that. Idols
                            and Conrad, not knowing my story, could not understand it at all.
They came home with me at once. Conrad, "under the circumstances,"
                            ventured to offer his arm, which I, under the circumstances, ventured to
                            accept. At the door he left me; but Idols came in with Giudice,
                            commissioned to see her safe home. She came in partly lest I should feel
                            lonely, partly to arraign Mrs. Shelfer (already condemned by both of us
                            girls) for daring to have such a reprobate drunken husband.
</div></body></text></TEI>