<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="76">
CHAPTER IV.
It must be owned that my evidence at present was very shadowy. Yet to
                            myself I seemed slow of hand for not having grasped it before. To the
                            mind there was nothing conclusive, to the heart all was irresistible. I
                            have not set down a quarter of the thoughts that now dawned upon me; and
                            it would be waste of time to recount them, when actual proof is
                            forthcoming. And poor Idols gave me small chance of thinking clearly, in
                            the turbulent flood of her questions.
"And are you quite sure, quite certain, Clara darling, that I have a
                            lawful father, one who is not ashamed of me, and was not ashamed of my
                            mother! And why did he never come for me? And do you think he will love
                            me? And is dear Conrad my own brother? I don't seem to understand half
                            that you have told me."
At length I knelt down, and thanked God—rather late in the day, I must
                            own—for His wonderful guidance to me. While doing so, and remembering,
                            as I always did then, my mother—revealed in sudden light I saw the
                            justice of God's Providence. Long as I had groped and groped, with red
                            revenge my leading star, no breath of love or mercy cheering the abrupt
                            steps of a fatalist, so long had He vouchsafed to send me check and
                            warning, more than guidance. By loss of wealth and dearest friends, by
                            blindness and desertion, and the crushing blow to maiden's pride when
                            her heart is flung back in her face, by sad hours of watching and
                            weeping over the bed of sickness, by the history of another's
                            wrongs—worse than my own, and yet forgiven—by all these means, and
                            perhaps no less by the growth of the mind, and wider views of life, the
                            spirit, once so indomitable, had learned to bow to its Maker. Stooping
                            thus it saw the path, which stiff-necked pride could not descry.
Not first and sole, as it would have been two years since, but side by
                            side with softer thoughts, came the strong belief that now God had
                            revealed to me the man who slew my father. And what humiliation to all
                            my boasted destiny! I had grasped the hand that did the deed, smiled to
                            the eyes that glared upon it, laughed at the sallies of the mind that
                            shaped it. Enough of this; ere it go too hard with Christian feeling. My
                            bosom heaves, my throat swells, and my eyes flash as of old.
Before I had time to resolve what next to do (for Isola would not let me
                            think), we had another interruption. That girl had a most ill-regulated
                            and illogical mind. And the fault was fundamental. If the lovely senior
                            sophist had ever got her degree, and worn the gown of a Maiden of Arts,
                            it could only have come by favour, after the manner of kissing. Her
                            enthymems were quick enough, and a great deal too quick I believe; but
                            as for their reduction or eduction into syllogisms—we might as well
                            expect her to make a telescope out of her boot-tags. And now at once she
                            expected, and would not give me room for a word, that I should minutely
                            detail in two sentences, with marginal annotations, and footnotes,
                            queries, conjectures, and various readings, all incorporated into the
                            text, everything that had ever, anywhere, or by any means, befallen her
                            "genuine father." Not being Thucydidean enough to omit the key-word in
                            the sentence, and mash ten thoughts into one verb, I could not meet the
                            emergency; and my dear cousin lost her patience, which was always a very
                            small parcel.
"At any rate, Clara, tell me one thing clearly. Are you quite certain
                            that Conny and I are not—not—"
"Not base-born," I said—why be mawkish in Oscan-English, when Saxon is to
                            be had?—"No, my darling, you are as lawful as I, your cousin Clara. We
                            Vaughans are a passionate race, but we never make wrecks of women, and
                            scoundrels of ourselves. That we leave for Corsicans, and people brought
                            up to lies."
The sneer was most unjust, and dreadfully unkind, but far too natural for
                            me, so long pent in, to resist it. I saw that I had grieved my pet, so I
                            begged her pardon, and reviled myself, till all was right again. Then
                            suddenly she leaped up and cried, with her hand upon her bounding
                            heart—every look and gesture must have been like her mother's.
"Let me go now, Clara. What am I thinking of? Let me start at once. And
                            you say my own father is very ill. He will die without seeing me. On
                            with your things, while I run to the cab-stand. I have money enough for
                            both."
She wrenched at the door-handle in her hurry, forgetting that I had
                            locked it; rich colour leaped into her cheeks, and her features and form
                            seemed to dance, like a flickering flame, with excitement. No wonder her
                            mother had loved, and been loved, with such power of passion.
"Idols, take it easily, or I won't let you go at all. I rather fancy, we
                            must have some evidence, before my Uncle owns a little chit picked up in
                            London. He is a clever and cautious man, and will expect something more
                            convincing than your beautiful eyes and sweet breath. Do you expect, you
                            impetuous jumper, that he will know you by instinct?"
Poor little thing, how her face fell, and how the roses faded out of it!
                            That look of hers went to my heart; but I knew what the mother had died
                            of, and feared lest her image and picture should perish in the same
                            manner. So I said again:
"Did you suppose, my dear, that your father would know you by
                            instinct?"
"Well, perhaps I did, Clara; if I thought about it at all. I am sure I
                            should know him so."
At this moment, two heavy knocks, like a postman's, but not so quick,
                            sounded through the house. I knew what they meant, one was Balaam, the
                            other was Balak. Isola clung to me, and turned pale; she thought it was
                            some one pursuing her. I told her hastily whom I expected, and sent her
                            to Mrs. Shelfer's room. My heart beat high, when with many a scrape and
                            bow, the worthy but not ornamental pair sidled heavily into the
                            room.
To my greetings they answered me never a word; but Balaam stood solemnly
                            at the end of the little table, and beckoned to his partner to fasten
                            the door. This being done with some pantomime, which meant "By your
                            leave, if you please, Miss," the two men, who looked none the leaner for
                            their arduous exertions, stood side by side before me. Tired of this
                            nonsense I exclaimed impatiently,
"Be quick, if you please; what is it you have found out?"
Balaam winked at Balak, and receiving a ponderous nod, began to digest it
                            leisurely.
"Have you brought me to London for nothing? What do you mean by all this
                            mummery? I shall ring the bell in a moment, and have you both shown
                            out."
Balaam's tongue revolved in his mouth, but burst not the bonds of speech,
                            and he tried to look straight at both windows,—till my hand was on the
                            bell-pull.
"Balak, I told you so. Lor, how much better it be for you to take my
                            advice, than for me to take yourn! Balak said, Miss, as we come along,
                            the young lady would be sure to know what was right, and turn up
                            handsome afore she asked us nothing. Now, says I, that ain't the
                            carakter of my experience, the women most always wants—"
"Here, quick, how much do you want, before I know what you have to
                            tell?"
Here a long interchange of signals took place, and even whispering behind
                            a hat.
"Well, Miss, I say ten, and that quite enough till you has time to judge.
                            But Balak say nothing under twenty, considering all the beer, and some
                            of it country brewers'—"
"Your advice is better than Balak's; I agree with you on that point; and
                            I will take it in preference. Here are ten pounds." He looked rather
                            taken aback, but could not well get out of it. Balak smiled grimly at
                            him.
"If what you tell me proves really valuable, I will give you a cheque for
                            another ninety ere long, and the residue hereafter: but not another
                            farthing, if you keep me in this suspense. Do I look likely to cheat
                            people of your class?"
"No, Miss, we hopes not; nor of any other class, I dare say. Still there
                            be so many rogues in the world—"
"You have taken my money; speak on."
What they told me at wearisome length, and with puzzling divergence, and
                            quantities of self-praise, need not occupy many lines. They had traced
                            the Jelly-corses, as they called Della Croce, from Somers Town to Lisson
                            Grove, where they stayed but a very short time, Lepardo Della Croce,
                            under some fictitious name, giving lessons in French, Spanish, and
                            Italian, at schools in Portland Town and St. John's Wood. But he only
                            seemed to play with his work, though he never broke any engagement to
                            which he really pledged himself. He was always reserved and silent,
                            accepted no invitations, and gathered his real subsistence by night at
                            chess-clubs and billiard-rooms, where his skill was unequalled. His only
                            friends were Italian refugees, his only diversion the vivisection of
                            animals. It must have been about this time that he saw the newspaper
                            paragraph, and did what he did to me. Then he changed his name again,
                            and lived awhile in Kensington; he had been in London years before, and
                            seemed to know it well. Here a nobleman, whom he had taught some new
                            device at billiards, took him up and introduced him to a higher class of
                            pupils, and obtained him some back-door palace appointment. He dubbed
                            himself "Professor," and started as Dr. Ross. But still he missed the
                            excitement and change of his once adventurous life, and several times he
                            broke loose, and left his household, for weeks and months together. Then
                            the two lovely children, whom all admired but none were allowed to
                            notice, were attended wherever they went, by a dark-browed Italian
                            woman. Suddenly they all left Kensington, and went to live at Ball's
                            Pond; the reason being some threatened exposure of the Professor's
                            cat-skinning propensities. His love of vivisection had become the
                            master-passion, and he would gratify it at all hazards. There is to some
                            natures a strange fascination in the horrible cruelties perpetrated
                            under the name of science. Through its influence he even relaxed his
                            strict reserve a little, and formed the acquaintance of a gentleman
                            connected with the college at Camden Town; to which suburb after a while
                            he removed, because he found it impossible to pursue his inhuman
                            researches under his own roof comfortably. Here, by means of his new
                            ally, who could not help admiring his infinitely superior skill, he was
                            appointed lecturer at several schools for young ladies, where
                            smatterings of science were dealt in. And now he was highly respected by
                            people who did not know him, and idolised by young ladies too clever to
                            care for pet parsons. Of course he became conceited; for his nature was
                            but a shallow one, and his cunning, though sharp and poisonous, had no
                            solid barb at the end. So he sneered, and grimaced, and sniggered, and
                            before an ignorant audience made learned men stammer and stutter, amazed
                            at his bold assumptions, and too honest and large of mind to suspect
                            them, at short notice.
But the skill of his hands was genuine, and his power of sight most
                            wonderful. I have since been told—though I do not believe it
                            possible—that he once withdrew and bottled nearly half the lungs of a
                            dog, tubercular after distemper, while the poor sufferer still gasped
                            on, and tried to lick his face. Oh that I were a man! How can I hear
                            such things and not swear? All animals, except one, hated him by
                            instinct. The only one, not sagacious enough to know him, was his
                            fellow-man. Men, or at any rate women, thought him a handsome, lively,
                            playful, and brilliant being. And yet, upon the honour of a lady I
                            declare—let those who know nothing of honour despise it as an
                            after-thought—that when he first entered my room, in his graceful and
                            elegant way, there ran through me such a shudder as first turns the
                            leaves towards autumn, such a chill of the spinal marrow as makes the
                            aura of epilepsy.
Darling Judy hated him from every bristle of his body, not only through
                            instinct, but for certain excellent reasons. The monster's most intimate
                            friend was a gallant Polish patriot, who had sacrificed all for his
                            country, and lived here in dignified poverty. This gentleman and his
                            wife could only afford one luxury; and that, by denying themselves many
                            a little comfort. They had the finest dog in London, one who had saved
                            his master's life from the squat-nosed sons of the Czar. This glorious
                            fellow, of Maltese family, was the father of my Giudice—whom in his
                            puppy days the Polish exile gave to Conrad and pretty girl Isola.
                            Slowski, now an ancient dog, had a wen behind his shoulder, which grew
                            and grew until the Professor could scarcely keep his hands from it. But
                            he knew that any operation, in so severe a case, was nearly sure to kill
                            a dog so old and weather-beaten. The owner too knew this, and would not
                            have it meddled with. Lepardo Della Croce swore at last that he would
                            taste no food until he had traced the roots of that wen. Judy, then a
                            pretty pup, gambolled into the room and saw his poor papa—but I will not
                            describe what a dog cannot even bear to think of. Poor Slowski died that
                            night, and the Pole knocked down the surviving brute, who shot him next
                            day upon Hampstead Heath. However, the gentleman slowly recovered; but
                            during his illness the frenzied wife overstepped the bounds of
                            honour—according to their ideas; she took advantage of Cora, in the
                            absence of Lepardo, and learned some of his previous crimes, by
                            practising on the poor woman's superstition. Then she found, through the
                            firm of Green, Vowler, and Green, that my Uncle was still alive, traced
                            out the history of the atrocious deed, and wrote the letter which had
                            brought me to London. Soon afterwards, when her husband recovered, she
                            was sorry for what she had done, and opened her lips on the subject no
                            more; at least in this country, which they soon forsook for America.
In this brief epitome, I have told, for the purpose of saving trouble, a
                            great deal more than I learned at the time, a great deal more than
                            Balaam and Balak would have found out in a twelvemonth. But it makes no
                            difference: for my conclusions and actions were just the same as they
                            would have been, if I had known all the above. "And so you see,
                            Miss"—was Balaam's peroration—"we have had a downy cove to deal with,
                            for all his furious temper. Lor now, I never believe any Bobby would
                            have discovered him; but we has ways, Miss, what with the carpets and
                            the sofys, and always knowing the best pump at the bar, gentlemen of our
                            profession has ways that no Peeler would ever dream of. And now, Miss,
                            the ink is on the table, and both of us wishes you joy—didn't you say
                            so, Balak?—if you only think we has earned that cheque for 90*l.*, and
                            the rest, please God, when the gentleman feel Jack Ketch."
"You shall have the money soon, if not now. For I believe you have
                            deserved it. But I must trouble you first to write down briefly what you
                            have told me, and to sign it in full. It is not for myself. I remember
                            every word. It is for the satisfaction of a gentleman who cannot see
                            you."
Balaam and Balak looked very blank, and declared it would take them a
                            week to write out half they had told me. This objection I soon removed,
                            by offering to make an abstract of it, which I could do from memory, and
                            then let them read and sign it. By this time they were both afflicted
                            with thirst, which I sent them away to quench, while I drew up a rough
                            deposition. But first I called darling Idols, and told her that now I
                            had evidence which would satisfy even a sceptical father.
"And surely, my pet, you yourself must have something; some relic, or
                            token, to help us."
"No, cousin Clara, I can't think of anything, except this little charm,
                            which has been round my neck for years, and which I have shown you
                            before: but I fear it is not uncommon. He took it away from me once, but
                            I managed to steal it back again."
The charm was a piece of chalcedony, ground into some resemblance which I
                            could not recognise then, and very highly polished. She said it had been
                            her brother Conrad's, and he had given it to her; hearing which I ceased
                            to examine it.
Presently the bailiffs returned, in very high spirits indeed, and ready
                            to sign almost anything. But I took good care to inform them that,
                            however hard they had laboured, I had made the discovery before them;
                            which they said was permiscuous, and not to be thought nothing of. All
                            the forms being quickly despatched, I found a few minutes to think what
                            was next to be done.
It is too late in my journey for dalliance and embarrassment with the
                            heavy luggage of motives, and the bandboxes of reflections, when we are
                            past the last station, and flying to our terminus: enough that I
                            resolved to take poor little Isola home at once to the house at Vaughan
                            St. Mary, and the arms of her longing father, that he might see her
                            before he died. I hoped he might live for years, but I feared he might
                            die to-morrow; so hangs over every one's mind that fatal third stroke of
                            paralysis. Her own entreaties and coaxing told much upon my resolution;
                            if none could resist her when happy, who could withstand her distress?
                            So Balaam and Balak were ordered most strictly to watch that demon's
                            abode, and at any risk give him in charge if he made attempt at
                            departure. To ensure due vigilance, I reclaimed the 90*l.* cheque, and
                            gave one payable three days afterwards. They grumbled and did not like
                            it; but in the course of all my rough usage, I had learned one great
                            maxim—Never trust, beyond the length of a cork, any man who is slave to
                            the bottle.
</div></body></text></TEI>