<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="54">
CHAPTER XVIII.
Cold and fresh was the morning air, and the open window invited the
                            sounds of country life. Who could think of fever with the bright dew
                            sparkling on the lawn, the lilac buds growing fat enough to claim their
                            right of shadow, the pleasant ring of the sharpening scythe, and the
                            swishing sweep of the swathe? From the stable-yard, round the corner,
                            came the soothing hiss of the grooms, the short stamp of the lively
                            steed (I fancied I knew my own favourite "Lilla"), and the gruff "Stand
                            still, mare, wull'e?" Far down the avenue whistled the cowboy,
                            waddle-footed, on his way to the clover leys, or the milkmaid sung with
                            the pail on her hip, and the deer came trooping and stooping their horns
                            along. Was it not one of my own pet robins, who hopped on the
                            window-sill, peered bravely at himself in the jug, and tried to remember
                            the last of his winter notes?
But it is cold, Jane, very cold indeed; and we have never been to bed;
                            and now the mowers have descried us, why do they stop their work, and
                            shake their heads together so, and keep outside the ranunculus bed, and
                            agree that the grass beneath our windows does not require cutting? Why,
                            if they were Papists, they would cross themselves, and that saves many
                            an oath. But the grass does want cutting, Jane. It cannot have been cut
                            for a week. I will call to them. No, it might disturb my uncle.
There is no sound from the bed-room yet: all deep and deadly silence. I
                            will go and see.
There my patient lies, just as when I saw him first, except that I have
                            arranged the wreck of his hoary locks, and applied a lotion to his
                            temple on the burning side. And yet, now I look closer, the face is not
                            quite so livid; or is it the difference between the candle-light and the
                            morning ray?
Even while I looked, he started up, as if my eyes revived him. He did not
                            moan or cry; but opened wide his filmy eyes, and gazed feebly and
                            placidly at me. For a time he did not know me: then a great change
                            gradually crept through his long faltering gaze. Fearing the effects of
                            excitement upon him, I tried to divert his attention by another good
                            dose of yeast. Three times he took it with resignation like a
                            well-trained child, but his eyes all the time intent on me. Presently
                            they began to swim and swerve; the effort of the faint blood-tissued
                            brain and the exertion of swallowing had been too much for his shattered
                            powers. He fell off again into the comatose state, but with a palpable
                            difference. The pulse, which had throbbed on the hot side only, could
                            now be felt most feebly moving in the other wrist, and the tension of
                            the muscles was relaxed: circulation was being restored and balanced,
                            and the breathing could now be traced, short as it was and
                            irregular.
I have not time to describe all the symptoms of gradual improvement, and
                            I have not the medical knowledge needful to do so clearly. Enough that
                            the six-hour interval was shortened that day by half, that the breathing
                            became more regular, and a soft perspiration broke through the clogged
                            and clammy pores. Jane wanted to second this by an additional blanket,
                            but I feared to allow it in a case of so utter prostration. When the
                            perspiration was over, then I prescribed the blanket for fear of a chill
                            reaction.
At every return of consciousness, our patient made an effort to speak,
                            but I hushed him with my hand on his lips, and he even managed to smile,
                            when he found that I would be obeyed. In the evening he tried to open
                            his arms to me, and then tried to push me away, in some faint
                            recollection of the nature of his disorder. To me the interest was so
                            intense, and the delight so deep, that if I had lost him now, it would
                            surely have broken my heart.
At sunset of that day, as nurse and I sat near the dressing-room window,
                            watching the slant rays flickering on the sward, and the rooks alighting
                            and swinging over their noisy nests, a black cloud hung for a moment
                            just above the sun, a black cloud with a vivid edge of gold. It tempered
                            the light in a peculiar manner, and seemed to throw it downwards.
                            Peering through my fingers at it, for it was very beautiful, I saw a
                            whitish mist or vapour steaming and hovering above the disk of the
                            setting sun, between my eyes and that golden marge. I wondered what this
                            could be; there was no heat to cause strong evaporation, nor any mist or
                            dewy haze about, nor was the sun "drawing water." But what I saw was
                            like that trembling twinkle of the air, which we often observe on a
                            meadow footpath in the hot forenoon of July. I drew Jane's attention to
                            it, not expecting any solution, but just for something to say.
"Dear me, Miss, don't you know what that is? I see it every evening; it
                            will be twice as plain when the sun goes down, and then it will be quite
                            white."
"Well, what is it? Why can't you tell me? Is everything here a
                            secret?"
I was rather irritable, but vexed with myself for being so. Too much
                            excitement and too little sleep were the causes.
"No, Miss, there's no secret at all about that. Every one knows what that
                            is. It's only the scum that rises through the grass from the arched pool
                            that takes all the drains of the house. Some of the arch fell in they
                            say, and the ground shakes when they mow it; they are afraid to roll
                            there."
"Is it possible? And you knew it, a practised nurse like you! Did my
                            uncle know it?"
"I am sure, Miss, I can't tell: most likely not, or he would have had it
                            mended, he hates things out of repair. But it can't do any harm, with
                            the mould and the grass above it."
"Can't it indeed? And you can see it rise. Shut all the bedroom windows
                            in a moment, Jane. I'll shut this."
She thought my wits were wandering, from what I had gone through;
                            nevertheless she obeyed me.
It happened that I had attended, at Isola's urgent request, one lecture
                            of the many delivered by Dr. Ross. She forgot what the subject was to
                            be. It proved to be an unsavoury and "unlady-like" one—Mephitis. Isola
                            wanted to run away, but I have none of that nonsense about me, when
                            human life is concerned, and listened with great attention, and even
                            admiration; for he handled the matter eloquently and well.
"Now, Jane, throw all the doors open, and the lobby window that looks in
                            the other direction. When do you think it will be possible to move our
                            poor patient from these rooms? The air here is deadly poison."
"Well I'm sure, Miss! And he couldn't have a nicer nor a more airy room;
                            and all my things in order too, and so handy, and so many
                            cupboards!"
"Out of this poison he must go. When can he be moved?"
"Well, Miss, he might be moved to-morrow, if we could only get plenty of
                            hands, and do it cleverly."
"Surely we can have plenty of hands. There used to be twenty-five
                            servants here; and I have not heard that my uncle has lessened the
                            number."
"No, Miss; but save and keep us, we shan't get one of them here."
"Nonsense! I will have them, or they leave the house. Of course I won't
                            peril their lives. We shall only want two or three; and they may take a
                            bath of disinfecting stuff, with all their clothes on, before they come;
                            and they may smoke all the while."
The nurse laughed grimly, and shook her gray head.
"And we will fumigate, Jane, fumigate tremendously. Surely Englishmen
                            have more self-respect than to be such babies, and you a woman, and I a
                            girl, shaming them out of face."
"It doesn't matter, Miss; they won't come. I know them well, the lot I
                            mean that are in the house now."
"Very well, Jane, we'll have Gamekeeper Hiatt, and his eldest son; they
                            are men I know. And if that is not enough, we'll send to Gloucester for
                            Thomas Henwood. But why don't you open the lobby door, as I told
                            you?"
"If you please, Miss, I can't. They have fastened it outside."
"Do you mean to say that they have dared to lock us in?"
"Indeed I do, Miss; we have been fastened in since the morning."
"And pray, why did you not tell me?'
"Because I feared to excite you, Miss. I know your temper when you are
                            wronged, ever since you was that high; and in this fever air, excitement
                            is sure to kill you. Brutes! But I suppose they don't know it."
"They know it well; at least the master-spirit does. And for that very
                            reason I will crush my indignation. Since I was that high, Jane, I have
                            passed through much tribulation, and have dropped my lady-heiress tone.
                            I can now command myself."
"Then, Miss, I will show you what they sent this morning, round the
                            handle of the coffee-jug. I was afraid to let you see it before." She
                            gave me a twist of paper, on which was written as follows:—
"For the safety of the household, Mrs. Fletcher orders that the persons
                            in the fever-room be allowed no communication with the other servants.
                            The intercepting door is fastened, because a most sinful un-Christian
                            act was perpetrated last night. Due supplies will be delivered once
                            a-day, at 10 A.M. No empty vessels and no correspondence received. Any
                            attempt to break these rules will be punished by suspension of supplies.
                            Servants are forbidden to come beneath the sick-room windows. May the
                            Lord have you in His keeping, in His tender mercy, according to His holy
                            will. You are requested to read Philippians i. 8-11 inclusive. There are
                            three holy bibles on the drawers and dressing-tables."
When I had read this, and perceived, by the blasphemy at the end, that it
                            could proceed from no other than that awful woman, I confess that my
                            spirit was cowed within me. Not from selfish fear, nor yet from the
                            taming of passion, but from the lowering thought that I belonged to the
                            same race of being as the author of such Satanity. Presently, I became
                            too indignant to speak, or even think. It added, if that were possible,
                            to my indignation, that I had seen her leave the house, about nine
                            o'clock that morning, in our best close carriage. She kept the windows
                            up until she was past the lawn and the light iron gates, beyond the
                            arcade of roses; then, at the first turn in the avenue, she let down the
                            glass and gracefully kissed her hand to me. I did not believe, however,
                            that she was gone back to Cheltenham. With so much at stake in our
                            house, and depending on her direction, she would surely stop in the
                            neighbourhood, if only to watch the course of events.
Sooner than I dared to expect, I regained the command of myself; horror
                            within me was stronger than wrath, and stronger than either became the
                            resolve to survive and win. "There can be no God," I exclaimed, in my
                            presumptuous ignorance, "if this scheme of the devil is permitted to
                            triumph."
First I tried the door, which severed us from the rest of the house. My
                            uncle's rooms were in the western wing, very near those which my dear
                            mother had occupied, and not very far from my own. They formed one floor
                            of the western gable; the three bedroom windows and that of the
                            dressing-room looked to the west, while the great lobby window, from
                            which I had seen Mrs. Daldy's departure, looked southward along the
                            avenue, the curve of which could be seen also from the bedroom windows.
                            An oaken door, at the end of the main passage, cut off the rooms in this
                            storey of the gable from all the rest of the house. This door Jane had
                            left locked from the inside, fearing lest others should lock her in, as
                            they had threatened to do. But now we found that a strong iron bolt had
                            been fixed upon the outside, while we were asleep in the morning, and
                            that we had no chance of forcing it.
Next I asked Jane, whether she thought that the house, now Mrs. Daldy was
                            gone, would be still in the hands of our enemies. Would not Mrs.
                            Fletcher at once re-assert her authority? Might not Matilda Jenkins be
                            expected to fly to the rescue? The nurse, knowing all the politics of
                            the servants' hall, assured me that there was no hope of either of these
                            events. Robert, a drunken Wesleyan, turned out of the sect in
                            Cheltenham, was Mrs. Daldy's lieutenant, and would take all care of
                            Matilda, to whose good graces he had been making overture. As for Mrs.
                            Fletcher, she was probably in the same plight as ourselves. From what I
                            heard about Robert, I began to believe that he had private orders to
                            disown me at the station, for the double purpose of yielding a tit-bit
                            of insolence, and warning of my arrival.
However, that mattered very little; but out of those rooms I must get,
                            either by door or by window; and that, too, without delay. Do they
                            expect to triumph so easily over Clara Vaughan? And in her father's
                            house? The windows were about twenty feet from the ground, as nearly as
                            I could guess, and the rooms beneath were empty. At once I resolved to
                            attempt an escape that way, and to do so before the moon, which was
                            southing now, should shine on the western aspect. Good Jane was
                            terrified at the thought; and then, upon my persisting, implored me to
                            let her make the attempt, if it must be made at all.
"Now, Jane, no more, if you please. We can't waste time about that. You
                            have a husband partly dependent upon you, and several children to think
                            of. For me nobody cares." But I hoped somebody did. "And you know I am
                            far more active and much lighter than you are. Help me out with the
                            feather bed."
The little bed in the dressing-room, which she had to sleep on, was
                            speedily brought to the window, and dropped just underneath it. It fell
                            upon the grass with a pleasing and quiet flop. Then the two strong
                            bell-ropes, already cut down and plaited together, were tied round the
                            bars of the double window sashes, the lower sash being thrown up to the
                            full extent, the glass pressed quietly out with a pair of wet towels,
                            and the splinters removed, so as not to cut the rope. The latter still
                            failed to reach more than half-way to the ground, but I would venture
                            the drop if I could only descend so far. After winding a linen sheet
                            around my body and dress, with the end tied round one ankle, so as to
                            leave me free use of my limbs, I sat upon the window-sill in the broad
                            shadow, and calculated my chances. Should I begin the descent with face,
                            or with back, to the wall? Face to the wall I resolved on, for though I
                            should have to drop backward so, yet what I feared most of all was
                            having the back of my head crushed against the house. Next to this I
                            dreaded a sprain of the ankle, but all our family are well-knit and
                            straight in the joint.
So I launched myself off, beginning as gently as could be, Jane having
                            firm hold of one hand, until I was well on the voyage. Though not well
                            versed in calisthenic arts, I got on famously almost as far as the end
                            of the rope, keeping away from the wall by the over-saling of the
                            window-sill, and the rapid use of my feet. Then I rested a moment on a
                            projecting ledge—called, I believe, a "stringing-course"—and away hand
                            below hand again. But I struck my knuckles terribly against that
                            stringing-course, and very nearly lost hold from the pain of the blow;
                            then bending my body forward I gave one good push at the wall, and
                            shutting both eyes, I believe, let go the rope altogether. Backward I
                            fell, and rolled over upon the feather bed. I was not even stunned, but
                            feared for a moment to try if my limbs were sound.
There I sat and stripped off the winding sheet. Presently, up I got, and,
                            in my triumph, alas! could not help crying "All right, Hurrah!" like a
                            foolish little child. In a moment I saw that my cry had been heard,
                            where it should not have been. A rapid flitting of lights along the
                            lower windows and in the stableyard, and I knew that chase would be
                            given.
But after leaving my father's house in such a dignified manner, was it
                            likely that I would give in and be caught? Now, Clara, you could beat
                            all your nurses in running, off and away like the wind! Away I went full
                            speed towards the shade of the avenue, while Jane had the wit to scream
                            out of the window, "Help! Help! Here's the house on fire!" This made
                            some little diversion; I had a capital start, and it was but half a mile
                            to the lodge where old Whitehead lived. Once there, I should care for
                            nobody. I must have escaped very easily, for my feet seemed as swift as
                            a deer's; but, as my luck would have it, the light iron gates between
                            the lawn and the park were fastened. What on earth should I do? I saw
                            men running across the lawn, and, what was worse, they saw me. In vain I
                            pulled at the gates; they rattled, but would not yield. Had I owned true
                            presence of mind, I should have walked boldly up to the men, and dared
                            them to touch me fresh from the fever-room. In the flurry of the moment
                            I never thought of that, but darted into the shrubbery, and crouched
                            among thick laurels. Presently I heard them rush down the main drive and
                            begin the search, with some heavy swearing. Two of them came to the very
                            clump I was hiding in, and pushed a pitchfork almost into my side, but
                            the stupid fellows had lanterns, which blinded them to the moonlight. On
                            they went with grumblings and growlings, which told me exactly where to
                            shun them. Judging at length, from the silence, that the search had
                            passed to the right, I slipped from my tangled lair, and glided away to
                            the left, beyond the shrubbery spring, where a little gate, as I knew,
                            led to a glade in the park. The deep ha-ha which I had feared to jump in
                            the dark, because of the loose stones at the bottom, was here succeeded
                            by a high oak paling, and probably through that gate had come the
                            murderer of my father.
With a cold shudder at the remembrance, I stole along through the shadowy
                            places, and had almost reached the little gate, when I saw two of the
                            searchers coming straight towards me. To the right of me was the
                            park-paling, on the left a breastwork of sod, which I could not climb
                            without being clearly seen; to fly was to meet the enemy; should I
                            yield, and be baffled after all; insulted too, most likely, for I knew
                            that the men were tipsy?
In my hand was the tightly-wound sheet, used as a rope to confine my
                            dress. I had folded it short and carried it, on the chance of its
                            proving useful. In a moment I was under the palings in deep shadow, with
                            the white sheet thrown around me, falling from my forehead, and draped
                            artistically over the right arm. Stock still I stood against the black
                            boards, and two great coils of long black hair flowed down the winding
                            sheet. The men came up, tired of the chase, and grumbling; and by their
                            voices I knew them for my good friends Jacob and Bob. Suddenly, they
                            espied a tall, white figure, of tremendous aspect. They stopped short,
                            both tongue and foot, and I distinctly heard their teeth chatter. With a
                            slow and spectral motion, I raised my draped white arm, and fetched a
                            low, sepulchral moan. Down fell the lantern, and, with a loud yell, away
                            went the men, as hard as their legs could carry them.
Laughing heartily, I refolded my sheet, and taking the short cut across
                            the park to the lodge where old Whitehead lived, arrived, without having
                            met even my old friend "Tulip."
The old man, in hot indignation, drew forth his battered musket—for he
                            had once been in the militia—and swore that he would march upon the ——
                            rogues at once. Instead of that I sent him for the two Hiatts, and the
                            village constable; and soon, without invitation, half the village
                            attended. With my torn dress tucked up by good Mrs. Whitehead, and a hat
                            on my head, newly bought for her clean little grandchild, I set forth
                            again in the moonlight, at the head of a faithful army, to recover my
                            native home.
Hiatt easily opened the gate, which had defied my flurried efforts, and
                            we presented ourselves at the main entrance, a force that would frighten
                            a castle. It is needless to say that we carried all before us. The state
                            of siege was rescinded, Mrs. Fletcher and Tilly set free, all the
                            ringleaders turned away neck and crop, and what was far more important,
                            my poor uncle removed, without being conscious of it, to a sweet and
                            wholesome room. The sturdy Gloucestershire yeomen scorned all idea of
                            danger.
Tired with all my adventures, before I slept that night—still near my
                            uncle's bed—two reflections came dreamily over my mind.
The first was a piece of vanity. "Ah, Mrs. Daldy, you little know Clara
                            Vaughan!"
The second was, "Dear me, how Conrad would be astonished at this! And how
                            strange that his father should thus have saved my uncle's life! For he
                            must have died, if left in that noisome room."
</div></body></text></TEI>