<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Clara Vaughan by R.D. Blackmore (3 volumes)</title><author>Blackmore, Richard Doddridge (1825-1900)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="77">
CHAPTER V.
Eager as Isola was to see her true father at last, she pressed me
                            strongly to call at her brother's lodgings on our way to Paddington, and
                            take him with us if possible; or at any rate learn where he was, and how
                            long he would be absent. But I refused to do anything of the kind.
                            Though not half so proud as of old, I could not quite stoop to that.
                            "You know, dear," she continued, "Conny will think it unfair of me to
                            get such a start of him with the real good Papa; and it would be so much
                            nicer to have him there to help. And I am terribly frightened, though of
                            course you can't understand it."
"Isola, no more nonsense. For your sake, and my poor Uncle's, I would do
                            anything honest and proper: but neither can I travel with your brother
                            Conrad, nor can I go near his lodgings. I am not quite reduced to that,
                            however I am trampled on."
"But, darling, they need not see you. And you know he has made some
                            wonderful mistake."
Of course I knew it, and told myself so fifty times in a minute; but it
                            was a likely thing that I would tell his sister so.
"He has, indeed, a very grave mistake, if he ever thinks I will forgive
                            him. No mistake ever made by man can be pleaded for what he has done.
                            Even if he believed, by some excess of absurdity, that my father had
                            murdered his, instead of his murdering mine (which was much nearer the
                            mark), would even that justify his rudeness, low rudeness, and personal
                            violence to a lady? What he did I never told you; and he, I should hope,
                            was too much ashamed to speak of it: why he actually pushed me; thrust
                            me, Clara Vaughan, away from him, till I almost fell on the floor!"
"Oh, Donna, how your eyes flash! And you call me excitable! Let me put
                            your hair back. There now, give me a kiss. I am so sorry for Conny. He
                            loves you with all his heart, and you look as if you could kill him. But
                            no doubt the new good papa will put every thing to rights."
"Will he indeed? Let us go and see."
We got to Paddington just in time to catch the two o'clock train, having
                            telegraphed first to my Uncle that I was coming to take his advice,
                            before doing anything more. This was true, so far as it went, and as
                            much of the truth as I then dared to administer. This message was sent,
                            not for the sake of finding the carriage at Gloucester, but in order to
                            break the suddenness of our arrival. Through all my joy I dreaded what
                            was to come, and knew not how to manage it. Idols talked fast enough all
                            the way down the line. As yet she had seen scarcely anything of our
                            quiet, rich English scenery; and although the Great Western exhibits it
                            rather flatly, some parts there are, below Swindon, which fill the mind
                            with content. But our minds could not be so filled, being full of
                            excitement already. Near Stroud poor Idols was in the greatest ecstasy,
                            and expected me to know the owner of every pretty meadow.
But after we entered my Uncle's carriage—or mine, I suppose, it should
                            now be called—dear Isola fell away into the deepest silence. She stored
                            her wonder inwardly, nor showed the sweet depths of her eyes, until she
                            sprang out at the foot of the old stone steps, trodden by so many
                            hundreds of her ancestors. Then she looked up at the long gray house,
                            with the dusk of July around it, and bats of three varieties flitting
                            about the gables; and I saw beneath her dark eye-lashes the tremulous
                            light of a tear.
After leading my sweet new cousin—whom everybody stared at, and who
                            feared to look at the pavement—to my own snug quarters, I left her there
                            under kind Mrs. Fletcher's charge, and ran to my Uncle's favourite room.
                            Already my breath was short, and my heart up and down with excitement,
                            and I had but the presence of mind to know that I was sure to make a
                            mistake of it. I saw a great change in him, even since the Monday; but
                            he was the first to speak.
"My dear child, kiss me again. You are nearly as tall as I am, since my
                            upright ways have departed. From the moment you went away, I have done
                            nothing but miss you, every hour and every minute; and last night I
                            slept never a single wink. Let us give it up, my darling. God has sent
                            you to me to make up for both daughter and son."
"Well, Uncle, that's all very fine, but I doubt it strongly." I was
                            forced to be flippant a little, for fear of breaking down. "It is my
                            firm belief that proud Clara will still have to wash at the pump."
He knew what I meant; it was an old tale, in our neighbourhood, of a
                            nobleman's second wife who would not allow her step-children even the
                            use of a yellow basin.
"What! do you mean to say"—and he began to tremble exceedingly—"that you
                            have found any trace, any clue even, to my poor darlings?"
"Yes, thank God, I have. Oh, Uncle, I am so glad!" And I threw myself
                            into his arms: his head fell heavily on my shoulder, and I felt that I
                            had been too sudden. He could not speak, but fetched one long sob. I
                            parted his white hair, and looked at him as if in surprise at his
                            hastiness.
"Dear Uncle, we must not be certain yet. I mean that I have found
                            something, or fancy I have found something, which—which—I mean if
                            properly followed up—may lead in time—but you know how sanguine I
                            am."
"Clara, you are playing with me. It is a mistake to do so. I cannot bear
                            it, child. But the sudden shock I can bear. Let me know all at once. Are
                            they alive or dead?"
"Alive, I think, dear Uncle; and I hope to find them soon, if you will
                            calmly advise me."
"You have found them. No more fencing. I know it by your eyes. All the
                            truth this moment, unless you wish to kill me."
He stood up as if to seize me, for I had withdrawn from his grasp, but
                            his poor legs would not carry him; so I was obliged to seize him
                            instead. He fell sideways on a chair, and vainly tried to speak; but his
                            eyes never faltered from mine.
"Dearest Uncle, I tell you the truth. Of course I cannot be certain yet,
                            and it won't do to make a mistake; and so I want more evidence."
"I want no more. Only let me see them." He spoke very slowly, and the
                            muscles of his face twitched at every word.
"Now, keep your mind calm and clear, to help me, my dear Uncle; for I
                            know not what to do. Have you anything, any tokens at all, of their
                            beloved mother?"
My object was to divert his mind, for I saw the approach of coma, and now
                            trembled more than he did.
With a feeble smile at the folly of my question, after such a love as
                            his, he answered in great exhaustion,
"Take the key from my neck. You know the large black box in—in—"
Here his chin fell on his breast, and he could not lift the key, but his
                            eyes still shone with intelligence, and followed me everywhere. Ribbon
                            and all I took the key, and rang the bell for Jane, the most careful and
                            kind of nurses. I ordered her, in a whisper, to give my Uncle a glass of
                            very strong brandy and water, if she could get him to swallow it; and
                            away I ran upstairs, hoping to relieve him. Then suddenly it struck me
                            that I had no right to open that box, without the presence of a
                            competent witness. I knew at once what box it was, from the constant
                            anxiety my poor Uncle had shown about it. Who had such right to be my
                            witness as his darling daughter? So back I flew to my own rooms, and
                            dragged the bewildered Isola down the broad corridor. The poor little
                            thing was frightened so that she could hardly breathe. I had no especial
                            object in opening that old box, at that particular moment, much as I had
                            often longed to know what its contents were. My presence of mind was
                            lost, and all I could think of was, that I might find something there to
                            break that awful suspension of life, so likely to end in death.
The box was in a panelled closet by the head of my Uncle's bed. When I
                            handed Idols the light to hold, she took it as if in a dream; her cheeks
                            were as white and transparent as the wax, and she held the candle so
                            that a hot flake splashed on my neck. The lock of the long box turned
                            most easily, and the hinges moved without creaking: most likely it had
                            been pored over every day, for many years. The lid was arched and
                            hollow, with straps of faded web inside it.
In beautiful order, so fair that I hardly dared to touch them, lay the
                            clothes and trinkets, the letters and little relics, the gloves and
                            pocket-handkerchiefs, the fairy slippers, the wedding-dress, the
                            coquettish veil, and saucy hat of the dead. I am not over sensitive,
                            thank God, or I should not be living now; but the sight of those things
                            upset me more than any distress of my own. The small parcels of silver
                            paper, screwed at the end and pinned in the middle, the pins put
                            stupidly as men always put them, the light gay dresses made for some
                            sweet figure, folded with such care, and yet quite out of the plaits,
                            and labelled with the dates when last the dear one wore them, even a
                            withered fern-wreath and a sprig of shrivelled myrtle—I could not thrust
                            my commonplace hands into these holy treasures; if I could I should
                            never deserve to be myself so remembered. But one thing struck me, as
                            thoughts profane always strike us crookedly; if the poor lady could have
                            been wept to life again, how much better would she have found all her
                            things arranged, than she had ever kept them! That is to say if she
                            resembled her wondering and crying daughter, who knelt down and wanted
                            to kiss every article in the box. Her little white hands were as busy as
                            mice among them; and long-drawn sobs were tumbled with
                            interjections.
"Now, my dearest Idols, you must not disturb these things. Your father
                            will be so vexed."
Would he though?—said I to myself—not if he knew whose hand it was that
                            did it. She paid no attention to me.
"Now just put back that silver knife, with the bit of peach-skin upon it:
                            and leave the stone as it was."
To my surprise she began to suck the stone, which her mother perhaps had
                            sucked, eighteen years ago. Inside the paper was written, "Knife and
                            peach-stone found in my Lily's pocket. The stone was meant for me to
                            set. I will plant it, when I have found her children. E.V., January,
                            1834."
"Now, you foolish child, you are really too bad." And with that I gave
                            her a little push. In her heedless way, she fell almost into the box,
                            and her light form lay amongst her mother's dresses. A sudden thought
                            flashed across me.
"Isola, off with that nasty dark frock!"
"Nasty, indeed, Clara! Why you said this morning how very pretty it
                            was."
"What has that to do with it? Pull it off, or I'll tear it. Now, out with
                            the other arm."
In a moment or two, I had all her beauty gleaming in white before me; and
                            carefully taking from the box a frock of pale blue silk, I lifted it
                            over her head, and drew her dimpled arms through the sleeves; then I
                            fixed it in front with the turquoise buttons, and buckled the slender
                            zone. Her blue eyes looked on in amazement, like violets at a
                            snow-storm. Then I led her to the mirror, and proud as we both had
                            always been of her beauty, the same thought struck us now. I saw it in
                            the mirror, by the toss of her pointed chin and the coy bend of her
                            neck: she saw it there as clearly, by the flash of my tear-bright eyes.
                            Neither of us had ever seen that loveliest of all girls look half so
                            lovely before. The glow of pride and beauty's glory mantled in her
                            cheeks; and her eyes were softly beaming down the avenue of lashes, from
                            clearest depths of azure. I never saw such eyes as she had, among all
                            our English beauties. Some perhaps are as fine of colour, and as liquid,
                            though not so lustrous: but the exquisite arch of the upper lid, and the
                            rich short fringe of the lower, cast a tremulous light and shade, which
                            dull Anglo-Saxons feel not. Like moonbeams playing through a mantled
                            bridge.
The dress fitted her exactly. It had been made for a slender, buoyant
                            figure, as graceful and pure as a snow-wreath, yet full of warm motion
                            and richness. Indeed, I must confess, that, although correct enough for
                            the time and clime of the owner, it showed too much of the lifting snow
                            for our conceptions of maidenhood: so I drew a gauzy scarf—perhaps a
                            true fazoletto—over the velvet slope of the
                            shoulders, and imprisoned it in the valley. This being nicely arranged,
                            I hung her chalcedony charm from her neck, and fastened it to her
                            waist-band. Then I caught up her clustering hair, nearly as thick and
                            long as my own, after the Corsican fashion, snooded it close in ripples
                            with a pink and white-striped mandile, and told her to love herself in
                            the glass, while I ran off to the hot-house for a truss of Stephanotis.
                            This, with a glossy sprig of Gardenia leaves to back it, I fastened
                            cleverly into the clear mandile, on the curve of her elegant head, and
                            my darling was complete. Then I kissed her sweet lips, and admired her,
                            more than she admired herself.
"Clara, it does not matter how much trouble you take; you can't make me
                            look a quarter so well as you do."
"Not quite so tall, my darling, nor anything like so naughty; but a
                            thousand times more lovely."
"Well, I wish I could think so. I am always longing to change with
                            you."
"Don't talk nonsense, my pretty; if I were a man I should die for you.
                            Now I glory in you as a Vaughan. Come along."
I led her through the gallery and to the door of her father's room,
                            before she had time to think. She did not know but what I was taking her
                            back to my own rooms, along another passage. At the sick man's door I
                            left her, while I went in to see how much might be safely ventured.
My Uncle was leaning back in his deep reclining chair, with his weak eyes
                            fixed most eagerly on the door. In vain he strove to hide his
                            disappointment, and to look at me with gratitude. The wandering mind too
                            plainly hoped for something dearer than a brother's child.
Dismissing Jane through the other room, that she might not encounter
                            Isola, I sat down to examine him. The brandy and water had rallied his
                            vital power, but made him hot and feverish. He kissed my hand to atone
                            for some sharp and impatient expressions, and I saw that the moment was
                            favourable.
"Uncle dear, what will you say to me? I have brought you another new
                            visitor, the loveliest girl in London. You know her well by name. You
                            have often longed to see my sweet darling Isola. And she wants to see
                            you so much. Only you must promise me one thing honourably. Be gay and
                            sprightly with her; she is timid in this old house."
"My dear, I can't see her to-night. You don't mean that of course. Give
                            her my best apologies. You say she is very sweet-tempered; I am sure she
                            will excuse me."
"If she would, I will not. Nor would you excuse her, if you knew whom she
                            resembles."
"What do you mean? Have you locked my box again?"
"Yes, and here is the key. I found a portrait of a lady"—I had not shown
                            this to my cousin—"very like beautiful Isola."
He began to tremble again, so I thought the quicker the better. Placing
                            the lamp-shade so that a dim light fell on the door, I ran out to fetch
                            his daughter.
"Now, don't be a baby, Isola. Remember how ill he is. Keep as much in the
                            shadow as possible; and if he should guess who you are, pretend not to
                            care a bit for him."
"I will try my very best, Clara. But I don't think I can do that."
She shook so much that I was obliged to support her, as she had supported
                            me that evening when first we met. Stiffly I brought her in, and began
                            to introduce her, holding her back all the time.
"Uncle Edgar, this is my dearest friend, of whom you have heard so often,
                            Miss Isola"—Ross I could not say. "Why, Uncle—why, Idols, darling—"
It was all in vain; I might as well have spared my devices. From the
                            moment she crossed the threshold, his eyes had been leaping towards her.
                            The paralysed man bounded forward, as if with galvanic life. His
                            daughter met him as wildly. "My Lily, my Lily," was all he could sob,
                            "my own Lily come from the grave!" With a father's strength he clasped
                            her, and her dark locks were showered with silver. As for tears—but I
                            left them together when I had seen both safe on the sofa.
</div></body></text></TEI>