
CHAPTER XXX.
THIS first day is a sample of Esther's new life; the other days were like it—not a jot
     better, not a jot worse. The same thing happened at the same time each day: no two things ever
     changed places. It was a life that provided all the necessaries of life—that demanded no hard
     manual labour, no overworking of the brain. The intellectual faculties that it called into play
     must have been possessed by any moderately intelligent seven-years' child. No one bullies
     Esther; no one oppresses her; no one troubles their head much about her. So as she performs her
     monotonous, easy, tiresome little duties towards them, the old people have no sort of objection
     to her enjoying life, if she can. With the aged, comfort and happiness are
     interchangeable terms: continuous warmth of body, pleasant-tasted meats, a profound stagnant
     quiet around their arm-chairs, much sleep—these are their summum
      bonum. They have had love, and have outlived it—excitement also, and grief: they
     have outlived all but the elemental instincts that refuse to be outlived. Looking back from the
     vantage-ground of dotage on the fought battle of life, they wonder that any one can long to be
     in the thick of it. In this life of Esther's there are no hardships to be borne—none of those
     sufferings, the enduring of which with self-conscious complacent heroism almost compensates
     them. It has none of the elements of tragedy: there is nothing very noble in bearing with
     respectable patience the trifling annoyance of making yourself hoarse roaring the price of
     wheat, and the pros and cons of disendowment, into an old man's ear; there is nothing
      grand in picking up the countless dropped stitches in an old
     woman's knitting. In it there is nothing to endure, nothing to enjoy; it is essentially
     negative, flat, stale, sterile. It would be all very well if any end were to be seen to it; if
     it were not a sort of small Eternity in life; if there were to be distant holidays to be looked
     forward to, when the few saved pounds might be poured, with the joyful generosity of the very
     poor, into some stricken parent's lap— might go to buy boots and shoes for needy little
     brothers and sisters. But 
"Fatherly, motherly, sisterly, brotherly
Home she has none." All her life seems crowded into the seventeen
     years behind her; there seems to be nothing left to happen in the fifty or sixty years ahead.
     She has nothing to look forward to but huge cycles of newspaper-reading, footstool-carrying,
     message- running; of lending all her useful organs of sight and hearing and touch to others; of
     keeping for herself only her suffering, aching, empty heart! 
"Every succeeding year will steal something away from her
      beauty."
People pity her now, because she is so young and pretty—not reflecting that the possession of
     the two best gifts under heaven makes her so much the less worthy a subject for compassion.
     Twenty years hence, she will probably be a "companion" still—will be not near so young, nor
     near so touching, and infinitely more to be pitied.
The snow lies long—longer than it generally does at this time of year. Ordinarily the old
     Cheshire saying holds good: 
"If there's ice in October as'll hould a duck,
All the rest of the winter'll turn to muck!" But this October there
     has been ice enough to hold many
      ducks; but yet the rest of the winter shows no signs of, as
     the homely saw phrases it, "turning to muck." In the little flower-garden, round three sides of
     which the ivied buttressed house is built, only a white heap here, and a white depression
     there, show where bush or bed were wont to be. Over the fair wide park, with all its mimic
     hills and valleys, copses and spinneys, God has laid a great sheet— great as the one that was
     let down by its four corners on the housetop to the fastidious Apostle—a sheet purely, crisply,
     miserably white. In the park Esther, in the early gloaming, after the daily drive, so literally
     a promenade en voiture, takes long walks; ruins her boots,
     discolours her petticoats, and makes her crape crimp with snow-water: strolls listless and
     alone under the old bare trees that have stripped off all their clothing—now at the very time
     that they seem to need them most; traces the slender footprints of the famished birds—the
     little delicate tracks crossing and recrossing one another. And always the leading
     thought—displaced now and then by lesser thoughts, that flit like travelling swallows through
     her mind, but ever, ever returning—is, "Where is Jack? Where has my boy gone to? Where is he
      now, at this moment "If some trusty messenger could but come to her, with
     sure tidings, saying, "It is well with him !" Has she any reason for believing him to be in
     heaven, beyond the vague confidence that most people seem to feel that their relatives must be
     there, on the principle, I suppose, of the French Duke, of whom his kindred remarked, that
      "God would certainly think twice 'avant de damner une personne
       de sa qualité!'"
Jack's death had been most unlike the deaths of the shining Evangelical lights in Bessy
     Brandon's books, whose whole lives had been but trifling prologues to the jubilant drama of
     their death. Death had been to them an ecstasy; they had died with words of confident rapture
     on their lips,
      with strains of welcoming music in their ears: he had
     departed painfully, sadly, almost dumbly; no sound of triuphant clarions greeted him from
     beyond Death's deep ford. Is he, then, in hell?  Oh blessed doctrine of cleansing
     purgatorial pains! if our faith would but admit of you! Which of us does not seem to himself so
     much too bad for heaven, so much too good for hell? 
"Let Faustus live in hell a thousand years,
A hundred thousand, and at the last be saved!"
Where is he, then?—where is he? She takes counsel of the mute forces of nature—of the clouds,
     the snows, and the blasts But of what use? They knew not of his story; or, if they did, they
     were forbidden to tell of it; silence was laid like a seal upon their lips.
It is not in the most edifying books that the grandest sayings are to be found. What can be
     nobler than this of Rousseau's dying Julie: "Qui s'endort dans le
       sein d'un père, n'est pas en souci du réveil?" 

The wearier in body she can return from these long, sad rambles, the better pleased is
     Esther; for is not weariness the father of sleep—sleep, the one impartial thing under heaven;
     sleep, the radical; sleep, the leveller, that leaves a king's arms to embrace a tinker? But of
     what use is it to sleep, if in sleep one hear—
"False voices, feel the kisses of false mouths,
And footless sound of perished feet?"  And worse even than such
     dream-tortured slumber is fear-tortured waking. Constitutionally timid, a weakened body and
     broken spirit have made Esther pitiably nervous. Jealousy, remorse, and fear run a dreary race
     for the palm of extremest suffering; and I am not sure that fear does not win. The poor child
     suffers the torments of the damned in her huge hearse-bed in the far-off, rat-haunted, ghostly
      old chamber. She dreads falling asleep, for fear of waking
     to find the low fire playing antics with Burke's long nose and spectacles, with Pitt's maypole
     figure on the screen; flickering over the malignant fleshy Cupids on the wall; waking to see,
     looking in upon her through the curtains, Jack's face—not kind, débonnaire, smiling, as she used to see it in the study at home (for that
     could frighten no one), but solemn, stiff, with closed eyes and bandaged chin, as she had last
     seen it. Sometimes she sits up in bed, a cold sweat standing on her brow, as some noise,
     distincter than usual, sounds through the room; "thud, thud," as of some falling object; an
     unexplained rustling in the passage; a little clicking in the door-lock—sits up, listening with
     strained ears, thinking, "Can that be rats ?" Momently she expects to see some
     crape-masked burglar enter the door or window. And if such burglar did enter, it would be
     useless to scream for help; she is too far off from the rest of the household to be heard: it
     would be of no use to ring the bell, for it rings downstairs, miles away, and everybody is in
     bed and asleep upstairs. So she lies quaking—her terror now and then rising to such an
     uncontrollable pitch that she feels as though, if it lasted a moment longer, she must go mad:
     listening with intense impatience to the leisurely "Tick-tack, tick-tack, tick-tack" of the
     cuckoo- clock outside; listening with inexpressible longing to hear it say, " Cuckoo, cuckoo,
     cuckoo, cuckoo !" four times. At four o'clock she will be safe, she thinks; at four o'clock
     cocks begin to crow, dairymaids to get up, the bodiless dead return to their churchyard homes,
     night's unutterable horror to pass. What wonder if, after the agony of such vigils—agony
     causeless, you will say, unreasonable, but none the less real, none the less acute for that—she
     comes down in the morning wan, nerveless, with haggard cheeks, and great dark streaks under the
     unrested beauty of her eyes?
     

"The time is near the birth of Christ."
"Stir-up Sunday" is past; people have bought their raisins, and suet, and citron, and begun
     to mix their Christmas puddings. Turkeys lie dead, thick as autumn-leaves in Vallambrosa. The
     snow is gone, but not without leaving Miss Craven the legacy of a very bad cold, derived from
     countless soaked stockings and neglected wet petticoats. She has had it a fortnight, and her
     weakened, lowered frame seems incapable of shaking off the trifling ailment. For a week her
     voice has been almost gone, and she has consumed many sticks of liquorice, many boxes of black
     currant lozenges, in the endeavour to bring it back to the requisite shouting pitch for the
     inevitable daily newspaper reading.
It is afternoon: heavy rain, following the thaw, has prevented the invariable drive to
     Shelford. Mrs. Blessington and the two girls are sitting in the great room hung with
     battle-pieces, which is old-fashionedly named "the saloon." It is a mercy that it is a great
     room—else the fire, piled halfway up the chimney, and the never-opened windows would render it
     unendurably close. As it is, the atmosphere, though less stifling than that of the interior of
     the family-coach, is fustier than is altogether agreeable.
"My dear," says Mrs. Blessington, shivering, "pick up my shawl; I really must have sand-bags
     to those windows; there comes in a wind at them that positively nearly blows one out of one's
     chair."
Esther complies, and then resumes her occupation of holding a skein of wool for Miss
     Blessington to wind. As often as she can do so without positive rudeness, she takes long looks
     at her companion's face—immovably polished, like a monumental angel's: looks at her, half out
     of that sheer love of beauty in any form, from a man's to a beetle's,
      which is innate in some sensuous natures; partly, and much
     more, because each frosty-fair feature of her face, each trinket almost upon her person, is
     linked indissolubly in her mind with some look or word of St. John. Association, they say, lies
     stronger in a smell than in aught else—stronger than in anything seen or heard ; and so now the
     slight subtle scent floating from Constance's perfumed hair recalls to the sad young
     "companion," with a thrust of sharpest pain, her one day's betrothal; that one day for whose
     sweet sake she does not regret having endured the calamity of existence; that day when they
     sowed— 
"...Their talk with little kisses, thick
As roses in rose harvest."
It is odd how often, when one is musing dumbly on some unspoken name, the people in whose
     company one is give utterance to that name, without any former conversation having led up to
     it.
"My dear Constance," says Mrs. Blessington, her slow old thoughts having at length travelled
     from draughts and sandbags, "do you think St. John has any fancy as to what room he has? Young
     men are sometimes faddy. I depend upon you to tell me, and I will give Franklin orders
     about it."
St. John's room! He is coming here, then! The wool that she is holding drops forgotten into
     Esther's lap; the old delicious carmine that used to make her so like a dogrose springs up
     suddenly lovely into her face. Love is as hard to kill as any snake: 
"Now, at the last gasp of love's latest breath,
When, his pulse failing, passion speechless lies;
When faith is kneeling by his bed of death,
And innocence is closing up his eyes:
Now, if thou wouldst, when all have given him over
From death to life, thou mightst him yet recover."

"Unless you hold the skein differently, Miss Craven, I'm afraid I really cannot wind it,"
     says Constance, a slight shade of contemptuous displeasure in her voice.
Esther jumps back to reality, to find Miss Blessington's icy, unescapable eyes riveted upon
     her. She cannot turn away her head, nor dive under the table for an imaginary lost
     handkerchief; she cannot lift her hands to hide her face; her occupation, which keeps both
     ruthlessly employed, forbids it. She can only sit still, plainly crimson, and be stared at.
"Thanks, very much, aunt," Constance says, in her lady-like, piano voice, beginning again to
     turn the scarlet ball swiftly through her long pale fingers; "but I don't think he has any
     fancies. I could not think of letting you spoil him by supposing he has; I'm sure he will be
     very happy, wherever you put him."
"The blue room, in the west gallery, is one of the warmest in the house," rejoins the old
     lady, gathering her wraps closelier about her: "it is next but two to Miss Craven's; it has the
     same aspect. Yours is warm—isn't it, my dear—and there is a bath-room opening out of it."
"Is Mr. Gerard coming here " asks Esther, tremulously, resolute to show Miss Blessington that
     she can mention his name.
"Yes, my dear—to-morrow. Do you know him? Oh no! of course you cannot," replies the old lady,
     looking a little inquisitively at the tender rose-face of the girl.
"Miss Craven met him at Felton, last autumn," Constance answers for her—no faintest gust of
     feeling apparently agitating the even indifference of her voice. "He was most good-natured to
     her; riding and walking, and altogether making a martyr of himself. St. John makes himself very
     useful, flirting with all the young ladies that come to the house : he really is invaluable in
     that way!" 
Esther stoops her head low down, choked with indignation.
      "Perhaps I don't come under the head of a 'young lady,'" she
     says, almost in a whisper; "but he certainly did not flirt with me."
"Didn't he?" Constance replies, carelessly. "Oh, if I recollect right, he amused himself a
     little—he always does. I often take him to task about that manner of his; it might give rise to
     unlucky mistakes; people who don't know him don't understand it."
Esther bites her lips, but has the sense to allow, with vast difficulty, this last
     observation to pass unquestioned.
"His horses have arrived already," continues Constance, placidly; "he has actually been
     unconscionable enough to send four of them: he is evidently going to test uncle's and your
     patience to the utmost by making a perfect visitation."
"Felton is such a good hunting country, that I wonder Mr. Gerard can bear to leave it now,
     just as the frost has broken up," remarks Esther, almost composedly; a dim, exquisite hope
     flashing up in her mind that he has heard of her being at Blessington, and is coming to ask her
     to forgive him—to forgive her, rather; to ask her to kiss and make friends.
The story-book ending, "Lived happy ever after," is running through her brain, when her
     reverie is broken, gently, but very effectually, as reveries are apt to be, by a simple speech
     of Miss Blessington's, spoken with a little smile:
"It is evident that Miss Craven has not heard our news, is not it, aunt?"
"What news?" inquires the girl, eagerly.
"Nothing of much interest to any one but ourselves, I suppose. It is only" (speaking with
     slow triumph, and narrowly watching the effect of her words) "that St. John and I have made up
     our minds to marry one another!" 
The knife cuts as clean and clear as she could have wished; the divine happy rose-flush slips
     away suddenly
      out of the poor blank face opposite her; a grey ashy-white
     takes its place. She had thought that pain and pleasure were buried with Jack on the slope of
     Glan-yr-Afon's mountain graveyard; but that moment of raging agony undeceives her. For an
     instant the table and chairs seem dancing round; a humming buzz sounds dully in her ears; then
     the faintness passes; the table and chairs stand still again; the buzz ceases; and she is
     sitting on an old gilt chair: her arms still moving mechanically, with the outstretched wool
     upon them, while Constance goes winding, winding on—winding away hope and pleasure and joy;
     while the ball, growing larger under her hands, seems to have stolen its red colour from
     Esther's heart-blood.
"Our friends have really been very disagreeable to us about it," says Miss Blessington with a
     subdued laugh; "they tell us that it is the most uninteresting marriage they ever heard of, for
     that they had all foretold it, heaven knows how many centuries ago!"
"It is very seldom," replies Mrs. Blessington, shaking her head slowly to and fro, " that a
     young man shows the sense St. John Gerard has done in coming into his parents' views for him:
     in the present day they are mostly so headstrong and resolute to pick and choose for
     themselves, which generally ends in their selecting some worthless person utterly unsuited to
     their rank and fortune."
"How long have you been engaged?" ?" asks Esther, presently, framing her words with as much
     difficulty as though they had been spoken in some little-known foreign tongue. Worse to her
     than the loss of St. John is the consciousness that that loss is written in despair's grey
     colours on her faded face, right under her rival's victorious eyes.
"How long? I really forget," answers Constance, with affected carelessness. "Oh, no!
     By-the-by, I recollect; it was almost immediately after you left Felton. I
      daresay"
 (with a smile) "that you were among the ranks of the
     prophets; lookers-on proverbially see most of the game."
"Indeed—no!" cries the girl, with a passionate disclaimer, the agony of loss made sharper by
     the humiliation of defeat. "Nothing ever struck me as more unlikely!"
"Indeed! And why, may I ask?" 
The skein is finished; Esther lifts one hand to her face, and feels a slight relief in the
     partial shade.
"Why, pray?" with a slightly sharpened accent.
"Because—because," she answers, in confusion, "you had been brought up together from
     children; because Mr. Gerard's manner seemed so much more like a brother's than
     a—a—lover's."
The word so applied half chokes her.
"We dislike public demonstrations of affection, both of us," rejoins the other, coldly
     displeased; "we leave those to servants and savages."
A footman enters with tea in handleless red dragon cups, costly as age, brittleness, and
     ingenious ugliness can make them.
Esther leans back in her chair, idle, staring vacantly at the pane, blurred with big
     rain-drops.
After a pause, "You have not congratulated me, Miss Craven," Constance says, sipping her tea
     delicately; her madonna smile relaxing the severely correct lines of her Greek mouth.
Esther gives a great start. "I? Oh, I beg your pardon! I—I forgot; I—I—I congratulate
     you!"
"I was just going to write and tell you the news," says Constance, graciously—"I thought it
     might interest you, as you had been with us so lately, and seen the whole thing going on—when
     we heard of your brother's sudden death."
Esther rises abruptly, and walks to the window, with that painful hatred in her heart towards
     Miss Blessington
      that we feel towards those who lightly name our sacred dead
     to us.
"Was he your only brother, my dear?" inquires Mrs. Blessington, with languid
     interest.
"Yes."
"Dear—dear! Very sad—very sad! And what did he die of? Consumption?"
"No—diphtheria."
"Ah! A very fatal complaint, my dear, especially among children. I have always had a great
     horror of it. In my younger days it used to be called sore throat, but I suppose it killed just
     as many people then as it does now that it has got a fine long Latin name. I suppose your poor
     brother suffered a great deal—didn't he, love?"
No answer, except a stifled sob, a rush from the room, and the sound of flying feet upon the
     hall's stone floor.
There are some things past human endurance; and to hear Jack's parting agonies—agonies whose
     memory she herself dare as yet hardly contemplate in her heart's low depths—lightly discussed
     by a gossiping old woman, is one of those things.
