
CHAPTER V.
THIS world is divided into poor and rich; into those who do things for themselves, and those
     who get other people to do them for them. The Cravens belong to the former class. On the
     afternoon of the day mentioned in my last chapter, Miss Craven is doing for herself what she
     had much rather that some one else should do for her. She is sitting at her sewing-machine,
     with a pile of huckaback cut up into towel-lengths beside her. As long as civilization remains
     at its present ridiculous pitch of elevation, people must have towels, and there is a prejudice
     in favour of hemmed versus ravelled edges. In the kitchen garden the maid-servants are all
     busy, picking currants and raspberries for preserving. Owen, the gardening man, is helping
     them; they are combining business with pleasure; fruit-picking with persiflage. How loudly and
     shrilly they laugh! and yet loud, shrill laughter expresses mirth and cause for mirth, as well
     as low and silvery. Esther, grave and alone, catches herself wondering what the joke was that
     caused such general merriment two minutes ago. Probably, did she know it, she would not laugh
     at it, would see no point in it, perhaps, but she would be glad to hear it. The huckaback is
     thick and heavy; bending down one's head over one's work sends all the blood in one's body into
     it. Phew! How hot! How much pleasanter to be out of doors, tweaking off dead rose heads,
     watching the great red poppie straightening out their folded creases, pulling the green
      nightcaps off the escholtzia buds! A shadow darkens the
     French window, causing Miss Craven to give one of those starts that make one feel as if one
     literally jumped out of one's skin, and fill one with ungodly wrath against the occasion of
     them.
"I rang several times," says Robert Brandon, apologetically, "but nobody came."
"Oh! it's you, is it?" she says, with a tone not exactly of rapture in her voice; "our
     servants always manage to be out of the way on the rare occasions when any one calls. They are
     all in the garden, picking currants; one would have been plenty, but they prefer working, like
     convicts or navvies, in gangs."
"I came to see whether you were inclined to take a walk?" he says, hesitatingly, for her
     manner is not encouraging.
"Too hot!" she answers, lazily, leaning her head on the back of her chair, and closing her
     eyes, as if his presence disposed her to sleep.
"Not in the wood?" he rejoins, eagerly. "Under our oaks it is as cool and almost as dark as
     night, and there there is always a breeze from the brook."
"I am busy!" she says, pettishly, annoyed at his persistence, and taking in with a
     dissatisfied eye his tout ensemble —yellow beard, frayed
     coat-sleeves, vigorous rustic comeliness.
He does not pursue the subject further, but stands leaning wistfully and uncertain against
     the window.
"Jack is not at home, I'm afraid," she says, stiffly, by-and-by.
"I did not come to see Jack," he answers, bluntly. She does not invite him to come in, but
     he, crossing the threshold diffidently, takes a seat near, but not aggressively near, her.
     "Don't let me interrupt you!" he says, deprecatingly.

She takes him at his word, and continues her homely occupation. Up and down, up and down her
     foot goes, keeping the wheel in motion; prick, prick, prick, the needle travels with its quick,
     regular stabs. If, as I have said, the process of bending over work on a July afternoon is
     heating, the consciousness that another person is watching every quiver of your eyelids,
     counting every breath you draw, and every displaced hair that straggles about brow or cheek,
     does not conduce to make it less so. The magnetic influence that sooner or later compels the
     eyes of the looked at to seek those of the looker, obliges Esther, after awhile, to raise
     hers—reluctant and protesting—to Robert's.
"I wish my mother could see you!" he says, with a smile of placid happiness. Mr. Brandon
     carries his mother metaphorically upon his back, almost as much as pious Æneas did the old
     Anchises literally. Esther suspends her employment for a moment.
"I beg your pardon; this machine makes such a noise that I did not catch what you said."
"I was only wishing that mother could see you now."
"It is a pleasure she enjoys pretty frequently. Why now particularly?"
"She would see how thrifty and housewifely you can be."
"I am glad she does not, then," answers the girl, drily, beginning to work again faster than
     ever, and flushing with annoyance; "she would form a most erroneous estimate of me. I dislike
     particularly to be found by people in one of my rare paroxysms of virtue; they take it for my
     normal state, and judge and expect of me accordingly."
"I shall tell her that, at all events, my judgment of you was nearer the truth than hers,"
     says Robert, triumphantly.
Esther laughs awkwardly.
"I don't know whether you are aware of it, but you are conveying to my mind the idea that
     your mother has been
      pronouncing a very unfavourable verdict upon me and my
     character."
"She thinks you are too pretty and lively, and—and—" (frivolous had been the word employed by
     Mrs. Brandon, but Robert cannot find it in his heart to apply it to his idol)—"too fond of
     society to care about being useful in tame, humdrum, everyday ways."
Esther gives her head a little impatient shake.
"Mrs. Brandon adheres to the golden axiom, so evidently composed by some one to whom beauty
     was sour grapes, that it is better to be good than pretty; an axiom that assumes that the one
     is incompatible with the other."
So speaking she relapses into a chafed silence, and he into his vigilant dumb observation of
     her. At the end of a quarter of an hour, as he still shows no signs of moving, finding the
     present position of affairs no longer tolerable, Miss Craven jumps up, flings down her heap of
     huckaback on the floor, and says abruptly, with a sort of forced resignation:
"I will come to the wood, if you wish; it will be all the same a hundred years hence."
"I am perfectly happy as I am," he answers with provoking good humour, looking up in blissful
     unconsciousness at her charming cross face, and the plain yet dainty fit of her trim cheap
     gown.
"But I am not," she rejoins brusquely; "indoors it is stifling to-day; please introduce me as
     quickly as possible to that breeze you spoke of; I have not been able to find a trace of one
     all day."
She fetches her hat and puts it on; too indifferent as to her appearance in his eyes to take
     the trouble of casting even a passing glance at herself in the glass, to see whether it is put
     on straight or crooked.
The Glan-yr-Afon wood is a fickle, changeable place; like
      a vain woman, it is always taking off one garment and putting
     on another. Three months ago, when the April woods were piping to it, it had on a mist-blue
     cloak of hyacinths—what could be prettier?—but now it has laid it aside, and is all tricked out
     in gay grass, green, flecked here and there with rosy families of catch-fly and groups of pur-
     ple orchis spires. Do you remember those words of the sweetest, wildest, fancifullest of all
     our singers?

"And the sinuous paths of lawn and of moss,
That led through this garden along and across,—
Some open at once to the sun and the breeze,
Some lost among bowers of blossoming trees,—
"Were all paved with daisies and delicate bells
As fair as the fabulous asphodels,
And flow'rets that, drooping as day drooped too,
Fell into pavilions white, purple, and blue,
To roof the glowworm from the evening dew."

They describe Glan-yr-Afon wood much better than I can. It is a great green cathedral, where
     choral service goes on all day long, and where the rook preaches impressive sermons from the
     swinging tree-tops.
"Had we not better walk arm in arm?" asks Esther, sardonically, as they march along in
     silence. "I believe it is the correct thing on these occasions; at least Gwen and her
     sweetheart always do on Sunday evenings."
He turns towards her; an expression of surprised delight upspringing into his eyes.
"Do you mean really?"
She is mollified, despite herself, by the simple joy beaming in his poor, good-looking
     face—face that would be more than good-looking if only some great grief would give it fuller
     expression; if only a few months of late hours and mundane dissipations would wear off its look
     of exuberant bucolic healthiness.

"No, no; I was only joking."
"Shall we sit here?" asks Brandon, presently, pointing to a rustic seat that stands under a
     great girthed oak, taller and thicker-foliaged than its neighbours. "See! did not I tell you
     true? Hardly a sunbeam pierces through these leaves, and the brawling of the brook comes up so
     pleasantly from below."
Esther looks, but the situation does not please her; it is too secluded, too sentimental; it
     looks like a seat on which Colin and Dowsabel might sit fluting and weaving 
". . . . belts of straw and ivy buds," and simpering at one
     another over the tops of their crooks.
"I don't fancy it," she says, beginning to walk on; "it looks earwiggy."
"Only the other day you said it was quite a lovers' seat!" he exclaims, in surprise.
"Exactly; and for that very reason I prefer waiting till I am more qualified to sit upon
     it."
By-and-by Miss Craven finds a position that suits her better; one nearer the edge of the
     wood, in full view of the Naullan road, along which market women, coal carts, stray limping
     tramps, go passing, and where loverly blandishments are out of the question.
The sun slides down between two birch stems that stand amid rock fragments, and riots at his
     will about her head, as she sits at the birch foot on a great grey stone, all flourished over
     with green mosses and little clinging plants. Below, the baby river runs tinkling; it is such a
     baby river that it has not strength to grapple with the boulders that lie in its bed; it comes
     stealing round their hoary sides with a coaxing noise, in gentlest swirls and bubbled eddies.
     The squirrels brought their nuts last autumn to Esther's stone to crack; the shells are lying
     there still; she is picking
      them up and dropping them again in idle play. Little dancing
     lights are flashing down through the birch's feathery-green locks, and playing Hide and Seek
     over Esther's gown and Robert's recumbent figure, as he lies in the repose of warmth, absolute
     idleness, absolute content at her feet. An hour and a half, two hours to be spent in trying to
     like Robert! Faugh! She yawns.
"That is the seventh time you have yawned since we have been here," remarks her lover, a
     little reproachfully.
"I dare say; and if you wait five minutes longer, you will probably be able to tell me that
     it is the seventy-seventh time."
"You did not yawn while we were indoors."
"I had my work; what is a woman without her work? A dismounted dragoon—a pump without water!"
     She stretches out her arms lazily, to embrace the dry, warm air. "Does every one find being
     courted as tedious a process as I do?" (Aside.) Aloud: "Some one said to me the other day, that
     no woman could be happy who was not fond of work. It is putting one's felicity on rather a low
     level, but I believe it is true."
"In the same way as no man can be good-tempered who is not fond of smoking," says Bob,
     starting a rival masculine proposition.
"I don't know anything at all about men," replies Esther, exhaustively. "No woman in the
     world can have a more limited acquaintance with the masculine gender than I have."
"You are young yet," says Brandon, consolingly.
"I was seventeen last May, if you call that young," she answers, her thoughts recurring to
     "Heartsease," the heroine of which is 
"Wooed and married and a'" before her sixteenth birthday.

"You are eight years younger than I am."
"Am I?" carelessly, as if such comparative statistics were profoundly uninteresting to
     her.
"Yes; I am glad there is so much difference in age between us."
"Why?"
"Because you are the more likely to outlive me."
She passes by the little sentimentalism with silent contempt. "I shall certainly
     outlive you," she says confidently. "Women mostly outlive men, even when they are of the same
     age. We lead slower, safer lives. If I spend all my life here, I shall probably creep on, like
     a tortoise, to a hundred."
"But you will not spend all your life here?" he cries, eagerly.
She shrugs her shoulders. "Cela dépend. I shall live here as
     long as Jack remains unmarried."
"That will not be very long, I prophesy," cries Brandon, cheerfully. "A farmer requires a
     wife more than most men."
"More than a soldier, certainly," retorts she, with a malicious smile.
He laughs; too warm and lazy and content to be offended, and makes ineffectual passes at a
     gnat that has settled upon his nose. "Has he never yet shown even a preference for any
     one?" he asks, feeling a more personal interest than he had ever before experienced in Jack's
     amours and amourettes.
"Not that I am aware of; Jack and I never show preferences for any one, nor does any one ever
     show a preference for us; we are a good deal too poor to be in any demand."
"I am glad of it."
"You may have the doubtful satisfaction of knowing that no one ever showed the slightest
     inclination to be your rival."

"So much the better; I don't want you any the less because nobody else wants you."
"Don't you? 'A poor thing, but mine own,' that is your motto, I suppose?"
A pause. An old woman, with a myriad-wrinkled Welsh face rides by along the road on a
     drooping-headed donkey; a large blue and orange handkerchief tied over her bonnet and a basket
     on each arm.
Esther watches her as she jogs along with a feeling of envy. Fortunate, fortunate old woman!
     she has no lover!
"I wish you would not look so happy," Miss Craven says suddenly, flashing round an uneasy
     look out of her great black eyes at her companion.
"Why should not I? I am happy."
"But you have no right to be, no reason for being so," she cries, emphatically.
"I have, at all events, as much reason as the birds have and they seem pretty jolly; I am
     alive, and the sun is shining."
"You were alive, and the sun was shining, this time yesterday," she says drily; "but you were
     not so happy then as you are now."
At the decided damper to his hilarity so evidently intended in this speech, a slight cloud
     passes over the young man's face; he looks down with a snubbed expression.
"I suppose I am over-sanguine about everything," he says, humbly, "because I have always been
     such a lucky fellow; my profession suits me down to the ground; I have never had an ache or a
     pain in all my life, and I have the best woman in England for my mother."
A body free from disease, a commission in a marching regiment, a methodistical, exigeante old mother. These would seem but a poor chétif list of subjects of thankfulness to Fortune's curled and
     perfumed darlings.

"Your acquaintance amongst old ladies must be extensive to justify you in that last
     statement," says Esther, with a smile.
"The best woman I know, then."
"It is a pity that when you went, like Cœlebs, in search of a wife, you did not try to find
     some one more like her," rejoins Esther, piqued and surprised, despite her utter indifference
     to his opinion of her, at finding that, notwithstanding the imbecile pitch of love for herself
     at which she believes him to have arrived, he can still set a dowdy, havering, brown old woman
     on a pedestal, above even that which she, with all the radiant red and white beauty of which
     she is so calmly aware, all the triumph of her seventeen sweet summers, occupies in his
     heart.
"You are young and she is old," says Robert, encouragingly; "I don't see why you should not
     be like her when you are her age."
"I think not; I hope not," says Miss Craven, coolly, strangling her twenty-fifth yawn.
     "Without meaning any insult to Mrs. Brandon, I should be sorry to think that, at any period of
     my life, I should be a mere reproduction of some one else."
Another long pause. (Have we been here an hour yet?) The brown bees go humming, droning,
     lumbering about, velvet-coated: a high-shouldered grasshopper chirps shrilly: the dim air
     vibrates.
"Just listen to that cricket!" says Esther, presently, for the sake of saying something. "How
     noisy he is! I read in a book the other day that if a man's voice were as strong in proportion
     to his size as a locust's, he could be heard from here to St. Petersburg."
"Could he?" says Bob, absently, not much interested in his betrothed's curious little piece
     of entomological information; "how unpleasant!" Then dragging himself along
      the grass and the flowers still closer to her feet, he says,
     "Esther, mother hopes to see a great deal more of you now than she has done hitherto."
"Does she? she is very good, I am sure," answers Esther, formally, with a feeling of
     compunction at her utter inability to echo the wish.
"She bid me tell you that she hopes you will come in as often as you can of an evening. We
     are all sure to be at home then; the girls read aloud by turns, and mother thought that—"
"That it might improve my mind, and that it needs improving," interrupts Esther, smiling
     drily; "so it does. I quite agree with her; but not even for that object could I leave Jack of
     an evening; he is out all day long, and the evening is the only time when I have him to
     myself."
"You find plenty to say to him always, I suppose?" says Robert, with an involuntary
     sigh and slight stress upon the word him.
"Not a word, sometimes. We sit opposite or beside each other in sociable silence."
"How fond you are of that fellow!" says Robert, sighing again, and thinking,
     ruefully, what a long time it would be before any one would say to her, "How fond you
     are of Bob Brandon!"
"He is the one thing upon earth that I could not do without!" she answers shortly, turning
     away her head.
There are some people that we love so intensely that we can hardly speak even of our own love
     for them without tears.
"I should be afraid to say that of any one," says Bob, bluntly, "for fear of being shown that
     I must do without them."
"What have I in all the world but him?" she cries, a passionate earnestness chasing the slow
     languor from her
      voice, all her soft face afire with eager tenderness;
     "neither kith nor kin; neither friends nor money. I am as destitute, in fact, though not in
     seeming, as that girl that passed just now, shuffling her bare feet along in the dust, and with
     three boxes of matches—her whole stock-in-trade—in her dirty hand. But for Jack," she
     continues, in a lighter strain, "you might at the present moment be carrying half a pound of
     tea or four penn'orth of snuff as a present to me in the Naullan almshouses."
Robert looks attentive, and says "Hem," which is a sort of "Selah" or "Higgaion," and does
     not express much beyond inarticulate interest.
"I often think that he is too good for this world," says the young girl, mournfully, picking
     an orchis leaf, and looking down absently on the capricious black splashes that freak its green
     surface.
Bob is a little embarrassed between his love of truth and his desire to coincide in opinion
     with his beloved.
Jack is not in the least like the little morbid boys and girls in his sister Bessy's books,
     who retire into corners in play-hours to read about hell-fire, to whom marbles and toffee and
     bull's-eyes are as dung, and who are inextricably entangled in his mind with the idea of "too
     good for this world." He evades the discussion of the alarming nature of young Craven's
     goodness by a judicious silence.
"I am such an expense to him," continues Esther, lugubriously, the corners of her mouth
     drooping like a child's about to cry—"what with clothes, and food, and altogether. Even though
     one does not eat very much every day, it comes to a great deal at the end of the year, does it
     not?"
"If you come to me, you would be no expense at all to him," Robert answers, stroking his
     great, broad, yellow beard (beard that will have to disappear before he rejoins his gallant
     corps in Bermuda), and looking very sentimental;
      yet not that either, for sentimental implies the existence of
     a little feeling, and the affectation of a great deal more.
"He would have to provide me with a trousseau and a wedding-cake, even in that case."
"I would excuse him both."
"Would you?" she says, jestingly; "I wouldn't; it has always seemed to me that the best part
     of holy matrimony is the avalanche of new clothes that attends being wed."
"You shall have any amount of new clothes."
"I should be an expense to you, then," she says, giving him a smile that is grateful and
     bright and cold, all in one, like a January morning. Cold as her smile is, it is a smile, and
     he is encouraged by it to refer to a subject nearer his heart than Jack Craven's
     excellences.
"If you cannot spare time to come to us of an evening, would you let me—might I—would you
     mind my joining you and Jack—now and then—for half an hour or so—if I should not be in the
     way?"
Her countenance falls, more visibly than she is herself perhaps aware of.
"Of course," she answers, in a constrained voice, "if you wish; we shall always be glad to
     see you, of course."
"I would not come often," says the poor young man wistfully; "once a week perhaps—so that we
     might get to know one another better; mother says—"
"Don't tell me any more of your mother's speeches to-day, or we shall have none left for
     to-morrow," interrupts Esther, with a sort of ironical playfulness, flapping about with her
     pocket-handkerchief at a squadron of young midges, and looking mild exasperation at the unlucky
     six-foot slave at her feet. Then she stretches out her hand, plucks a dandelion, or what was a
     dandelion a week ago, but is now a sphere of delicatest, fragilest, downspikes, and blows it
     like a child to see what o'clock it is. "One, two, three, four, five, six.
      Time to go home!" she says, flinging away the hollow stalk
     and springing up.
"It seems only five minutes since we came," says Robert, with a great sigh of good-bye,
     looking down at the long stretch of bruised grass that indicates his late resting- place.
"Do you think so?" exclaims Esther, opening her eyes very wide, and the most violent negative
     could not have expressed dissent more clearly.
So they pass home through the loudly vocal wood, and he parts from her under the porch. He
     had meant to squeeze her hand at parting; perhaps still bolder forms of adieu flitted before
     his mind's eye, but a certain expression in her face makes all such plans take to their heels.
     He looks as if he would come in if he were asked; but he is not asked, therefore, courage
     failing him, he departs. She stands in the shadow watching him, and thinks, "What bad boots!
     and is not one shoulder rather higher than the other!" It is not the least bit higher; no young
     fir is straighter than he; but when a thing belongs, or may possibly belong, to oneself, one
     waxes marvellous critical.
