
CHAPTER XI.
IT is the 1st of September, and the seal of impending destruction is set upon many a little
     plump brown bird; but ignorance is bliss, and the little brown birds do not know it, and are
     walking about the turnip ridges and amongst the stubble fields as confidently as if there were
     no such man as Purdey, and no such infernal machine as a gun. St. John and his papa go out
     shooting together. Sir Thomas knocks up by luncheon time, and returns to his orchid-house, and
     to the goading the bricklayers, as King Agamemnon did his fellow-chiefs, with bitter words.
     Esther spends the day in her bedroom, lying in state on a sofa with her ankle bandaged up. It
     hurts her acutely if she attempts to walk on it; but if she keeps quiet, she is hardly aware of
     there being anything wrong with it. It is very annoying having to play the invalid for an
     ailment that is purely local when you feel in riotous health and spirits—to have your dinner
     sent up to you on a tray when you are so hungry that you could eat double your allotted
     portion, if it were not that, being an invalid, you are ashamed to say so. One has a sense of
     shamming, malingering.
Poor Miss Craven passes a very dull day; the red rose on one side the window, and the
     travellers' joy on the other, look in and say, "Why is this lazy child lying all day on a
     couch, when we and so many other flowers have been calling to her with our voiceless voices to
     come out into the breeze and shine" A bee comes in sometimes, and goes buzz-buzzing about,
     telling himself how busy he is, and that he has no time to waste now that his honey-harvest is
     drawing so near
      to its sweet close. The room is so still that, but for
     feeling intensely alive, and not having her chin tied up, Esther might almost imagine herself
     laid out previous to her interment. Now and again Miss Blessington enters noiselessly, says "I
     hope you are feeling a little easier," in her soft monotone, and then rustles gently away
     again. She has provided Esther with a novel and a book of acrostics, and thinks she has done
     her duty by her neighbour amply. The novel is one written with a purpose; a dull one-sided tilt
     against Ritualism. Esther never found out an acrostic in her life, and has seldom been so
     completely vacant of employment as to try. She is, therefore, reduced to spending half the day
     in writing to Bob—half the day! and yet when the letter is finished it only covers three sides
     of a sheet. She has written, rewritten, and re-rewritten it. All around and about her lie
     half-covered, quarter-covered, whole-covered sheets, all stamped with the seal of condemnation.
     Gerard is the stumbling block; his name either will not come in at all, which looks unnatural,
     or else insists on thrusting itself in every second line. This is the form in which Miss
     Craven's billetdoux finally presents itself at Plas Berwyn:

"DEAR BOB,—Thanks very much for your letter; please put a few stops next time. I had a very
      disagreeable journey here—bushels of dust and a sick baby. This is a very handsome place, and
      they are all very kind to me. (H'm! are they? I don't know about that; one of them,
      is.) Yesterday I went out riding with Sir Thomas and his ward (so I did; I set out with them),
      and I stupidly fell from my horse, a sort of thing that nobody but I would have done, and hurt
      my foot a little; but nothing to speak of. Miss Blessington, the ward, is remarkably handsome,
      but looks a great deal older than I do. My love to your
       mother, and thanks for her kind messages; the same to the
      girls. Tell Bessy that it is hardly worth while sending me 'The Sinfulness of Little Sins,' as
      I shall have more time for reading when I get home again.
"Yours affectionately, "E. C.
"P.S.—
Mr. Gerard is not at all good-looking; he seems very fond of shooting; he has been out all
      to-day."
"The long day wanes : the slow moon climbs."

Dinner is over; nothing to look forward to but bed-time. Yah ! How dull! A knock comes at the
     door. Miss Blessington enters with flowers in her hand—jessamine, heliotrope, everything that
     smells sweetly and not heavily—unlike Bob's well meaning but annihilating double stocks.
"I hope you are in less pain now" (the usual formula, that comes as regularly and frequently
     as the doxology in church).
"Oh yes! thanks; I'm very well" (yawning and looking woefully bored.) " What lovely flowers!" 
"St. John sent them to you" (rather shortly).
"Mr. Gerard?" (with animation, the bored look vanishing.) "How very kind of him!"
"He always is so good-natured," answers Constance, with a cold generality.
"It is so particularly kind of him, when he has such an overpowering aversion for strangers,"
     continues Essie, with a malicious twinkle in her eyes.
Constance sweeps to the window, slightly discomfited.
"He told me to ask you whether you would like him to come and carry you downstairs for an
     hour or two?" she says, in a somewhat constrained voice; "but I daresay you
      would rather be left in peace up here; and I should think
     that the quieter you kept your foot the better for it."
"On the contrary, I should like it of all things," cries Essie, with perverse alacrity. "In
     your cheerful company downstairs, I shall be more likely to forget my sufferings, such as they
     are, than all by my dull self up here; to tell the truth, I was meditating asking your maid to
     come and talk to me about haberdashery."
Outside Miss Craven's door St. John pauses, as one that is devout hesitates on the threshold
     of a sanctuary. Chintz curtains rose-lined, white-dressed toilet-table, simple valueless
     ornaments lying about, two little slippers, that look as if they had been just kicked off—his
     eye takes in all the details. He feels like Faust in Marguerite's chamber. And Marguerite
     herself, lying careless, restful on her couch, her two arms flung lazily upwards and backwards,
     to make a resting-place for her head; the smooth elbows and shoulders gleaming warm,
     cream-white, through the colder blue-white of her dress; and the up-looking face, childish in
     its roundness, and blooming down—but oh! most womanish—in the shafts of quick fire that greet
     him from the laughing, sleepy eyes: Where did she learn that art of shooting? From the pigs and
     cabbages at Glan-yr-Afon? From old Mrs. Brandon? From Miss Bessie? From—"Stop the Leak?"
     Deponent sayeth not whence.
"How good of you!" she says, with emphasis, stretching out her hand to him, as he
     stands beside her sofa, looking rather fagged with his day's work. "I had just been calculating
     how many hours there would be before I could have a decent pretext for going to bed; one gets
     so tired of oneself."
"Not so tired as one does of one's family," answers St. John, rather ruefully.
"I have no family," she rejoins, simply.

"We Gerards have a particularly happy knack of rubbing each other the wrong way," he says,
     rather irritably. "I am sometimes tempted to think that we are the most unamiable family God
     ever put breath into."
" People always think that of their own family," answers Essie, laughing; "they know their
     own little crookednesses much better than any one else's."
"Has Miss Craven changed her mind, St. John?" asks Miss Blessington from the doorway.
St. John starts. "Not that I know of."
He stoops, and lifts her carefully, as a thing most precious; as he does so, a little foolish
     trembling passes over her, as a baby-breeze passes over some still pool's breast, hardly
     troubling the sky and the trees that lie far down in the blue mirror. Down the grand staircase
     he bears her, and Constance follows to see that there is no loitering by the way.
The morning-room at Felton (so called because the family always sit there in the evenings) is
     very lofty. You have to crane your neck up to see the stucco stalactites, faintly imitative of
     Staffa and Iona, pendant from the ceiling. There are statuettes in plenty standing about in
     niches and on pedestals. Venuses and Minervas and Clyties, all with their hair very elaborately
     dressed, and not a stitch of clothes on. There is a great litter of papers and magazines on the
     round table: the Justice of the Peace, that is Sir Thomas's; the Field, that
     is St. John's; the Cornhill, that is everybody's. Sir Thomas and miladi are playing
     backgammon; miladi is compelled to do so every night as a penance for her sins—four rubbers,
     and if he wins, as she prays and endeavours that he may, five.
"Don't take the dice up in such a hurry, miladi," he says, snappishly; "how the deuce can I
     see what your throw is?"

"Seizes, Sir Thomas," responds miladi, meekly.
"Seizes! don't believe a word of it! much more like seize ace!"
Miss Blessington, dressed by Elise in Chambéry gauze, and by Nature in her usual panoply of
     beautiful stupidity, which she wears sleeping and waking, at home and abroad, living and dying,
     is at work at a little table, a nude Dian, with cold, chaste smile and crinkly hair, on a red
     velvet shrine just above her head.
"Do they play every evening?" asks Esther, from the recess where she has been deposited by
     St. John, whose eyes she encounters, considering her attentively over the top of the
      Saturday. Shams, Flunkeyism, Woman's Rights, Dr. Cumming, the Girl of the Period—they
     have all been passing through his eye into his brain, and, mixed with Esther Craven, make a
     fine jumble there.
St. John has been rather unlucky in his experiences of women hitherto. He has got rather into
     the habit of thinking that all good women must be stupid, and that all pleasant women must be
     bad. Esther is not stupid. Is she bad, then? Those glances of hers, they give a man odd
     sensations about the midriff; they inspire in him a greedy, covetous desire for more of them;
     but are they such as Una would have given her Red Cross Knight? Are they such as a man would
     like to see his wife bestow on his men friends? The wilder a man is or has been himself, the
     more scrupulously fastidious he is about the almost prudish nicety of the women that belong to
     him. He likes to see the sheep and the goats as plainly, widely separated as they are in the
     parable; it moves him to deep wrath when he sees a good woman faintly, poorly imitating a bad
     one. I do not think that good women believe this half generally enough; or, if they do, they do
     not act upon it.
"Do they play every evening?" 

"Every evening, and Sir Thomas always accuses my mother of cheating."
"And you, what do you do?" 
"Read, go to sleep, play cribbage or bézique with Conny."
"Does she live here always?" 
"Always."
"You and she are inseparable, I suppose?"
"We get on very well in a quiet way; she is a very good girl, and comes and sits in my
     smoking-room by the hour with me."
"Wrong, but pleasant, as the monkey said when he kissed the cat," remarks Esther, flippantly.
     "You are very fond of her, I suppose?"
"H'm!" shrugging his shoulders. "I have a cat-like propensity for getting fond of anything
     that I live and eat and breathe with—like the fellow in the Bastille, don't you know, that got
     so fond of a spider. I never should have grown fond of a spider, though; they have got such a
     monstrous lot of long legs; but the principle is the same."
"Why are not you fond of Sir Thomas then?"
"So I am, I suppose, in a way; if he were to tumble into the pool, I suppose I
     should hop in and fish him out again; I'm not quite sure about that, either."
"We'll have another rubber, miladi?" shouts Sir Thomas's stentor voice, elate with victory;
     "that is the ninth game I have beat you to-night; you'll never win as long as you leave so many
     blots—I have told you so a score of times."
Poor miladi, strangling a gigantic yawn, begins to set her men again; she had hoped that her
     punishment was ended for the night, and that she might be dismissed to the otium cum dignitate of her armchair and nap.
St. John jumps up and walks over to the players; there are few things in life he hates so
     much as playing backgammon
      with his father, but he hates seeing his mother bullied even
     more. If a man is cursed with a necessity foi loving something, the chances are that he will
     love his mother, even if she bear more resemblance to a porpoise than to a Christian lady.
"I'll have a rubber with you, Sir Thomas; my mother is tired."
"Fiddlesticks!" growls Sir Thomas. "Tired! what the devil has she been doing to tire
     herself?—fiddle-faddled about the garden, picking off half a dozen dead roses. Very good thing
     for her if she is."
But the man's will is stronger than the turkey-cock's, and the latter yields.
