
CHAPTER XXXIII.
NEXT morning St. John wakes, recovered from his ill temper, his headache, and all the effects
     of his Irish saturnalia. Perhaps, had he known who it was that lay wakeful in a great ginger
     four-poster, two doors off, his slumbers would not have been so profound. The hounds meet
     twelve miles away, at Shepherds Hatch. By nine o'clock he is in the saddle, and riding quietly
     along the deep Essex lanes and wet fields, with a soft, south wind blowing in his face, and the
     grass, crisped by the slightest possible frost, beneath the horse's hoofs.
He is lucky enough to come in for the run of the season; has the satisfaction of seeing many
     better men than himself floundering, hatless and well-watered, in a brook, or getting croppers
     over stiff hawthorn hedges; over all which obstacles his grey, a new investment, of whose
     fencing powers he and his groom had been unjustly doubtful, carries him like a bird. As to
     whether his ladylove may relish this early preference of " bold Reynolds " to
     herself, any more than she relished his fatigue and headache last night, he troubles
      himself but little. He has no intention whatever of being a
     hen-pecked husband. When he proposed to her, he told her what he could give her, and what he
     could not—what she might expect, and what she might not: nor has this day's desertion been any
     departure from his half of the bargain. Somewhere about five o'clock he is back again at
     Blessington, splashed from head to heel; his tops, in which this morning you might have seen
     your face, all stained and discoloured; with a dab of mud on each cheek, and a third on the
     bridge of his nose. He runs upstairs lightly, whistling a tune, and has just reached the first
     landing, when, "Click-clack," he hears a woman's high-heeled shoes descending. It is Esther,
     who is walking listlessly down, with her eyes fixed on a great picture let into the wall—a
     large, white woman, with her clothes tumbling off, hurling her substantial person upon a spear;
     a young man, with arms like a blacksmith's, lying on the ground, making a profuse display of
     his charms, and, though with no very perceptible wound, evidently in
      articulo mortis; a fat Cupid blubbering hard by—the whole entitled "Pyramus and
     Thisbe."
St. John looks upward, to see who the author of the "click-clacking " may be. "Who the devil
     is this pretty girl?" is his first thought. His second—a thought that makes him stagger back
     with the colour hurrying from his healthy cheek—a thought full of anger, astonishment, desire,
     and pain—a thought that involuntarily he speaks aloud, is "Esther."
At almost the same moment she has caught sight of him. In her case, there is no surprise; but
     the pain is as great, if not greater.
"Yes, it is I," she answers, almost inaudibly, trembling all over.

His first impulse seems to be to rush away from her, to pass quickly upstairs; his second
     takes him to her side.
"In Heaven's name, what brings you here ?" he asks, in a voice almost as low as her
     own, from intense repressed emotion.
No answer. His voice has carried her back, across the gulf of Jack's death, of her own
     servitude and failing health, to that night when, in the starry Felton fields, she had stood by
     his side, his beloved, promised wife. She is silent—struggling with a strong, vile, degrading
     temptation to fling down her tired head upon the shoulder of Miss Blessington's affianced
     husband, and weep out loud.
"Are you on a visit here?" he asks again, with stern brevity.
"Yes," she answers, bitterly, strengthened by his tone, in which there is small kindness, and
     much wrath; "I am paid fifty pounds a year to visit here."
"What do you mean?"
"I am Mr. and Mrs. Blessington's ' companion.'" 
"Good God! You are here always, then?"
"Always."
A pause! Against his will his eyes dwell upon her, hungry and fierce, astonied at the
     alteration wrought in her whom he had once thought fairest among women. Faded, wasted, forlorn,
     to his cost he finds that he still thinks her so.
"Is this bondage to last all your life, then?" he inquires more collectedly, after a few
     seconds.
"Until they die, or until my voice fails."
"And what then?"
"I must look out for some other old people, to whom I can be ears, and voice, and feet."
"Good God! And what can be your motive?"
"One must live."

"I had thought the world wide enough for two people to walk apart," he says, with almost a
     groan. "I have entreated God that I might never look on your face again, and this is how my
     prayer is answered."
Another pause. "Tick-tack-tick-tack-tick-tack," goes a clock in the gallery overhead.
"You look extremely ill!"
"Do I?"
"You are wonderfully altered!" 
"Yes, I know it!"
"What is it ails you?"
"Nothing."
"What does this mean?"—touching her black dress with a jealous pang of fear that his
     innocent rival, the "lout who gave her the sixpenny Prayer Book, and inscribed his name with a
     crooked pin on the fly-leaf," is numbered with the dead; and that the hollow cheeks, dejected
     droop of the head, and crape-covered garments are for him.
The tears crowd into her eyes; they know the way there so well now. She turns away, and leans
     against the banisters to hide them.
A light breaks in upon him. He remembers that she had a brother, her girlish rhapsodies about
     whom used to make him rather impatient.
"I see," he says, in a softer tone; "forgive me for asking." Encouraged by his voice, she
     lifts her face towards him with a tearful smile.
"You may be satisfied, I think," she says, simply. "You have had your revenge; I have been
     punished almost enough."
Revenge is sweet, they say; but at this moment I do not think that St. John finds it so.
"You did not know that I was here?" she asks, presently.

"Know it!" he repeats, passionately. "Not I. Do you suppose I would have come within a
     hundred miles of this house if I had known it?"
"I will try to keep out of your way," she answers, meekly.
"For God's sake, do! It is the most merciful thing that you can do for both of us."
"I would leave this place to-day, if I could," she answers, humbly raising her wistful,
     deprecating eyes to his; "but I cannot. My daily bread is here—yours is not. Why cannot you
     go?" 
He hesitates. "I ought, I suppose," he answers, doubtfully. "I will, if you wish it."
"It is as you wish," she replies.
Footmen are passing to and fro, through the hall, busy with preparations for dinner; any
     moment Mr. Gerard's blue-and-white angel may come sweeping downstairs and surprise them.
"I have not congratulated you yet, Mr. Gerard," Esther says, timidly.
"Congratulated me!—what upon?" he asks, absently, staring vacantly at her.
"Upon your engagement to Miss Blessington."
A shade crosses his face. "Oh yes, to be sure! I had forgotten. Thanks! you are very good,
     I'm sure."
"I hope you will be very happy—quite happy."
"Thanks. Wish that I may be Prime Minister, or Commander-in-Chief, or something equally
     probable, while you are about it," he says, sardonically.
"I wish you to be happy," she repeats, gently, " and I hope that is not improbable."
" Such a wish in your mouth is something like a butcher with his knife at its throat wishing
     a sheep a long life!"
A guilty sense of hypocrisy in wishing him happy whom,
      less than forty-eight hours ago, she had been congratulating
     herself on his certain misery, keeps her dumb.
"Why could not you have sent me word that you were here, and I would have kept away?" he
     asks, flashing angrily upon her.
"I asked Miss Blessington to tell you, but she forgot."
He turns away with a muttered exclamation, not benedictory towards his betrothed, between his
     teeth.
"I will try to be as little annoyance to you as I can," says the poor child, in bitter
     mortification. "You will be out hunting most of the day, I daresay, and, except when I am
     waiting upon either Mr. and Mrs. Blessington, I am not often downstairs."
He takes no notice of her submissive speech, but stands, with his eyes moodily downcast, upon
     the white stone of the cold carpetless stairs.
"Believe me, I would go away, if I could," she says, piteously. " I did not wish to be in
     your way; but I had nowhere to go to."
A shade of pity softens his stern face.
"Are they kind to you?" he asks abruptly.
"Yes—oh yes—quite kind."
"And what, in God's name," he says, slowly, as if the question were forced from him against
     his will, by the slender fragility of her figure, by the pallid delicacy of her face—" And
     what, in God's name, can have induced your friends to allow you to accept such a situation, for
     which you are about as well fitted as I for the archbishopric of Canterbury?"
"I have not many friends, and I did not ask the advice of the few I have."
"They ought to have given it unasked," he says, gruffly.
"So they did, but I did not take it."
"Well, it is no business of mine," he says, harshly,
      ashamed and angry at himself for his temporary lapse into
     friendliness. "God knows I have had as good reason to hate you, and wish you ill, as ever man
     had! I have hated you," he says, with fierce heartiness, "during the last three
     months, as I should not have thought it possible to hate anything so weak and tender. I
      hope I hate you still!"
Remembering how much deeplier she had sinned against that other, and with how godlike a
     fulness and freedom he had pardoned her, she feels her heart rise up against him.
"The worse case I see you in, the more I ought to rejoice—the more I should have
     rejoiced yesterday," he continues, with rapid passion; "and yet—and yet—"
He passes his hand across his forehead, pushing the hair away; and not even the dab of mud on
     his nose can hinder the expression of his countenance from having something of a tragical
     pathos in it.
"And yet what?" she asks, tremulously, moving a step nearer to him.
"And yet, for the life of me, while I am with you, I cannot. When I am away from
     you, I can remember what you are; when I am with you, I see only what you seem.
     Esther! Esther! why, in God's name, don't the two tally better?"
"Whether they tally or not can be of but little concern to you now, Mr. Gerard," she answers,
     with some exasperation.
His brown cheek flushes into shamed angry-red.
"You are right," he says, stiffly. "It is no concern of mine; I am sorry I needed
     reminding."
"Why must we waste time digging that poor old past out of its grave?" she says, with
     persuasive gentleness, as her hand lays itself lightly, as if half afraid of being shaken off,
     upon his scarlet sleeve. "Why cannot we let bygones,
      that" (with a sigh) "are so completely bygones, be bygones?
     I did you an injury once—not an irreparable one, you will allow, since it is already repaired"
     (smiling half-scornful, half-melancholy); "and my whole life since has been a punishment—O God!
      what a punishment!" (putting her hand for a second over her eyes). "I am tired of
     being punished now. We shall see very little of one another heneforth, but that little might as
     well be in civility as in inoivility—mightn't it?" 
"Civility!"—he repeats, without much of that quality in his tone—"civility between you and
     me! And what would that end in, pray? It would be oversweet at first, and bitterer than
     wormwood afterwards, as our former civility was. No—no! we will have no sophisms, no
     absurd Platonisms here! God forbid my thrusting myself into temptation again! We will say 'good
     morning' and 'good evening' to one another, as people would remark it if we did not. But for
     the rest, let us hold our tongues and keep apart; and as soon as I can do it, without exciting
     great question, you may rely upon my going; and then we shall have done with one another for
     good, I pray God!"
She bends her head submissively. "You are right, I think."
"Click-clack—click-clack," come other high-heeled shoes; "swish! swish!" a long dress trails
     along. From the heaven of the upper regions the blue-and-white angel is in the act of descent.
     Without another word, the two part—the woman going quickly down, the man as quickly up.
"Good morning, Conny! Rather late in the day to say 'good morning,' isn't it?" 
This is his greeting, accompanied with a rather constrained laugh, to his future
     proprietor.
" So you and Miss Craven have been renewing your acquaintance upon the landing?" replies the
     divinity, smiling
      a little inquisitively. "I was looking down at you from the
     gallery; you looked so picturesque!"
" If being cased from top to toe in black mud is pictresque, I am eminently so," answers he,
     looking down at his legs to hide a transient expression of confusion. "Well, good-bye for the
     present; I suppose I must be going to adorn for this unearthly meal."
