
CHAPTER I.
HAVE you ever been to Wales? I do not ask this question of any one in particular; I merely
     address it to the universal British public, or, rather, to such member or members of the same
     as shall be wise enough to sit down and read the ensuing true and moving love story—true as the
     loves of wicked Abelard and Heloise, moving as those of good Paul and Virginia. Probably those
     wise ones will be very few; numerable by tens, or even units: they will, I may very safely
     aver, not form the bulk of the nation. However high may be my estimate of my own powers of
     narration, however amply Providence may have gifted me with self-appreciation, I may be sure of
     that, seeing that the only books I know of which enjoy so wide a circulation are the
     Prayer-book and Bradshaw. I am not going to instruct any one in religion or trains, so I may as
     well make up my mind to a more limited audience, while I pipe my simple lay (rather squeakily
     and out of tune, perhaps), and may think myself very lucky if that same kind, limited audience
     do not hiss me down before I have got through half a dozen staves of the dull old ditty.
Have you ever been to Wales? If you have ever visited
      the pretty, dirty, green spot where Pat and his brogue, where
     potatoes and absenteeism and head-centres flourish, alias Ireland, you have no doubt
     passed through a part of it, rushing by, most likely, in the Irish mail; but in that case your
     eyes and nose and ears were all so very full of dust and cinders—you were so fully employed in
     blinking and coughing and enjoying the poetry of motion—as to be totally incapable of seeing,
     hearing, or smelling any of the beauties, agreeable noises, or good smells, which in happier
     circumstances might have offered themselves to your notice. Perhaps you are in the habit, every
     midsummer, of taking your half-dozen male and female olive shoots to have the roses restored to
     their twelve fat cheeks by blowy scrambles about the great frowning Orme's Head, or by
     excavations in the Rhyl Sands. Perhaps you have gone wedding-touring to Llanberis on the top of
     a heavy-laden coach, swinging unsafely round sharp corners, and nearly flinging your Angelina
     from your side on to the hard Welsh road below. Perhaps you have wept with Angelina at the
     spurious grave of the martyred Gelert, or eaten pink trout voraciously at Capel Curig, and
     found out what a startlingly good appetite Angelina had. But have you ever lived in the land of
     the Cymri? Have you ever seen how drunk the masculine Cymri can be on market days, or what
     grievous old hags the feminine Cymri become towards their thirtieth year? have you ever, by
     bitter experience, discovered the truth of that couplet—

"Taffy was a Welshman,
Taffy was a thief?"

I have lived in Wales, so I speak with authority; and for my part I don't think that
     Taffy is much more given to the breaking of the eighth commandment than the canaille of any other country. He is not a bright fellow, is not
     Taffy;
      happiest, I think, when rather tipsy, or when yelling psalms
     in his conventicle or schism-shop—for Taffy is addicted to schism; he will tell you plenty of
     lies, too, and will not season them with the salt of a racy, devil-me-care wit, as Pat would.
     But he is very civil-spoken, and rather harmless; seldomer, I think, than his cleverer
     neighbour over the border does he hanker feloniously after his neighbour's spoons, or hammer
     his wife's head with the domestic poker.
But why am I drivelling on, like a sort of Murray and water, on the manners and character of
     this, to my thinking, not very interesting nation? I will waste no more "prave 'ords" upon
     them, as the few men and women whom I am going to tell you about, and whom I shall want you to
     like a little, or dislike a little, as the case may be, are not Taffies, only they happen to
     have stuck up their tent-poles in Taffy-land when they first make their low bow to you. These
     men and women were nothing out of the way for goodness, or beauty, or talent; they did a
     hundred thousand naughty things, each one of them. Some of them did them with impunity, as far
     as this world goes; some of them, capricious Megæra and Tisyphone lashed with scorpions for
     their derelictions. This is going to be neither a "Life of Saints," nor a "History of Devils;"
     these are memoirs neither of a "Hedley Vicars," nor of a "Dame aux Camellias;" so, whoso
     expects and relishes either of those styles of composition may forthwith close this volume, and
     pitch it (if it be his own, and not the battered property of a circulating library) into the
     fire. Those who love a violent moral, or violent judgment for sins and follies—a man struck
     dead for saying "damn," or a woman for going to a ball, as the Record would charitably
     have us believe is the way of Providence—equally with those who enjoy the flavour of violent
     immorality, will be disappointed if they look this way for the gratification of their peculiar
     idiosyncracies.
      Of my friends presently to be made known to you, and
     criticised by you, "the more part remain unto this present, but some have fallen asleep."
Once upon a time—I like that old, time-honoured opening; it makes one so nobly free, gives
     one so much room to stretch one's wings in, ties one down to no king's reign, no hampering,
     clogging century—once upon a time there was a valley in Taffy-land; there is still, unless some
     very recent convulsion has upheaved it to the top of a mountain, or submerged it beneath the
     big Atlantic waves; a valley lovelier than that one in " Ida," where "beautiful Paris,
      evil-hearted Paris," pastured his sheep and his jet-black goats, and inaugurated his
     rakish course; a valley where there are no dangerous, good-looking Parises, only one or two
     red-headed Welsh squires, who have each married, or will in the fulness of time each marry, one
     lawful wife—red-headed, too, very likely; and have never made, will never make, love to any
     Enones or other ill-conducted young shepherdesses. In fact, in that Arcadia there are no such
     shepherdesses; the daughters of the Cymri do not "ply the homely shepherd's
      trade," nor would they shed much romance over it if they did; for with sorrow be it
     spoken, blowsy are they mostly, hard-featured, toothless; and, moreover, the little nimble,
     lean sheep that go scrambling and jumping and skurrying about the rough crags and steep
     hill-sides do not need any crook'd and melodious Dowsabellas or Neæras to look after them and
     guide them in the way they should go.
In that valley there are plenty of houses, squires' houses and peasants' houses, where the
     propagation of the Cambrian is conducted with much success; houses big and little, red-faced
     and white-faced and dirty-faced, old and new. But we have at present to do with only one of
     those houses, and it comes under the head of the littles and the olds. Halfway
      up a hill-side it stands, looking across the valley to other
     higher hills that swell out softly against the sky, and go sloping gently down to the sea
     twenty miles away. They always remind me—I don't know why—of the distant hills in Martin's
     picture of the "Plains of Heaven;" so mistily do they rise in their hazy blueness. It is a
     snug, unpretending little house enough, with its black and white cross-beamed front and
     unwalled kitchen-garden straggling steeply up the slope at the back. Many and many a day has it
     stood there, seeing generations and fashions come in and go out; has stood there since the
     far-away days when men wore curly wigs half-way down their backs, and sky-blue coats, and
     fought and died for prerogative and King Charles, or fought and lived for England and liberty:
     when most houses were black and white, like its little elderly self, before plate glass or
     stucco, or commodious villa residences, five minutes' walk from a station, were dreamed of. The
     name of the little house is Glan-yr-Afon.
