<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">

CHAPTER IV
I HAVE mentioned Percy Gerrard. I disliked him then, I may add that I dislike him
      still. A certain pleasure is derivable from describing those whom one dislikes. I will not
      deny myself that pleasure.
At this particular period of his development; Gerrard had lately passed from the expansive
      and aggressive to the reserved style. He moved as one anointed by profound experiences, as one
      hallowed by an esoteric wisdom of the heart.—Had Miss Perry, by chance, acquired some of her
      curious little theories on the subject of the affections from this source? I could not say.—In
      bearing, Gerrard was withdrawn, augustly apart. He had religious scruples too, or, to be quite
      accurate, religious persons had, according to his own report, scruples concerning him. He
      hinted at diplomacies on the part of Eminences sent forth from the Eternal City. Both in
      speech and in print he gave one to understand that, not only many a member of the Sacred
      College, but even the Holy Father himself, was engaged in efforts to
       gather this wandering sheep—in whom mystic and worldling
      were so subtlely mixed—into the great central Catholic fold. The honest man commits himself
      hastily. The truly wise man commits himself very, very slowly. For is not the possible convert
      precious, alike to those whose communion he is on the edge of joining, and those whose
      communion he is on the edge of leaving? Gerrard knew this. He remained on the edge, wooed by
      both parties. I believe, for I don't see him often in these days, he remains there still.
In person he was not beautiful. I have heard that plain but vivacious lady, Madame Jacobini,
      describe him as “a cross between a second-rate Parisian petit
       crevé and a Methodist parson gone wrong.” There is an element of excess in this
      statement, yet truly he was not beautiful. For he was short, sallow, and inclined to
      stoutness; in moments of asperity I could have found it in my heart to call him
      greasy-looking. His hair was black, rather long, and of an uncomfortable thinness and
      smoothness. What of moustache he owned was black also. He dressed soberly, as in mourning for
      lost illusions. He had political aspirations of the grand
       seigneur type,—he dwelt on pictures of the stately, conscientious noble, of the
      lowly and contented serf. As far as I know, he never owned a rod, pole, or perch—let alone
      acre—of his native or any other soil. But that is
       a base detail. As rank would not marry him—I speak from
      hearsay—he had decided to marry money. Meanwhile a lady possessed of neither, according to
      contemporary scandal, solaced the leisures of this truly remarkable mind.
In the days immediately succeeding my surprising interview with Miss Perry, I observed that
      Gerrard treated us to an increasing amount of his society. He came in to luncheon; he came in
      to dinner. He, if I may employ so common an expression in speaking of so uncommon a person,
      was perpetually hanging about.
I was hanging about too. For I soon discovered Miss Perry's demand that I should help her in
      the present crisis of her affairs was no empty one. I had begged her to dispose of me. She
      took me at my word. She did dispose of me. I am far from complaining, for our fair Charlotte
      did everything (almost everything) well, and she disposed of me admirably. She held me with a
      silken chain; held me so gently, so deferentially, yet with so delicate a flavour of chastened
      sadness, of just conceivable reproach, that I came near hugging that same chain. It became
      natural I should be constantly at hand. Gerrard, as I have said, was also constantly at hand.
      So, of course, was Leversedge. It was not her object, I entirely acquit the young lady of any
      so paltry a scheme, but in point of fact she did thus establish a rival
       court to those of the American prima
       donna and the Russian poet—a court which not only rivalled, but came near eclipsing
      theirs. For while they merely herded indiscriminately with their kind, Miss Perry throned it
      alone in her maidenly sweetness, always attended by one, sometimes by two, more frequently by
      three still youngish and entirely eligible English gentlemen. Such things give me
      pleasure!—Let it be added, that her worthy parents were constantly, though unobtrusively,
      within hail; their office, like that of the chorus in a Greek play, to direct the eyes of the
      spectators upon the chief actors in the piece by praising these last, lauding their talents,
      virtues, and beauty, reciting their titles, and the innumerable noble deeds they had
      performed, or might, in the hopeful opinion of the chorus, almost certainly be expected to
      perform very shortly.
But we were not always in public. The suite of apartments retained by Leversedge for the
      Perry family included a smart little sitting-room. And it was here, as far as my memory serves
      me, that the next serious scene of the Perry-Leversedge drama enacted itself.
The devotion of Miss Perry's parents to their offspring reached the point of
      self-effacement. And further than that no devotion, surely, can go? As my intimacy with this
      interesting family increased, I could not fail to remark the young
       lady, on more than one occasion, tenderly but firmly suggest
      that her mother might stand in need of repose. Sometimes the dear good woman took the hint
      gratefully. Sometimes she appeared slightly perplexed, and did not display entire docility;
      or, and that was embarrassing, bungled in speech and required explanation. She was guilty of
      this last, I grieve to report, on the evening in question.
We were gathered in the sitting-room, and Charlotte had been playing to us. Mrs. Perry,
      supported by a wealth of puce silk cushions, was seated on a sofa, at right angles to the
      large French-window opening on to the balcony. A disposition to slumber after the last and
      heaviest meal of the day, in which hereditary middle-class habit triumphed for a brief space
      over a somewhat late developed social sense, held Mrs. Perry in its ponderous grasp. Her
      knitting fell on to her lap. She recovered it. Soon it fell again, and this time with a
      distinct tinkle of the steel needles. Our active Perry, seated beside her (the sound of whose
      own breathing had, more than once, quite audibly filled up the pauses in his daughter's really
      magnificent rendering of the ill-omened Kreutzer Sonata), recalled her to a fitting sense of
      her dignified surroundings by gently fanning her with the half-completed woollen sock, while
      murmuring in tones of playful severity—

“Mrs. Perry, my love, do not give way! Awake, my life—rouse yourself, pray rouse yourself,
      Mamma!”
In consequence, I suppose, of overhearing these admonitions, Miss Perry, her progress
      accompanied by the soft rustlings of what I believe is technically known as a “silk
      foundation,” crossed the room and laid her hand caressingly upon her mother's shoulder.
“Dearest”—she began in her charmingly hesitating voice.
Mrs. Perry sat bolt upright.
“Gracious, Lottie, how you did make me jump!” she cried.
Leversedge had been standing at the open window; he stepped rather quickly out on to the
      balcony. Gerrard had been turning over some music lying on the top of the piano. He emitted
      the peculiar sound I have characterised as a grunt. I had been standing by Leversedge; I
      remained where I was, and Charlotte Perry, still bending very prettily above her mother,
      raised her eyes to mine in pleading, in pathetic apology for the shortcomings of one so near
      and dear to her. Then, visibly making an effort over herself, she went on gently:—“Dearest, I
      see that you are weary. The day has been so hot. We must not let you over-tire yourself. You
      need rest. You must not let me keep you up.”

“Well, it has been very hot, my dear,” Mrs. Perry assented. “And the heat often does turn me
      a little giddy, as I think I told you, Mr. Hammond. And the music's very nice and pretty, but
      you see I never can keep awake long under it.”
“A lullaby,” broke in Mr. Perry gaily,—“a lullaby! Delightful compliment, I'm sure, really
      delightful compliment to the soothing qualities of my daughter's playing— 
And tired eyes in sweet repose,

et cetera.—Line from a hymn that, I fancy. But, as I
      maintain whenever the subject comes up for discussion, our hymnology is not to be despised,
      numbering, as it does, Cowper, Addison, and the late venerable, though mistaken, Cardinal
      Newman among its producers. Sweet verses, I give you my word for it, most exceedingly sweet
      verses, I have often been constrained to recall to my wife's memory—haven't I, Mamma?—on our
      return from our church services.”
Again Charlotte Perry raised her dewy eyes to mine. Poor young lady, I really felt for her.
      Her parents were somewhat unspeakable.
“Listen, dearest mother, you acknowledge that you are tired,” she repeated. “I know our
      guests will excuse you. So do not attempt to sit up any longer”—here she glanced at Mr. Perry,
      and once again it struck me that at moments there was a
       singular similarity between the expression of the father and
      daughter.—“Persuade her to go,—they have kindly asked for a little more music,—but persuade
      her to go. It will be much better.”
An air of bewilderment pervaded Mrs. Perry's kindly countenance. She looked questioningly
      from one to the other.
“But, my dear,” she said,—“of course you know best, and I wouldn't interfere with your
      arrangements on any account, you know; but isn't it rather odd—it is so awkward to say like
      this—but you know, my dear, how nervous I am at night, and if Papa goes to bed too you'll be
      left alone with these three gen—”
A quantity of loose music fell with a slither and thump from the piano on to the floor, and
      Gerrard stooped, murmuring excuses for his stupidity, to pick it up. Leversedge, who was
      standing near the window again, called to me—
“Come out here, Hammond. The lake is looking awfully pretty to-night.”
</div></body></text></TEI>