<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Carissima : VWWP edition </title><author>Malet, Lucas (1852-1931)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1896</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">

CHAPTER V
IT was the misfortune of Percy Gerrard that he had dirty fingers, and smirched
      everything he touched. Those dirty fingers of his had broken up the fulness of my
      self-complacency; I began to misdoubt the efficacy of the gospel which I had so lately
      preached with such success. My mental atmosphere changed, and for the worse; my whole outlook
      was affected. The hall, for instance, which had only been pleasantly warm half an hour ago,
      grew stuffy. The crowd, which had been amusing, grew oppressive. I had seen handsome couples,
      nice young couples; I had noted gay little flirtations. Now there seemed to start into
      disquieting prominence all sorts of queer people; people one could not quite place, people who
      from their general appearance suggested the idea that they had retired from active
      service—whether of business or pleasure—and were just “stopping over,” without much either of
      name or local habitation, making out the time till the cemetery should claim them and the very
      little they still were should utterly cease to be. A
       watering-place or hotel population always contains figures
      of this sort. Women of uncertain nationality, in strange garments, whose purses are light,
      whose eyes are hungry for social or any other sort of recognition, and whose day, such as it
      may have been, is very clearly over. Men of more than middle age, who once no doubt held
      distinguished positions in distant lands; but who now grumble away a purposeless existence on
      a pension or annuity, play a fractious game of whist, and air imaginary grievances of gigantic
      proportions.
Within the last half-hour these melancholy figures seemed to have multiplied exceedingly in
      the hall of the Grand Hôtel. And their near neighbourhood
      was depressing. For is it not more or less thus that we all, every one of us, end, alas!
      Platitudes regarding the brevity of things gay and pleasant, the certainty of the ultimate
      arrival of things altogether the reverse, began to form themselves on my lips. I recognised
      that I needed change of air, and that speedily.
Just within the great door of the portico I paused. The night was clear and sweet. In the
      basin of the little dribbling fountain, frogs were croaking—not the sonorous, full-throated
      chant of the southern frogs, but a modest tinkling note as of tiny bells. Great bats were
      hawking over the shrubberies in the dim garden.
       The stars were very large and keen. While from the
      wine-shop of some hamlet, far up among the vineyards, came the sound of a rude chorus of men's
      voices and the thumping of a drum. Figures passed along the wide carriage-drive, slipping out
      of the half darkness on the one hand and vanishing into it again on the other, as figures pass
      across the stage in some interlude of a play. First the lady of the scarlet silk blouse went
      swiftly by, talking excitedly to her two companions, the debilitated Russian young men. She
      had a white lace handkerchief thrown over her head, and it gleamed far down the avenue of
      pollarded chestnuts long after her figure, and those of her cavaliers, had been swallowed up
      in the shadow of the thick trees. Then a cheery lad in evening dress, a typical British
      subaltern, with the shortest of red hair and honestest of sunburnt faces, went by. He escorted
      a trim American maiden, to whom, in the last week, he had very obviously and completely lost
      his heart. The two were laughing, evidently the joke was a first-rate one. Almost immediately
      after, Perry père fled across the scene, a lopsided stripe
      of hurrying blackness.
I let him get to a safe distance, then I went out and followed the path along the left of
      the big hotel, under the long row of dining-room windows. All the chandeliers were lighted within,
       and a confused noise of talk and of feasting reached me.
      Who paid, I wondered—not those who ate and drank, not the hotel proprietor, very certainly,
      nor yet Mr. Perry. Leversedge, I supposed; that was his rôle.—Yes, Percy Gerrard's dirty fingers had decidedly spoilt the evening for me!
      Leversedge, I feared, was doomed to pay for most things, whoever happened to consume them.
And just as I had reached this somewhat disheartening conclusion, at the turn of the
      terrace, in the full glare of the great cluster of electric lights fixed flowerlike against
      the corner of the huge building, I came upon Leversedge himself.
He lounged, with his hands in his pockets, staring up at the soft night-moths, that
      fluttered around the bulbs of hard white light. I felt troubled, I therefore became weakly
      vapid—in speech.
“You here? The gay and giddy dance is over then,” I said.
Leversedge's eyes met mine in vague inquiry for an instant.
“Oh! we've had some splendid turns,” he said. “Charlotte dances divinely.”
“Does she not do all things divinely?”
“Pretty nearly,” he answered, smiling.
All went well still, then; my soul received
       comfort, my faith in my own gospel revived. Yea, these
      lovers should yet find complete salvation and—sustaining thought—through me.
Leversedge was staring at the upward flying night-moths again.
“Poor, silly fools,” he said slowly, “they're a little too much of a parable.”
But my cheerfulness had returned.
“My dear fellow,” I replied, “they ‘needs must love the highest when they see it,’ like the
      rest of us. But the highest is perfectly safe in this case, and will not do them any injury.
      They can't singe themselves. The globes are sealed.”
Leversedge's mildly distracted brow gathered into a frown for a moment, and he raised his
      shoulders the least bit in the world.
“No, they can't singe themselves,” he said, “but they can bash their silly heads in, which
      will answer much the same purpose.” Then he added, quickly and courteously—“I beg your pardon,
      Hammond; I am an ass, and like an ass I am a little bit out of temper.”
Just then, somewhere down in the direction of the little harbour, a dog yelped. I saw
      Leversedge start.
“What's that?” he said, under his breath.
His face straightened. He listened. I listened too, somehow. It was exceedingly stupid of
      me, for I ought to have talked; but I could not help
       myself. I had to listen. The sounds of revelry from the
      dining-room had grown faint; a breath of air had stirred the surface of the bank of shrubs on
      our right. And again, down by the harbour, a dog, evidently a small dog, yelped and
      whimpered.
“Let us come round to the front of the house,” Leversedge said, rather hurriedly. “That set
      of Lancers must be over by now, I should think, and she told me to meet her at the steps.”
As we went along the terrace, he added—
“That greasy animal, Gerrard, has turned up again to-night. He insisted upon Charlotte's
      sitting out this square dance with him, which bored her, and annoyed me rather. Of course I
      know, I'm rather out of it, Hammond, from having been away so long; but if that fellow's not a
      bad lot, I never saw any man that was.”
“Briefly, he is a beast!” I exclaimed.
Leversedge chuckled audibly.
“Thanks, I feel better,” he said. “Charlotte doesn't fancy him either, I know; but she's
      seen a good deal of him at Mrs. Mertyns', and she can't be uncivil, you see. As to this dance,
      she couldn't civilly get out of it.”
As we moved forward the air became positively heavy with the rich, aromatic scent of the
      magnolia blossoms, while the sound of the band came upon us with a sudden gush, in the light
      tuneful music of La Cigale.

“We shall get away from all these people tomorrow,” Leversedge said. “Till then I strive to
      possess my soul in patience.”
He smiled very charmingly, looked half proudly, half shyly at me.
“I'm awfully grateful to you, Hammond,” he said. “But for you I might not have dared go on.
      Thanks to you, the supreme good is near, is very near.”
Just then we reached the foot of the marble steps, crossed by broad spaces of golden
      brightness from the windows of the salon—against which last
      the band, fiddling and blowing under the vine-embowered verandah, showed as a company of
      grotesque silhouettes. Halfway down the flight stood the Deputy Surgeon-General discoursing
      earnestly to Perry père et mère.
“Oh! hang it, they've not done yet,” Leversedge said.
At the sound of his voice Mr. Perry turned, and perceiving us, ran playfully down to join
      us.
“Ah, ha!” he cried; “I see, I see. Damon and Pythias, David and Jonathan—as usual,
      inseparable companions— 
Divorced for a brief space
And then together flowing, impelled by friendship,
As severed drops upon the petals of the dewy rose.
 Upon my word, I begin to suspect Charlotte has a rival in that naughty boy's
      affections, eh, Mr. Hammond
       mond? Ladies have been known before now to grow jealous of
      their husband's friends. You must be nice to Charlotte, very, very nice to Charlotte, or who
      can tell—eh?”
“It's a beautiful night,” Leversedge remarked, with a certain irritation in his tone; “all
      the same, I don't care to stand still here. Shall we take a turn, Hammond, and come back?”
“By all means,” I said.
Was Leversedge only restless, anxious to shake off Perry père, or was he cold? Really I was becoming very sentimental over Leversedge. I
      would sacrifice myself to an almost unlimited extent in the way of pedestrianism to prevent
      his feeling cold.—But if his intention was to shake off his father-in-law, that end was not to
      be attained by such simple methods.
“Yes, by all means,” echoed Mr. Perry; “I am with you.”
And he trotted gaily beside us.
“A beautiful night, as you observe, Constantine, truly a beautiful night. Really, I may say,
      without exaggeration, a sublime night. I have just been calling my wife's and our good friend,
      the doctor's, attention to the expanse of the starry heavens as presented to us this evening— 
Worlds upon worlds displayed
To awe the human eye,
In majesty arrayed,
Go slowly rolling by.”


Here Mr. Perry became extremely noble.
“If my youth had not been necessarily devoted to pursuits of a practical character, and if
      the virtue of patriotism had not become the master passion of my maturer years, I should
      certainly have been an astronomer. Most elevating branch of science, Mr. Hammond, I am
      sure,—most elevating. The silent night, the lonely observatory, the burnished brass tube
      turned in humble inquiry upon unnumbered universes! Ah yes, ‘the undevout astronomer is
      mad,’—must be, you know, 'tis perfectly obvious. Yet, as I often remind myself, the busy bee
      has its place in nature, its little duty to fulfil, as well as the soaring eagle. And I trust
      I do not neglect my own honey cells, as we may say, do not neglect them. I am proud to think
      our local branch of the Primrose League, for instance, owes much to my efforts and to those of
      Mamma—for we must never forget the gentle hand of women, which rocking the cradle still rules
      the world—ah ha! rules us, and, therefore, of necessity, the world.”
We had walked the length of the terrace. Before us lay the garden, blotted by trees and
      masses of shrubbery, spreading away to a flat stretch of vineyards intersected by the pale
      gleam of a long straight road. Then the scattered lights of the little town—points of silver
      clustered along the edge of a blue-purple abyss of lake and mountain.

Mr. Perry drew himself up. He was quite detestably full-blown just then. He carried his head
      on one side, and shook his finger waggishly at the constellations—which, again, were points of
      silver clustered in that other blue-purple abyss of the night sky.
“Yes, yes,” he cried, “you heavenly bodies must indeed pursue your immemorial way without
      me! Hearth and home, wife and child, man and brother, Church and State, our revered Queen, our
      glorious Constitution,—these, after all, Mr. Hammond, twine themselves more closely about the
      heart-strings of the true Briton than even the most august of scientific studies. he
      affections must be satisfied, must be so, 'tis absolutely necessary. Constantine is in a
      position to bear witness to that truth just now; eh, Constantine?— 
He left his books
For ladies' looks.
 Account-books, in the case of Constantine. Ledgers, yes, ledgers—and very well-kept
      ones, too, as I can testify. Most creditable entries in those ledgers.—Dear me, what's
      this—what's this? Amid all our charming conversation and light musical gaiety the plaint of
      some inferior animal in pain!”
The dog was yelping again. The sound had shifted, was nearer. It seemed to come from the
      chestnut avenue, into the dark shadow of which
       the scarlet-bloused Russian and her companions had
      disappeared.
Leversedge touched me on the shoulder, speaking quickly.
“Let's turn, Hammond. That dance must be over by now, and I don't want to keep her
      waiting.”
“Right, right!” cried Mr. Perry genially. “I approve the sentiment. The Fair may sometimes
      delay us, but let us never delay the Fair. For 'tis the little foxes, the little foxes, that
      spoil the grapes. And how often the surface of domestic happiness is ruffled, and the peace of
      its depths endangered, I'm sure I may say positively endangered, by the omission of small
      courtesies— 
Those trifling, trivial tributes of our love,
Which still the heart's complete devotion prove.
 These are too often ignored by us members of the sterner sex; yet they are
      foundational, I protest foundational, as the basis of sweet agreement in the matrimonial
      state.”
At the foot of the steps stood Mrs. Perry.
“Dear me!” she said as we approached, “I'm sure it's a very shocking thing we should be
      benefiting so by those poor black people's bad habits, and I really don't see how we do,—and
      I'm sure it ought all to be put a stop to at once by the Queen, or the Parliament, or anybody
      in a position to do it.—Oh, well, here you all are; the doctor here's
       been explaining to me all about those poor Indians and the
      opium, and it does seem all very dreadful. And there's been a dog howling so; I've just been
      asking him to go and see what is the matter with it. It always upsets me,—doesn't it you, Mr.
      Hammond?—to hear anything crying about like that when you don't know what's wrong with
      it.”
The set of Lancers were clearly over, for the band was well away with a valse again. The
      Carissima, in her trailing peach-bloom skirts, stood just outside the central window of the
      ballroom. Gerrard's squat figure was behind her. He was talking to her, insisting upon
      something. The girl moved forward impatiently, as though wishing to escape from him. But he
      followed her to the head of the steps. He was very close to her, still speaking, still
      insisting. I saw him, to emphasise his words—whatever they might be—touch her arm with his
      hand.
Leversedge saw it too. His mouth opened a little, and a dangerous light came into his
      eyes.
“Damn your impudence! I should like to settle with you once and for all,” he said under his
      breath.
“Yes, to be sure, there it is howling again,” Mrs. Perry chimed in. “But, dear me, I don't
      want the poor thing done away with altogether, if that's what you mean, Constantine. I only
      want it turned out of the garden, you know, or taken back where it belongs.”

Charlotte came swiftly down the marble steps. She pressed her left hand against the side of
      her charming head; and the up-draught, as she moved, taking the lace of her open sleeve blew
      it back, showing her arm almost to the shoulder. The great diamonds, which Leversedge had
      brought her, glittered upon her third finger and upraised wrist. And the band played softly, I
      remember, a die-away passage of the valse,—it was one arranged from that pretty, silly song of
      Caminada's, “Ashes of love are as ashes of roses,”—and, down by the lake shore, once more a
      dog whimpered and yelped.
</div></body></text></TEI>