<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Hard Cash, by Charles Reade</title><author>Reade, Charles (1814-1884).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
PROLOGUE
IN a snowy villa, with a sloping lawn, just outside the great commercial seaport, Barkington,
     there lived a few years ago a happy family. A lady, middle-aged, but still charming; two young
     friends of hers; and a periodical visitor.
The lady was Mrs. Dodd; her occasional visitor was her husband; her friends were her son
     Edward, aged twenty, and her daughter Julia, nineteen, the fruit of a misalliance.
Mrs. Dodd was originally Miss Fountain, a young lady well born, high bred, and a denizen of
     the fashionable world. Under a strange concurrence of circumstances she coolly married the
     captain of an East Indiaman. The deed done, and with her eyes open, for she was not, to say, in
     love with him, she took a judicious line—and kept it: no hankering after Mayfair, no talking
     about “Lord this” and “Lady that,” to commercial gentlewomen; no amphibiousness. She accepted
     her place in society, reserving the right to embellish it with the graces she had gathered in a
     higher sphere. In her home, and in her person, she was little less elegant than a countess; yet
     nothing more than a merchant-captain's wife; and she reared that commander's children in a
     suburban villa, with the manners which adorn a palace. When they happen to be there. She had a
     bugbear; Slang. Could not endure the smart technicalities current; their multitude did not
     overpower her distaste; she called them “jargon”—“slang” was too coarse a word for her to apply
     to slang: she excluded many a good “racy idiom” along with the real offenders; and
     monosyllables in general ran some risk of' having to show their passports. If this was
     pedantry, it went no further; she was open, free, and youthful with her young pupils; and had
     the art to put herself on their level: often, when they were quite young, she would feign
     infantine ignorance, in order to hunt trite truth in couples with them, and detect, by joint
     experiment, that rainbows cannot, or else will not, be walked into, nor Jack-o'-lantern be
     gathered like a cowslip; and that, dissect we the vocal dog—whose hair is so like a
     lamb's—never so skilfully, no fragment of palpable bark, no sediment of tangible squeak,
     remains inside him to bless the inquisitive little operator, etc., etc. When they
     advanced from these elementary branches to Languages, History, Tapestry, and “What Not,” she
     managed still to keep by their side learning with them, not just hearing them lessons down from
     the top of a high tower of maternity. She never checked their curiosity, but made herself share
     it; never gave them, as so many parents do, a white-lying answer; wooed their affections with
     subtle though innocent art, thawed their reserve, obtained their love, and retained their
     respect. Briefly, a female Chesterfield; her husband's lover after marriage, though not before;
     and the mild monitress the elder sister, the favourite companion and bosom friend of both her
     children.
They were remarkably dissimilar; and perhaps I may be allowed to preface the narrative of
     their adventures by a delineation; as in country churches an individual pipes the keynote, and
     the tune comes raging after.
Edward, then, had a great calm eye, that was always looking folk full in the face, mildly;
     his countenance comely and manly, but no more; too square for Apollo; but sufficed for John
     Bull. His figure it was that charmed the curious observer of male beauty. He was five feet ten;
     had square shoulders, a deep chest, masculine flank, small foot, high instep. To crown all
     this, a head, overflowed by ripples of dark brown hair, sat with heroic grace upon his solid
     white throat, like some glossy falcon new lighted on a Parian column.
This young gentleman had decided qualities, positive and negative. He could walk up to a
     five-barred gate and clear it, alighting on the other side like a fallen feather; could row all
     day, and then dance all night; could fling a cricket ball a hundred and six yards; had a lathe
     and a tool-box, and would make you in a trice a chair, a table, a doll, a nutcracker, or any
     other moveable, useful, or the very reverse. And could not learn his lessons, to save his
     life.
His sister Julia was not so easy to describe. Her figure was tall, lithe, and serpentine; her
     hair the colour of a horse-chestnut fresh from its pod; her ears tiny and shell-like, her
     eyelashes long and silky; her mouth small when grave, large when smiling; her eyes pure hazel
     by day, and tinged with a little violet by night. But in jotting down these details, true as
     they are, I seem to myself to be painting fire, with a little snow and saffron mixed on a
     marble pallet. There is a beauty too spiritual to be chained in a string of items; and Julia's
     fair features were but the china vessel that brimmed over with the higher loveliness of her
     soul. Her essential charm was, what shall I say? Transparence.

 “You would have said her very body thought.” 
Modesty, Intelligence, and, above all, Enthusiasm, shone through her, and out of her, and
     made her an airy, fiery, household joy. Briefly, an incarnate sunbeam.
This one could learn her lessons with unreasonable rapidity, and until Edward went to Eton,
     would insist upon learning his into the bargain, partly with the fond notion of coaxing him on,
     as the company of a swift horse incites a slow one; partly because she was determined to share
     his every trouble, if she could not remove it. A little choleric, and indeed downright prone to
     that more generous indignation which fires at the wrongs of others. When heated with emotion,
     or sentiment, she lowered her voice, instead of raising it like the rest of us. She called her
     mother “Lady Placid,” and her brother “Sir Imperturbable.” And so much for outlines.
Mrs. Dodd laid aside her personal ambition with her maiden name; but she looked high for her
     children. Perhaps she was all the more ambitious for them, that they had no rival aspirant in
     Mrs. Dodd. She educated Julia herself from first to last: but with true feminine distrust of
     her power to mould a lordling of creation, she sent Edward to Eton, at nine. This was
     slackening her tortoise; for at Eton is no female master, to coax dry knowledge into a slow
     head. However, he made good progress in two branches—aquatics and cricket.
After Eton came the choice of a profession. His mother recognised but four; and these her
     discreet ambition speedily sifted down to two. For military heroes are shot now and then,
     however pacific the century; and naval ones drowned. She would never expose her Edward to this
     class of accidents. Glory by all means; glory by the pail; but safe glory, please; or she would
     none of it. Remained the church and the bar: and, within these reasonable limits, she left her
     dear boy free as air; and not even hurried—there was plenty of time to choose: he must pass
     through the university to either. This last essential had been settled about a twelvemonth, and
     the very day for his going to Oxford was at hand, when one morning Mr. Edward formally cleared
     his throat: it was an unusual act, and drew the ladies' eyes upon him. He followed the
     solemnity up by delivering calmly and ponderously a connected discourse, which astonished them
     by its length and purport. “Mamma, dear, let us look the thing in the face.” (This was his
     favourite expression, as well as habit.) “I have been thinking it quietly over for the last six
     months. Why send me to the university? I shall be out of place there. It will cost you a lot of
     money, and no good. Now, you take a fool's advice; don't you waste your money and papa's,
     sending a dull fellow like me to Oxford. I did bad enough at Eton. Make me an
     engineer, or something. If you were not so fond of me, and I of you, I'd say send me to Canada,
     with a pickaxe; you know I have got no headpiece.”
Mrs. Dodd had sat aghast, casting Edward deprecating looks at the close of each ponderous
     sentence, but too polite to interrupt a soul, even a son talking nonsense. She now assured him
     she could afford very well to send him to Oxford, and begged leave to remind him that he was
     too good and too sensible to run up bills there, like the young men who did not really love
     their parents. “Then, as for learning, why, we must be reasonable in our turn. Do the best you
     can, love. We know you have no great turn for the classics; we do not expect you to take high
     honours like young Mr. Hardie; besides, that might make your head ache: he has sad headaches,
     his sister told Julia. But, my dear, an university education is indispensable Do but see how
     the signs of it follow a gentleman through life, to say nothing of the valuable acquaintances
     and lasting friendships he makes there: even those few distinguished persons who have risen in
     the would without it, have openly regretted the want, and have sent their children: and
      that says volumes to me.”
“Why, Edward, it is the hall-mark of a gentleman,” said Julia eagerly. Mrs. Dodd caught a
     flash of her daughter: “And my silver shall never be without it,” said she warmly. She added
     presently, in her usual placid tone, “I beg your pardon, my dears, I ought to have said my
     gold.” With this she kissed Edward tenderly on the brow, and drew an embrace and a little grunt
     of resignation from him. “Take the dear boy and show him our purchases, love!” said Mrs. Dodd,
     with a little gentle accent of half reproach, scarce perceptible to a male ear.
“Oh, yes,” and Julia rose and tripped to the door. There she stood a moment, half turned,
     with arching neck, colouring with innocent pleasure. “Come, darling. Oh, you good-for-nothing
     thing.”
The pair found a little room hard by, paved with china, crockery, glass, baths, kettles,
     etc.
“There, sir. Look them in the face; and us, if you can.”
“Well, you know, I had no idea you had been and bought a cart-load of things for Oxford.” His
     eye brightened; he whipped out a two-foot rule, and began to calculate the cubic contents.
     “I'll turn to and make the cases, Ju.”
The ladies had their way; the cases were made and despatched; and one morning the Bus came
     for Edward, and stopped at the gate of Albion Villa. At this sight mother and daughter both
     turned their heads quickly away by one independent impulse, and set a bad example. Apparently
     neither of them had calculated on this paltry little detail; they were game for theoretical
     departures; to impalpable universities: and “an air-drawn Bus, a Bus of the mind,” would not
     have dejected for a moment their lofty Spartan souls on glory bent; safe glory. But here was a
     Bus of wood, and Edward going bodily away inside it. The victim kissed them, threw up his
     portmanteau and bag, and departed serene as Italian skies; the victors watched the pitiless Bus
     quite out of sight; then went up to his bedroom, all disordered by packing, and, on the very
     face of it, vacant; and sat down on his little bed intertwining and weeping.
Edward was received at Exeter College, as young gentlemen are received at college; and
     nowhere else, I hope, for the credit of Christendom. They showed him a hole in the roof, and
     called it an “Attic;” grim pleasantry! being a puncture in the modern Athens. They inserted
     him; told him what hour at the top of the morning he must be in chapel; and left him to find
     out his other ills. His cases were welcomed like Christians, by the whole staircase. These
     undergraduates abused one another's crockery as their own: the joint stock of breakables had
     just dwindled very low, and Mrs. Dodd's bountiful contribution was a godsend.
The new comer soon found that his views of a learned university had been narrow. Out of place
     in it? why, he could not have taken his wares to a better market; the modern Athens, like the
     ancient, cultivates muscle as well as mind. The captain of the university eleven saw a
     cricket-ball thrown all across the ground; he instantly sent a professional bowler to find out
     who that was; through the same ambassador the thrower was invited to play on club days; and
     proving himself an infallible catch and long-stop, a mighty thrower, a swift runner, and a
     steady, though not very brilliant bat, he was, after one or two repulses, actually adopted into
     the university eleven. He communicated this ray of glory by letter to his mother and sister
     with genuine delight, coldly and clumsily expressed; they replied with feigned and fluent
     rapture. Advancing steadily in that line of academic study towards which his genius lay, he won
     a hurdle race, and sent home a little silver hurdle; and soon after brought a pewter pot, with
     a Latin inscription recording the victory at “Fives” of Edward Dodd: but not too arrogantly;
     for in the centre of the pot was this device, “The Lord Is My Illumination.” The Curate of
     Sandford, who pulled number six in the Exeter boat, left Sandford for Witney: on this he felt
     he could no longer do his college justice by water, and his parish by land, nor escape the
     charge of pluralism, preaching at Witney and rowing at Oxford. He fluctuated, sighed, kept his
     Witney, and laid down his oar. Then Edward was solemnly weighed in his jersey and flannel
     trousers, and proving only eleven stone eight, whereas he had been ungenerously suspected of
     twelve stone, was elected to the vacant oar by acclamation. He was
     a picture in a boat; and, “Oh!!! well pulled, six!!” was a hearty ejaculation constantly hurled
     at him from the bank by many men of other colleges, and even by the more genial among the cads,
     as the Exeter glided at ease down the river, or shot up it in a race.
He was now as much talked of in the university as any man of his college, except one.
     Singularly enough that one was his townsman; but no friend of his; he was much Edward's senior
     in standing, though not in age; and this is a barrier the junior must not step over—without
     direct encouragement—at Oxford. Moreover, the college was a large one, and some of “the sets”
     very exclusive: young Hardie was Doge of a studious clique; and careful to make it understood
     that he was a reading man who boated and cricketed, to avoid the fatigue of lounging; not a
     boatman or cricketer who strayed into Aristotle in the intervals of Perspiration.
His public running since he left Harrow was as follows: the prize poem in his fourth term;
     the sculls in his sixth; the Ireland scholarship in his eighth (he pulled second for it the
     year before); Stroke of the Exeter in his tenth; and reckoned sure of a first class to
     consummate his twofold career.
To this young Apollo, crowned with variegated laurel, Edward looked up from a distance. The
     brilliant creature never bestowed a word on him by land; and by water only such observations as
     the following: “Time, Six!” “Well pulled, Six!” “Very well pulled, Six!” Except, by-the-bye,
     one race; when he swore at him like a trooper for not being quicker at starting. The excitement
     of nearly being bumped by Brasenose in the first hundred yards was an excuse. However, Hardie
     apologised as they were dressing in the barge after the race; but the apology was so stiff, it
     did not pave the way to an acquaintance.
Young Hardie, rising twenty-one, thought nothing human worthy of reverence, but Intellect.
     Invited to dinner, on the same day, with the Emperor of Russia, and with Voltaire, and with
     meek St. John, he would certainly have told the coachman to put him down at Voltaire.
His quick eye detected Edward's character; but was not attracted by it: says he to one of his
     adherents, “What a good-natured spoon that Dodd is; Phoebus, what a name!” Edward, on the other
     hand, praised this brilliant in all his letters, and recorded his triumphs and such of his
     witty sayings as leaked through his own set, to reinvigorate mankind. This roused Julia's ire.
     It smouldered through three letters; but burst out when there was no letter; but Mrs. Dodd,
     meaning, Heaven knows, no harm, happened to say meekly, a propos of Edward, “You know,
     love, we cannot all be young Hardies.” “No, and thank Heaven,” said Julia defiantly. “Yes,
     mamma,” she continued, in answer to Mrs. Dodd's eyebrow, which had curved; “your mild glance
     reads my soul; I detest that boy.” Mrs. Dodd smiled: “Are you sure you know what the word
     'detest' means? And what has young Mr. Hardie done, that you should bestow so violent a
     sentiment on him?”
“Mamma, I am Edward's sister,” was the tragic reply; then, kicking off the buskin pretty
     nimbly, “There! he beats our boy at everything, and ours sits quietly down and admires him for
     it: oh! how can a man let anybody or anything beat him! I wouldn't; without a desperate
     struggle.” She clenched her white teeth and imagined the struggle. To be sure, she owned she
     had never seen this Mr. Hardie; but after all it was only Jane Hardie's brother, as Edward was
     hers; “And would I sit down and let Jane beat me at Things? Never! never! never! I
     couldn't.”
“Your friend to the death, dear; was not that your expression?”
“Oh, that was a slip of the tongue, dear mamma; I was off my guard. I generally am, by the
     way. But now I am on it, and propose an amendment. Now I second it. Now I carry it.”
“And now let me hear it.”
“She is my friend till death—or Eclipse; and that means until she eclipses me, of course.”
     But she added softly, and with sudden gravity: “Ah! Jane Hardie has a fault which will always
     prevent her from eclipsing your humble servant in this wicked world.”
“What is that?”
“She is too good. Much.”
“Par exemple?”
“Too religious.”
“Oh, that is another matter.”
“For shame, mamma! I am glad to hear it: for I scorn a life of frivolity; but then, again, I
     should not like to give up everything, you know.” Mrs. Dodd looked a little staggered, too, at
     so vast a scheme of capitulation. But “everything” was soon explained to mean balls, concerts,
     dinner-parties in general, tea-parties without exposition of Scripture, races, and operas,
     cards, charades, and whatever else amuses society without perceptibly sanctifying it. All
     these, by Julia's account, Miss Hardie had renounced, and was now denouncing (with the young
     the latter verb treads on the very heels of the former). “And, you know, she is a district
     visitor.”
This climax delivered, Julia stopped short, and awaited the result.
Mrs. Dodd heard it all with quiet disapproval and cool incredulity. She had seen so many
     young ladies healed of many young enthusiasms by a wedding ring. But, while she was searching
     diligently in her mine of ladylike English—mine with plenty of water in it, begging her
     pardon—for expressions to convey inoffensively, and roundabout, her conviction that Miss Hardie
     was a little, furious simpleton, the post came and swept the subject away in a moment.
Two letters; one from Calcutta, one from Oxford.
They came quietly in upon one salver, and were opened and read with pleasurable interest, but
     without surprise, or misgiving; and without the slightest foretaste of their grave amid
     singular consequences.
Rivers deep and broad start from such little springs.
David's letter was of unusual length for him. The main topics were, first, the date and
     manner of his return home. His ship, a very old one, had been condemned in port: and he was to
     sail a fine new teak-built vessel, the Agra, as far as the Cape; where her captain,
     just recovered from a severe illness, would come on board, and convey her and him to England.
     In future, Dodd was to command one of the Company's large steamers to Alexandria and back.
“It is rather a come-down for a sailor, to go straight ahead like a wheelbarrow in all
     weathers with a steam-pot and a crew of coalheavers. But then I shall not be parted from my
     sweetheart such long dreary spells as I have been thus twenty years, my dear love: so is it for
     me to complain?”
The second topic was pecuniary; the transfer of their savings from India, where interest was
     higher than at home, but the capital not so secure.
And the third was ardent and tender expressions of affection for the wife and children he
     adored. These effusions of the heart had no separate place, except in my somewhat arbitrary
     analysis of the honest sailor's letter; they were the under current. Mrs. Dodd read part of it
     out to Julia; in fact all but the money matter: that concerned the heads of the family more
     immediately; and Cash was a topic her daughter did not understand, nor care about. And when
     Mrs. Dodd had read it with glistening eyes, she kissed it tenderly, and read it all over again
     to herself, and then put it into her bosom as naively as a milkmaid in love.
Edward's letter was short enough, and Mrs. Dodd allowed Julia to read it to her, which she
     did with panting breath, and glowing cheeks, and a running fire of comments.
“'Dear Mamma, I hope you and Ju are quite well——'”
“Ju,” murmured Mrs. Dodd plaintively.
“'And that there is good news about papa coming home. As for me, I have plenty on my hands
     just now; all this term I have been ('training' scratched out, and another word put in: C — R —
     oh, I know) 'cramming.'”
“'Cramming,' love?”
“Yes, that is the Oxfordish for studying.”
“'—For smalls.'”
Mrs. Dodd contrived to sigh interrogatively. Julia, who understood her every accent, reminded
     her that “smalls” was the new word for “little go.”
“'—Cramming for smalls; and now I am in two races at Henley, and that rather puts the snaffie
     on reading and gooseberry pie' (Goodness me), 'and adds to my chance of being ploughed for
     smalls.'”
“What does it all mean?” inquired mamma, “'gooseberry pie'? and 'the snaffle'? and
     'ploughed'?”
“Well, the gooseberry pie is really too deep for me: but 'ploughed' is the new Oxfordish for
     'plucked.' O mamma, have you forgotten that? 'Plucked' was vulgar, so now they are 'ploughed.'
     'For smalls; but I hope I shall not be, to vex you and Puss.'”
“Heaven forbid he should be so disgraced! But what has the cat to do with it?”
“Nothing on earth. Puss? that is me. How dare he? Did I not forbid all these nicknames and
     all this Oxfordish, by proclamation, last Long.”
“Last Long?”
“Hem! last protracted vacation.”
“'—Dear mamma, sometimes I cannot help being down in the mouth,' (why, it is a string of
     pearls) 'to think you have not got a son like Hardie.'” At this unfortunate reflection it was
     Julia's turn to suffer. She deposited the letter in her lap, and fired up. “Now, have not I
     cause to hate, and scorn, and despise le petit Hardie?”
“Julia!”
“I mean to dislike with propriety, and gently to abominate—Mr. Hardie, junior.”
“'—Dear mamma, do come to Henley on the tenth, you and Ju. The university eights will not be
     there, but the head boats of the Oxford and Cambridge river will; and the Oxford head boat is
     Exeter, you know; and I pull Six.'”
“Then I am truly sorry to hear it; my poor boy will overtask his strength; and how unfair of
     the other young gentlemen; it seems ungenerous; unreasonable; my poor child against so
     many.”
“'—And I am entered for the sculls as well, and if you and “the Impetuosity”' (Vengeance!)
     'were looking on from the bank, I do think I should be lucky this time. Henley is a long way
     from Barkington, but it is a pretty place; all the ladies admire it, and like to see both the
     universities out and a stunning race.' Oh, well, there is an epithet. One would think
     thunder was going to race lightning, instead of Oxford Cambridge.”
“'—If you can come, please write, and I will get you nice lodgings; I will not let you go to
     a noisy inn. Love to Julia and no end of kisses to my pretty mamma. —From your affectionate
     Son,
“'EDWARD DODD.'”
They wrote off a cordial assent, and reached Henley in time to see the dullest town in
     Europe; and also to see it turn one of the gayest in an hour or two; so impetuously came both
     the universities pouring into it—in all known vehicles that could go their pace—by
     land and water.
</div></body></text></TEI>