
CHAPTER XXIV
IN WHICH CIVILISATION TRIUMPHS
OUTSIDE was the wan light of a wet daybreak. A thin rain flipped her face, cooling
     her feverish cheeks. The gas-lamps already took on an orange hue, and in the east there
     flickered a streak of mysterious light. A faint chirruping of birds began, though London still
     lay mute, but soon the bird-chorus waxed louder, more shrill, more persistent. The terrible
     night was over. The dawn was at hand.
Mary lit her lamp and searched about among her papers for the chapter of her novel at which
     she had been at work yesterday before Vincent came. She had still to do another happy ending,
     the rapturous finale which the public demanded. She tried to
     fix her thoughts, but the great bunch of pinkish lilac irritated her with its dominant,
     sensuous odour. Taking the dripping stalks in her hand she went to the open window and let them
     drop gently on the pavement below. And then, there was something
      thing else—the large, full-length, faded photograph of
     Vincent Hemming, which stood just above the pigeon-holes on her desk.
Raising the short silk curtain which hid the grate in the summer-time, Mary placed the
     photograph upright in the fireplace and lit it with a match. Then she sat down on the fur rug,
     in her dressing-gown, and, hunched up, with her chin on her knees, watched the holocaust. There
     was neither sorrow, love, nor anger in the grey eyes, nothing but a kind of curiosity. But the
     stiff cardboard would not burn. Mary lit it twice with matches, and it caught for a minute, and
     then went out with a sudden little puff.
‘Paper—paper is what I want,’ she muttered. ‘I wonder if love-letters burn better than other
     kinds of paper?’ And, going to the table, she unlocked a drawer and took out a thick bundle of
     letters in thin, foreign envelopes; all Vincent's letters during his journey round the world.
     ‘It is poetic justice,’ she thought grimly; ‘and then—I must keep nothing that will remind me
     of him—nothing—nothing—nothing.’
So she gathered up all his letters, even the last one, which she had received the day before
     Alison's death, and laid them under the photograph. Ah! now he burned. First the boots,
      then the trousers to the knee, then to the trim waist of the
     frock-coat. But then it went out again, leaving Vincent's head and shoulders still there;
     Vincent's face, with its slightly superior air, the orchid in the button-hole. How chilly it
     had grown! A draught came under the chink of the door, and her bare feet, thrust into bedroom
     slippers, were deadly cold. Another match; this time it was for good. First the orchid was
     licked up by the little blue flames, then the chin, the mouth, the eyes. Soon there was only a
     handful of blackened paper. Well, real life was like that. The love of lovers was a blaze, a
     whiff, a vain, fleeting thing. She looked at the little heap of fluttering paper, and saw, with
     her sane vision, Vincent going back to his wife. Yes, he would go to Paris, and then he would
     go back to domesticity in Queen's Gate. Next year there would possibly be another child—a boy,
     perhaps, in whom he would take more interest. He had his wife's fortune, and for sure next time
     he would secure a safe seat in Parliament. That passionate interview would soon be a mere
     episode to him.
‘A mere episode,’ she repeated to herself deliberately, as the white daylight came creeping
     in at the window.
And now a draught, blowing down the
      chimney, rustled the handful of ashes and dispersed them
     with a sudden gust, while a ray of wan sunlight crept tentatively along the empty hearth.
Late that afternoon a slight figure was to be seen toiling up to Highgate Cemetery. Mary had
     to see the stonemason about the inscription on her father's grave. They had written to say that
     some of the letters wanted re-painting, perhaps re-cutting. She found the stonemason sitting
     straddle-legged on a high tomb near, carefully scraping a marble anchor which had become dingy
     in the course of years. The man clambered down and touched his cap. She remembered him well as
     a freethinker, and a great admirer of her father's books.
They both looked carefully at the professor's grave. And, to be sure, the line— 
      ‘To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield’
      was almost illegible. The urn on the top was slightly askew.
‘It gets all the wind and the rain, you see, Miss Erle,’ said the stonemason, gazing
     critically at his work. ‘Yer father's tomb, it do stand so 'igh. Almost the 'ighest in the
     cem'try, I may say. And a sight of rain we do 'ave up here in winter time. Soaks the clay, it
     does, and shifts
      the graves. Look at that angel with the trumpet over there.
     A bit squiffy, he looks, don't 'e? Some of them tombs 'ave to be repaired constant.’
‘I want this seen to at once,’ said Mary.
‘It'll be a matter of five pound to do it up properly, Miss,’ he said, after some
     consideration, and then he added, in his apologetic workman's voice, ‘and I shouldn't like, for
     'is sake, to skimp the job. Ah! we ain't got many like 'im up 'ere.’
When the man had gone, Mary stood for a long time there on the little mound at the top of the
     hill.
All around her was the joyous activity of spring-time. Nature, who never ceases, who never
     rests, was once again at her work of recreation. Once again the lilac-trees were burgeoning
     with waxen blossoms. Once again a thrush, somewhere among that great city of sleepers, was
     swelling its brown throat with an amorous song. The air was loaded with the perfume of may; a
     pair of swifts were circling and swooping against the tender evening sky. And in all this
     gaiety of a new-born world only she was to have no part. Henceforward she was to stand alone,
     to fight the dreary battle of life unaided. ‘And women live long,’ came the ironical thought:
     ‘yes—we live long!’

The sunset touched her face, her hand, the flush of hawthorn above her head. At her feet,
     beyond the foreground of spreading trees, lay stretched out an ocean of houses, softened, made
     vague with a silvery veil of smoke, and pricked by endless spires. Here and there a blurred
     block, a monster hotel, a railway station, rose out of the great sea of dwellings. It was
     London that lay stretched out at her feet; majestic, awe-inspiring, inexorable, triumphant
     London.
Standing alone, there on the heights, she made a feint as if to grasp the city spread out
     before her, but the movement ended in a vain gesture, and the radiance of her face was blotted
     out as she began to plod homewards in the twilight of the suburban road.
