
CHAPTER XXIII
THE WOMAN IN THE GLASS
MARY walked rapidly round the Regent's Park. Over yonder, where the sombre trees
     massed themselves against the pale evening sky, came the sounds and scents of the on-coming
     summer; children's shrill voices calling to each other near the ornamental water; the tread of
     sweethearts' feet on the gravel path; the delicate aroma of newly-cut grass. All around her
     were simple human joys. But they were not for her. She had left all that behind her in that
     little room in Bulstrode Street, where sat the one man in the world that she cared for—the one
     man now who cared for her. There was no one else; there never could be any one else.
But it behoved her henceforward to be sensible—to be strong for both of them. She must never
     see him again, must, above all, try and think of Vincent as she used to do, before that
     afternoon in Harley Street—how many years ago now?—when he had first made love to her, and
     asked her to wait for him. How it spoiled
      everything—this eternal question of sex! It was almost
     impossible for a woman to see a man as he really is. And, in pursuance of the plan of being
     sensible, she went deliberately over Hemming's faults. They were obvious enough. He was weak,
     vacillating; his phrases were absurd. His ambitions, after all, were but vulgar ones, and he
     had not the will-power to carry out even his most cherished plans. He was all that, and yet he
     was the only man in the world that she loved—the only man in the world now who desired her as a
     woman.
And yet she must walk on, get as far away from him as possible. Here, at the North Gate, the
     slim young poplars detached themselves tremblingly against the pinkish sky, while in front of
     her stretched the long, white Avenue Road, with its substantial, scrupulously-kept houses,
     holding themselves aloof in their leafy gardens. She would walk on until she came to Hampstead.
     Up there, there was space, distance; one's horizon opened out.
Over the garden walls swayed the waxen, pinkish lilac. The scent struck her like a blow;
      that room where they had been together had been filled with the same penetrating,
     sensuous odour. Pink lilac and foliage made artificial-looking by the yellow light of a
     gas-lamp—how they always reminded her of Paris: of Paris,
      where they might have been on their way by now. But she was
     walking alone, steeling her heart against him, in a road in a London suburb. On each side was
     the prosperous, orderly, contented life of the middle-class, with its placid domesticity, its
     unemotional joys. From the open window of a long drawing-room came the sound of a young girl's
     thread-like voice. Upstairs, in the nursery, the lights were already lowered. The white street
     was deserted. But suddenly, from one of the open gateways, appeared a pair of sleek chestnuts.
     The carriage passed out, and, as Mary stood waiting at the curb, a man and a woman's smiling
     faces were photographed on her brain. A prosperous, middle-aged couple, going out to a placid
     evening's amusement. Then silence again.
The girl pushed on, past endless rows of houses, trim, smug dwellings, every one of which
     represented the Family—that special product of civilisation for which she, as an individual,
     was to be sacrificed.... On and on, until at last, through a dark, leafy lane, she emerged on
     the open heath.
The after-glow of a crimson sunset still hung in the west. The Surrey Hills were faintly
     blue, and the heath, with its broken ridges topped with gorse and bracken, swept in superb
     lines at her feet. The air was very still. Over
      yonder a mysterious hand had hung a silver sickle in the
     pale twilight sky. Mary sank tired on to a seat. But presently two vague figures approached in
     the growing darkness—the figures of a girl and a young man, working people both, who sat
     awkwardly down at the other end of the bench, and talked in jerky, constrained whispers. The
     girl's eyes were bent demurely on her lap, but once, when Mary turned her head in their
     direction, she could see that the young man's eyes were devouring the face of his shabby little
     companion with a passionate glance. Something tightened at Mary's throat. Why to-night, of all
     nights, must she be reminded of what she was giving up? She got up, and began to walk rapidly
     homewards.
‘I was not wanted there; I was spoiling their evening,’ she thought. ‘I must learn to be
     discreet.’
With some trepidation she rang the bell of her lodgings.
‘When did Mr. Hemming go?’ she asked.
‘About eight o'clock, miss. Will you have some dinner?’
‘No, thanks, Sarah. I can't eat anything to-night. I've got one of my headaches.’
Mary went straight into the little study and shut the door.
Outwardly nothing was changed. The air
      was full of his presence. There were the tea-cups out of
     which they had drunk; the chair at the writing-table was still half swung round, just as
     Vincent Hemming had left it. It was here, just at the mantelpiece, that he had taken her into
     his arms and said all those mad things. She went deliberately over the scene, repeating in her
     mind everything he had said. On the sofa the cushions were still tumbled where he had sat and
     sobbed. Ah, for once, she had made him suffer. She flung herself down, clenching
     her fists, with her face against the silken cushions. Her other self revolted against the
     injustice of human laws. The woman within her cried aloud in the darkness. What had she done
     that she was always to be sacrificed? Why was she to miss the best that life has to offer?
She lay there a long time, miserable, stricken, helpless. Then, going into her bedroom she
     began to take off her dress mechanically and to unloosen her hair. Half-dressed as she was, she
     flung herself on the bed; she was tired and footsore with her long walk. For an hour she fell
     into a fitful sleep.
The night was warm, but she could hear the flapping of the window-blind, swaying in a light
     breeze. Mary lay there a long time, every nerve in her body quivering. How long, how long the
     night was! Would it never end, never be
      daylight, when she could get up and work again? To work was
     to forget. If only she could keep strong and not worry too much.
She got up presently, weary with lying awake, and lit a couple of candles on the
     dressing-table. The flapping-blind got on her nerves. She had forgotten to wind up her watch,
     but, from the curious hush in the air, Mary thought it must be nearing dawn. Then she began to
     pace the room mechanically. Would the night never end?
In the mirror on the dressing-table she caught sight of herself as she passed. Her fair hair
     was floating in a kind of halo round her head; her bare arms and shoulders emerged from the
     whiteness of her bodice. How the eyes looked at her—hauntingly, appealingly—from out of a
     pathetic little face. She slipped into the chair at the table, and leaning her face on her
     hands, looked gravely at the mirror. For a long time now she had had a strange sense of dual
     individuality. When she looked in the glass a woman looked back at her with reproachful,
     haunting eyes. And to-night the woman looked at her appealingly. By the soft candle-light the
     face was curiously young. The cheeks were delicately thin, but the lips were those of a girl of
     eighteen; in the fluffy, fair head the few grey hairs were lost among the pale gold. There was
     the line
      of her throat, her beautiful white shoulders, the delicate
     modelling of her satiny arms. And, as she looked, the woman in the glass softened with a
     triumphant smile.
‘You may torture me, starve me, but you cannot make me unlovable. He loves me!’ smiled the
     woman. ‘Why, he would ruin himself to-morrow for me. I have only to say one word, and his life
     is mine. What are we two, after all? Two atoms of matter, breathing, living, loving, suffering
     for one brief moment on a planet which was once without organic life, and which is slowly
     grinding on to irreparable decay. A few more drops in the ocean of eternity, and we and our
     little loves and little hates will be forgotten. A few more drops, and mankind itself will have
     disappeared, and once more a cold, uninhabited globe will continue its monotonous course round
     the sun. No one can stop the coming of the “Great Year.” Nature—insolent, triumphant
     nature—cares nothing for the individual. Summer and winter, seedtime and harvest will come and
     go in the ages to come, but I—I shall not be here. Nestlings will crouch,
     chirruping, under the eaves; there will be dew on the meadow-sweet, sunshine in the orchard;
     there will be lovers' glances, and the laughter of little children. But for me, for me it
      will all be dark. Yet we do have the
      present moment; let us keep it and hold it. We are alive
     now. We love each other. Give him to me! Only a few short years am I here,’ pleaded the
     haunting eyes: ‘I, and such as I, tearing our little hands in the search for gold, shaking them
     at the heavens with impotent vengeance. Give him to me, give him to me! The inexorable
     years—the years which fade and blight—will pass over us, and then our “folly” will be
     forgotten. Why, people in the next generation will shrug their shoulders and say, “After all,
     they were only human.” And I,’ pleaded the woman in the glass, ‘I shall have lived.’
Mary dropped her head on her arms. The night was mysteriously still. The breeze had dropped,
     and an uncanny silence hung about the house. The window was shut now, the blind drawn. The two
     candles on the dressing-table were burning low in their sockets. When she raised her head
     again, the eyes were no longer triumphant, they were reproachful. ‘Who am I? Why am I here?’
     they asked: ‘To live is to suffer; why do you let me live? Must I go on looking back at you
     until my eyes are faded, my lashes are grey, until I have run through the gamut of mental and
     physical pain? I am a living, suffering entity,’ said the woman in the glass, ‘in a world of
     artificial laws; of laws made for man's convenience and pleasure,
      not for mine. Have I one thing for which I have longed? Have
     I a human love, have I the hope of immortality, have I even tasted the intoxication of
     achievement? Human life is but a moment in the æons of time, and yet one little human lifetime
     contains an eternity of suffering. Why, since you take joy from me, why do you let me
     live?’
Here, indeed, was a greater temptation than the one from which she had just escaped. She
     sprang up, horrified, afraid of the haunting eyes.... Was that to be the end?
Pacing the room, Mary fell to thinking of her father; of the kind-eyed enthusiast who, in his
     younger years at least, had little enough joy, and much toil, who had been blamed and reviled
     and stoned by the public, and who had worked solely and single-heartedly for truth's sake. 
      ‘To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield,’
      she suddenly said aloud. It was a line she had engraved on her father's tomb at
     Highgate, a favourite line of his, of that dear worker of whom, even to think, was morally
     bracing. Yes— 
      ‘It may be that the gulfs will wash us down,
It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles;
....but something ere I end—
Some work of noble note may yet be done,’
      repeated Mary deliberately, as she walked into the little study, pulled up the blind
     and raised the sash.
