

CHAPTER IV
WITHIN the course of the next five weeks I had seen Eurydice perhaps six or seven
     times, calling at her house once, and rarely twice, in the week. Her manner was kind, and
     gentler, it seemed to me, than formerly; the old mocking spirit had nearly died out of it, but
     there was a distance, a long, long distance, in that manner, a coldness in that gentleness,
     that was very slight and delicate, but which chilled like the first breath of winter that stirs
     insidiously through the warm autumnal air.
I had kept my promise to her, of course, and for the last five weeks my life had been an
     exemplary one, and I knew it rendered her
      happier to see the influence for good that she possessed
     over me.
But the reform was not a radical nor a deep-seated one, since no reform enforced or induced
     by outside circumstances can be so. The very soul of all true self-reform is in personal
     revolutionary ardour which can prompt and sustain the reformation, independent of and in spite
     of outside influences. All other self-reform is a mere counterfeit.
And the command this stronger mind and higher moral nature exerted over me was beginning to
     weary me, and I longed now to escape from it.
While the privilege was still denied me I had been eager to be allowed to see her and know
     her as a mere acquaintance, but now that I had gained it I found that she was right.
As she had predicted, acquaintanceship was unsatisfactory and friendship an illusion, and the
     upshot of my reflections, as I flung away
      the cigar end and glanced round the darkening room, found
     expression in the resolution:
‘It's slow. Cut it.’
Then I turned to the neglected paper, took it up, and glanced through the divorce cases by
     way of distraction.
At dinner that night I talked with Dickinson in a desultory way of change and travel; then I
     hinted that I wanted a change, thought town life getting rather long, remarked our leave was
     half through, and we neither seemed much the better for it, and wound up by asking if he didn't
     think a trip out as far as Gib, say, to start with, would do him a lot of
     good?
And Dickinson, who certainly is a most good-hearted, obliging and convenient fellow, fell in
     with the proposal at once.
I did not tell Eurydice anything of my decision or views. I had made up my own mind as to
     what was best to do, and formed my own resolution, and it was not till all our
      preparations were made and I was at her place for the last
     time, or the last time but one, that I determined to tell her.
I did not mean to make a tragic good-bye of it, nor conjure up the passionate phase of
     feeling we had parted in on board.
We had been meeting as ordinary acquaintances, on the terms of conventional politeness, for
     over a month; these were the only terms we could be on. Then let them stand now.
‘Heroics don't suit our modern everyday existence,’ I thought idly, as I lounged on the
     settee in her softly-shaded room, smoking—for she allowed me to smoke—cigarettes, and watched
     through half-closed lids the woman opposite me, on the other side of the little bamboo
     tea-table.
It was four o'clock; the April sun slanted warmly through the lowered venetians, played
     amongst the blue egg-shell china, and caressed the white hands moving the cup in the tray.

It glinted too irritatingly on the plain gold circlet of the left hand third finger, and
     struck out venomous-looking green and blue stabbing rays from the diamond guard above.
‘She is rather of the heroic order though,’ I thought on; ‘that's the worst of her,’ and my
     eyes travelled from the hands upwards over the slight figure to the delicate face with its
     tranquil eyebrows, and its expression of serene, indifferent repose.
‘I'm leaving England very shortly,’ I said, after there had been silence for a few
     minutes.
‘Oh, really? Why?’
‘No particular reason,’ I returned carelessly. ‘I feel I want a change, that's all.’
‘When are you going?’
‘Next week. I've settled to leave Wednesday. Going to Gibraltar with Dickinson. We shall use
     up the rest of our leave out there, I expect.’
I watched her face closely as I spoke, but
      not a muscle changed nor an eyelash quivered. The next
     second she leant a little forward and gently stirred the fire.
‘Ah, and then go on to India from there?’ she said quietly.
I nodded.
I certainly had not thought when I came that I wanted or even expected her to be moved or
     seem distressed at my departure, but I knew now that I must have had some such anticipation,
     from the vexed annoyance and disappointment I felt as I met her expression now, which was
     simply three parts indifferent and one part resigned.
The involuntary resentment against it was so keen that when I had risen to go, and she said
     as her hand lay in mine, ‘Shall I see you again, then, before you leave?’ a curt negative came
     to my lips and I should have uttered it, but an accent of tender sadness on the words made me
     hesitate.

‘Of course, if you wish it,’ I said gravely instead, and stood waiting for her to speak
     again.
She looked absently through the window by which we were standing for a few seconds before
     replying.
‘Mrs. Denvers is dining with me on Monday night,’ she said at last, ‘and we are going to the
     Sonnambula afterwards, would you and Mr. Dickinson care to come with us—or perhaps you are too
     busy?’
‘No; we shall be very pleased indeed,’ I answered quietly.
‘Come, then,’ she said with a charming smile, withdrawing her hand. We exchanged good-nights,
     and then I left her.
When I told Dickinson on my return of her invitation, and my acceptance of it for him, he
     made some impolite remarks and told me that he couldn't come.
Pressed as to the reason, he confessed he had
      a seat at the Alhambra for that night to take a farewell
     view of a young person engaged there in whom he was interested.
I was slightly annoyed, as he would have paired Mrs. Denvers and left Eurydice to me, and, as
     it was, I should have the two women thrown upon my hands.
‘However, perhaps it's as well,’ I concluded philosophically.
‘Three is a safer number than four.’
On Monday I drove round to Eurydice's house a little before the dinner-hour.
When the maid let me in she seemed slightly agitated, and said with a little flutter:
‘Please, sir, Mrs. Williamson had a telegram just now, and she dressed again and went out,
     and she told me to say if you came before she got back that she didn't expect to be very
     long.’
I listened to this somewhat confused statement and then nodded and passed into the
     drawing-room.

Here I strolled about restlessly, feeling a nervous irritation throughout my whole system,
     and a sort of mental nausea against life in general and one's duty in particular.
‘I wish I were out of it and on my way to Gib,’ I muttered two or three times as I passed
     about amongst the fragile tables with their lamps under coloured shades or top-heavy palms in
     ridiculously small pots.
But somehow I don't think I was genuinely so very anxious to be on my way to Gib.
I had only been in the room perhaps about ten minutes when light hurried steps came up the
     stairs and Eurydice entered the room.
She was dressed in her walking things, a plain black skirt, a tight-fitting black velvet
     jacket with a high collar buttoned tightly round her white throat, and a small felt hat.
The night was wet, and the damp chill air had sent a flush to the smooth cheek and scarlet to
     the lips.

She came forward to me with a smile of greeting, a creature brilliant with life.
‘I am so sorry,’ she said, ‘Mrs. Denvers is very ill and cannot come. Where is your friend?’
     she added hastily.
‘He sent his extreme regrets, but he had a previous engagement,’ I answered, and then there
     was a sudden pause of a moment, and our eyes met each other with a certain conscious
     embarrassment as we realised we were alone together for the rest of the evening.
Here was a situation which we had neither of us sought, which we had both tried to avoid, and
     we both knew that the other had wished to avoid it, and yet there was no obvious reason for not
     accepting it now that chance had thrown us into it.
There was clearly no good nor even plausible excuse for withdrawing, and I can't say that I
     felt any great inclination to withdraw at that
      moment, while probably Eurydice with her stern view of
     facing life's perplexities and her perfect confidence in her own strength would not admit even
     to herself that in the position there was any danger to the equanimity of either of us.
Her next words proved this.
The momentary embarrassment passed out of her eyes: she took her hat off and threw herself
     into an easy-chair.
‘Yes, Mrs. Denvers is very bad—sit down, won't you? an inflamed eye, iritis, the doctor says.
     I only heard it just as I'd finished dressing for dinner, and then, as her wire did not say
     what was wrong, I felt I must go round and see her.’
‘It was very good of you to take all that trouble,’ I remarked.
‘I am very fond of her,’ she answered simply, and added after a minute, ‘I thought I should
     have been back sooner. Will you excuse this
      state of undress? I don't think there's time to change back
     again now.’
‘You could not look more charming than you do,’ I said quietly.
There was silence for a few minutes; she looked into the fire, and I looked at her and
     thought over the incident.
It was slight in itself, but slight as it was it indicated the character, the mind, the soul
     that animated that lovely frame.
Almost every other woman, certainly all the other women I had known on such an occasion as
     this—the farewell visit of a man who, they knew, admired them, to put it mildly—would have made
     every effort to stimulate him to the sentiments they nominally forbade, and certainly one of
     the efforts would have been to make their most elaborate and fascinating toilet.
They would, obeying their sense of duty, very possibly have dismissed him, but they would
     have wished him to go with a disordered
      brain and a torturing image of them stamped in his
     memory.
But Eurydice was different from these, and the thought of her carelessly thrown aside dinner
     dress, the simple way she had appeared before me, her resignation to her own sorrow, and the
     fact that even in such a moment her thoughts could pass so readily from her own affairs to
     sympathy with another, touched me. My eyes softened as I looked at her. She was a woman of
     worth. We ate little at dinner, and talked even less. She made no reference whatever to my
     leaving, and her complete and passive acceptance of it, without dispute and without complaint,
     gradually produced in me an unreasonable annoyance.
One may respect an emotion, as one may respect a person, and yet be excessively irritated by
     either, and my feeling of admiration was pretty well swallowed up in irritation by the end of
     dinner.

When we rose from the table Eurydice walked across to the window. ‘It's a very wet night,’
     she remarked, holding the blind aside and looking out. ‘Ah! here comes the brougham. Now, what
     time is it?’ she asked, turning back into the room. ‘Nine. It's late, as usual.’
She crossed over to the mantelpiece, picked up her little felt hat from the easy chair, and
     set it on her head before the glass. I watched her with a smile, knowing she must be acting in
     sheer absence of mind, and rather pleased to note this first sign of mental distraction.
It was not till we were seated side by side in the brougham, and she leant her head against
     the back, that she became conscious she had the hat on.
‘Why, what a maniac I am!’ she exclaimed, with a laugh, taking it off and tossing it on to
     the opposite seat. ‘And you watched me put it on!’ she added, turning to me, her face brilliant
      between mock anger and laughter, ‘deliberately—you
     horror!’
‘Well, I thought you were a little absent-minded,’ I returned, smiling.
‘Yes; I was thinking about Mrs. Denvers,’ she replied simply, growing serious.
‘Dash Mrs. Denvers!’ I thought.
‘That's the comfort of a box,’ she said, leaning back in her corner. ‘You can go dressed as
     you please.’
Doubtless because it was the last night, Eurydice seemed more attractive to me this last
     night than ever before.
As we passed through the vestibule, flooded with white light and crowded with pretty women, I
     threw a cursory glance round, and then let my eyes return and rest on my companion. Her simple
     afternoon toilette seemed out of place, I admit, in this crush of silks and glisten of
     jewellery on bare flesh, and there were many astonished glances and supercilious
      smiles at it, but the face above was without a rival in the
     whole hall, and I felt a strange mixture of emotions as I saw the contemptuous
     shoulder-liftings of the women at her dress and the lingering glances of the men at her face as
     she passed. I knew—I saw for myself—that it was not any extraordinary perfection of feature or
     colouring that raised it so far above the level of all the handsome worldly faces round us, but
     that remarkable expression of peace, of serene tranquillity, which seemed to rest upon the
     forehead as light rests upon a lake—the calm, conscious pride that looked out of the luminous
     eyes. Amongst all these faces, stamped variously with conceit, inanity, or discontent, but all
     marked alike with some trace of this world's fret of anxiety, hers, in its absolute repose,
     seemed something almost startling, positively holy.
And the repose was not that of vacuity, it seemed the repose born of a chastened mind,
      in which all earthly, passions have been subdued, and which
     can view the present with indifference and the future with resignation.
She looked a woman at peace with all the world, and at peace with her own conscience, and in
     that peace proud and secure.
And as I looked at her two great impulses rose simultaneously within me, but the better
     conquered, and I felt glad I was going to Gib.
Just at the entrance to the vestibule there was a small flower-stall laden, piled up with a
     profusion of flowers, loose, and made up into sprays and button-holes. I saw Eurydice glance
     over it, and I took her arm and drew her across to it.
‘Choose some,’ I said, ‘and let me get them for you. What shall it be?’
She smiled, and glanced over the stall, and I saw her eyes resting meditatively on some
     lilies of the valley, gathered into a spotless sheaf on one side of the table.

‘No,’ I said suddenly; ‘I'm not going to let you have those. I'll choose for you,’ and I
     leant towards the stall and took four damask roses that stood glowing in a china bowl.
They were dark, almost to blackness, and their thick petals turned outwards, glossy, with
     velvet-like bloom.
‘How much?’ I said to the girl selling them, and paid her, and then turned and gave the
     flowers to Eurydice.
She took them and looked at me jestingly, with half-lowered lids.
‘As you've chosen them for me, perhaps you'll direct where I am to wear them,’ she said,
     laughing.
‘I'll put them in in a minute, not here, in the box,’ I answered, and with the colour
     heightened in both our faces we turned towards the staircase.
When we entered our box the house was three-quarters full. The lights were not yet
      fully turned up, and a faint mist hovered in the dim
     atmosphere over the auditorium and clung round the drawn curtains of the yet unfilled boxes and
     the gilding of the gallery.
I glanced down through the misty space and saw the lines of women filing slowly into the
     stalls, and then turned my eyes back into the secluded darkness of our box.
She had taken a seat beside the window where she would face the stage behind the hanging
     curtain, and from the shade and across the shadows her eyes met mine.
I felt a dangerous sense of pleasure stir suddenly within me as I looked back into them, a
     keen, reckless enjoyment of the moment, and I leant forward and took the flowers from her
     lap.
‘May I? will you let me?’
She did not answer, but bent forward with a sort of impulsive submission, and, feeling all
     the old magnetism that the personality of this
      particular woman exerted upon me, rushing through my veins,
     I fastened two of the roses at her breast.
‘Turn your head a little,’ I said, and she turned it obediently. There, where her dark hair
     lay in a silken mass against the white throat, I fixed the remaining two flowers, twisting the
     stems into her hair and fastening them with one of her own pins. Honestly, I tried to touch her
     as little as possible in the action, but twice my hand came in contact with her throat,
     inclined so submissively towards me, and for one moment a violent impulse to abuse that
     submission rose in me.
I controlled it, and when the roses were fastened, I threw myself back into the opposite seat
     and leaned forward, looking down into the sea of space below which swam dizzily before me. ‘How
     I love her!’ I thought passionately, feeling the glow of her neck still under my fingers.

‘And how hopeless it is! ... I'm going ... well it's safer so! This is the last time, I
     swear!’
And because it was the last time, and I knew it, I gave myself up with a sense of security to
     the enjoyment of the hour. What did it matter? It was quite safe! I was going!
My conscience was at ease because I had elected and chosen my duty, and these last few hours
     would fortify me to carry it through. Who grudges the condemned his last draught of brandy
     before he goes to the scaffold?
Sobered a little, I leant back in the box again. I knew in a vague way Eurydice had been
     murmuring words of thanks or something, but I had not heard them.
‘Very full, isn't it?’ she said, referring to the house, as I sat back.
‘Will be, I think,’ I answered, and at that moment, with a sudden blaze, the lights were
      turned fully on throughout the house, and the orchestra
     burst into the overture.
The wave of sound came up to us, and now in the strong light Eurydice looked across at me, a
     smile parting her brilliant lips. ‘Remember the café at Port
     Said?’ she said, and I felt a choking sensation in my throat as I turned my eyes from hers.
‘Yes, I remember,’ I said gloomily.
In the café at Port Said she had been mine. Mine in
     thought, in hope, in anticipation.
And as the strains of the violins rose and fell and swelled through the brilliant
     light-flooded house, how I longed for the white-washed walls, the smoking oil-lamps, the
     blatant, strident music, and the narrow benches of the Egyptian café with those hopes again. ‘Programme! Programme!’ came sharply through the door
     as the boy came down the corridor, and in another moment he pushed our door open. ‘Programme,
     sir?’ I bought
      a couple and the libretto, and laid them on her knees,
     crossed lightly one over the other in her usual fashion, one little foot swinging, one elbow
     leaning on the velvet edge of the box, and her chin supported on her hand as she gazed at the
     house.
She looked up with a smile.
‘Thanks; and now get me some chocolates, will you, and I shall be satisfied!’
I smiled too: making these small purchases for her was delightful to me, and I believe she
     knew it.
I went myself into the corridor and found an attendant, despatched her for the chocolates and
     returned to the box.
When the woman came back, she brought a tray of different confections and boxes of bon-bons,
     and I persuaded Eurydice to choose first one and then another till the tray was considerably
     lightened.
‘Well, it's an improvement on Egypt, isn't
      it?’ she said, bursting open a box of chocolates and putting
     the dark sweetmeat between her glistening teeth.
‘I don't know—yes, as far as the music goes,’ I answered.
She looked at me with elevated brows and then laughed.
‘In all respects, I should say,’ she returned, turning over the sweets in the box with her
     soft fingers, and apparently intent upon them.
‘All perhaps except one,’ I said with savage insistence.
‘And what's that? do you miss the mosquitos?’ she answered, with a lovely jesting smile.
‘You were not wearing that ring in Egypt,’ I said, more bitterness and more passion coming
     into my tone than I meant to come.
Eurydice half rose from her seat.
‘One word more like that and I shall go home,’ she said indignantly.

‘Oh, forgive me!’ I said imploringly, and she sat down again and looked away to the
     stage.
The hours passed, and the brilliant scenes seemed to hurt my sore eyes as I looked, and the
     swelling ripples and the falling cascades of music to wound my sore ears as I heard.
I saw and heard mechanically, thinking of the cruelty of Life: that great sandy, stony,
     waterless desert, with its shifting mirage of happiness ever before the traveller's eyes, eyes
     blinded, scorched, and quenched, by the pitiless dust of the struggles in its arid ways.
But still I felt master of myself, possessed of that same sort of control which nerves a man
     to go through with fortitude the last remaining portion of a torturing and prolonged operation:
     to treat this woman gently and reverently in these few last hours, and then to leave her, was
     the part I had assigned to myself, and I was acting with the same dogged satisfaction in my
      own pain that a man has sometimes in tearing away or
     rearranging the agonised flesh of a gunshot wound.
The drive back to Ebury Street was made in perfect silence. Eurydice sat beside me and leant
     back as if fatigued. I looked through the open window into the damp black streets.
She let herself in with her latch key and we stood together on the steps. As she opened the
     door, and when I was going to hold out my hand to say a formal good-bye, she uttered a sharp
     exclamation of surprise. I followed her glance into the hall, and saw it piled up with luggage:
     ship luggage evidently, covered over with red and white labels and marked ‘Cabin, Wanted,’ on
     all sides in chalk. ‘Major Williamson,’ printed in white on the topmost trunk caught my
     eye.
‘He has returned!’ Eurydice said simply, looking at me, and there was hardly any emotion on
     her face. ‘He likes to take me
      by surprise like this!’ she said with a faint smile. ‘He has
     done so before.’
I could not speak for the moment. I hardly realised now the situation.
Williamson come back! Her husband here in the very drawing-room above! and I had thought him
     four thousand miles distant!
I stared at the heap of luggage until it seemed to jump before my eyes.
Eurydice seemed neither distressed nor moved, nor in any way confused.
‘You ... you didn't expect him?’ I said, looking at her, and noting the unmoved calm of her
     face.
‘No; I did not, not in the least,’ she answered. ‘But he is always welcome to come home at
     any time. I am always prepared for him.’ She had had difficulty in extricating the key from the
     lock, but she drew it out now and added: ‘You will come up and see him, won't you?’

‘Oh no, no, thanks, I'd rather not,’ I rejoined hastily.
‘Why?’ asked Eurydice, regarding me with quiet eyes.
‘Oh, well, it's late, and—er ... so on, I'll say good-bye now.’
She did not seek to detain me.
‘Very well,’ she said gently, ‘Good-bye.’
She held out her hand and I took it and held it reverently, and some impulse unlocked my lips
     and swept away the hesitating confusion of a moment ago.
‘Believe me, you have always at least my greatest, deepest sympathy.’
She withdrew her hand and smiled the old glad triumphant smile. ‘I have no need of it. I am
     happier than you think. I am going back to my duty. Trust me: there is nothing to live for in
     life but that, good-bye.’
‘Good-bye.’
I turned to go.

She came to the steps.
‘I hope you'll have a pleasant voyage to Gib.’
‘Thank you.’
The door was closed. I stood and looked up at the windows above me for a few seconds until I
     saw a slim shadow fall across the yellow blind; it passed, I saw no more, and I walked away
     homewards, thinking.
