
CHAPTER XII.

“Oui, sans doute, tout meurt; ce monde est un grand rêve,
Et le peu de bonheur qui nous vient en chemin,
Nous n“avons pas plus tôt ce roseau dans la main,
Que le vent nous l“enlève.”
Alfred De Musset.
Sibyl continued pale and listless, and presently Mr. Loftus found fault with her gowns. They
     were not new enough. The colours of her tea-gowns did not suit her. He suggested that she
     should go to London to Lady Pierpoint's house for a few days to see her dressmaker, and added,
     as an afterthought, that he should like her
      to consult the specialist to whom she had gone on former occasions, and whose
     name he had reason to remember.
Sibyl received the suggestion of this visit in silence. She did not oppose herself to it, but
     left the room to shed a torrent of angry tears in private. The truth, which seldom visited her
     feeble judgment, did not tell her that Mr. Loftus was anxious about her health. Hysteria took
     up the tale instead, and officiously informed her that he was tired of her. He wanted to get
     rid of her. Men were always like that after they had been married a little time. What was a
     woman's love and devotion to them when the first novelty had worn off? She would go. She would
     certainly go; and when she was gone she would write to him, telling him that she saw only too
     plainly that his love for her was dead,
      and that she had decided never to return, and at the same time making over to him
     her entire fortune, reserving only for herself a pittance, on which she would live in seclusion
     in a cottage in some remote locality.
She was somewhat consoled as she thought over the dignified, the harrowing letter which she
     would compose in London. Parts of it, as she repeated them to herself, moved her to tears. A
     new sullenness was added to the previous listlessness of her demeanour. She parted from Mr.
     Loftus with studied indifference.
Mr. Loftus missed her, not altogether unpleasantly, when she left him. It was the first time
     that she had been a day away from him since their marriage. Life was certainly very tranquil
     without her. He wrote her a charming little letter
      every day of the three days she was away.
Doll was with him on business. Now that Sibyl was absent, something of the old affection and
     confidence returned between them, which shrank away in her presence; but not quite all. At
     times, as they were talking, the younger man longed to break down the slight, almost
     imperceptible barrier that his stupid untimely silence had raised. But he could not do it. He
     could not take the plunge. Mr. Loftus, however, who would not have done such a thing for
     worlds, unwittingly gave him a push.
“The spring coppice wants thinning,” he said to Doll the third morning. “We will go up and
     mark the trees this afternoon.”
“I am going away to-day,” said Doll sullenly.

“Stay another day,” said Mr. Loftus. “Mrs. Gresley tells me that the sight of her happy home,
     and Mr. Gresley, and the church-tower as viewed from the spare bedroom of the Vicarage, have
     proved a turning-point in the lives of many wild young men. Stay another day, Doll, and I will
     emulate Mrs. Gresley. It will do you good.”
“Uncle George,” stammered the young man with sudden anger, “will you never, never understand?
     Have you forgotten that it is not a year ago since I told you—in this very room—and you said
     you would help me. I can't meet Sibyl; and—and she is coming back to-day. I tried in the
     winter, and—it was a failure.”
Mr. Loftus had momentarily forgotten Sibyl, as he had done once before when she was ill.

“I beg your pardon, Doll,” he said, his pale face reddening. “I ought to have
     remembered.”
There was a constrained silence.
“It need not come between us,” said Mr. Loftus at last. “You must not let it do that.”
“I can't help it,” said Doll. “It does. It must.”
“Sibyl's happiness,” said Mr. Loftus sadly, “seems to be a costly article. A great deal has
     been spent upon it, apparently without making it secure. If we have any real regard for her, we
     must manage to save that between us, Doll, whatever else goes by the board.”
“What do you take me for?” said Doll fiercely.
“A good man,” said Mr. Loftus, “and the person I care for most in the world.”

Sibyl's letter to Mr. Loftus was never written. At least it was written, as, indeed, were
     several, and read over and retouched at night in her own room; but even the best of the
     assortment remained unposted. Sibyl brought back her wan face and limp figure to Wilderleigh a
     few hours after Doll had left it, and heard with bitterness that he had been staying there. She
     had pictured to herself Mr. Loftus alone, missing her at every moment of the day, realizing the
     withdrawal of the sunshine of her presence. This was a “high jump,” on the bar of which, it
     must be owned, even her practised imagination caught its toe. And now she found that Doll had
     been with him all the time—Doll, whom he cared for more than for his wife. He had not missed
     her, after all. Probably he and Doll had been discussing
      her. She had been jealous of Doll ever since she had seen Mr. Loftus take his arm
     during her first visit to Wilderleigh before she was married.
Her jealousy revived now. For the remainder of the day Sibyl met Mr. Loftus with averted eyes
     and monosyllabic answers, rehearsing in her mind parting scenes with him which were to prove
     more poignantly distressing to him than the best of the letters, and in which he was to appeal
     in vain (imagination caught its toe once more) against her irrevocable determination to leave
     for ever one who had married her for other motives than love.
She could see herself in evening dress, pale as the jasmine flower in her breast, mournful
     but unflinching, withdrawing her hand, and saying, in reply to the moving
      representation which he would of course make of his loneliness:
“You have Doll!”
She decided that she would not say more than that. No reproach should pass her lips.
“You have Doll!”
What words for a young wife to be forced to use to her husband! Her hands clenched in an
     agony of self-pity. What a cruel situation was hers!
So Sibyl walked in her waking dream, and her husband watched her.
“Is it the body that is ill, or is it the mind?” he asked himself.
Later in the day the doctor's letter to himself—Mr. Loftus had written to him asking for a
     frank statement of Sibyl's condition—confirmed his worst fears for her.

“Mrs. Loftus's health is endangered, not by her recent illness, of which no trace appears,
     but by some anxiety. She does not deny that she is suffering from great depression. Unless that
     anxiety, whatever it may be, can be removed, her morbid condition, if prolonged, will give rise
     to grave apprehension as to her future.”
Mr. Loftus had heard something very like this before—about nine months ago. He had removed a
     mountain in order to remove with it the first cause of her unhappiness, and now unhappiness had
     reappeared. No one had guessed—no one had been allowed to guess—what an effort his marriage had
     been to him. And it had availed nothing. He dropped the letter into the fire, and, as he did
     so, exhaustion and an intense weariness of life
      laid hold upon him. He knew well the touch of those stern hands, but this
     evening, as he sat alone in the library, it seemed to him as if he had never endured their full
     pressure until now.

