
CHAPTER XIII.

O World, O Life, O Time.
O these last steps on which I climb.”
Shelley.
For those who do not sleep, life has two sides—the side of night as well as day—and the
     heaviest hour of the day or night is the hour before the dawn, when the night-lamp totters and
     dies, and the ashen light of another day falls like despair on the familiar articles of
     furniture, the chairs, the table, the wardrobe, which have been up all night like ourselves,
     taking the imprint of our exhaustion through the interminable hours, and which look older and
      more haggard than ever in the changed light which brings nor change nor rest.
Those who sleep at night, for whom each day is not divided by a gulf of pain, who look upon
     the darkness as a time of rest, and the morning as a time of waking, know one side of life,
     perhaps, as the passers-by in the street know one side of the hospital as they skirt it—the
     outside wall.
Mr. Loftus slept ill, and the night after Sibyl's return he woke early. The gray light was
     just showing above the white blinds as he had seen it so many, many times. Would the morning
     ever come, he wondered, when he should no longer open his eyes upon the dawn, when “these last
     steps” should be climbed, and effort would cease, and weariness might lie down and cease
     also?

The premonitory tremor, the shudder of coming illness, laid its hand upon him, and with it
     came that physical recoil of the flesh from solitude before which the strongest will goes
     down.
Involuntarily he got up and went to Sibyl's room. He opened the door noiselessly and looked
     in.
The room felt deserted. He went up to the bed; it was empty. A great fear fell upon him. Had
     she left him? Poor, poor child! had she left him, as that other wife had left him in the
     half-forgotten past, buried beneath so many years? Can any man whose wife has forsaken him ever
     quite forget that he has once been deserted, that the road which leads away from him has known
     a woman's footsteps, and another may walk in it? He stood still and listened. The spirit had over-
     mastered the flesh. All suffering had vanished.
From the next room, Sibyl's sitting-room, which opened out of her bedroom, a faint sound
     came. He noiselessly crossed, and looked through the half-open door, and thanked God.
Sibyl was lying on her face on the polished floor in her night-gown, moaning and sobbing, a
     white blot upon the dark boards.
He had seen her lie like that once before, among the bracken in the park, in the entire
     abandonment of young despair. The vague suspicion of many weeks dropped its disguise, and stood
     revealed, an awful figure between them, between the old man in his gray hair and the young,
     young wife.
He withdrew stealthily, regained his
      own room, and sat down in the armchair.
That passion of tears could flow from one source only. He knew Sibyl well enough to know that
     she had no tears, no strong emotion, for anything except that which affected her own personal
     happiness. Her slight nature could not reach to impersonal love, any more than it could reach
     to righteous anger. All this apparent failure of health and listlessness had a mental cause, as
     he had always feared, as he now knew for certain. She was unhappy.
“She has ceased to love me,” said Mr. Loftus to himself, “and she is in despair. Doll loves
     her, and she has found it out. Those tears are for Doll.”
There was a long pause of thought.
He started at the remembrance that
      she was probably still lying on the floor in her thin night-gown.
He got up, and tapped distinctly at the door of her bedroom. At first there was no reply, but
     after the second time there was a slight hurried movement and a faint “Come in.” He went in.
     She had crept back into bed, as he had hoped she would at the sound of his tap.
“May I have your salts?” he said, taking them from the dressing-table. “I have waked with a
     headache.”
“Can I do anything for it?” she asked, but without moving, her miserable eyes following his
     thin, gaunt figure in its gray dressing-gown.
“Nothing, my dear, except forgive me for disturbing you.”
“I was not asleep,” said Sibyl, yielding to the impulse, irresistible to some women,
      to approach the subject which they are trying to conceal.
He took the salts, and went back to his own room, closing the door carefully. But he did not
     use them. He sighed heavily as he sat down again in the old armchair in which he had so often
     watched the light grow behind the Welsh hills.
There was another pause of thought, and he remembered again Doll's confession of the day
     before.
“Poor children!” he said—“poor children!”
And he remembered his own youth and its devastating passions, and the woman whom he had loved
     in middle life, and how nearly once—how nearly—— And he and she had been stronger than Doll and
     Sibyl.
“God forgive me!” he said; “I meant well.”

There was another pause.
“I knew her love could not last,” his mind went on. “It was too extravagant, and it had no
     foundation. But I thought it would last my time, and it has not. I have outlived it; I am in
     the way.”
Mr. Loftus had never willingly been in the way of anyone before. His tact had so far saved
     him. But a kind intention had betrayed him at last.
“I am in the way,” he repeated, “and I am fond of them both, and I think they are both fond
     of me. But they will come to hate me.”
The light was strong and white now, and a butterfly on the window-sill, that had mistaken
     spring for summer, waked, and began to beat its wings against the pane.
He rose wearily, and opened the old-
     fashioned window wide upon its hinges. The butterfly flew away into the spring
     morning.
“My other butterfly,” he said—“my pretty butterfly, who mistook the spring for summer,
     breaking your heart against the prison windows of my worn-out life—I will release you,
     too!”
He took up the little silver flask that always stood on his dressing-table at night and lived
     in his pocket by day, and which contained the only remedy which a great doctor could find for
     his attacks of the heart, by means of which he had been till now kept in life.
“I have a right to do it,” he said. “I can only help them by going away. And if I am in the
     wrong, upon my head be it.”
He checked himself in the act of empty
     ing the contents of the flask into the dead fire.
“A right?” he said. “What right have I to shirk the consequences of my own actions? what
     right to be a coward? No; I will not go away until I receive permission to do so. I will stay
     while it is required of me.”
He sighed heavily, and replaced the flask upon the dressing-table.
“Patience,” he said. “I thought I had seen the last of you. I am tired of you. But,
     nevertheless, I must put up with you a little longer.”

