
CHAPTER VIII.

“Le monde est plein de gens qui ne sont pas plus sages.”—La Fontaine.
With the winter came many invitations, but they were nearly all refused, for Mr. Loftus had
     long since dispensed himself from attending county festivities, and Sibyl, though she had
     recovered her health, was always delicate. Lady Pierpoint had had doubts as to whether she
     ought to winter in England, but not only was Sibyl herself determined so to do, but when Lady
     Pierpoint saw her in London before Christmas with a vivid
     colour and an elasticity of bearing which made a marked contrast to the drooping,
     listless demeanour of the previous winter, her doubts were at once set at rest.
Presently, however, an invitation came for a masked ball in the immediate neighbourhood,
     which Mr. Loftus decided could not be refused.
“But why should we go?” said Sibyl, “if we don't care about it. And I hate balls, and I hate
     society. I was saying so to the Gresleys only yesterday. I love my own fireside and a
     book.”
Sibyl had no idea how much these occasional mild flourishes, which found great favour at the
     Vicarage, annoyed Mr. Loftus. She put them forth, poor thing! with a view to showing him how
     much she had in common with him.
“It is a mistake to say you hate society,”
      said Mr. Loftus, “because you are not in a position to hate what you have never
     seen. Personally, I can see nothing peculiarly obnoxious in my fellow-creatures when they have
     their diamonds and white ties on. I do not even discover that they are more worldly in
     ball-gowns than on other occasions.”
“But it is all so empty and vain,” said Sibyl; “and though I dare say I have not seen much,
     still, the small-talk is so wearying, and I suppose that is the same everywhere. I should not
     mind society if there was any real conversation, anything deep.”
Sibyl loved the word “deep.” She used it on the occasions when others use the word “trite,”
     she meaning the same as they did, but looking at the trite from a different angle. From her
     point of
     vantage, eccentricity was originality, and a wholesale contradiction of
     established facts a new view.
Mr. Loftus was so close on the verge of annoyance that he was obliged to be amused
     instead.
“I have heard many people say they hated society,” he said, smiling, and Sibyl smiled back at
     him, delighted at having won his approbation by the nobility and originality of her
     sentiments.
“I have generally found that they are persons to whom, probably for some excellent reason,
     society has shown the cold shoulder, or those, like the Gresleys, who have never seen anything
     of it, and who call garden-parties, and flower-shows, and bazaars, and all those dismal local
     functions, society.”
“She is not going to this masked ball,”
      said Sibyl. “I asked her, and she said, "Of course not. Her husband being a
     clergyman made it quite impossible." I wonder why she always says things are quite impossible
     for the clergy that most of the other clergy do. She said the same about the Hunt Ball.”
“That was because of the pink coats of the men and the new gowns of the women, and also
     partly because they were not asked. It happened to be a good ball, consequently it was
     dangerous. Dowdiness has from a very early date of this world's history been regarded as a
     sacrifice acceptable to the Deity, so naturally pretty gowns and electric light are considered
     to be the perquisites of the Evil One.”
“But are we really going to this ball?”
“We are. It would be unneighbourly
      not to do so. I met Lady Pontesbury yesterday in D——, and she begged us to
     support her, and to bring even numbers. People cannot give balls in the country, Sibyl, if none
     of the neighbours will take the trouble to fill their houses. I have seen very cruel things of
     that kind done. Ours is the largest house in the neighbourhood, and, as it now has a mistress,
     we must fill it.”
The idea of society having any claim on her was a new light to Sibyl. She had always
     considered herself superior to its blandishments. But now that she discovered that Mr. Loftus
     actually regarded certain social acts as a duty, and this masked ball as one in particular, she
     immediately changed her opinion, and forthwith looked upon it as a duty also. It was a duty
     which, as its fulfilment drew
      near, became less and less unpleasant to anticipate.
She had until now lent a sympathetic ear to the Gresleys when they talked of society as a
     snare, and had echoed Mr. Gresley's remarks on the same.
“Balls are not wrong in themselves,” Mr. Gresley would say in his chest voice, keeping his
     hand in before Sibyl and his admiring wife. “It is only the abuse of them that is blameworthy.
     Use the world as not abusing it. A carpet dance among young people I should be the last to
     blame. We cannot keep the bow always at full stretch. But when it comes to ball after ball,
     party after party, and pleasure is made a business, instead of a recreation, by which I mean
     that which restores elasticity to the exhausted faculties, recreates us in fact, and renews our energy
      for our work, then indeed——” And Mr. Gresley would express himself at that length
     which is apparently the one great compensation of the teacher who has no pupils.
Sibyl enjoyed his conversation very much. She thought Mr. Gresley a very sensible person, and
     his opinions were in harmony with her own.
Mrs. Gresley had also declared, after a brief visit to Kensington in July during the “sales,”
     that she had neither the means nor the inclination to throw herself into the social whirlpool
     which she and Mr. Gresley had dispassionately viewed from two green chairs in the Row, and
     which Mr. Gresley had estimated “at its true worth.” If she had possessed both the means and
     the inclination, she would perhaps have discovered that she was no
      nearer to that vortex than the many thousands who annually make a pilgrimage to
     London only to be tossed on the outermost ripple of the whirlpool, and who revolve for ever on
     the rim of society like Saturn's rings, without approaching the central luminary. But that it
     is difficult to be loved of Society and ensnared by her the Gresleys and Sibyl did not know,
     any more than that certain crimes require great qualities in order to commit them.
Mr. Loftus might have been able to relieve their ignorance, but, as Sibyl told the Gresleys,
     he did not care much for conversation.
A habit of silence was certainly growing upon him since his marriage.

