
CHAPTER III.
“L“amour est une source naïve, partie de son lit de cresson, de fleurs, de gravier,
      qui, rivière, qui, fleuve, change de nature et d“aspect à chaque flot.”—De
     Balzac.
In England Spring is a poem. In the Highlands of Scotland she has the intensity of a passion.
     The crags and steeps are possessed by her; they stand transfigured like a stern man in the eyes
     of his bride. And here in these solemn depths and lonely heights, as nowhere else, shy Spring
     abandons herself, secure in the fastnesses where her every freak is loved. She sets the broom
     ablaze among
      the gray rocks, yellow along the river's edge, yet hardly yellower than the leaves
     on the young oak just above. The larches hear her voice, and hundred by hundred peep over each
     other's heads upon the hillside, all a-tremble with fairy green. The shoots of the dwarf
     cherry, scattered wide upon the uplands, are pink among the grass. The primroses are
     everywhere, though it is Whitsuntide—behind the stones, among the broom, beside the little
     tumbling streams, in every crevice, and on every foothold. The mountain-ash holds its white
     blossoms aloft in its careful spreading fingers. Even the silver birch forgets its sadness
     while spring reigns in Scotland.
There are those to whom she speaks of love, but there are many more to whom she whispers, “Be
     comforted.” When
      hope leaves us, it is well to go out into the woods and listen to what Spring has
     to say. Though life is gray, the primroses are coming up all the same, and the young shafts of
     the bluebell pierce the soft earth in spite of our heartache. A hedge-sparrow has built him a
     house in the nearest tangle of white hawthorn. There will be children's voices in it presently.
     Be comforted. Hope is gone, but not lost. You shall meet her again in the faces of the
     children, God's other primroses. She is not lost. She has only taken her hand out of yours. Be
     comforted.
But Sibyl refused to be comforted. Her love for Mr. Loftus, if small things may be called by
     large names, was the first violent emotion of a feeble and impulsive mind in a feeble body,
     both swayed by
      veering influences, both shaken by the changing currents of early womanhood, as a
     silver birch is shaken with its leaves.
A woman with a deeper heart, and with a slight perception of Mr. Loftus's character, would
     have reverently folded her devotion in her heart and have gone on her way ennobled by it. But
     with Sibyl, to admire anything was to wish to possess it; to tire of anything was to cast it
     away.
Mr. Loftus was in her eyes without an equal in the world. Therefore—the reasoning from her
     point of view was conclusive—she must marry him. She had no knowledge, she had not even a
     glimpse, of the gulf of feeling, far wider than the gulf of years, which separated him from
     her. She imagined no one appreciated him, or entered into the dark places of his
      mind, as she did. She mistook his patient comprehension of her trivial
     aspirations, and his unfailing kindness to all young and crude ideas, for the perfect sympathy
     of two kindred souls, and was wont to speak mysteriously to Peggy of how minds that were really
     related drew each other out and enriched each other.
It is always a dangerous experiment to awaken a sleeping soul to the pageant of life. Mr.
     Loftus had endeavoured to do this for Sibyl, consciously, gently, with great care, out of the
     mixed admiration and pity with which she inspired him, in the hope that, in later years, when
     her feet would be swept from under her, she might find something to cling to, amid the wreck of
     happiness which his dispassionate gaze foresaw that she would one day achieve out of her
     life.

He had run the risk which all who would fain help others must be content to run—the risk that
     their work will be thrown away. He saw that the little rock-pool which reflected his own face
     was shallow, but he had not gauged the measure of its shallowness. His deep enthusiasms, tried
     and tempered before she was born, weary now with his own weariness, aroused hers as the
     Atlantic wave, sweeping up the rocks, just reaches and arouses the rock-pool, and sends a
     flight of ripples over it, which, if you look very close, break in mimic waves against the
     further edge. And before the thunder of the wave is silent the pool is glass once more.
On natures like these the only influence which can make any impression is a personal one. It
     is overwhelming while it lasts; but it is the teacher who is every
     thing—the teaching is nothing. And when he is removed, they passively drift under
     another personal influence, as under another wave, and the work of the first, the foundation
     patiently and lovingly built in its pretty yellow sand, is swept away, or remains in futile
     fragments, as a mark of the folly of one who built on sand.
Certain strong, abiding principles Mr. Loftus had sought to instil into Sibyl's mind. She had
     perceived their truth and beauty; but she cared nothing for them in reality, and had fallen at
     the feet of the man who had awakened those exquisite feelings in her.
And now either she would not, or could not, get up. She clung to her imaginary passion with
     all the obstinacy which is inherent in weak natures. The disappointment had undermined her delicately-poised
      health. As she walked down towards the Spey alone on this particular June
     afternoon, she looked more fragile and ethereal than ever. The faint colour had gone from her
     cheek, and with it half her evanescent prettiness had departed. Her slight, willowy figure
     seemed to have no substance beneath the many folds of white material in which her despairing
     dressmaker had draped her. With the suicidal recklessness of youth, she made no attempt to turn
     her mind to other thoughts, but pondered instead upon her trouble, with the unreasoning
     rebellion against it with which, in early life, we all meet these friends in disguise.
She picked her way down the steep hillside, through the wakened broom and sleeping heather,
     and along the edge of the little oasis of oatfield, where so many
      thousands of round, river-worn stones had been gleaned into heaps, and where so
     many thousands still remained among the springing corn. The long labour and the patience and
     the partial failure which that little field meant, reclaimed from the heather, but not wholly
     reclaimed from the stones, had often touched Lady Pierpoint, who knew what labour was; but it
     did not appeal to Sibyl.
She sat down with a sigh on the river-bank, a forlorn white blot against the crowded world of
     green, with Crack, her little Scotch terrier, beside her, and looked listlessly across the
     sliding water, which ran deep and brown as Crack's brown eyes, and loitered shallow and yellow
     as a yellow sapphire among its clean gray stones and gleaming rocks. A pair of oyster-catchers
     sped upstream, low over the
      water, swift as eye could follow, with glad cries, like disembodied spirits that
     have found wings at last and feel the first rapture of proving them.
“Happy birds!” said Sibyl to herself. “They do not know what trouble means.”
Crack, who had heard this sentiment, or something very like it, before, stretched himself
     methodically, both front-legs together first, and then the hind-legs one by one, and walked
     slowly down to the edge of the water and sniffed sadly, as one who knows that search is vain
     among the stones for a rat which is not there. Crack had a fixed melancholy which nothing could
     dispel. His early life had been passed in the activity of a camp, and his spirit seemed to have
     been permanently embittered by the close contemplation of military character. He had been round
      the world. He knew the principal smells of our Eastern empire, but no
     reminiscences of his many travels served to brighten the gloomy tenor of his thoughts. He was
     sad, disillusioned, still apt to hurry and shorten himself through doors, and to retreat under
     sofas to brood over imaginary wrongs. All games distressed him. He went indoors at once when
     the red ball was produced which transformed Peter from an elegant poodle into a bounding demon.
     But in spite of his melancholy he was liked. He went out but little, but where he went he was
     welcomed. He was a gentleman and a man of the world. No dog ever quarrelled with him. He met
     bristling overtures with a mournful tact which turned growls into waggings of tails. He himself
     was seldom seen to wag his tail, except in his sleep.

He returned from the water's edge and sat down on an outlying fold of Sibyl's gown.
In the sunny stillness a wild-duck, with cautious, advanced neck, and a little fleet of
     water-babies, paddled past, bobbing on the amber shallows. Crack raised his ears and watched
     them. His feelings were so entirely under control that he could scratch himself while observing
     an object of interest; and he did so now. But he did not move from his seat on Sibyl's gown. He
     was disillusioned about wild-ducks, who did not play fair and stick to one element, but would
     take to their wings when hard pressed in the water, like a woman who changes her ground when
     cornered in argument.
Presently the afternoon sun shifted, and all the larches on the steep hillside opposite
      and all the broom along the bank stooped to gaze at a flickering fairyland of
     broom and larches in the wide water. The deep valley of the river was drowned in light. Only
     the bank on which Sibyl was sitting under the mountain-ash had fallen suddenly into shadow.
“Like my life,” she thought, and rose to go.
Who was this coming slowly towards her along the little path by the water's edge?
She stood still, trembling, her hands pressed against her breast.
It was he. It was Mr. Loftus. He was looking for her. He was coming to her. Joy and terror
     seized her.
He saw her standing motionless in her white gown under the white blossom-laden tree. And as
     he drew near and took her
      nerveless hands in silence, and looked into her face, he saw again in her deep
     eyes the shy, imploring glance which had met him once before—the mute entreaty of love to be
     suffered to live.
“Sibyl,” he said, and in his voice there was reverence as well as tenderness—reverence for
     her untarnished youth, and tenderness for the white flower of love which it had put forth,
     “will you be my wife?”

