
CHAPTER XI.

“Dark is the world to thee? Thyself art the reason why.”
Tennyson.
Convalescence is often accompanied by a depression of spirits rarely experienced during the
     illness itself. A weak nature seeks for a cause for this depression in its surroundings, and
     when it finds one, as it invariably does, it hugs it. These causes, thanks to the assiduity of
     one whom we are given to understand has seen better days, are seldom far to seek; and it
     requires a very strong will to hold fast the conviction that these paroxysms of de
     pression arise from physical weakness, and not from some secret woe. Sibyl had not
     a very strong will. After the first novelty of convalescence was past, and she had been
     installed in her sitting-room in a cascade of lace and ribbons, which her dressmaker called a
      saut du lit, and after Mr. Loftus had gravitated back towards the library on the
     ground-floor and his article for the Millennium, Sibyl began to experience that vague
     weariness and distaste of life which all know who know ill health.
It is at this stage that the unprincipled invalid becomes “the terror of the household and
     its shame.” It is at this stage that lengths of felt are laid down in passages by tender and
     injudicious parents, because no sound can be borne by sensitive ears, that the children are
      “hushed,” the blinds are drawn down, and doctors who encourage exercise and light
     are speedily discovered to have misunderstood the delicate constitution with which they have to
     deal.
If Sibyl had not had a cause for depression, she would most certainly have manufactured one.
     But unfortunately she had a real one. The incident of the masked ball rankled. Doll had lied.
     He had done his poor best, but he had not lied well. His eyes had not quite looked her in the
     face when he told her that Mr. Loftus had married her for love. His voice had not that emphatic
     ring which the crude mind ever recognises as the ring of truth, and which in consequence the
     progressive one applies itself to acquire.
Her mind, dulled by illness and narcotics, had half forgotten that she had
      been momentarily distressed. But now the remembrance came back like a nightmare.
     The grain of sand, blown by chance into her eye, pricked, and she sedulously rubbed it into an
     inflammation.
She remembered now that there had been an earlier incident in his courtship which had not
     been satisfactorily explained, when he proposed to her the second time. Sibyl always
     regarded his offer under the mountain-ash as the second time. She had a vague feeling
     that he had proposed before. She had said as much to one or two friends in confidence. But now
     that she came to think of it, she remembered that it was she who had proposed the first
      time, and had been refused. This minor detail of an uncomfortable incident had until now
     almost slipped out of her memory, which, like that of many women
      whose buoyancy depends on the conviction of the admiration of others, seldom
     harboured anything likely to prove a worm in that bud.
But now she applied to the whole subject that mental friction which morbid minds believe to
     be reflection, until it became, so to speak, inflamed.
Why had he sworn before the altar and the Bishop to love her, if he did not love her? She
     became tearful, listless, apathetic. She sat for hours looking into the fire, unemployed,
     uninterested. The evil spirit which ever lurks in sofas and couches whispered in her ear, when
     it pressed the cushions, that she was indeed miserable, that her husband avoided her, that she
     was an unloved martyr, that no one felt for her or sympathized with her. It did not tell her
     that she had been
      married for her money, simply because no sane person could look at Mr. Loftus and
     believe that. But she changed in manner towards him. She was cold, formal. She turned away her
     head when he came into the room, and then when he had left it wept in secret because she had
     been married out of pity.
And yet in her heart of hearts, if she had such a thing, had she not partly guessed that fact
     long ago, and wilfully shut her eyes to it? The chance words she had overheard were only the
     confirmation of a latent misgiving. Does any woman ever really remain in ignorance if she is
     not loved, or if she has been married for other reasons than love? What constant props and
     supports she had given to Mr. Loftus's love for her! It had never been allowed to stand alone.
      Why had she from the first always bolstered it up by continually saying to
     herself and others, until she almost believed it: “My husband is so devoted to me. My love is
     such a little thing beside his. What have I done to deserve such a great devotion?” How often
     she had said all these things that tepidly-loved women say!
Seeming to observe nothing, Mr. Loftus saw all, and pondered over the reason of her altered
     appearance, and her visibly changed feeling towards himself since the night of the masked ball.
     If it were that her health was threatened as it had been before her marriage, why should her
     affection towards himself have undergone this change? Could it be anything to do with Doll? And
     in these days Sibyl was more frequently in his thoughts than in the early days of his marriage
     with her. The
      thought of her came between him and the political article which the editor of the
      Millennium had asked for.
“Time will show,” he would say to himself, with a sigh, taking up his pen again.
One afternoon soon afterwards he came into her sitting-room, and found her in tears.
“Has Crack said anything unkind?” he asked gently, while Crack beat his tail in the depths of
     the fur rug in courteous recognition of his own name.
“No,” she said, turning her head away.
“Have I, then?” sitting down by her.
“No.”
“Then, my child, what is it?”
“Nothing,” she said faintly.
There was a pause.

“Is it the same nothing that troubled you the night of the ball?”
He saw her start and shrink away from him.
“Oh! did Doll tell you?” she gasped, turning crimson.
“My dear, he told me nothing,” said Mr. Loftus gently, moving slightly away from her, and
     looking at her with grave attention. He greatly feared that unhappiness was before her in some
     form or other. He waited in the hope that she would speak to him of her own accord. But she
     only began to cry again. She was still weak. Was it possible that she was afraid of him? What
     could be troubling her that she, who did not know what reticence meant, could fear to tell him,
     which yet Doll knew? Doll was in love with her. Had he lost his head on the night of the ball? Had
      she discovered that she and Doll were young?
“Crack,” said Mr. Loftus, “I have a very neglectful wife. I come to ask for something for my
     headache, and she pays no attention to me at all.”
In earlier days Sibyl would have been on the alert in a moment if Mr. Loftus's sacred head
     confessed an ache. Now she moved slowly to the writing-table and produced certain innocuous
     remedies which he had brought to her and asked her to apply for him after that terrible time
     when he had had an attack of the heart and had repulsed her.
Presently the headache was better, and Mr. Loftus went back to the library and lit his pipe,
     which was remarkable, because he was as a rule unable to smoke after a headache.

He sat motionless a long time, his eyes fixed.
“I hope,” he said at last, knocking the ashes out of his pipe, “that I shall not live to
     become Sibyl's natural enemy, for I think I am about the only real friend she has in the
     world.”
And the small seed that would have quickened in another man's heart into a deep-rooted
     jealousy remained upon the surface of his mind as a misgiving, which took the form of anxiety
     for her.

