
CHAPTER IX.

“Et chacun croit fort aisément,
Ce qu“il craint.”
La Fontaine.
The night of the masked ball had arrived. A large party had assembled at Wilderleigh,
     including Lady Pierpoint and her daughters, and Doll. It was Doll's first visit to Wilderleigh
     since Mr. Loftus's marriage, and as he looked down the dinner-table at Sibyl he wondered at his
     own folly in coming. He thought he had “got over it,” but to-night he found that he had made a
     sufficiently grave mistake in supposing so. Unimaginative persons
     never know when they have got over anything, because they have no fore-knowledge
     in absence of the stab which a certain presence can inflict. So Doll walked stolidly in—where
     Mr. Loftus in a remote but not forgotten passage of his own life had feared to tread—and then
     writhed and bit his lip at the hurt he had inflicted upon himself.
In the days when he had hoped to marry Sibyl, he had often pictured her to himself—his
     imagination could reach as far as tangible objects, such as furniture and food and
     raiment—sitting at the head of his table, talking to his guests, wearing the Wilderleigh
     diamonds, and looking as she looked now; for to-night Sibyl was beautiful. And it had all come
     about, except one thing—that she was married to Mr. Loftus instead of to him. He
      turned to look fixedly at Mr. Loftus talking to Lady Pierpoint, and saw as in
     some new and arid light his thin stooping figure in the carved high-backed chair, the refined
     profile with the high thin nose and scant brushed-back gray hair, and the bloodless Vandyke
     hand holding his wine-glass. Mr. Loftus had a very beautiful hand. Doll had not seen Mr. Loftus
     and Sibyl together except at the altar-rails. And as he looked rage took him. It was a
     monstrous marriage. The blood rushed to his face, and beat in his temples. And a sudden bitter
     hatred surged up within him against Mr. Loftus as man against man. He looked at him again in
     his gray hair and his feebleness, and loathed him.
And Mr. Loftus's indifferent kindly glance met his, and he smiled quietly at him. And the
     cold fit came after the hot
      one, and poor Doll cursed himself, and told himself for the first time of many
     times—of how many times!—that the greatest evil that could befall him in life would be to
     become estranged from “Uncle George.”
“What are you thinking of?” said Peggy's voice at his elbow. Peggy was often at Doll's elbow
     at other times besides dinner, a fact which did not escape Lady Pierpoint's maternal eye, but
     for which she did not reprimand Peggy, any more than for her slightly upturned nose and little
     upper lip, which turned up in sympathy too. But Peggy vaguely felt that on this occasion her
     dear “mummy” was rather in the way, especially when the whole party assembled in the hall in
     their masks and dominoes, and Peggy could not sufficiently admire Doll's flame-coloured garment
     with a black devil outlined on the
     back and a hood with pointed ears. She had no eyes for Captain Charrington, the
     tallest man in the Guards, magnificent in crimson silk from head to foot, with crimson mask as
     well, or for another of Doll's companions in arms in a chessboard domino of black and white
     with an appalling white mask.
“Look, Peggy,” said Lady Pierpoint, “at Mrs. Devereux. I think I have never seen any domino
     as pretty as her white one with little silver bees all over it.”
Mrs. Devereux protested, in a muffled manner, through the lace edge of her mask that Miss
     Pierpoint's and Mrs. Loftus's duplicate primrose ones edged with gold quite put her bees into
     the shade.
“Into a hive you mean,” said her husband, a dull young man in dove colour.
      “But how are we to know Mrs. Loftus and Miss Pierpoint apart?”
“You won't know us,” said Sibyl; “that is just the point.”

“There is one thing I ought to have asked you before,” said Sibyl solemnly in her
     married-woman voice, as the brougham in which she and Mr. Loftus had driven together drew up in
     the queue. “Would you like me to dance or not?”
“Are you fond of dancing?”
“Very—at least, I mean I don't mind.”
“Then, dance by all means.”
“You are quite sure it is what you wish. I thought perhaps as a married woman——”
“Married goose,” said Mr. Loftus, laughing, perfectly aware that she would have liked him to
     be jealous.


“I'm going to dance,” whispered Sibyl to Peggy, as they followed Mr. Loftus and Lady
     Pierpoint, the only unmasked ones of the party, towards the ballroom. “He says he wishes me to.
     He is always so unselfish.”
But Peggy's open eyes and mouth and whole attention were turned to the ballroom which they
     were entering.
Lord and Lady Pontesbury were standing near the entrance solemnly shaking hands with the
     masked hooded figures who came silently towards them. No introductions were possible. Lord
     Pontesbury almost embraced Mr. Loftus, so relieved was he to see a human face. Lady Pontesbury
     beamed on Lady Pierpoint.
“Your girls here?” she whispered. No one seemed able to speak above a whisper.
“Yes,” said Lady Pierpoint below her
      breath, looking helplessly round at the twenty muffled figures in her wake. And
     Captain Charrington came forward at once, and said he was the eldest, and produced Doll as his
     youngest sister, while Peggy and Molly wondered how anyone could be so funny and live.
The long ballroom, with its cedar-panelled walls outlined in gilding, was brilliantly
     lighted. The floor of pale polished oak shone like the pale walls. Banks of orchids rose in the
     bay-windows. In the brilliant light a vast crowd of spectral figures stalked about in silence,
     clad in every variety and incongruous mixture of colour.
“Like devils out on a holiday,” said a voice from the depths of a fool's cap and bells.
Mr. Loftus was at once surrounded by
      masked figures who shook hands with him warmly. A Bishop was the centre of
     another group, ruefully responding to he knew not whom, half the young men in the room telling
     him that they had met him last at the Palace when they were ordained.
One mischievous couple were making the circuit of the room, conversing with the chaperons one
     after the other, who smiled helplessly at them and answered but little, for middle-aged ladies
     with daughters out have other things to think of besides repartee. Captain Charrington
     sustained his character of a wit by walking about growling at intervals in a mysterious and
     interesting manner.
The band took its courage in both hands, and broke the silence. A tremor passed through the
     crowd. There was a momen
     tary pause, a momentary uncertainty as to the sex of the hooded figures, and then
     forty, fifty, seventy couples of demons were solemnly polkaing.
Mr. Loftus smiled. Sibyl, standing by him, laughed till he gently urged her to take it more
     quietly. Lord and Lady Pontesbury turned for a moment from the fresh arrivals, and their
     mournful faces relaxed. The Bishop, who seldom saw anything more enlivening than a confirmation
     or a diocesan gathering, shed tears. The trombone collapsed, the wind instruments wavered, and
     left the violins for a moment to make desperate music by themselves. Then the band pulled
     itself together, and the music and the flying feet rushed headlong on.


Doll, who had hardly spoken to Sibyl that day, came up to claim his dance.
“I can't dance any more,” she said plaintively. “My domino weighs me down. Let us sit
     out.”
“Shall we go into the gallery,” said Doll, “and watch the unmasking from there? It is a
     quarter to twelve now, and every one unmasks at twelve.”
He did not know whether to be glad or sorry that she would not dance with him. “Better not,”
     he said to himself. But he had thought of the possibility of that dance many times before he
     reached the ballroom, and had decided that it was his duty to ask her.
They left the ballroom, and, passing numerous ghostly figures sitting in nooks and on the
     wide staircase, they made their way to the arched gallery which overhung
     the ballroom. Every white arch had been lit by a pendent pink-shaded lamp, and the
     arches and Sibyl's primrose domino all took the same rosy hue. In nearly every arch a couple
     were already sitting, watching the crowd below. Doll secured one of the few vacant places, and
     Sibyl drew her chair forward and leaned her slender bare arms on the white stone balustrade.
     The couple in the adjoining archway were chattering volubly, but Doll and Sibyl did not talk.
     She did not notice the omission, for her eyes were following the quaint pageant with the
     delight of a child. Doll racked his brains for something to say, and found nothing.
Why had she married Uncle George? Why had she married Uncle George? So, as he could not ask
     her that, and tell her that he cared for her a hundred times
     more than her husband did, he said nothing.
The pas de quatre was in full swing. The men, annoyed by their long dominoes, and
     having one hand disengaged, raised their voluminous skirts and danced with long black legs,
     regardless of propriety. Captain Charrington's endless crimson domino had come open in front
     and displayed his high action to great advantage. A very elegant pink domino, which had been
     introduced by the eldest son of the house as an heiress to all the men whom he did not
     recognise, and which had danced only with masculine dominoes, was now seen to emulate its
     partner, and to have black trousers rolled up above its white-stockinged ankles, and rather
     large white satin shoes.
“Look!” said the girl in the next arch
     way; “that pink domino must be Mr. Lumley. He often acts as a woman.”
“Hang him for an impostor! I“ve danced with him as such,” said the man, with ill-concealed
     vexation. “He knew me, and called me by name. I took him for——” He did not finish his sentence.
     “By Jove! that black domino with a death's-head and cross-bones is a good idea,” he went on.
     “Is it half-mourning, do you suppose?”
“How foolish you are! That is Lord Lutwyche. I have just been dancing with him.”
“Lord Lutwyche is not here. He sprained his ankle at hockey yesterday.”
The female domino appeared to be a prey to uneasy reflections.
“The primrose domino is the prettiest in the room,” she said presently. “And
      how well she dances! I wonder who she is.”
“I happen to know that is Mrs. Loftus.”
Sibyl, with her back to the arch, could hear every word on the other side of it. Doll was not
     near enough. This was indeed delightful! How lucky that she and Peggy had come dressed
     alike!
“Which is Mr. Loftus?” said the woman's voice eagerly. “I have heard so much about him.”
“That tall, thin, fine-looking old chap with his hands behind his back, standing by the
     Bishop. The Union Jack domino is speaking to him.”
“So that is he. I have always wished to see him. He looks tired to death.”
“He always looks like that. Quite a character, though, isn't he?”
“He has an interesting face. But it
      was a disgraceful thing, his marrying a pretty young girl, and an heiress, at his
     age.”
Sibyl made a sudden movement, and the other couple glanced round. They saw her, but her
     primrose domino had taken the pink of her surroundings, and they suspected nothing.
“I'm not so sure. His nephew stands up for him, though his uncle cut him out, and his nephew
     ought to know. I fancy there was more in that marriage than outsiders suspect. I“ve heard it
     said more than once that she fell head-over-ears in love with him, and he married her out of
     pity.”
The last words fell distinctly on Sibyl's ears, and at that second the music ceased with a
     crash, and a gong boomed out, engulfing all other sounds. It was twelve
      o“clock. A bell somewhere just above them was counting out twelve slow strokes,
     just too late—just ten seconds too late.
She leaned back sick and shivering.
She did not realize that the crash and the tolling bell were part of the evening's programme.
     They seemed to her the natural result of the words she had just heard. If she had been crossed
     in love at Lisbon before the earthquake, she would have regarded that upheaval as the immediate
     consequence of her lacerated feelings.
“Look, look!” said the woman; “they are unmasking.”
A confused sound of laughter and surprise and recognition, and a widespread hum of
     conversation, came up to them.
Everyone was streaming out of the gallery, and in the ballroom there was
      a vast turmoil, as of hiving bees, and a throng at every door.
“Shall I take you to the cloak-room to leave your mask and domino?” said Doll, turning to her
     at last, from watching without seeing it what was passing below. He took off his velvet mask as
     he spoke. The sullen wretchedness of his face fitted ill with the pointed rakish ears which
     still surmounted it.
She did not answer. He saw that the outstretched hand still on the balustrade was tightly
     clenched.
“Mrs. Loftus,” he said. “Sibyl! what is it? Are you ill?”
She tore off her mask, and, as if she were suffocating, plucked with trembling hands at the
     gold ribbon that fastened her hood and domino.
He was alarmed, and clumsily helped
      her to loosen them. Her small face, released from the mask, looked shrunk and
     pinched like a squirrel's in its thrown-back hood. The pink glow upon it from the lamp was in
     horrible contrast with its agonized expression.
“What is it? what is it?” said Doll, in distress nearly as great as her own, taking her
     little clenched hand, and holding it, still clenched, in his large grasp. “Are you ill?”
She shook her head impatiently.
“Would you like—shall I—fetch Mr. Loftus?”
She winced as if she had been struck.
“No,” she gasped; “I will not see him—I will not see him!”
A change came over Doll's face. Involuntarily, his hand tightened its clasp on hers.


“These entertainments,” said the Bishop to Mr. Loftus, as they paused for a moment in the
     gallery, and looked down into the ballroom, which was now rapidly refilling with gaily-dressed
     women and pink and black coats, “are, I believe, typical of English country life. They
     are—ahem!—the gallery seems conducive to conversation; it is, in fact,
     a—er—whispering-gallery.” Here he turned, smiling, to Mr. Loftus. “Perhaps Mr. Doll has hardly
     reached the stage at which he will call upon me to officiate—just so; we will go down by the
     other staircase—but I trust, though I might be in the way at present, that my services may be
     required a little later on.”
“I should like to see Doll married,” said Mr. Loftus, who had been not a little surprised at
     the eager manner in which
      the young man was bending towards the figure with her back towards them, whose
     fallen-back hood intercepted her features. He recognised the domino.
“I had no idea Peggy had made such an impression,” he said to himself.
As he re-entered the ballroom, he met Lady Pierpoint, also returning to it with her two plump
     little girls in tow, whom she had been tidying in the cloak-room. Captain Charrington and some
     of the other men from Wilderleigh were waiting near the doorway, claiming first dances as their
     party came in. The orchestra, who had been refreshing themselves, were remounting to their
     places.
“Then, where is Sibyl?” said Mr. Loftus, looking at Peggy.
“She went to the gallery a long time ago,” replied Peggy promptly, “with Mr.
      Doll, to see the people unmask at twelve o“clock.”
Mr. Loftus smiled. “It was a horrible sight as seen from below,” he said; “half the men's
     faces were black, and the hair of every one of them stood up at the back.”
The band struck up a swaying, languorous valse such as tears the hearts out of young persons
     in their teens.

“I must go home,” Sibyl kept repeating feverishly. “Doll, you must get the carriage. I must
     go home.”
Doll was engaged to Peggy for this valse, but he had forgotten it. Sibyl was engaged to
     Captain Charrington, but she had forgotten it.
He was terrified, as only reticent persons can be, lest her loss of self-control should
      be observed. He helped her to her feet, and took her to the cloak-room, she
     clinging convulsively to him. Her entire disregard of appearances filled him with apprehension.
     The cloak-room was empty, even of attendants, for it had been thronged till within the last ten
     minutes, and now the wave had surged back to the ballroom, and the maids, their duties
     finished, had slipped away to see the spectacle.
Sibyl cast herself down on a chair, shivering. Her little Grecian crown of diamonds fell
     crooked.
“Let me fetch Lady Pierpoint,” said Doll urgently.
“No, no,” she said imploringly; “I want to go home. Oh, Doll, get the carriage, and take me
     home. Is it so much to ask?”

He looked at her in doubt. She was not fit to return to the ballroom. Evidently she would
     make no attempt to conceal her despair, whatever its cause might be, from the first chance
     comer.
“I will take you,” he said; and he rushed out to the stables, found the Wilderleigh coachman,
     and himself helped to put the horses into the brougham.
“It was ordered for one o“clock especially for Mr. Loftus,” said the coachman, hesitating,
     “and the landau, and the fly, and the homnibus for half-past three.”
“You will be back in time for Mr. Loftus,” said Doll. “Mrs. Loftus is ill, and must go home
     immediately.”
He had the brougham at the door in ten minutes, and returned to the cloak-room to find a maid
     standing by Sibyl with a glass of water. Sibyl was still
      shivering, holding on to the chair with both hands, her eyes half closed, her
     face ghastly.
“I am afraid the lady is ill,” said the servant.
It was very evident that she was ill.
“The carriage is here,” said Doll. “Can you manage to walk to it?”
She rose unsteadily, and the maid wrapped her in her white cloak. It annoyed Doll that the
     maid evidently looked upon them as an interesting young married couple.
He gave Sibyl his arm, and she staggered against him. He hesitated, and then compressed his
     lips, put his arm round her, and, half carrying, half leading her, helped her to the
     carriage.
It was a white night with snow upon the ground. The band was playing one
      of Chevalier's songs. Out into the solemn night came the urgent appeal of 'Enery
     “Awkins” to his Eliza not to die an old maid, accompanied by the dull, threshing sound of many
     feet.
As the carriage began to move, Sibyl seemed to revive, and a moan broke from her.
“Oh, Doll,” she said suddenly, turning towards him and catching his hand and wringing it. “It
     isn't true, is it? It is only a horrible lie.”
“What isn't true?” he said fiercely, almost hating her for the pain she was causing him, not
     his hand.
“It isn't true what that man said in the next arch, that—that Mr. Loftus married me out of
     pity?” And she swayed herself to and fro.
She had asked the only person to whom
      Mr. Loftus had confided his real reasons for his marriage.
It had been on the tip of Doll's tongue all the evening to say: “Why did you marry him?
      I would have married you for love.” But he mastered himself.
“It isn't true, is it?” gasped Sibyl.
Doll set his teeth.
“No,” he said. “It's a lie. He married you for love. He—told me so!”

