
CHAPTER XVI
THE SIMPLE LIFE
Julia was collecting fir-cones. All around her the land lay brown and still; dead heather,
     and sometimes dead bracken, a shade paler, and, more rarely, gorse bushes, nearly brown, too,
     in their sober winter dress. It was almost flat, a wonderful illimitable place, very remote,
     very silent, unbroken except for occasional pine-trees. These were not scattered but grew in
     clumps, miles apart, though looking near in this place of distances, and also in a belt not
     more than five or six trees wide, winding mile after mile like a black band over the plain.
     Julia stood on the edge of this belt now, gathering the dropped cones and putting them into a
     sack. The afternoon was advanced and already it was beginning to grow dark among the trees, but
     she determined not to go till she had got all she could carry. It was the first time she had
     been to collect cones; she had sent her father once and Mr. Gillat once. They had taken longer
     and gathered less than she, but it was not on that account that she had gone herself to-day.
     Rather it was because she wanted to go to the dark belt of trees which she saw every day from
     her window, and because she wanted to go right out into the wide open land and see what it
     looked like and feel what it felt like. And when she got there she found it, like the Dunes,
     all she had expected and more.
At last she had her sack full, and, shouldering it, carried it off on her back, which, seeing
     the comfort of the
      arrangement, must be the way Nature intended weights to be carried. Clear of the
     shadow of the trees it was lighter; the grey sky held the light long; twilight seemed to creep
     up from the ground rather than fall from above, as if darkness were an earth-born thing that
     gained slowly, and, for a time, only upon the brighter gift of Heaven. It was quieter, too, out
     here, for under the pines, though the weather was still, there was a breathing moan as if the
     trees sighed incessantly in their sleep. But out here in the brown land it was very quiet; the
     air light and dry and keen, with the flavour of the not distant sea mingled with the smell of
     the pines and the dead ferns—a thing to stir the pulse and revive the memory of the divine
     inheritance and the old belief that man is but a little lower than the angels, related to the
     infinite and god-like.
White's Cottage stood where the heath-land ceased and the sand began. There was much sand;
     tradition said it had gradually overwhelmed a village that lay beyond; indeed, that White's
     Cottage was the last and most distant house of the lost place. Be that as it may, it certainly
     was very solitary, rather far from the village of Halgrave, with no road leading to it except
     the track that came from Halgrave and stopped at the cottage gate—there was nowhere to go
     beyond.
Dusk had almost deepened to darkness when Julia reached the house; it gleamed curiously in
     the half light, for it was built of flints, for the most part grey, but with a paler one here
     and there catching the light. She put her sack of cones in one of the several sheds which were
     built on the sides of the cottage, and which, being of the same flint material, made it look
     larger than it was. Then she went into the kitchen.
Johnny Gillat was there before her; he had been busy in the garden all the afternoon, but,
     with the help of the
      field-glasses which he had not been allowed to sell, he had descried her coming
     across the open land. As soon as he was sure of her, and while she was still a good way off, he
     hurried away his tools into the house to get ready. He wanted it all to look to her as it had
     to him on the day when he came back from cone-getting—the fire blazing, the tea ready, the
     kitchen snug and neat; very unlike the dining-room at Marbridge with the one gas jet burning
     and "Bouquet" alight. Of course Johnny did not quite succeed; he never did in matters small or
     great, but he did his best. The dinner things, which Captain Polkington was to have washed,
     were not done, and still about. They had to be put in the back kitchen, and Johnny, who had no
     idea of saving labour, took so long carrying them away, that he hardly had time to set the tea.
     He had meant to make some toast, but there was no time for that; the first piece of bread had
     no more than begun to get warm when he heard Julia's step outside. But the fire was blazing
     nicely, and that was the chief thing; even though the putting on of the kettle had been
     forgotten. When Julia came in and saw the fire and crooked tablecloth and hastily-arranged
     cups, and Johnny's beaming face, she exclaimed, "How cubby it looks! Why, you have got the tea
     all ready, and"—sniffing the air—"I believe you are making toast; that is nice!"
Mr. Gillat beamed; then he caught sight of the kettle standing on the hearth, and his face
     fell.
But Julia put it on the fire. "It will give you good time to finish the toast while it
     boils," she said; "toast ought not to be hurried, you know; yours will be just right."
It was not; it was rather smoky when it came to be eaten, the fire not being very suitable;
     but that did not matter; Julia declared it perfect. This was the only
      form of hypocrisy she practised in the simple life; possibly, if she thought of
     the will more than the deed, it was really not such great hypocrisy. At all events she
     practised it; she did not think truth so beautiful that frail daily life must be the better for
     its undiluted and uncompromising application to all poor little tender efforts.
During tea the great subject of conversation was the hen house. The last occupant of the
     cottage had kept hens and all the out-buildings were in good repair; however, a recent gale had
     loosened part of the roof of this one, and Captain Polkington had been mending it. There had
     not been much to do; the Captain could not do a great deal; his faculties of work—if he ever
     had any—had atrophied for want of use. Still, he thought he had done a good day's work, and, as
     a consequence, was important and inclined to be exacting. That is the reason why he had
     neglected the dinner things; he felt that a man who had done all he had was entitled to some
     rest and consideration. Julia did not mind in the least; if he was happy and contented, that
     was all she wished; she never reckoned his help as one of the assets of the household. For that
     matter, she had not reckoned Mr. Gillat's of much value either, but there she found she was a
     little mistaken. Johnny was very slow and very laborious and really ingenious in finding a
     wrong way of doing things even when she thought she had left him no choice, but he was very
     painstaking and persevering. He would do anything he was told, and he took the greatest
     pleasure in doing it. Whether it was digging in the garden, or feeding the pigs, or collecting
     firewood, or setting the table for meals, he was certain to do everything to the best of his
     ability, and was perfectly happy if she would employ him. There can be no doubt that the coming
     to White's Cottage began a time of real hap
     piness to Mr. Gillat; possibly the happiest since his wealthy boyhood when he
     spent lavishly and indiscriminately on anybody and everybody. The Captain was less happy; his
     satisfaction was of an intermittent order. His discontent did not take the form of wishing to
     go back to Marbridge or to join his wife, only in feeling oppressed and misunderstood, and
     wishing occasionally that he had not been born or had been born rich—and of course remained so
     all his life. He was dissatisfied that evening when the contentment begotten of his work had
     worn off; he wanted to go to the market town to-morrow. Julia was going to get several
     necessaries for the household; he considered that he ought to go too, but she would not take
     him.
"You will have a great deal to carry," he protested.
"Yes," Julia agreed; "but I shall manage it."
"It is not fit for you to go about alone," her father urged.
She forebore to smile, though the novelty, not to say tardiness of the idea amused her; she
     only said, "It would take you and Johnny too long to walk into the town; we can't afford to
     spend too long on the way, and we can't afford a cart to take us."
The Captain was not convinced; he never was by any one's logic but his own; perhaps because
     his own was totally different to all other kinds, including the painful logic of facts. He
     sighed deeply. "It is a strange, a humiliating condition of things," he observed to Mr. Gillat,
     "when a father has to ask his daughter's permission to go into town."
Johnny rubbed the side of his chair thoughtfully, then a bright idea occurred to him. "Ah,
     but," he said, "gentlemen always have to ask ladies' permission before they
      can accompany them anywhere—especially when it is the lady of the house."
A wise man might not perhaps have said this last, but Johnny did, and as it happened, it did
     not much matter; before the Captain could answer, Julia rose from the table and began to clear
     away.
Sundry household jobs had to be done in the evening; some were always left till then; in
     these short dark days it was advisable to use the light for work out of doors. At last,
     however, all was done, and Julia began to arrange for to-morrow. The Captain was sulky and sure
     that he would have rheumatism and so not be able to go out. His daughter did not seem to be
     greatly troubled; she told him of some easy work in the house he could do, or if he liked and
     felt able, he would perhaps go and get more fir-cones; there were plenty, and they saved other
     fuel. The Captain replied that he was not in the habit of taking orders from his children.
Johnny looked unhappy; he did not like these ruffles to the tranquil life; it always pained
     him for any one to be dissatisfied, with reason or without it. When Julia turned to him he was
     even more ready than usual to take orders; he would have done anything she told him from
     sweeping the copper flue to calling upon the rector, but secretly he hoped she would give him
     work in the garden.
The garden was of considerable size, and, by some freak of nature, of fairly good soil,
     though the field and most of the surrounding land was very poor. They had all worked hard in
     this plot ever since their coming; there was not much more to be done, or at least not much
     planting, which was what Mr. Gillat liked. However, there had been no sharp frosts yet and
     Julia, who knew his tastes, thought she could find something to please him.
      She called him to the back kitchen and between them they brought from there a
     wooden case, the contents of which she began to sort over to find an occupation suitable to
     him. The box was getting rather empty now, but there was still something in it, bulbs and seeds
     and printed directions, and a strange mixed smell of greyish-brown paper and buckwheat husks
     and the indescribable smell of Dutch barns.
It had come from Holland, from the Van Heigens; it was Mijnheer's present to the disgraced
     companion who had been so summarily dismissed. When Julia went to the cottage, it occurred to
     her to write to Mijnheer and tell him where she was, and how she meant to live a harmless
     horticultural life. She had come to think that perhaps she ought to tell him; she knew how her
     own words, about the way they were thrusting a sinner down, would stay with him and his wife.
     They would quite likely grow in the slow mind of the old man until he became uneasy and unhappy
     about her, and blamed himself for her undoing. At the time that she spoke she wasted the words
     to so grow and germinate; but now, looking back, she could think differently; after all the Van
     Heigens had only done what they thought right, and she had done what she knew to be at least
     open to doubt. And they had not thrust her down; it would take considerably more than that to
     do anything of the sort; they had allowed her an opportunity which she had used to achieve a
     great success. And now that it was achieved and she had left it all behind and was settled to
     the simple life—her vague ambition—her heart went out to the simple folk who had first shown
     her that it might be good; who had been kind to her when there was nothing to gain, who had
     made her ashamed.
So she wrote to Mijnheer and told him that she had
      fared well, and found another situation in Holland after leaving his service.
     Also that she had now left it and, having inherited a little property, had come to live in a
     country cottage with her father. She further said that she meant to imitate the Dutch and do
     her own house-work and also grow things, vegetables especially, in her garden.
And Mijnheer, when he got the letter, was delighted; so, too, was Mevrouw; Joost said
     nothing. They read the letter two or three times, showed it to the Snieders (including Denah)
     and to the Dutch girl who now filled Julia's situation—more or less. They talked over it a
     great deal and over Julia too; they remembered every detail about her, her good points and her
     great fall. They were as delighted as they could be to hear that she was well and happy and
     apparently, good. Mijnheer especially was pleased to hear that she was with her father—he did
     not know that gentleman—he was sure she would be well looked after with him, and that, so he
     said, was what she wanted. So, contrary to their theory, but not out of accord with their
     practice, they forgave the sin for the sake of the sinner, and Mijnheer ordered to be packed,
     seeds and bulbs and plants for Julia's garden. He selected them himself, flowers as well as
     vegetables, sorts which he thought most suitable; and he ordered Joost to stick to the bags
     strips cut out of catalogues where, in stiff Dutch-English, directions are given as to how to
     grow everything that can be grown. And if Joost put in some sorts not included in his father's
     list, and failed to tell the good man about it, it was no doubt all owing to his having at one
     time associated with the dishonest Julia.
The packing and dispatching of the box gave great pleasure to the Van Heigens; but the
     receiving and un
     packing gave even greater pleasure when at last it reached Miss Snooks at White's
     Cottage. Julia had not told Mijnheer why she was Miss Snooks now and he, after grave
     consideration, decided that it must be because of the legacy, and in fulfilment of some obscure
     English law of property. Having so decided, he addressed the case in good faith, and advised
     her of its departure.
Julia and Mr. Gillat planted the things that came in the box; Julia planted most, but Mr.
     Gillat enjoyed it even when he was only looking on. There was one bulb she set when he was not
     there to look on, but it did not come with the others. She chose a spot that best fulfilled the
     conditions described in the directions for growing daffodils and there, late one afternoon, she
     planted the bulb that she had brought with her from the Van Heigens. Afterwards she marked the
     place round and told Johnny and her father there was a choice flower there which was not to be
     touched.
Julia went to the market town as she had arranged. Mr. Gillat worked in the garden; Captain
     Polkington watched him for a little and then went out, after spending, as he always did, some
     time getting ready. He took a basket with him; he thought of collecting fir-cones and he
     objected to the sack, though it held a vast deal more; he felt carrying it to be derogatory to
     a soldier and a gentleman. It is true he did not get fir-cones that day, but he really meant to
     when he started.
Julia, in the meantime, did her shopping, and, having loaded herself with as much as she
     could carry—more than most people could except those Continental maids and mistresses who do
     their own marketing, she started for home. It was a long walk—a long way to Halgrave and a good
     bit beyond that to the cottage. She did not expect to reach the village till dusk, but she
     thought very
      probably she would find her father or Mr. Gillat there; she had suggested that
     one or both of them should come to meet her and help carry the parcels the rest of the way.
Johnny fell in with the suggestion; she saw him through the twilight before she reached the
     village. Her father, she concluded, was still sulky at her refusal to have his company earlier
     and so would not come now.
"I suppose father would not come?" she said, as she and Mr. Gillat walked on after a
     readjustment of the burden.
"Oh, no," Johnny answered; "it was not that; I'm sure he would have come if he had been in
     when I started, but he was not back then."
"Not back?" Julia repeated. "Why, where has he gone?"
"Well," Johnny replied slowly, "he said he was going to get fir-cones, but I'm not sure, I
     didn't see him go across the heath. Still, I dare say he went—he took a basket, so I think he
     must have gone."
Julia apparently did not find this very conclusive evidence. "There is not anywhere much
     about here where he can go," she said; much less as if she were stating a fact than as if she
     were reviewing likely and unlikely places. "There is only the one road, and that goes to
     Halgrave, and there is nowhere for him there."
"No, oh, no," Johnny said; "there really is nowhere there."
"There is the 'Dog and Pheasant,'" Julia went on meditatively, "but he would not get anything
     he cared about there."
"No," Mr. Gillat said decidedly; "besides he would not go there, he would not sit in a small
     country public house and—er—and—sit there—and so on—he would not
      think of going to such a place. It is one thing when you are out in the country
     for a day's fishing or something, to have a glass of ale and a piece of bread and cheese at an
     inn, but the other is quite different; he wouldn't do that—oh, no. To sit in a little bar
     and—"
"Booze," Julia concluded for him. "Johnny, you are always a wonder to me; how you have
     contrived to live so long and yet to keep your belief in man unspotted from the world beats
     me."
Johnny looked uncomfortable and a little puzzled. "Well, but your father—" he began.
"My father is a man," Julia interrupted, "and I would not undertake to say a man would not do
     anything—on occasions—or a woman either, for the matter of that. There is a beast in most men,
     and an archangel in lots, and a snob, and a prig, and a dormant hero, and an embryo poet. There
     are great possibilities in men; you have to watch and see which is coming out top and back
     that, and then half the time you are wrong. Of course, at father's age, possibilities are
     getting over; one or two things have come top and stay there."
Mr. Gillat opened the cottage door and, not answering these distressing generalities, fell
     back on his one fact. "Look," he said, pointing to an empty peg, "he must have gone after
     fir-cones; you see the basket has gone; he took it with him; I am sure he would not have taken
     it to the 'Dog.'"
"I believe their whisky is very bad," Julia said, and seemed to think more of that than the
     argument of the basket. "I'll give him another hour before I set out to look for him."
She gave him the hour and then, in spite of Mr. Gillat's entreaties to be allowed to go in
     her place, set out for
     Halgrave. But she did not have to go all the way, for she met her father coming
     back. And she early discovered that, if he had not been to the "Dog and Pheasant," he had been
     somewhere else where he could get whisky. They walked home together, and she made neither
     comments nor inquiries; she did not consider that evening a suitable time. The Captain was only
     a little muddled and, as has been before said, a very little alcohol was sufficient to do that;
     he was quite clear enough to be a good deal relieved by his daughter's behaviour, and even
     thought that she noticed nothing amiss. Indeed, by the morning, he had himself almost come to
     think there was nothing to notice.
But alas, for the Captain! He had never learnt to beware of those deceptive people who bide
     their time and bring into domestic life the diplomatic policy of speaking on suitable occasions
     only. He came down-stairs that morning very well pleased with himself; he felt that he had
     vindicated the rights of man yesterday; this conclusion was arrived at by a rather circuitous
     route, but it was gratifying; it was also gratifying to think that he had been able to enjoy
     himself without being found out. But Julia soon set him right on this last point; she did not
     reproach him or, as Mrs. Polkington would have done, point out the disgrace he would bring upon
     them; she only told him that it must not occur again. She also explained that, while he lived
     in her house, she had a right to dictate in these matters and, what was more, she was going to
     do so.
At this the Captain was really hurt; his feeling for dignity was very sensitive, though given
     to manifesting itself in unusual ways. "Am I to be dependent for the rest of my days?" he
     asked.
Julia did not answer; she thought it highly probable.
"Am I to be dictated to at every turn?" he went on.
     
Julia did answer. "No," she said; "I don't think there will be any need for that."
Captain Polkington paid no attention to the answer; he was standing before the kitchen fire,
     apostrophising things in general rather than asking questions.
"Are my goings out and comings in to be limited by my daughter? Am I to ask her permission
     before I accept hospitality or make friends?"
"Friends?" said Julia. "Then it was not 'The Dog and Pheasant' you went to, yesterday? I
     thought not."
"Then you thought wrong," her father retorted incautiously; "I did go there."
"To begin with," Julia suggested; "but you came across some one, and went on—is that it?"
The Captain denied it, but he had not his wife's and daughters' gifts; his lies were always
     of the cowardly and uninspired kind that seldom serve any purpose. Julia did not believe him,
     and set to work cross questioning him so that soon she knew what she wanted. It seemed that her
     surmise was correct; he had met some one at the "Dog and Pheasant"; a veterinary surgeon who
     had come there to doctor a horse. They had struck up an acquaintance—the Captain had the family
     gift for that—and the surgeon had asked him to come to his house on the other side of
     Halgrave.
When the information reached this point Julia said suavely, but with meaning: "Perhaps you
     had better not go there again."
"I shall certainly go when I choose," Captain Polkington retorted; "I should like to know
     what is to prevent me and why I should not?"
Julia remembered his dignity. "Shall we say because it is too far?" she suggested.
After that she dismissed the subject; she did not see
      any need to pursue it further; her father knew her wishes—commands, perhaps, he
     called them—all that was left for her to do was to see that he could not help fulfilling them,
     and that was not to be done by much talking any more than by little. So she made no further
     comments on his doings and, to change the subject, told him she had bought some whisky in the
     town yesterday and he had better open the bottle at dinner time.
The Captain stared for a moment, but quickly recovered from his astonishment, though not
     because he recognised that a little whisky at home was part of a judicious system. He merely
     thought that his daughter was going to treat him properly after all, and in spite of what had
     been lately said. This idea was a little modified when he found that, though he drank the
     whisky, Julia kept the bottle under lock and key.
It also seemed that she found a way of enforcing her wishes, or at least preventing frequent
     transgressions of them, although, of course, she was prepared for occasional mishaps. There
     really was nothing at the "Dog and Pheasant" that the Captain could put up with even if he had
     not been always very short of money—absurdly short even of coppers—and Julia saw that he was
     short. There remained nothing for him but the hospitality of acquaintances, and they did not
     abound in Halgrave, the only place within reach; also, as he declared, they were a stingy lot.
     The next time he called upon his new friend, the veterinary surgeon, he was at a loss to
     understand this; it was unlike his previous experience of the man and most disagreeably
     surprising; he could not think why it should happen. But then he had not seen Julia set out for
     Halgrave on the afternoon of the same day that she explained things to him. She had on all her
     best clothes, even her best boots, in spite of the bad roads.
      She looked trim and dainty as a Frenchwoman, but there was something about her
     which suggested business.
There are, no doubt, advantages attached to the simple life. It is decidedly easier to deal
     with your drawback when you do not have to pretend it has no existence. You can enlist help
     from outside if you can go boldly to veterinary surgeons and others, and say that whisky is
     your father's weakness, and would they please oblige and gratify you by not offering him
     any.


