
MY SEVENTH STAGE

Yet on the dull silence breaking 
 With a lightning flash, a word, 
 Bearing endless desolation 
 On its blighting wings, I heard; 
 Earth can forge no keener weapon, 
Dealing surer death and pain, 
 And the cruel echo answered 
 Through long years again.A. A. Procter.
Curiously enough, I must actually have started for Russia on the same day that Sigismund
     Zaluski was summoned by his uncle at St. Petersburg to return on a matter of urgent business. 
     I learnt afterwards that the telegram arrived at Muddleton on the afternoon of one of those
     sunny September days and found Zaluski as usual at the Morleys.  He was very much annoyed at
     being called away just then, and before he had received any reply from Gertrude’s uncle as to
     the engagement.  However, after a little ebullition of anger, he regained his usual philosophic
     tone, and, reminding Gertrude that he need not be away from England for more than a fortnight,
     he took leave of her and set off in a prompt, manly fashion, leaving most of his belongings at
     Ivy Cottage, which was his for another six weeks, and to which he hoped shortly to return.
After a weary time of imprisonment in my envelope, I at length reached my destination at St.
     Petersburg and was read by Dmitry Leonoff.  He was a very busy man, and by the same post
     received dozens of other letters.  He merely muttered—“That well-known firm!  A most unlikely
     story!”—and then thrust me into a drawer with other letters which had to be answered.  Very
     probably I escaped his memory altogether for the next few days: however, there I was—a
     startling accusation in black and white; and, as everybody knows, St. Petersburg is not
     London.
The Leonoff family lived on the third storey of a large block of buildings in the
     Sergeffskaia.  About two o’clock in the morning, on the third day after my arrival, the whole
     household was roused from sleep by thundering raps on the door, and the dreaded cry of “Open to
     the police.”
The unlucky master was forced to allow himself, his wife, and his children to be made
     prisoners, while every corner of the house was searched and every book and paper examined.
Leonoff had nothing whatever to do with the Revolutionary movement, but absolute innocence
     does not free people from the police inquisition, and five or six years ago, when the Search
     mania was at its height, a case is on record of a poor lady whose house was searched seven
     times within twenty-four hours, though there was no evidence whatever that she was connected
     with the Nihilists; the whole affair was, in fact, a misunderstanding, as she was perfectly
     innocent.
This search in Dmitry Leonoff’s house was also a misunderstanding, and in the dominions of
     the Czar misunderstandings are of frequent occurrence.
Leonoff knew himself to be innocent, and he felt no fear, though considerable annoyance,
     while the search was prosecuted; he could hardly believe the evidence of his senses when,
     without a word of explanation, he was informed that he must take leave of his wife and
     children, and go in charge of the gendarmes to the House of Preventive Detention.
Being a sensible man, he kept his temper, remarked courteously that some mistake must have
     been made, embraced his weeping wife, and went off passively, while the pristav carried away a
     bundle of letters in which I occupied the most prominent place.
Leonoff remained a prisoner only for a few days; there was not a shred of evidence against
     him, and, having suffered terrible anxiety, he was finally released.  But Mr. Crichton-Morley’s
     letter was never restored to him, it remained in the hands of the authorities, and the night
     after Leonoff’s arrest the pristav, the procurator, and the gendarmes made their way into the
     dwelling of Sigismund Zaluski’s uncle, where a similar search was prosecuted.
Sigismund was asleep and dreaming of Gertrude and of his idyllic summer in England, when his
     bedroom door was forced open and he was roughly roused by the gendarmes.
His first feeling was one of amazement, his second, one of indignation; however, he was
     obliged to get up at once and dress, the policeman rigorously keeping guard over him the whole
     time for fear he should destroy any treasonable document.
“How I shall make them laugh in England when I tell them of this ridiculous affair!”
     reflected Sigismund, as he was solemnly marched into the adjoining room, where he found his
     uncle and cousins, each guarded by a policeman.
He made some jesting remark, but was promptly reprimanded by his gaoler, and in wearisome
     silence the household waited while the most rigorous search of the premises was made.
Of course nothing was found; but, to the amazement of all, Sigismund was formally
     arrested.
“There must be some mistake,” he exclaimed, “I have been resident in England for some time. 
     I have no connection whatever with Russian politics.”
“Oh, we are well aware of your residence in England,” said the pristav.  “You left St.
     Petersburg early in March 1881.  We are well aware of that.”
Something in the man’s tone made Sigismund’s heart stand still.  Could he possibly be
     suspected of complicity in the plot to assassinate the late Czar?  The idea would have made him
     laugh had he been in England.  In St. Petersburg, and under these circumstances, it made him
     tremble.
“There is some terrible mistake,” he said.  “I have never had the slightest connection with
     the revolutionary party.”
The pristav shrugged his shoulders, and Sigismund, feeling like one in a dream, took leave of
     his relations, and was escorted at once to the House of Preventive Detention.
Arrived at his destination, he was examined in a brief, unsatisfactory way; but when he
     angrily asked for the evidence on which he had been arrested, he was merely told that
     information had been received charging him with being concerned in the assassination of the
     late Emperor, and of being an advanced member of the Nihilist party.  His vehement denials were
     received with scornful incredulity, his departure for England just after the assassination, and
     his prolonged absence from Russia, of course gave colour to the accusation, and he was ordered
     off to his cell “to reflect.”
