
IV.—Digressive, and may be skipped without mutilating the History.
I stop here to address any of the following characters, should he perchance read these
            memoirs:
 You, Mr. Statesman—if there be such; Mr. Pseudo-Statesman, Placeman, Party
              Leader, Wirepuller; Mr. Amateur Statesman, Dilettante Lord, Civil Servant; Mr.
              Clubman, Litterateur, Newspaper Scribe; Mr. People's Candidate, Demagogue, Fenian
              Spouter; 
or whoever you may be, professing to know aught or do anything in matters of policy,
            consider, what I am sure you have never fairly weighed, the condition of a man whose
            clearest notion of Government is derived from the Police! Imagine one who had never seen
            a polyp trying to construct an ideal of the animal, from a single tentacle swinging out
            from the tangle of weed in which the rest was wrapped! How then any more can you fancy
            that a man to whose sight and knowledge the only part of government practically exposed
            is the strong process of police, shall form a proper conception of the functions,
            reasons, operations, and relations of Government; or even build up an ideal of anything
            but a haughty, unreasonable, antagonistic, tax-imposing FORCE! And how can you rule such
            a being except as you rule a dog, by that which alone he understands—the dog-whip of the
            constable! Given in a country a majority of creatures like these, and surely despotism
            is its properest complement. But when they exist, as they exist in England to-day, in
            hundreds of thousands, in town and country, think what a complication they introduce
            into your theoretic free system of government. Acts of Parliament passed by a
            “freely-elected” House of Commons, and an hereditary House of Lords under the threats of
            freely-electing citizens, however pure in intention and correct in principle, will not
            seem to him to be the resultants of every wish in the community so much as dictations by
            superior strength. To these the obedience he will render will not be the loving assent
            of his heart, but a begrudged concession to circumstance. Your awe-invested legislature
            is not viewed as his friend and brother-helper, but his tyrant. Therefore the most
            natural bent of his workman-statesmanship—a rough, bungling affair—will be to tame
            you—you who ought to be his Counsellor and Friend. When he finds that your legislative
            action exerts upon him a repressive and restraining force he will curse you as its
            author, because he sees not the springs you are working. Should he even be a little more
            advanced in knowledge than our friend Ginx, and learn that he helps to elect the
            Parliament to make laws on behalf of himself and his fellow-citizens, he will scarce
            trust the assembly which is supposed to represent him. Will he, like a good citizen and
            a politic, accept with dignity and self-control the decision of a majority against his
            prejudices: or will he not regard the whole Wittenagemote with suspicion, contempt, or
            even hatred? See him rush madly to Trafalgar Square meetings, Hyde Park demonstrations,
            perhaps to Lord George Gordon Riots, as if there were no less perilous means of
            publishing his opinions! There wily men may lead his unconscious intellect, and stir his
            passions, and direct his forces against his own—and his children's good.
Did it ever occur to you, or any of you, how many voters cannot read, and how many
            more, though they can read, are unable to apprehend reasons of statesmanship?—that even
            newspapers cannot inform them, since they have not the elementary knowledge needed for
            the comprehension of those things which are discussed in them; nay, that for want of
            understanding the same they may terribly distort political aims and consequences?
Might it not be worth while for you, gentlemen—may it not be your duty to devise ways
            and means for conveying such elementary instruction by good street-preachers on politics
            and economy, or even political bible-women or colporteurs, and so to make clear to the
            understanding of every voter what are the reasons and aims of every act of Legislation,
            Home Administration, and Foreign Policy? If you do not find out some way to do this he
            may turn round upon you—I hope he may—and insist on annually-elected parliaments, and
            thus oblige ambitious state-mongers, in the rivalry of place, to come to him and declare
            more often their wishes and objects. Other attractions may be found in that solution:
            such as the untying of some knots of electoral difficulty, and removing incitements to
            corruption. Ten thousand pounds for one year's power were a high price even to a
            contractor. Think then whether at any cost some general political education must not be
            attempted, since there is a spirit breathing on the waters, and how it shall convulse
            them is no indifferent matter to you or to me. Everywhere around us are unhewn rocks
            stirred with a strange motion. Leave these chaotic fragments of humanity to be hewn into
            rough shape by coarse artists seeking only a petty profit, unhandy, immeasurably
            impudent; or dress them by your teaching—teaching which is the highest, noblest, purest,
            most efficient function of Government, which ought to be the most lofty ambition of
            statesmanship—to be civic corner-stones polished after the similitude of a palace.
