
IV.—Law on Behalf of Gospel.
In the moment of Sister Suspiciosa's triumph, the enemy was laying his train against
            her. The little man made his report to the secretary of the Protestant Detectoral
            Association. This gentleman was well-born and well-bred; moved to work in this “cause”
            by an honest hatred of superstition, priestcraft, and lies; now giving all his energies
            to the ambitious design of pulling down the strongholds of Satan. In any other matter he
            could act coolly, and with deliberation; in this he was an enthusiast. He had a keen
            Roman nose. He could scent a priest anywhere in the United Kingdom. He could smell
            Jesuitry in the Queen's drawing-room, a cabinet council or convocation, though he had
            never been at either. His eye was beyond a falcon's; he saw things that were invisible.
            It penetrated through all disguises. He knew a secret emissary of the Pope by the cock
            of his hat, or the color of his stockings. At least, he thought so, and thousands of
            persons acted on his estimate of himself.
“This case,” said he to the little man, when he had concluded his report, “though not
            in its first incidents so grave as we were led to expect, is, in another point of view,
            very serious. Here is a man, as you have expressed it, 'indifferent' to his child's
            life—animal and spiritual. The mother, with a true Protestant heart, and a fine breast
            of milk, is longing to nurture her child, and to deliver it from the toils of the
            Papacy. But the husband, what's his name?.... Ginx—Ginx? a very bad name for a case, by
            the way—GINX'S CASE!—this Ginx has given up his child to the Sisters of Misery. How are
            we to get it away again, without his cooperation?.... Well, we must try.”
The solicitor of the Association was forthwith summoned. When the matter had been laid
            before him, he expressed doubts, offered and withdrew courses of action, and ended by
            suggesting that he should take the opinion of counsel.
“Mr. Stigma, I suppose?” said he to the secretary.
“Oh, yes, Sir Adolphus Stigma is one of our principal supporters, and his son's heart
            is thoroughly with us.”
Messrs. Roundhead, Roundhead and Lollard, drew up a case to be submitted to Mr. Stigma.
            I will only transcribe the latter paragraphs:—
Mr. Ginx being indifferent, and Mrs. Ginx being ready to assist in regaining the
            custody of her child, to be conveyed to a Protestant Home,
 “YOU ARE REQUESTED TO ADVISE: 
“1. Whether a summons should be taken out before a magistrate against the Lady Superior
            of the convent, for enticing away or detaining the infant, under the 56th sect. of 24
            and 25 Vict., c. 100 Or,
“2. Whether the proper remedy is by a writ of Habeas Corpus? and, if so, whether it is
            necessary that the father should be joined in the proceedings or his leave obtained to
            prosecute them? Or, failing these,
“3. Whether counsel is of opinion that this is a case within Talfourd's Act, and an
            application might not be made to the Lord Chancellor, or the Master of the Rolls, on the
            mother's behalf for the custody of her child? And,
“4. To advise generally on behalf of the infant.”
Mr. Adolphus Stigma took ten days to consider. Meanwhile, the infant Ambrosius
            continued to thrive on conventual pap. Then Mr. Stigma wrote his opinion. It was a model
            for a barrister. You took the advice at your own peril—not his. Therefore I transcribe
            it.
 “OPINION. 
“I have given to this case my most careful attention; and it is one of great
            difficulty. Having regard to the questions put to me, I think—
“1. Section 56 of the Act of 24 and 25 Vict., c. 100, appears at first sight to be
            directed against the stealing and abduction of children for marriage, or other improper
            purposes. It provides that 'Whosoever shall UNLAWFULLY, either by force or fraud, lead
            or take away, or decoy, or entice away, or detain any child, etc., with intent to
            deprive ANY parent, etc., of the possession of such child'—shall be guilty of felony.
            It is perfectly clear, that in the case before me, the infant was not, 'by force or
            fraud, led or taken away, or decoyed, or enticed away.' The statute, however, uses the
            word 'detain;' and this, it appears to me, has much the same force and intention as the
            previous words. It is to be noted, however, that it is separated from them by the
            disjunctive 'or;' and, therefore, it might be argued with some plausibility that any act
            of forceful or fraudulent detention, after notice, by persons who have originally
            acquired a child's custody in a lawful way, came within the section. The point is new,
            and of great importance; and if the Protestant Detectoral Association feel disposed to
            try it, they would do so under favorable circumstances in the present case. Should they
            decide to do so, a written demand should be served upon the authorities of the convent,
            by the mother, or some one acting on her behalf, to give up the infant.
“2. The second question is also involved in difficulty. Were the father to be joined in
            the proceedings, the writ of Habeas Corpus would be the correct remedy. But his probable
            refusal necessitates the inquiry whether the mother can alone apply for the writ. The
            general rule of law is, that the father is entitled to the custody and disposition of
            his children. In Cartlidge and Cartlidge, 31, L. J., P. M. & D. 85, it was held that
            this rule would not be generally departed from by the Divorce Court; but in Barnes v.
            Barnes, L. R. I, P. & D. 463, the court made an order, giving the custody of two
            infant children to the mother, respondent in a suit for a dissolution of marriage, on
            the ground that the mother's health was suffering from being deprived of their society,
            and that they were living with a stranger, and not with the father. These cases were,
            however, in the Divorce Court, and do not apply. But, as there seems to be much ground
            in the peculiar circumstances here, for arguing that the mother should have the custody
            of the child, or, at least, that it should not be left to that of persons of a different
            religion from both parents, an application might be made to the Queen's Bench to try the
            question.
“3. Should the common law remedies fail, resort may perhaps be had to the powers in
            Chancery under Talfourd's Act, but on this point I should like to confer with an equity
            counsel before giving a decided opinion. It has been decided under this Act that the
            court has power to give the custody of children under seven to the mother. (Shillito v.
            Collett, 8, W. R. 683-696.) As this infant is but six weeks old it comes within that
            case.
“4. I have no general advice to give on behalf of the infant.
 “ADOLPHUS STIGMA, “9, Plumtree Court.” 
If none of the courses suggested by Mr. Stigma was very decided, Messrs. Roundhead,
            Roundhead and Lollard were not sorry to have three strings to their bow. The Detectoral
            Association were good clients; most of their funds went into their lawyers' pockets. It
            was part of their policy to be litigious. Thereby the world was kept alive to the
            existence of Papacy within its bosom. Who shall say the Association were wrong? Some
            healthy daylight was occasionally let in upon the mysteries of Jesuitism, and there are
            people who think that worth while at the risk of a chance injustice. Though the Devil
            should not get his due, few would give him any sympathy.
The solicitor at once instructed Mr. Dignam Bailey, Q.C., to apply with Mr. Stigma to a
            magistrate for a summons. Mr. Bailey, Q.C., was not chosen for his partialities. In
            religious matters he was a perfect Gallio; but he was like St. Paul in one particular,
            he could be all things to all men.
