
CHAPTER V.
LESLIE had become aware that his presence had become unacceptable to the mistress of
     the house, or rather that his behaviour made it so, and therefore that it was time he should
     go. Her evident pique, which he had understood from Elinor’s report of her conversation with
     Laura, had confirmed this resolution, and he had determined to “have found letters at
     Cantleton” which required his presence elsewhere, even before the Squire looked so grim at him
     for being alone with Elinor in the wood.
At dinner, therefore, he avoided sitting by Elinor, made himself as agreeable to Laura as her
     anger would allow, and before the ladies withdrew, told her he must leave Chan‐
      son Wood next morning. Laura believed not one word of the
     story of the letters. She had heard her brother’s report, and when he upbraided her with
     neglect of her charge, had given him to understand that the young girl chose to manage her own
     concerns, and was amenable neither to reproof nor persuasion. The Squire had guilelessly
     believed her, inclined the more to do so by what he had himself remarked; and Laura, strong in
     the impression she had then made, had courage to attempt the same thing with Leslie.
“I am sorry,” said she, with a voice in which it was easy to perceive emotion, for his
     departure touched the sorest place in her heart, “I am very sorry that you have found reason to
     leave us.”
“Indeed, so am I. I have enjoyed the visit so much, that it is odious to me to learn from my
     letters ...... ”
“From them all?” said Laura, smiling sadly enough. “No, no! it’s not your letters.”
“And what is it, then?” said Leslie, abruptly, and colouring.
“Why should not you treat me as a friend?”
      said Laura. “But I have no right to intrude on your
     secrets.”
“I’ve no secrets,” said Leslie, mounting higher on his high horse.
“I will not ask any,” said Laura; “only I cannot bear to see a friend I value suffering from
     capricious power.”
“You speak in enigmas,” said Leslie. “I am not suffering at all, that I know of, except in
     leaving you.”
“That’s unkind,” said Laura, suddenly, and thrown off her guard; “that’s the last of your
     thoughts. I only wish you were as little deceived as you deceive me.”
“Deceived—deceit!” said Leslie’; “what are we talking about? I leave two friends here, who
     are, I know, as true as the mirror of a mountain lake; two charming ladies, whose friendship is
     the pride of my life—Miss Chanson and her ward, to whose joint society I offer up all my
     homage.”
Laura looked at him steadily for a few seconds, and then changing her manner suddenly,
     uttered her scornful laugh, which made the blood tingle in his face as though he had
      been detected in the most egregious simplicity.
“I doubt nothing, I doubt nobody,” said he. “I am the simplest fellow in the world. When I
     see blue sky, I believe it blue.”
“And the little angels and all?” said Laura.
“Certainly.”
“I’ll say nothing against it, then;” and slightly shrugging her shoulders, she escaped.
When he took leave of the Squire it was the same thing.
“You are going away in a hurry,” said Mr. Chanson. “Have you had a tiff with anybody?”
“By no means. I have business which obliges me ......”
“Ay, ay. They’ll miss you, especially the little girl there; but mind you, I know nothing
     about her, beyond that I must take care of her. She has not a penny, and I am afraid is
     whimmy.”
Leslie was vexed at the Squire’s caution. Laura’s would have been nothing, had not her
     brother’s confirmed it. There must be some‐
      thing, as both had made a similar observation. Yet, when he
     met Elinor before breakfast next morning, walking in the garden, and she told him that she had
     hoped to see him there, and it was therefore she had come, he forgot to ask himself if such
     child‐like simplicity could be feigned, and renewed all those vows of friendship and support
     which Elinor needed; and vowswarmer than which he felt instinctively would not be understood.
     His intention was to leave her for a time, since his hostess took his desertion so much amiss,
     but if his own heart preserved the impression Elinor had made upon it, he had resolved to see
     her again at any cost, and then to let the course of events determine their future
     relations.
Accordingly he betook himself home, where he had occupation and amusement awaiting him, and
     where the novelty of being master gave him interests which made it the place most frequently in
     his thoughts when absent. It was an ancient house, which seemed, from the remains of building
     about it, to have been once a portion of a much larger resi‐
      dence. It stood in a valley, upon an isolated hill, on the
     slopes of which the various ruined walls, covered for the most part with the vegetation of
     years, and crowned with mountain ash and birch, offered many a romantic seat, and many a
     sheltered bit of terrace for whole natural beds of wild flowers. The house was out of order,
     but not ruinous, and offered scope to the eye and fancy of the proprietor as to its restoration
     to a beautiful and convenient dwelling. From it one looked down the valley to the church, with
     its spire rising above the cottages and orchards of a village, and on the stream which wound
     its way through wood and meadow, wandering on towards hills, for ever varying in light and
     shade, and as it had a western aspect, offering every evening the gorgeous spectacle of
     sunset.
All this valley belonged to Leslie, and so did the neighbouring lands, for about 3,000 acres
     in all, of poor but lovely country. He had a neighbour, richer than himself, and with a grander
     place, to the east of his valley; and a few other scattered houses, together
      with a market town about six miles on, over the common and
     heathy grounds, made up his neighbourhood. There was plenty of game on Leslie’s estate, and one
     plan for this autumn was to amuse himself with its pursuit; but though he was as active as
     might reasonably be guessed from his admirable frame, he had never got up to any enthusiasm for
     hunting or shooting. He tried the latter the first morning after his return, but though the
     partridges were plentiful, and his success considerable, he thought it a more stupid occupation
     than ever, to‐day.
While he was walking over the dry stubbles, what was Elinor doing? Was she reading one of
     those little dreamy books which he had commented upon many a time, till an unwilling smile
     broke over her lips, and she turned away her face that he might not see it? or was she
     suffering from Laura’s bad temper, with that pretty mournful expression in her eyes and on her
     mouth, which made her look even younger than her own fresh youth? Was she sitting, cool and
     pale, on the fallen oak in the wood, while he was
      toiling, hot and red, in company with his gamekeeper,
     watching a dog beguiling a bird?
He went home very early, and then walked about his own place, cutting away boughs which shut
     out the lovely view, and projecting how to convert into an entrance a hexagon room supported by
     a central pillar, which was said once to have been a chapel.
But he was constantly leaning the hatchet idle against a tree, or drawing scrolls and scrawls
     on the margin of the paper where he was making his plans—his thoughts being elsewhere, at the
     side of Elinor, thinking over something said or done by her, and what he had said, or had
     better have said or done, in return.
Two or three days made his home intolerable—intolerable, at least, to a man so free to go
     whithersoever his wishes directed him—and getting up one morning at dawn, from a bed where he
     could not sleep, he put up a portmanteau before his servant was awake, and by the time the
     labourers came to their work, was driving to the little neighbouring town where the coach
     changed horses at seven
      o’clock. Nobody asked, and nobody knew where he was going: he
     went quite alone, and by one change of vehicle and another reached the neighbourhood of Chanson
     Wood by nightfall.
He would not on any account have been recognised; he was ashamed of returning so soon, and
     took the most genuine precautions to remain in obscurity. He engaged a room a couple of miles
     from the park, at a little public house where, having never entered it during his visit to the
     Squire, he was unknown; and pretending something about an engagement to survey the country, and
     displaying some paper and pencils, felt himself safe from inquiry.
The intense desire to see Elinor again, however, would not let him rest in the house, and as
     soon as the night was quite dark, he took his way along the lane, and through the wicket beside
     the carriage entrance, and then by cautious approaches to that side of the house where was the
     room the family occupied in the evening. All was carelessly secure, as in a great country house
     in the midst of its
      gardens, and inhabited by its multitude; and he had but to
     push open the low iron gate in the fence between the garden and the park, to find himself upon
     the walk which led up beneath the windows. There was a flower border, and then a green sward,
     between the house and the gravel walk, so that Leslie, by walking on the turf, and then on the
     silent mould of the border, got noiselessly up to an open sash, and could look in and command
     the whole room.
All was silent inside. There were three persons, and one was Elinor. She was sitting beside a
     lamp, with her face to the window, but it was leant over a piece of work which she held in her
     hands. There was nothing but white of different shades about her; her muslin gown was white, a
     white satin bow fastened it at her throat, a white lace border, or collar, lay flat on her low
     shoulders, the work in her hands was white cambric, which she was embroidering; her pale face
     and fair hands were touched by the lamplight, and her motionless figure seemed patient of a
     dull employment and ungenial companions.

Laura reclined in a chair, partly turned from the window, reading; and the Squire was fast
     asleep on a sofa, breaking the silence by regular snoring, loud enough to increase Leslie’s
     chance of escaping detection. He saw her then, he could speak to her with silently moving lips,
     he could appeal to her with passionate eyes and entreating hands, he could bend his knee
     towards the ground, adoring her beauty, or rather her loveableness. Perhaps he a little
     over‐wrought these gesticulations, for while most wrapped in them, a little dog, which was
     lying with its back well into Laura’s silk gown, jumped up, and gave a sharp volley of
     barks.
Elinor looked suddenly up, but Leslie was gone into the shadow. The Squire did not cease his
     sonorous aspirations, and Laura was too much used to her Spitz’s hysterical alarms to move so
     much as her head. But Leslie felt his security gone; and that probably the little Spitz’s eyes
     were even then on the window, beaming with the purpose of another frantic yap upon the smallest
     sign from outside. He withdrew very cautiously, but his soul was bitter against the Spitz.

“Let me catch you outside these walls, Master Puff, and see if you disturb me again,”
     murmured he, as he retreated.
The necessity of his soul was to see Elinor again; he wished to be the unseen spectator of
     what she was and did, to make sure that a creature so innocent really existed, and to enjoy the
     spectacle if it was true. To enjoy it and destroy it; for he looked no further than to present
     gratification of the passion which filled his breast—all his remoter thoughts were of ambition
     and success in the tempestuous world, which seemed another sphere from that he occupied at
     present.
He put on, next day, the dress of a workman, and as deeply slouched a hat as he could suppose
     consistent with the character. He provided himself with an axe, and hoped to pass unrecognised,
     if he could avoid direct communication with his former host and fellow guests; and taking his
     way into the woods about the house, went first to the brook, where he had shown Elinor the
     waterfall, and where he knew she had occasionally resorted after that time.

His expectations were more than fulfilled, for he had no pains of waiting to go through, no
     fears, no doubtful hopes; a figure was standing on the very spot whither he had led Elinor, and
     though the face was turned away, the elegant shape was that which he longed to see. The falling
     water prevented his step from being heard, and he was able to take up a place among the trees,
     where he could observe her, yet run scarce any danger of detection. Should she perceive him, he
     would deal a few strokes at the trees, and trust to be taken for the forester, and pass
     unnoticed.
The unconscious Elinor made her preparations for passing the burning hours in shade and a
     refreshing atmosphere. She laid aside her bonnet, put by her gloves, unfastened the cotton gown
     from her throat, and it charmed him to see she did not open a book, but unfolded a piece of
     household work, and industriously shaped, and hemmed, and sewed at the white jacket she was
     making. Sometimes she paused, and looked long at the lovely fall of waters, and once going down
     to the edge
      of the brook, took water in her joined hands, and drank from
     that pretty cup. Then returning, she resumed her work, and gave no sign of thoughts within,
     except a few times singing some notes, like a bird alone in the sun, trying a passage taught by
     the impulse of its melodious throat.
It was a fair picture of still life, and he looked at it with the passion of a lover, and the
     eye of an artist; but at last he began to grow discontented that there was no sign of wanting
     or thinking of him, no looks cast upwards, no sighs, no restless movement, which he might have
     interpreted into regret that he was not there. Should he suddenly appear, would he be welcome
     even? Yes, welcome, perhaps, as a novelty, not as the thing desired—welcome to come and go, but
     if she knew he had come all that way merely to look at her, she would laugh. He was a very
     young man, and little knew the patience of a modest maiden, nor the absence of all spoken
     words, and speaking signs, when she is with herself alone, and is occupied with her natural
     duties and works.

He watched her all that morning, and saw her at last fold her work, rise and gather some
     beech leaves while she stood under the tree, to wind one into the other, till they made a
     wreath, then hanging it on her wrist, she took up her wicker basket, and shortly withdrew
     towards the house.
“Dear household Lar,” said he, coming and standing exactly in front of the seat she had
     occupied, “one day you will sit beside some humble hearth, content to do the lowly offices of
     home, to live the joyless life of little wants and coarse means; your fragile loveliness will
     be stained by weather and hard work, your pure voice will have lost its clearness, but neither
     you nor yours will think it worsened since these days. I should not love you then—I shall be in
     my grave, or on the summit of ambition then—but there is an interval between that time and
     this, in which, oh! Elinor! your quiet heart must beat—beat as mine does now—in which you must
     know the agony of my adoration—in which we must make life all diamond‐light, if it be but for
     the space of a moon’s change! Ex‐
      quisite calm face, when will you lighten thus for me?”
Next day, he came again, and saw her again. It was, as the village bells told him, a Saint’s
     day, and Elinor, whom no one helped to perform her usual devotions in an appointed place, came
     into the entangled woods to find a temple. He saw her kneel in front of the great tree, and
     with humble eyes cast upon the ground, sign the cross upon her bosom, and open her little book
     of prayer.
Even in these devotions there was something which suited his feeling about Elinor better than
     if the prayer had been more untaught, more her own creation. She passively did what she had
     been taught to do—she murmured over a form of words, continually coming to the same repetition,
     and making the same sign of devotion. She turned her pages to the places where marks in the
     book showed she ought to go, and though the service lasted long, showed no wish either to
     shorten or prolong it, but did what was set down for her, and then rose and had
     done.
Again she took her seat upon the fallen
      tree, again unfolded her work, and again, with the shadows of
     boughs and leaves moving over her as the breath of air gently swayed them, sat plying her
     household needle. What thoughts broke in upon the even train which was necessary to guide that
     needle, he would fain have guessed. Surely some thoughts must accompany the motion of those
     active fingers—perhaps there were many given to convent days; perhaps some to him—he wished it,
     but hardly hoped it; but at last, without the sewing being interrupted, he heard well known
     notes begin to murmur from her throat, and go on to a continued but still low song, which made
     him believe those tranquil thoughts had indeed been recalling him, and had come to the point
     which made that song and him one common subject, for it was the air of a duett in which he had
     attempted to join her, an air sung at village weddings in Brittany, and he had never seen her
     laugh so cordially as at his failures in trying to keep a second. Now he heard the village
     notes and verses again, and believed his own image was before her.


“Nous sommes venus vous voir,
Du fond de not’e village,
Pour vous complimenter
Sur vot’e mariage
A monsieur votre epoux,
Aussi bien comme à vous,” etc.

She broke off before the verse was finished, and he saw her look from her work, and though he
     could not hear it, was certain she laughed—briefly, as one does alone. Then there was some
     measuring or adapting in the work, which took up her attention, and obliged her to rise and use
     the fallen tree for a table, and when all was in order, she again sat down to work, and seemed
     to have forgotten all about “vot’e mariage.” Probably they were the words in the song which
     were the very last she thought about.
The intense pleasure of watching, and appropriating her solitary ways and movements, had gone
     on long past mid‐day, when Leslie heard a step coming along the rough track which led from the
     wood walk to this unfrequented place. It was only a servant, who, approaching Elinor, delivered
     some message
      and went away again; and she, in consequence it seemed,
     collected the materials of her employment, and left her seat probably to obey a summons to the
     house. Leslie was vexed, first at losing his amusement, and next at the way in which it was
     lost.
“I thought he had chosen a spot all unknown,” said he, to himself—“one which a lover only
     could discover—but it seems the very servants know where she is to be found, much more every
     idle puppy and loiterer belonging to the society”—puppy himself, though of a stout, handsome
     breed.
However, there was no probability of her return, he thought, and after half an hour’s waiting
     for the chance of it, he had moved away, and was descending towards the brook, when he
     perceived a motion in the boughs overhanging the path, and stopping to watch, perceived it was
     Elinor coming again, and in haste, to the accustomed spot. Leslie was in front of her, and
     accident gave him a better place to see her than he had ventured to choose for himself; his
     fear was that she should also perceive him, but she evidently
      was in a mood so preoccupied as not readily to have her
     attention caught by outer objects. All her humble tranquillity was gone. As soon as she reached
     her fallen tree, she sank down upon it, and leaning both hands upon one of the projecting
     branches, hid her face, and wept bitterly. She lifted her head more than once, to wipe her
     streaming eyes, and then hid them again, as though the lovely scene were blotted and rendered
     null by the grief within.
Presently she rose, and went hastily down to the brook, and there kneeling and stooping over
     it, dashed the water repeatedly over her face, and let her hair come dripping from the stream.
     She then sat down on a rock close to the margin, and not five yards from Leslie, but, as it
     chanced, with her back to him, and bringing from a little basket a case containing paper and a
     pen, she put her lithe figure into such a position as to find a desk on part of the rock where
     she sat, and began hastily to write.
Leslie’s heart beat faster than ever. Had she not asked him for his direction, that she
      might apply to him if ever she was in trouble? Was she
     writing to him? To whom else was it probable, that in that sudden grief, whatever it might be,
     she should be writing? and he so near—he could almost see the lines as she traced them. Did she
     summon him to her? What would she say if he were suddenly at her side?—but then he should lose
     all the gratitude due to obeying her call—he should be the inferior who had come to seek,
     instead of the superior who had been besought to come. No, he would not hazard that!—besides,
     he was not sure that she was writing to him; it might be some one else to whom she was
     appealing. She had very suddenly made him her confidant—it was not impossible that there might
     be others equally favoured. What was it the Squire had said she was—whimmy?—he had
     called her whimmy. Yet, alas! that she should cry so, and no one be near to comfort her. Would
     not she cling to him like a friend if she saw him? would not she be gladder than she knew? Yet,
     possibly, no!—he would not hazard it—but that letter he would get by some means, and
      it should not be long before it was his; then he should know
     what to do.
Meantime, Elinor finished the hastily‐written letter, folded it, and replacing the little
     matters in her basket, pushed the basket among the ferns and stones, and hastily took her way
     by a difficult path down the dingle. Leslie concluded that she was going to the post‐office to
     put in her letter; and he purposed to follow soon after, and ask for it in his own name, in
     case it should be addressed to him. But then the letter would be directed to his own place, of
     which he had given Elinor the direction, and at the post‐office they would not dare give it
     except where it was addressed. Yet he knew the old woman who acted as post‐mistress, and she
     had been constantly in the habit of seeing him during his visit at Mr. Chanson’s, and perhaps,
     if he resumed the clothes and character of Mr. Leslie, she might be prevailed upon to disregard
     the direction in favour of the bodily presence of the man directed to. He therefore rushed back
     to his lodgings to change his peasant’s dress, and then, regardless of being discovered,
      regardless of everything except the possession of the letter,
     he turned back boldly to the post‐office. For the convenience of the great house, it was
     located at the park gates, in the lodge, and was kept by the same old woman who had taken
     notice of Elinor’s watch for Mr. Leslie. She was perfectly familiar with his appearance, but
     when he went into the house and inquired if there was anything for him, she started as if she
     had no expectation nor wish to see him, and seemed to take the circumstance occurring as a
     personal injury.
“A letter for P. Leslie, Esq.?” said she; “there’s more fuss than enough about P. Leslie,
     Esq. I can’t sit to my tea for people all coming for that blessed letter.”
“Then there is one,” cried Leslie, eagerly, “give it.”
“I did not say there was,” said the old woman; “and if there should be, it’s gone away in the
     west bag as directed.”
“Gone!” cried he, stamping impatiently; “what luck I have! but when—there’s been no mail
     since—when did it go, I say?”
“The mail was due at eleven and half,”
      said the post‐mistress, “but it might be ten minutes later.”
“You are not telling me the truth,” said Leslie; “the letter was not here then.”
“If you know better than I, sir, then I say no more.”
“Nay!” said Leslie; “but you know you were telling stories—and what’s the use? The letter is
     here, and you may as well get half a guinea by giving it me as not.”
“I can’t do no such thing; it’s made up in the bag to go where it ought to go, and I’m
     forbidden by my office to let anybody meddle with it, except the right person at the right
     place.”
“But,” said Leslie, “you have already let somebody meddle; the person—the people—who you say
     have been disturbing you at your tea.”
The old woman coloured up to the eyes, though she would not give way. “I said somebody
     disturbed me; and so she did. Was not the hole cut away in the window for letters to be dropped
     in? Where’s the use of bringing them into the house, and not being content with the natural
     gap.”

“That’s not what you meant by disturbing you,” said Leslie; “that person may have brought the
     letter into the house, but after it was in the box, I believe you have been taking it out for
     somebody else, and you can’t produce it for the right owner.”
“Can’t I?” said the old woman.
“No! I shall inform against you,” said. Leslie, “for allowing your office to be tampered
     with, unless you immediately put it into my possession.”
“That will just be doing the thing you are going to complain of,” said the old woman.
Leslie was provoked to smile.“Come, come,” said he, “I will have the letter, and
     you may as well take my money at once, for the trouble of opening your bags, although I know
     they are not shut. Here, old lady, don’t tell any more lies, but do as you are bid.”
The ancient post‐mistress laughed, and went to the box into which the letters were dropped.
     Leslie found out her fibs as fast as she composed them, and she acknowledged him a master
     spirit. A little rummaging and a little grumbling produced the letter in
      question, and Leslie seizing it, first of all before
     devouring the contents, carefully examined the folds and fastening, for he had conceived
     certain suspicions from the old lady’s words.
“Who opened this letter?” said he, abruptly, after looking at it attentively.
“Nobody but yourself,” said she, trying to lay her thumb on the fastening; “you have worried
     it in turning it about so.”
“No, no!” said Leslie, guarding it from her, for though he had only asked the question as a
     random shot, he now was certain that there was some mystery.
“That I have not, neither shall you; but you shall tell me what I ask, for I
     have you in my power, and I will know.”
The old sharpshooter was chased from her defences, but ran and took up another position.
     “Well—well,” said she, “you are a young gentleman, and a mighty good‐looking, and if I were
     you, I should not take it amiss that the ladies thought worth while escorting my letters, and
     jealousing what was writ in them. It is not old gentlemen and old ladies as do such
     things.”

“In short, Miss Chanson has had this letter in her hands before me.”
“Oh! dear me!—Miss Chanson!—no, dear no!—I never said no such thing.”
“No, you did not say it!” said Leslie. “I perfectly comprehend that it could not possibly be
     that lady; and now don’t be afraid, for I know all I want. Good evening.”
“That’s a wilful man,” said the post‐mistress to herself, “and those be two silly girls to
     have anything to do with him.”
Leslie meantime walked hastily away, and took a path over the fields to be out of
     observation, opening and reading the much canvassed letter as he went along. He could not but
     smile at the simplicity of the writer’s alarms, and of her confidence in him.
“Sir, (”that’s Monsieur,“ said he)—

”SIR—You are my only friend; I do not know what to do unless you can help me—and you told me
      to ask you for help if I was in trouble. Have you money you can lend me? I will pay you back,
      a little every quarter, and once you said it was not wrong
       to borrow from you. Miss Chanson called me, and gave me many
      bills, which I did not know of—perhaps they will put me in prison. What will become of me?
“ELINOR LADYLIFT.”

“Poor, precious, enchanting Elinor!” cried he; “how unkind, how sententious, they are to you.
     I can see the matter from here; ordinary bills are thrust into your hands, without explanation,
     without advice, and your conventual imagination sees nothing in them but an ogre of a creditor,
     and dungeons and chains. Oh! how can I be soonest with you? I dare not come at once, for even
     your innocence would disbelieve that I was as far off as I ought to have been when I got your
     summons. Yet—summons! no, it is not that; nothing was further, I do believe, from your
     thoughts, than to call me to you—yet, poor dove, you have done so, and when such fair birds are
     no better looked after by their natural guardians, what is indeed to become of them? Now I must
     write so as not to frighten her.”

Accordingly he wrote in the soberest manner, making much, indeed, of her embarrassments, but
     promising to alleviate them; and then informed her “that particular circumstances having called
     him into her neighbourhood, he had received her letter in a most fortunately brief space of
     time, and he should be able, that very evening, to meet her near the waterfall in the wood, and
     to bring her the means of extricating herself from her difficulties.”
“She will wonder why I should not walk straight up to the house, and ask to see Miss
     Ladylift,” said he, as he sealed his letter; “but I hope the spirit of intrigue and coquetry
     may awaken in her sufficiently to do as I suggest, and ask no questions.”
The next difficulty was to convey this letter to her, and it perplexed him till he saw the
     Squire and Laura ride past his lodging, and thus knew they were out of the way; and then he
     resolved to go himself to the house, in the peasant’s dress he had worn in the morning, and
     there to put his answer into the hands of a labouring clod in the gardens. This he did, begging
     him to take “Mr. Davis
      tailior’s acquoint for the French lady, up speedy to the
     house.”
The obliging clod complied, and Leslie returned to his lodging, and early in the evening to
     the woods, expecting the guileless creature who put such confidence in him. Nor was he
     disappointed. About nine o’clock, of a warm, moonlit, September evening, Leslie standing
     anxiously in the wood‐path, saw Elinor coming along it to meet him.
“How good you are,” she said, as they met; “but indeed I did not mean to trouble you thus. I
     thought you would have written to me; indeed, I did not think of your coming.”
“But you are not displeased?” said Leslie, taking her hand, which she withdrew when she had
     performed the proper greeting. “For my part, I am so happy to be of any service to you, I am so
     happy to see you again, that I cannot but bless the difficulties which have brought this
     meeting about.”
“Oh! Mr. Leslie, I am sure you would not say so, if you knew how miserable I have been.”
     
“But you are miserable no longer, are you?” said Leslie; “you feel that I am able and willing
     to remove every cause of pain—I am able to make you happy.”
“I hope so,” said Elinor; “but it will be a long time before I can pay you.”
“What! pay me? Oh! I was not thinking of that; I was thinking,” said Leslie, drawing her
     gently to the fallen tree, where he had watched her sitting those autumn days, and placing
     himself beside her—“I was thinking whether you did not know that I look upon this moment, when
     you trust me, when I you apply to me, when you know me to be a better friend than any of those
     whom chance has thrown you amongst, as the most delightful that ever in all my youth and
     enjoyment passed over me”—he possessed himself of her hand—“and I don’t deceive myself, do I?
     You know me to be your truest well‐wisher, your most anxious counsellor, the person who would
     desire your happiness beyond all other things, and do whatever may best promote it.”
Elinor’s hand stayed in his, but it was
      with the calmest voice she answered, “Yes, or you would not
     be here to help me.”
“No, no! and you felt it was none of those guardians of yours, who was willing to do so?—you
     did not apply to them?”
“Oh! I should never have done such a thing,” said Elinor, the slightest smile passing over
     her face, as at the suggestion of something wholly out of the question.
“I have a kind of right, you have given me a right to counsel you, guard you; you are
     inclined to do as I advise you?”
“Yes,” said Elinor, with a mournful inflection in her voice. “I know nothing at all of this
     world I am in, and I have found you wise, knowing everything. You can teach me what you please,
     but I know you will teach me what is right.”
“Ah, yes! right—the right way to be happy—and we are creatures made to be happy, not to
     suffer pain from each, other, not to be unkindly treated, but to seek out those who love us,
     and to put all our trust that what they do will be the best they know how to do, for our
     happiness.”

Elinor was silent. She was listening, and trying to comprehend.
“Elinor, did any ever devote themselves to you, and think, of nothing except how to please,
     how to take care of you; what you liked, where you would go?”
“Oh! no, certainly,” said Elinor.
“Your kind Mother in the Convent, your teachers the nuns, your companions—did you ever feel
     that when you came they rejoiced, when you went they mourned; that you were the thing they
     first thought of at waking; the object for which they planned their plans, lamented their
     failures?”
“No!” said Elinor, “they were not so unreasonable.”
“But he who loves you is so unreasonable, so reasonable at the same time, for that which is
     dearer than oneself must be more present, more cherished than oneself—the happiness of that
     creature must be before every other wish and plan. Would it be no pleasure, dearest Elinor, to
     be thus beloved?”
His right hand suddenly transferred her’s to his left, and went round her waist, nor did
      it fail to press that slender, warm column, which it had
     encircled. Elinor did not withdraw, but she raised her clear eyes to his, and met his fierce
     glance with such inquiring, innocent calmness, that his arm released its hold, and he did but
     raise her hand to his mouth, and pressed one kiss upon it.
“May I not love you, Elinor?”
“Indeed I think you do,” said Elinor.
“I doubt whether you do as much for me,” said Leslie, to himself, and he felt that he should
     but set her on her guard by any further revelation of his feelings; but he was not wholly
     displeased with the step he had advanced. All recollection of the cause of their meeting had
     departed from him; but while he was thinking how best to go on with the interview, Elinor took
     advantage of the pause, and returned to the difficulties he was to settle for her, which to him
     appeared prosaic and superfluous, but to her was the thing that made their meeting interesting.
     Leslie took from her hand the little neat bundle of papers which she produced; he comprehended
     that Laura had not chosen to explain or soften
      anything, and promised that he would himself arrange
     all.
He would then have passed to other subjects, but Elinor would stay no longer after she had
     fulfilled her errand, and then he fixed the next afternoon for another meeting at the same
     place, to give account of what he should have done.
“Say nothing of our meeting,” said he; “it is best not. I can scarcely explain why; but
     promise that you will follow my advice.”
Elinor did so. She had no conscience but Leslie—her own had never come much into activity,
     and that which she brought from the Convent had been all overthrown.
Elinor returned to the house, and to the saloon where Mr. Chanson and his sister Laura were
     sitting, and entering it with her light, noiseless movement, was taking up her work, and about
     to seat herself in her usual place, when Laura stopped her, by asking, in a constrained
     voice,
“Where have you been, Elinor?”
“In the wood,” said Elinor, the colour rising, she knew not why.

“But, my dear,” said the Squire, “that’s not the proper place for a young girl like you, at
     night, all alone; you should not go there.”
“And were you alone?” said Laura, briefly.
Elinor had nothing to say; the question was so home, that it admitted but of yes or no; one
     of which she might not, and the other she would not say.
“Speak out,” said Mr. Chanson; “don’t be afraid of us. Tell the truth always.”
“Oh, yes! that I will, always,” said Elinor.
“You were alone, then, I dare say, were you not?” said Mr. Chanson. “Still I don’t like you
     to wander about alone, and you will do it no more, will you?”
“Very well,” said Elinor.
But Laura, speaking almost at the same time, said, “You were not alone, then;
     you can’t deny it, Elinor. You went there to meet somebody.”
Elinor answered nothing, but bent her head over her sewing, and had the tears in her
     eyes.
Mr. Chanson was almost as much embar‐
      rassed as she. He rose up, crushed the newspaper, and
     turning his back, leaned on the mantel‐shelf, taking part in his own heat with the
     embarrassed young girl, against his sister, though the latter was clearly in the right.
“Was it Mr. Leslie?” said Laura.
“Oh! Mr. Leslie!” said her brother, half turning round; “quite impossible.”
Laura could not be quite sure it was he, for though, indeed, the broken seal of Elinor’s
     letter had revealed the intercourse between them, she could not comprehend by what means he
     could so rapidly have obeyed the summons; yet she could not but feel it must be Leslie, and her
     anxiety and dread about it were extreme.
“Speak, Elinor! say whether or not it was he.”
“No, no,” said Mr. Chanson; “there is no sense in asking such a thing. I had a letter from
     him two days ago, about the distemper‐powders; he was not going from home—besides ......”
What there was besides he did not explain,
      but Elinor took courage under this unexpected defence, and
     though she would not say a word of denial herself, felt half justified by the denial he
     extemporised, and sewed away, supported in the silence she resolved to observe. Laura, on the
     other hand, was unduly discouraged, and her pressing investigation, which must have ended in a
     victory, resulted in an impatient “Well!” and the three sat in the most uncomfortable silence,
     till Elinor, who felt thoroughly humble, and anxious to do something right, though she could
     not do the one right thing they wanted, so anxiously watched her chances of finding the
     Squire’s spectacles, picking up his book, and placing it softly on the table when it fell out
     of his slumbering hand, of remembering where Laura had laid down the key of the tea‐chest, of
     letting Puff out of the room, and letting him in again, that Mr. Chanson’s heart was quite
     softened, and gently touching her head, he said, in a low voice,
“You are a good little girl—only mind what Laura tells you;” and Elinor was so pleased with
     the kind words, that she felt as
      if she should never obey anybody else, nor perhaps would
     she, had there been as much womanly kindness and sincerity in the sister as of gentleness in
     the brother.
But Laura had feelings quite apart from the interests of Elinor, which prevented any approach
     to kindliness, and those were her own concern in Leslie, and in all that he did. He had secured
     a place in her affections such as he never aspired to, and which, at this time, he would much
     rather have been without; and it made Laura wild with jealousy to think that one day Elinor
     might occupy the place which she herself, with all her beauty, wit, and wealth, longed for in
     vain. Should those two be coming and going together, civil to her, but lovers of each other?
     should it be by short and transient fits that she should see Leslie, but Elinor be of his
     house, always his and with him? should the stranger’s sustained attention be for her, but the
     word, the sign, the look, the understood gesture, be for Elinor? Laura could not endure it, and
     the thing was so inadmissible, that whatever she could do to prevent it
      seemed the thing to be done—not the right thing, perhaps,
     but still to be done. She hated Elinor, and would willingly have seen in her all those defects
     which would disenchant Leslie; she wished they were in her, and acknowledged to be there by
     everybody; and when Elinor had gently crept out of the room, at an early bedtime, she broke the
     long silence that had descended upon them all, and began to talk in an ingenuous, candid tone,
     to her brother.
“There are great excuses to be made for that poor child,” said she. “The liberty she enjoys
     is so sudden, and the training she has had is so bad, that she is liable to errors from which
     other people are free.”
“Yes, indeed,” said the Squire; “and it is very kind and just of you, Laura, to make excuses
     for her. She wants a friend.”
“Yes! I only wish she were more willing to listen to me.”
“She is a little wilful, is she?”
“I think you must have perceived that. Don’t you see how she keeps apart all the
     morning? I am always willing—anxious—
      that she should come to my room and be with me; but was not
     it strange, how she persecuted Mr. Leslie to attend to her?—not unnatural certainly—a man was a
     marvel to a girl from a convent; but I explained to her the common forms of society, and she
     should have altered her conduct in consequence; however, it was just the same, and I’m afraid,
     I really am, that this walk of hers has something to do with an appointment—if not with him,
     with somebody else.”
“I hope not,” said the Squire; “though, indeed, I saw that Leslie was rather in love with
     her.”
“Oh! no, no!” cried Laura, anxiously; “a man is always flattered if a girl shows any liking
     for him, but that’s all. How could he take a fancy for a child like that—uneducated yet
     artificial, not pretty nor amusing?”
“She does not say much,” answered the Squire.
“Besides, Lawrence,” went on Miss Chanson, “though he might have been pleased with her, if he
     had been wholly fancy‐free, yet—being as he is ......”

“What? is Leslie in love with anybody—hey; Laura! is that it? is it possible, my
     dear?”
“I have never said a word to any human being before,” said Laura, turning away her head.
“Is it possible? The thing I should like beyond all others; why did not I know?”
“Nay, you think more of it than you ought. Indeed, Lawrence, I don’t quite understand him;
     something. is on his mind, which—which ...... in short, there has no word passed between us.
     Has he any fortune? Sometimes I have thought, that knowing me to have a large one, his own want
     of any may have held him back.”
“Oh! he is not poor, but very proud. Are you civil enough to him, Laura?”
“Nay, certainly,” said Laura; “it is for him to seek, not me.”
“Yes, yes; but at the same time, I can tell you that Fanny Wimbledon would have been Mrs.
     Chanson, if she had not thought it necessary to chaff and flout me, when I was looking for a
     kind word.”

“Did she like you, vain man?”.
“So I heard afterwards; but I was in Caithness, and it was too far to come back. So don’t
     throw him away—that is, if you think you could like him.”
“Lawrence, you are mother and brother to me;” and she laid her head on his shoulder. “I
      do like him.”
“Is it so, dear Laura?” said he, fondly caressing her; “then may Providence bring you and him
     together. If I can help you ....”
“Only say nothing to him. Oh! for heaven’s sake! do nothing rash. Proud he is, and a word
     might alarm him. But it is a comfort, brother, to have made a confidant of you, and to you I am
     not ashamed of saying what no mortal ear besides must know.”
Thus talked brother and sister; it was a pity that Laura knew all the time that she was
     lying. Those words of her own, “I have never revealed it to another human being,” took herself
     in, for although they conveyed a great deal, they affirmed nothing.
Elinor was perplexed beyond measure what to do about her next day’s engagement. The
      utmost she wished was to tell Leslie that she could meet him
     no more; but she knew not by what means to effect this. Laura would not let her go beyond her
     sight. The room, which she had declared herself so anxious should be common
     between them, was for the first time opened to Elinor; she took a pretext of some fine lace,
     which was in bad condition, and which Elinor, profiting by a convent accomplishment, had once
     offered to put in order. She had then told how a certain veil had been wanted for an image of
     the Virgin, in a procession, and how it had been trusted to her to put to rights, when some
     others had refused through fear of its tenderness. She had spread it on a thick bed of cambric,
     and then, by patient immersions in certain prepared waters, had removed every trace of dirt and
     stain, without the least violence to the frail fabric, so that when the image appeared in it
     next day, inquiries had been made who could so successfully have renovated the delicate
     fabric.
This had been a tale of the early days of her arrival, and she was surprised to‐day at
      Laura’s recollection of it, and not best pleased that the
     occupation should have been given her just this morning. Then followed a drive in which Elinor
     was included, the object of which was to meet a young relation of the Chansons, Sir Peter
     Bicester, who had just got orders to join his regiment in Ceylon, and was coming for a farewell
     visit to Chanson Wood. He was a lively, thoughtless lad of eighteen, a great admirer of his
     cousin Laura, who was six years older than he, and in his intense attentions, during their
     after‐dinner saunter in the garden, Laura lost sight of Elinor, and Elinor, with the speed of
     an Italian greyhound, ran to the waterfall to say one word, and but one, to Leslie. In case of
     not finding him, she had provided herself with a little note, merely, “I cannot come this
     evening. Mr. Chanson forbids me to go out.—ELINOR LADYLIFT.” This she intended to lay on the
     fallen tree, and trusted it would be found by Leslie, should she not meet with him.
Leslie had been there early—as early as he thought it possible the usual morning ride or
     drive of the others would set Elinor at liberty
      —and the longer she delayed, the stronger the fear became
     that he should not see her, so much the intenser grew his desire to do so, and the regard in
     which he held the object of it.
“Innocent and artless Elinor!” thought he; “with a whole heart to give, a whole nature to be
     made happy, is there anything better in life than to make and share your happiness?” and then
     more dreamily his thoughts dwelt upon images of virtuous felicity, upon the meanness of
     betraying such guileless confidence, and upon the difficulty which he had not hitherto counted
     upon of converting her quiet feeling into one of passion.
It was already quite dusk, when his ear at last caught a footfall. It was of one running
     quickly; and eagerly springing to meet her, he at last beheld Elinor, and felt an almost
     unknown pleasure in the reality that she was there.
“I am here for one minute only,” said she. “Mr. Chanson forbade me to walk out in the
     evening. I only wanted to tell you not to wait.”

“And why?” said Leslie, holding fast her hand.
“He says it is wrong. You did not tell me so, or I would not have done it.”
“I know no wrong; but you must not go yet. What! will you not stay to know what I have been
     doing for you? All is settled now.”
“Oh! kind friend,” said Elinor, receiving the little bundle of papers which he had prepared
     so as to look business‐like (taking care that in fact they should trouble her no more), “how
     can I thank you? I can only say thank you—thank you—Mr. Leslie, good—good Mr. Leslie. Farewell!
     I must not stay; let me go.”
“And it is this moment I have been waiting for all day,” said he.
“Have you, indeed? I am very sorry to have kept you so long. How kind of you not to have gone
     away. But I am so glad you did stay; I had got a note written for you, but I should have been
     uncertain whether you received it.”
“A note!” cried Leslie; “let me have it;”
      and perceiving it closed in her hand, he gently took that
     hand, to draw the paper from when a violent start from Elinor made him, too, start, and looking
     where she looked, he saw Laura standing but a few yards from them. She came forward directly
     that she perceived she was observed.
“Elinor,” said she, “is it thus you keep your promise?”
“I did not promise,” said Elinor; “besides, I came only to say that I could not come.”
“Go home,” said Laura, in a low, trembling voice.
Leslie did not mean to be scolded like a schoolboy; he approached Elinor with the open,
     commonplace air of an acquaintance, and offering his hand, “Good evening, then, Miss Ladylift,”
     said he. “It gives me great pleasure if I have been useful to you, and I trust you will command
     my services on any future occasion.”
“Go home, Elinor,” Miss Chanson repeated, and Elinor, puzzled, moved away and disappeared,
     letting fall, as she did so, the little twisted note, which by this time she had forgotten.

Laura, meantime, made several efforts to speak, while Leslie politely waited, his eyes
     averted, and only listening indifferently for anything she might wish to say. But he was
     surprised and startled out of this indifference by a sudden outburst of tears from Laura, who,
     unable to withhold her emotion any longer, gave way, and wept like one most miserable.
“Miss Chanson,” said he, coming up to her; “alas! what is the matter? Are you ill? can I do
     anything? Lean on me, I beseech you.”
Laura’s tears flowed only the more profusely, and it was in vain she used her utmost effort
     to restrain the sobs which burst from her breast. She did, in fact, put her hand on his arm,
     but she turned away her head, and avoided, as much as she could, any support or assistance he
     would have given her.
“Forgive me. I did not know I was so weak. I am ashamed, like one on the rack. Pain and
     shame—pain and shame for me who have been so proud, so sheltered from both!”
“What is it you mean?” cried Leslie,
      feeling the awkwardness of his position, yet not displeased
     at its novelty, only quite resolved to commit himself in no manner, and to no thing. “Why, or
     how, can Miss Chanson be the subject of pain?”
“I shall not be, if I can think I am your sister,” said she, suddenly. “A sister prefers her
     brother’s happiness to her own—if he is happy, so is she. I have just learned what are your
     feelings. I did not always know them, but I do now ......”
Her voice broke off, and though she tried to go on she could not.
“What do you know?” said Leslie, not at all choosing that Laura should force herself on him
     as a confidant, nor be able to say that he was the lover of Elinor. “I have nothing to
     discover, beyond a casual circumstance in which I have been of some slight use to your friend,
     but if it is true I am to hope for the kindness of a sister here”—and he tried to take her
     hand, which she very hastily snatched away—“ my happiness would be great in proportion to my
     want since infancy, of every kindly home tie.”

Laura raised her large, fine eyes to his, with a look interpreted by him to mean, “Is that
     indeed all you can feel?” and then suddenly put out her hand, which he took, and felt that it
     trembled.
“Be it so! yes,” said Laura, “and now believe that I will promote your wishes in any way you
     will direct me. I have no self any longer.”
“How can I thank you,” said Leslie; “but do not mistake me—I want no service from any one. I
     have no wishes, unless, indeed, I might entertain that of again enjoying the pleasure of such
     society as made my life happy under your roof.”
Laura sighed deeply, and shook her head. “Ah, yes! you use such words very lightly. Well, be
     it so; come to us again, Mr. Leslie, and if ...... am I not your sister?” she concluded, at
     last, in an eager, abrupt voice.
“I feel,” said Leslie—not knowing what to say he felt—“ I, the most unworthy ......”
“I’ll explain that I met you,” said Laura, breaking off what he was saying very impatiently;
     “you will be very welcome to my
      brother—my real brother,” she added, forcing a smile to her
     pale lips. “To‐morrow, then,” and she moved away; but in all her violence of emotion, she had
     recollected the little twisted note, and had stooped and secured it, without attracting
     Leslie’s attention to it.
“What is all this?” thought Leslie, looking after her as she hastily disappeared. “I am to
     understand that she thought me her lover! and not only forgiven, but taken for a brother.
     Brother, indeed! There’s something generous about her—romantic enough. But how unlike
     Elinor—that inquiring, innocent look, those confiding eyes! Why should this Laura want me to
     see more of her? Can it be real generosity? But I will have nobody force upon me
     the character of a lover. I am free!”
