
CHÂTEAU DE CROIXMARE
Château de Croixmare,

Monday, 29th August.

The Sights of the Foire

Dearest Mamma,—Oh, we had such fun yesterday! After Mass the Baronne sent over to ask if
     Jean, Héloise, and I would go with them to the Foire at Lavonnière, a village
     about ten miles off. It is a very celebrated Foire, and in the last century every one
     went from Versailles, and even now lots of people who spend the summer there attend. You go in
     the evening after dinner, and there are no horrid cows and things with horns rushing about, or
     tipsy people. Godmamma looked awfully severe when she heard of the invitation; but since the
     row, when they had to cajole me, she has been more civil, so she said I might go if Héloise
     would really look after me, although if I was Victorine she would not have permitted it for a
     moment.

On a Motor Car

We left here about six, and then picked up the party at Tournelle. They all went—the old
     Baron, and every one, except the Marquis's mother. We dropped the brougham there, and went on
     with them in a huge motor car (that is another fad of the Baron's). It is lovely motor-carring;
     you get quite used to the noise and smell, and you fly along so, it takes your breath away;
     even with your hat tied on with a big veil, you have rather the feeling you have got to screw
     up your eyebrows to keep it from blowing away. We seemed to be no time doing the ten miles. The
     Baronne and Héloise hate it, and never go in it except under protest. The Foire is
     just one very long street, with booths and merry-go-rounds, and Montagnes Russes, and
     all sorts of amusing things down each side. There are rows of poplar trees behind them, and
     evidently on ordinary occasions it is just the usual French road, but with all the lights and
     people it was gay.
We stopped at the village inn, the "Toison d'Or" which is famous for its restaurant
     and its landlady. In the season the Duc de Cressy's coach comes here from Paris every Thursday.
     Hippolyte was there already; he had been sent on to secure a table for us. We had no sooner sat
     down under the awning than the Vicomte and "Antoine" and two other officers turned up. They had
     ridden from Versailles, which is near. Such extraordinary people sat at some of the tables!
     Families of almost peasants at one, and then at the next perhaps two or three lovely ladies,
     with very smart dresses and big hats, and lots of pearls, and some young men in evening dress.
     And then some respectable bourgeois, and so on. I could hardly pay attention to what
     the Marquis, who sat next me, was saying, the sight was so new and entertaining.
The tables had cloths without any starch in them, and the longest bread rolls I have ever
     seen. One of the beautiful ladies with the pearls used hers to beat the man next to her before
     they had finished dinner. We did not have fresh forks and knives for everything, but the famous
     dish of the place made up for it. It is composed of poussins—that is, very baby
     chickens—raw oysters, and cream and truffles. You get a hot bit of chicken into your mouth and
     think it is all right, and then your tongue comes against an iced oyster, and the mixture is so
     exciting you are stimulated all the time; and you drink a very fine old Burgundy with it, which
     is also a feature of the place. I am sure it ought to poison us, as oysters aren't in for
     another month, but it is awfully good.

Chevaux au Galop

One of the strange officers is so amusing; he looks exactly like the young man the Marquise
     de Vermandoise was walking in the Bois with, but it could not be he, as she seemed so surprised
     to see him at the Foire, and said they had not met for ages. The Comte sat on my other
     side; he said I would be greatly amused at the booths presently, and was I afraid of
      Montagnes Russes? That is only an ordinary switchback, Mamma, so of course I am not
     afraid. There were Tziganes playing while we dined, and it was all more amusing than anything I
     have done here yet. When we had drunk our coffee we started down the Foire. There were
     hundreds of people of every class, but not one drunk or rude or horrid.
The first entertainment was the Chevaux au Galop, a delightful merry-go-round with
     the most fiery prancing horses, three abreast, and all jumping at different moments. The
     Marquis helped me up, and Jean got on the other side; we all rode except the Comtesse and the
     old Baron. It was too lovely; you are bounced up and down, and you have to hold on so
     tight, and every one screams, and the band plays; and I wish you could do it, Mamma. I am sure
     the thorough shaking would frighten your neuralgia away. I could have gone on for an hour, but
     there was such a lot to see, we could not spare the time for more than one turn. The Marquis
     whispered when he helped me off that his walk down the Champs Elysées had indeed been
     fortunate, as he had seen me, and that it was he who had suggested to the Baronne to come to
     the Foire. So of course I felt grateful to him. We walked all together more or less,
     but Jean kept glued to my side, which was rather a bore, only the Marquis or the Vicomte were
     always at the other side.

The Ennui of the Lions

The next place we came to was a huge menagerie of clever animals, with their
      Dompteurs—cages of lions, bears, tigers, etc. There were sets of seats before the
     cages where anything interesting was going on, and the audience moved up as each new Dompteur
     came in to the animals. We sat down at first in front of the tigers' cage, the Baronne next to
     me this time. The creatures went through astonishing tricks, and looked such lazy great
     beautiful cats. The Dompteur was a handsome man, just the type they always are, with a
     wide receding forehead and flashing eyes. They positively blazed at the brutes if they did not
     obey him instantly. I wonder why all "tamers" have this shape of head? I asked the Vicomte, but
     he did not know. The bears came next, horrid cunning white things, and turning in their toes
     like that does give them such a frumpish look.
The attraction of the show was to see the great Dompteur, Pezon. He had been almost
     eaten by his lions a few months ago, and was to make his reappearance accompanied by a
     beautiful songstress who would charm the beasts to sleep. Pezon was just like the other
      Dompteurs, only older and fatter, and the beautiful lady was such a pet!
      Enormously stout, in pink satin, with quite bare neck and arms; the Vicomte said that
     the lions had to be surfeited with food beforehand, to keep them from taking their dessert off
     this tempting morsel. She began to sing through her nose about "l'amour," etc., and
     those lions did look so bored; the eldest one simply groaned with ennui. His face said
     as plainly as if he could speak, "At it again to-night!" and "Oh! que cela m'embête." When the
     song was finished, the Belle Chanteuse stretched herself on two chairs, making herself
     into a sort of bridge for the animals to jump over. From our position we could only see
     mountains of pink satin embonpoint, and the soles of her feet. The lions had the
     greatest difficulty in jumping not to kick her. What a life, Mamma! Then Pezon put his head
     right into the old lion's mouth, and so ended the performance.

Inspecting the Machinery

When we got outside, a man was ringing a bell opposite, to invite every one in to see a woman
     with only a head; she could speak, he said, but had no body. The Baronne insisted upon going
     in. It was a tiny cell of a place and crammed full. Presently a head appeared on a pedestal and
     spoke in a subdued voice. All the others said it was a fraud, but I thought it wonderful.
     "Antoine" wanted to go beyond the barrier and touch it, which was mean of him, I think.
     Presently a villainous-looking old hag, who was exhibiting the creature, came over, and
     whispered in "Antoine's" ear. I only caught "cinq francs," but his face looked
     interested at once, and he and Jean disappeared behind the curtain and the head disappeared
     too, so we went outside, and bought "farings" at the next booth. There they joined us. "Alors,
     mes amis?" demanded every one. "Pas la peine, très mal faite," said "Antoine"; so I suppose it
     was the machinery they had been examining. The next thing we came to was a sort of swing with
     flying boats, but no one was brave enough to try it except the Marquise and me, though all the
     men wanted to come with us. You sit opposite one another, and they are much higher than the
     ones in England. Jean would come with me, though I wanted the Vicomte—so I was glad it made him
     look quite green.
It chanced that "Antoine" was beside me as we walked to the pistol booth, so I asked him if
     he had been in Paris on Friday, and he looked so hard at me, you would have thought I was
     asking a State secret; but he said that alas! no, he had been detained at Versailles. So it
     could not have been him after all; there must be a lot of French people exactly alike, I never
     keep making these mistakes in England.
Have you ever fired off a pistol, Mamma? it is simply horrid. The pistol booth was next after
     the "farings" shop, and the prizes were china monsters and lanterns, etc. The Comtesse is a
     splendid shot, and hit the flying ball almost each time; she is such a quiet little thing, one
     would not expect it of her. The Baronne made a lot of fuss, and said she knew it would kill
     her, until Hippolyte, who was behind the party with her cloak, said: "Madame la Baronne doit
     essayer c'est nécessaire que toutes les belles jeunes dames sachent comment se défendre." And
     she fired off the pistol at last with her eyes shut, and it was a mercy it did not kill the
     attendant, the ball lodged in the wall just beside him, so we thought we had better leave after
     that!

The Montagnes Russes

Next came the Montagnes Russes. How I love a switchback, Mamma! If I were the Queen
     I would have a private one for myself, and my particular friends, round Windsor Castle; I could
     go on all day. The Marquis and the Vicomte kept so close to me that Jean could not take the
     seat beside me, as I saw he intended to, and then the other two made quite a shuffle, but the
     Vicomte won. The person who sits next you is obliged to hold your arm to prevent your tumbling
     out. I looked round to see, and every one was having her arm held, but I don't believe the
     Vicomte need have gripped mine quite so tight as he did. We had three turns; next time the
     Marquis was beside me, and he was more violent than the Vicomte. So when it came to the last,
     and Jean scrambled in, and began to hold tighter than either of the others, I just said my arm
     would be black and blue, and I would rather chance the danger of falling out, in a seat by
     myself, than put up with it. That made him sit up quite straight. I can't see why people want
     to pinch one; can you, Mamma? I call it vulgar, and I am sure no Englishman would do it. It
     seems that Frenchmen are awfully respectful, and full of ceremony and politeness, and then
     every now and then—directly they get the opportunity—they do these horrid little tricks.
The next entertainment was really very curious. It was a marble woman down to her waist, and
     as you looked, the marble turned into flesh, her eyes opened, and she spoke; then her colour
     faded, and she turned into marble again, and was handed round the audience; wasn't it
     wonderful, Mamma? I can't think how it was done, and as "Antoine" and Jean did not go behind
     the curtain to examine the machinery, I suppose we shall never know.

The Fun of the Fair

After that there were endless shows—performing dogs, fortune-telling, circuses, etc.—but the
     nicest of all was another merry-go-round, with seats which went up and down like a boat in a
     very rough sea. Hardly one of them would venture, but I made the Vicomte come with me for two
     turns; he looked so pale at the end of it, and when I wanted to go a third time, he said we
     must be getting on, and no one else offered to come. Wasn't it stupid of them, as it was by far
     the most exciting part of the Foire? It was half-past twelve before we got back to the
      "Toison d'Or," and there had supper, with "Punch à l'Américaine." It
      is good, and you do feel so gay after it. One of the ladies with the pearls, who was
     also supping, was so friendly to the man next her; Pezon was of their party, and he did look
     common in clothes, while he was quite handsome in spangled tights.
We were obliged to go slowly in the motor car returning, there were such heaps of people and
     carts and things on the road, but we got back to Croixmare about two; and I have slept so late
     this morning, so now, good-bye, dear Mamma.—Your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.
Château de Croixmare,

Wednesday, August 31st.

Back at Croixmare

Dearest Mamma,—To-day is the dinner and cotillon at the de Tournelles'. The Marquis
     and the Vicomte and "Antoine" and every one will be there, and I am sure it will be fun. The
     Vicomte can't get leave for the night, so the Baronne—who was here yesterday on her
     bicycle—told us. He will have to ride back to Versailles, as there are no trains at that time,
     to be there for some duty at six in the morning. I can't tell you how many miles it is; he will
     be tired, poor thing. These last two days have been just alike, that is why I have not
     written—the same tiresome ceremony about everything, and the same ghastly evenings.
We went for a drive on Monday, and Godmamma did nothing but question me as to what we had
     done every minute of the time while we were in Paris. This is the first chance she has had with
     me alone. So I would not tell her a scrap, even a simple thing like Héloise going to the
     Madeleine. She thinks I am fearfully stupid, I can see. I forgot to tell you about the morning
     we left Paris; Héloise went to see Adam again, and I went shopping with Agnès, but I would not
     even tell Godmamma that! Victorine says spiteful things to me whenever she can, but Jean and
     Héloise are so charming that I don't mind the rest. We are to wear sort of garden-party dresses
     and hats at the entertainment to-night. Dinner is to be at eight, in a large pavilion, where
     they have had a beautiful parquet floor laid down, and then when the tables are cleared away,
     we shall begin the cotillon. As I have never danced in one before, I hope I sha'n't
     make an idiot of myself.

Etiquette of the Bathroom

This morning I very nearly had another row with Godmamma—you will never guess what for,
     Mamma! She knocked at the door of my room before I was quite dressed, and then came in with a
     face as glum as a church. She began at once. She said that she had heard something about me
     that she hoped was a mistake, so she thought it better to ask me herself. She understood that I
     went down to the Salle de Bain every day, instead of just washing in my room. (I have
     done so ever since Agnès discovered there really was water enough for a decent bath there, and
     that no one else seemed to use it.) I began to wonder if she was going to accuse me of
     tampering with the taps—but not a bit of it! After a rigmarole, as if she thought it almost too
     shocking to mention, she said she understood from her maid, who had heard it from the valet
      de chambre who clears out the bath after I leave, that there never were any wet chemises,
     and that she was therefore forced to conclude that I got into my tub "toute nue!"
I had been so worked up for something dreadful, that I am sorry to say, Mamma, I went into a
     shriek of laughter. That seemed to annoy Godmamma very much; she got as red as a turkey-cock,
     and said she saw nothing to cause mirth—in fact, she had hoped I should have been ashamed at
     such deplorable immodesty, if, as she feared from my attitude, her accusation was correct. I
     said, when I could stop laughing, of course it was correct, how in the world else
      should one get into a bath?

The Marquis Again

Her eyes almost turned up into her head with horror; she could only gasp, "Mais si quelqu'un
     ouvrait la porte?" "Mais je la ferme toujours à clef," I said, and then I asked her if in
     France they also dried themselves in their wet chemises? But she said that that was a childish
     question, as I must know it would be an impossibility; and when I said I could not see any
     difference in washing or drying, she was so stumped she was obliged to sit down and fan
     herself. I smoothed her down by assuring her it was the English custom, and that I was sorry I
     shocked her so. At last I got rid of her, evidently thinking our nation "brûlée," as
     well as "toquée". Now aren't they too odd, Mamma? I suppose a nice big bath is such a
     rare thing for them that they are obliged to make as much fuss as possible over it. One would
     think they received company there, dressing up like that! Héloise and the smart people wash all
     right; it is only the girls and the thoroughly goody ones like Godmamma who are afraid of
     water.
5.30 p.m.—The Marquis came over from Tournelle with a note from the Baronne after
      déjeûner to-day. I happened to be getting some music out of the big salon for Héloise
     when he arrived. Louis, the valet, who showed him in, did not catch sight of me as I was behind
     the piano, or he would certainly have taken him somewhere else. He began at once (after putting
     his heels together) to say a lot of compliments and things. This was a fortunate chance—more
     than he had dared to hope—would I promise to dance the cotillon with him to-night?
     etc., etc. You would not believe, Mamma, the amount he got into the five minutes before Héloise
     came into the room. She knew it was her own fault for sending for the music that I was alone
     with him, or I should have got a scolding; as it was, she talked without ceasing until at last
     he got up to go. I had not answered about the cotillon, so as I have half promised the
     Vicomte I don't know which I shall take; perhaps I could manage both, as I believe one only has
     to sit on a chair and every now and then get up and dance. However, I will see when I get
     there. Now good-bye, dear Mamma.—Your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.
Château de Croixmare,

September 1st.

A Proposal of Marriage

Dearest Mamma,—I have had a proposal! Isn't it too interesting? It all happened at the de
     Tournelles' last night, but I never blushed or did any of the things they used to in Miss
     Edgeworth's novels that you have allowed me to read; but I must go straight on. We were quite
     punctual at Château de Tournelle, and got there as the clock struck eight. Héloise looked
     perfectly lovely, she does hold herself and walk so beautifully, and her head is such a nice
     shape. I am going to be like her, and not like the women at Nazeby (who all slouched) when I am
     married. Victorine looked better than usual too, and Héloise had put some powder on her face
     for her, but afterwards it came off in patches and made her look piebald; however, to start she
     was all right, and everybody was in a good temper. There were lots of people there already, and
     the Baronne and the Comtesse received us in the hall.
I wore the white silk and my pink tulle hat. The Marquis and the Vicomte both flew across
     when we arrived, and the Vicomte got to me first, as Godmamma detained the Marquis; and this is
     where Frenchmen shine, for although he told me afterwards that he wanted to murder her, he
     stood with a beautiful grin on his face all the time. The Vicomte at once began to assure me I
     had promised him the cotillon, but I would not say; and as he could only get words in
     edgeways, with Victorine listening all the time, it made it rather difficult for him. Then the
     Comte and René, his little boy, came round with a silver basket full of buttonholes and little
     cards with names, and by the kind of flower we got we were to know which table we were to sit
     at, as they were to be decorated with the same.

Les Jeunes Filles

Of course the Baronne had arranged for the Vicomte to take me in; and our table was pink and
     white carnations. Presently the whole company had arrived, and we started—a huge train, two and
     two, arm-in-arm—for the pavilion. It was pretty; all the trees hung with electric lights and
     Chinese lanterns, and the pavilion itself a fairyland of flowers. There were about twelve
     tables, three of different coloured carnations for the "jeunes filles," and the rest
     with roses for the married people. Godmamma thought it most imprudent separating them like
     that, and would hardly let Victorine sit down so far away from her until she saw the daughter
     of the Princesse d'Hauterine at the same table. Victorine went in with another officer from
     Versailles, in the same regiment of Chasseurs as the Vicomte; he was like a small
     black monkey. The Marquis sat with the Comtesse at her table, and Godmamma and the other bores
     had a table with the old Baron, etc. The Baronne had quite a young man next her. I expect she
     could not do with the chaperons and the old gentlemen.
Most of the girls at our table were either ill-at-ease or excited at the unusual pleasure of
     being without their mothers, and at first no one talked much. The French country people are
     almost as frumpy as the English, only in a different way, but many of the guests were very
     smart, and of course had come from Paris.
The Vicomte did say such a lot of agreeable things to me, and the others were so occupied
     with their one chance of talking to a young man that they did not listen as much as usual. He
     said he had never spent such an agitated night as the one at Vernon. So I said No, the fleas
     were horrid. He said he had not meant them; he meant that the sight of my beautiful
     hair hanging down had caused him "une grande émotion" and "rêves
     délicieux."
There was an oldish girl next to him whom he knew; she has coiffed St. Catherine for several
     years now, and was put at our table, I believe, to be a kind of chaperon. She happened to be
     listening just then, as her partner would talk to Victorine's friend—the pretty one with the
     dirty nails—who was at his other side. She caught the word "fleas," and at once asked what we
     were talking about. "Un sujet si désagréable," she said. I said it was about our journey on the
      Sauterelle, where, at Vernon, Monsieur de la Trémors had been so badly bitten by the
     fleas that they had given him silly dreams. He said his dreams were as beautiful as those
     produced by the Hachis of Monte Cristo (whatever that is), so the old girl exclaimed, "Quel
     pouvoir pour une puce!" She thought we were mad; and I overheard her presently telling her
     partner—when she could get him to listen—that no one would believe the bizarre
     conversations of the toqués English unless they actually heard them!

The Cotillon

I would not say I would dance the cotillon with the Vicomte. I told him I had half
     promised it to the Marquis; and when he seemed offended, I said if he was going to be
     disagreeable I would certainly dance it with Monsieur de Beaupré (the Marquis's name, which I
     forgot to tell you before). I remember hearing Octavia say once that it never did to make
     oneself easy to young men, that the more capricious one was the better; and you know how nice
     Octavia is, and I meant to be like her. He went on imploring; so I told him that I had come
     there to enjoy myself, not to amuse him, so I should just dance with whom I pleased, or not at
     all if I happened not to want to. He said I was "très cruelle," and looked perfectly
     wobbly-eyed at me, but I did not mind a bit.
As dinner went on all the girls began to talk and to get excited, and laugh, and every one
     was so gay; but I could see Godmamma craning her neck with anxiety and disapproval, and I am
     sure, if it had not been for the Princesse d'Hauterine being at her table, she would have
     jumped up and clawed Victorine away. It came to an end at last, and we returned arm-in-arm to
     the house, while the servants arranged the pavilion for the cotillon. Godmamma
     collected Victorine and me, and made us stay by her; and that horrid old Mme. de Visac—the one
     who called me a "jeune femme"—came up, and they had a conversation. Godmamma said it
     was "très imprudent" having the dinner first, that the champagne would go to the young
     men's heads, and with all the care in the world no one could foresee the consequences! The
     garden, too! If they should dance the farandole! what opportunities! It was all the
     fault of the chère Baronne, so sadly giddy for her age. She never thought of the
     anxieties of other mothers, having married her only daughter so young! I don't know what
     Godmamma feared, but I should hate to think you could not trust me to behave like a lady,
     Mamma, if I was out of your sight a moment.

Nearly a Duel

I saw the Marquis talking to a very young youth; he seemed pleading with him about something,
     and presently the youth crossed over and kissed Godmamma's hand, then asked Victorine for the
      cotillon. She looked furious, but she was obliged to say yes, as no one else had
     asked her; it was getting late, and the Marquis was busy speaking to some other ladies.
     Presently he came up to us, and the young youth said before he could speak: "N'ai-je pas de la
     veine, mon cher, Mlle. de Croixmare m'a promis le cotillon." Upon which the Marquis asked me to
     dance it with him—right out loud before Godmamma! and when I said I had half promised it to
     Monsieur de la Trémors, he looked so cross and offended, that I thought it was better to be
     firm with him, as I had been with the Vicomte. He—the Vicomte—came up just then, and they
     looked as if they wanted to fight each other; so I said if they would stop frowning, I would
     dance it with both of them, but if they were nasty, I should not dance it with either; and so
     that is how it ended, I was to have one on each side.
Godmamma said to me that it was unheard of conduct, and might have produced a duel, and when
     I tried to explain to her that that was just what I had avoided, she looked angrier than ever,
     and would not understand. Wasn't it stupid of her, Mamma?

The Two Partners

At last we got to the pavilion, and all sat round, and having both the Vicomte and the
     Marquis to talk to, I did have fun. They arranged that our chairs should be against the wall,
     and not in the row that the chaperons were behind. Godmamma tried to make signs to me to come
     and sit by Victorine in front of her, but I pretended not to see, until all the chairs were
     filled up. The Marquise de Vermandoise was next me, with the Vicomte between; she was dancing
     with the Comte. We were gay! The first set of presents were big brocade bags, and we
     called one our "pot au feu" and pretended it was for the ingredients to make bon
      ménage, and so all the presents that were small enough afterwards we put in there to keep
     for me. I did have lots! A cotillon is very easy, Mamma, as you have often
     told me, and it was fun dancing with all sorts of strange people that one did not even know. In
     one figure a huge Russian prince got hold of me, and squeezed me until I very nearly screamed;
     you see, Mamma, how dreadful foreigners are like that. It was like being hugged by a bear in
     the Zoo; and after it, he kept giving me flowers or presents if I dared to sit down for a
     moment, but he did not say a word except once or twice a mumble of "Adorable mademoiselle."
My two partners were nice, we had a perfectly beautiful time, they laughed at
     everything I said; and Madame de Vermandoise leant over and whispered—while they were both away
     doing a figure—that never had any one had such a succès as me, and that all the old
     ladies would be ready to tear my eyes out. Héloise did not dance with "Antoine," but he sat
     next her, and they talked while his partner was away with other people. It is much better to
     have two partners, Mamma, because then one is not left to oneself at all, and they are each
     trying to be nicer than the other all the time. The Comtesse led the cotillon with a
     cousin of hers; he does do it well, and does nothing else in Paris, the Baronne told me. At
     last we got on towards the end, and they began the farandole. You know it, Mamma? A
     lady and a gentleman take hands, then she beckons some one, and he has to come; and then he
     calls another lady, and so on. It goes on until the whole company are hand-in-hand; and the
     leader runs about everywhere with this chain of people after him, dancing a long sliding step,
     to such a lovely go-ahead tune. The leader tears all over the garden, and one is obliged to
     follow in and out. It is too exciting, and just as we got to the furthest end of the
     illuminated paths, and had rushed round into the dark, some one let go, and in the confusion of
     trying to catch on again, the Marquis and I were left behind.

To Elope with the Marquis

It was then the proposal happened, he did not wait a moment; he talked so fast I
     could hardly understand him. He said he had heard that it was the custom of our country to
     speak directly to the person one loved, without consulting the parents; so he hoped I would
     believe he meant me no disrespect, but that he adored me. He had fallen in love at
     first sight, when he went to review Victorine—that he implored me to fly with him, as his
     mother would never consent to his marrying an English woman! Think of it, Mamma! me flying with
     the Marquis! without a wedding cake, or bridesmaids, or pages, or trousseau, or any of the
     really nice bits of getting married—only the boring part of just going away and staying with
     one man, without any of the other things to make up for it. I nearly laughed at the
     ridiculousness of it, only he was so deadly in earnest, and would hold my hand. I said I could
     not think of such a thing, and would he take me back to the pavilion? He became quite wild
     then, and said he would kill himself with grief; and such a lot of things about love; but I was
     so wanting to join in the farandole again—we heard them coming nearer—that my
     attention was all on that, and I did not listen much.
Anyway, I am sure runaway matches aren't legal in France, from what I heard Jean saying two
     nights ago at dinner; and I told him so at last, and that pulled him up short. And just then
     the train passed, and I stretched out my hand to the last man, and was whirled away back to the
     pavilion and the people. I was glad to get away from the Marquis, because he looked
     desperate, and you can't trust foreigners, they have pistols and things in their pockets, and
     he might have shot me. When we got back to our seats, the défilé began and I took the
     Vicomte's arm to go and make our curtsey to the Comtesse and the Baronne. It was just as well
     the Marquis was away, because they might have quarrelled as to which one's arm I was to
     take.

Godmamma's Friends

Just before the supper tables were brought in, Monsieur de Beaupré turned up again. His face
     was green; he came up behind me, and whispered through his teeth that I had broken his heart,
     and that he should marry Victorine! So you see, Mamma, nothing could have turned out better,
     and they ought to be very grateful to me.
We had the gayest supper, all at little tables; and it was arranged that we should go with
     the de Tournelles, and the Baronne, to a Ralli de Papier to-day, given by the 75th
      Cuirassiers at the Forêt de Marly.
While we were going to the house to get our wraps, I overheard two ladies talking of
     Godmamma. They said she gave herself great airs, and considering that every one knew that years
     ago she had been the amie of that good-looking Englishman at the Embassy these high
     stilts of virtue were ridiculous. I suppose to be an amie is something wicked in
     French, but it doesn't sound very bad, does it, Mamma? And, whatever it is, I wonder if poor
     papa knew, as he was at the Embassy, and it might have been one of his friends, mightn't it? I
     expect she had not a moustache then.
I am dreadfully afraid the Vicomte won't be able to be at the Ralli to-day, although
     he did whisper when he was putting on my cloak that nothing should keep him away, and that then
     I would believe the extent of his devotion. He won't have gone to bed at all, if he does turn
     up, as he will only have got back to Versailles just in time for his duty at six, and how he is
     to be in the Forêt de Marly by ten I don't know, but we shall see. It is just time to start,
     the brake is at the door, so good-bye, dear Mamma, with love from your affectionate daughter,
     Elizabeth.
Château de Croixmare,

Thursday Night, September 1st.

The "Ralli de Papier"

Dearest Mamma,—I wonder if you have ever been to a Ralli de Papier? It is fun. We
     got to Marly at last after a long drive. The rendezvous was in the middle of the
     forest, in such a lovely glade, and although it rained for the last twenty minutes of our
     drive, the sun came out when we got there, and the lights through the trees on the wet green
     were so beautiful. There were quantities of carriages already arrived, every sort—victorias,
     coaches, pony carts, charabancs, motor cars, and a few of the really odd kinds of shandrydans
     that one sees coming to country garden parties in England. There were also numbers of officers
     riding in uniform—cuirassiers, chasseurs, dragons—and they were to take part in the
     chase. There was one officer who was to lead the carriages in a procession through the short
     cuts, so that we might not miss any of the jumps, and he had a horn slung over his shoulder. I
     do think it such a sensible plan; and if we could have the foxes trained in England to go just
     where they should, and then always drive to where the jumps are, like that, how much nicer
     hunting would be—wouldn't it, Mamma?

Better than Fox-hunting

Well, at last every one seemed to be arrived, and it was gay. I was glad Godmamma had been
     too tired to come, so Victorine was actually trusted with Jean and Héloise and me. We had
     picked up the Baronne and the Comte and the Marquise de Vermandoise at Tournelle on our way.
     The brake was not quite like an English one; it had seats facing, and then an extra one behind
     for the grooms, and Jean drove with Héloise beside him; but he does look like a trussed pigeon,
     and if the horses were not as quiet as mice, I am sure the Baronne would never have trusted
     herself with him.

The Vicomte up to Time

They all began to chaff about the Vicomte; "Il ne chevauchera jamais si loin, pas même pour
     vos beaux yeux," the Marquise said. Victorine seemed annoyed that any one should expect he
     would do anything for me. "Evidemment Monsieur de la Trémors ne viendra pas," she said. I saw a
     beautiful black horse being led about by a groom, apart from the crowd, and I wondered who
     would ride it. Just before the horn sounded for the carriages to start, from the farthest end
     of the allée we saw an officer galloping as hard as he could. "Mon Dieu! C'est
     Gaston!" screamed the Baronne. "C'est pour vous, Enchanteresse," said the Comte. "Que c'est
     ridicule," snapped Victorine, while the Marquise laughed and put her tongue into her gap. "Oh!
     la belle jeunesse!" she said.
Meanwhile the Vicomte had dismounted, jumped on to the fresh black horse, and was bowing
     beside us. "Vous voyez je suis venu," he said, and he looked only at me. I don't know why,
     Mamma, but I felt the blood rushing all over my cheeks; it was nice of him, wasn't it? He had
     arranged it all yesterday, and by changing horses and galloping the whole way, he had managed
     just to get to the rendezvous in time. I don't believe any Englishman that I know
     would do so much for me, and I was touched. We were fortunate in being almost the first
     carriage behind our leader, the officer with the horn, and he took us across roads, and we
     halted at last, where we could see the whole hunt advancing to some hurdles which had been
     erected at a few yards' distance from each other down the allée. Such an excitement!
     every one encouraging them at the top of their voices, their uniforms glittering in the
     sun.
The jumps were not very high, and most of the officers got over all right, only one
      cuirassier fell, and every one shrieked, but he wasn't a bit hurt. We clapped those
     who jumped especially well, and cried "Bravo!" It was fun. Then, when they had all
     passed, we were conducted through some more short cuts to another set of hurdles covered with
     green boughs, and these were a little higher. It did sound lively, with horns blowing and
     people shouting all the time. The Vicomte was among the last, as he passed us following the
     paper, but he waved gaily. We had to drive very quickly to be in time for the next
      "obstacles" and so it went on. When we watched the last ones, the Vicomte was among
     the very front four.

Rewards of Gallantry

Then the exciting part began, as they had to race for the ribbons, white for the winner and
     blue for the second; but it was quite a long way, so we had time to get to the winning-post,
     the flat place near where the Château stood formerly. There were long tables laid out with
      goûter, and the bands of the regiments playing nice tunes. Victorine began to be
     disagreeable directly we saw them coming, the Vicomte well to the front. "Comme c'est cruel de
     Monsieur de la Trémors, de presser son cheval à ce point," she said, while even the Comte
     became excited, and shouted, "Bravo, Gaston!" I was pleased when he came in first, and
     really he rides quite nicely, Mamma.
Then every one got out of the carriages and there was a ceremony. The wife of the Colonel of
     the 75th chasseurs (young and nice looking) placed a white ribbon with gold fringe ends round
     the neck of the Vicomte, while he knelt and kissed her hand on the damp grass, and when he got
     up there was quite a wet stain on his knees. The second man—a great lumbering
      cuirassier—got a blue ribbon, and as he was heavier the stain showed worse on his red
     trousers. After that, we all began to eat cakes and drink drinks (I don't know what they were
     made of, that is why I say "drinks," anyway they were sweet and nice), and as the rain had
     stopped we danced on the green, after we had finished. Now you know, Mamma, we could never have
     any fun like this in England. What Englishman would think of dancing the Lancers on sopping
     grass, quite gravely, with a white ribbon round his neck like a pet lamb, and his trousers wet
     through at the knees? They would simply laugh in the middle, and spoil the whole thing. The
     Vicomte danced with me, of course, and while we were advancing to our vis-à-vis in the
     first figure, he managed to whisper that he adored me, and now that he had ridden all night,
     and won the white ribbon for me, I ought to believe him. I did not answer because there was not
     time just then, and he looked so reproachfully at me for the rest of the Lancers.

The Whispered Declaration

It began to rain again before we finished, and we got into the brake as quickly as we could.
     It was a perfect wonder that they were not all exclaiming at their wet feet, and catching cold;
     but it seems that dancing on the green and these sort of fêtes champêtres are national
     sports, and you don't catch cold at them. It is only washing, and having the windows open, and
     the house aired, and things like that, that give cold in France. The Vicomte came back with us,
     and, as he was one too many for the brake, we had to sit very close on our seat. He was between
     the Baronne and Victorine, who made room for him when he was just going to sit down by me. She
     kept giggling all the way home, and the Vicomte looked so squashed and uncomfortable. I was
     next, beyond the Baronne, and as both of them could not keep up their umbrellas, Victorine was
     obliged to put down hers, and the drips from the Baronne's umbrella got on to the roses in
     Victorine's hat. At last they ran in a red stream right down her nose, and she did look odd,
     and each time she said anything to the Vicomte, he nearly had a fit to keep from laughing, and
     when we got back and she found how she was looking she was cross.
The Vicomte took hold of my hand when he helped me out, it wasn't in saying good-bye, as of
     course unmarried people only bow and don't shake hands. Somehow his spur caught in my dress,
     and we had to stop a minute to disentangle it, the others had bolted into the house, as they
     were afraid of the rain, so we were alone for an instant. The Vicomte at once kissed my hand
     and said, "Je vous adore." It was done so quickly that even Hippolyte, who had come
     out with an open umbrella to help us, did not see—at least I hope he didn't. We went in to
     Tournelle to have something to drink, while the horses were being rubbed down, as we had had
     such a long drive; and it was at the first mirror Victorine discovered her red striped
     nose.
While I was sipping my punch, I heard the Baronne telling Héloise that her nephew, the
     Marquis, had consented to marry Victorine; and that the Baron would go over to Croixmare the
     next day to make the formal demand for her hand. Then she whispered something, and they looked
     at me, and Héloise laughed, while the Baronne said, "Pauvre garçon. C'est dommage qu'il ne
     puisse pas combiner le plaisir avec les affaires." And when we got back to Croixmare, Héloise
     came to my room and kissed me, and thanked me; she had heard, she said, from the Baronne, how I
     had broken the Marquis's heart, and so got him to consent to take Victorine!
I am glad, Mamma, that getting married is differently arranged with us. I should hate to have
     some one because somebody else that he wanted would not have him. However, Victorine is as
     pleased as can be, and has been smiling to herself all the evening.
Now I must go to bed, so good-bye, dear Mamma, with love from your affectionate daughter,
     Elizabeth.
Château de Croixmare,

Saturday, September 3rd.

In Due Form

Dearest Mamma,—I am sure what I am going to tell you will surprise you quite as much as it
     has done me. Victorine is really engaged! The day after the Ralli de Papier it rained
     again, and as we were sitting in the little salon after breakfast the old Baron was announced.
     He was dressed in a frock coat and a tall hat, just as if it was Paris and the height of the
     season. They made conversation for about ten minutes, and then he got up and, putting his heels
     together, he said he had come to request a private interview with Mme. la Comtesse Douairière
     de Croixmare, and Monsieur le Comte de Croixmare, son fils; upon which Victorine looked coy,
     and began scrabbling with her toes on the paquet. Héloise was not in the room, and Godmamma
     said to me that it was time for our walk, as the rain had stopped, and Mdlle. Blanc ("the Tug")
     would be waiting. So we bundled out of the room, and Victorine for the first time became
     affectionate as we went upstairs.
"Il est venu pour demander ma main, pour son neveu, Monsieur de Beaupré," she said, putting
     her arm round my waist; "J'espère que cela ne vous chagrine pas, chérie?" And when I asked her
     why in the world it should grieve me she said that, as every one had noticed how I had
     flirted with the Marquis, she supposed his preferring another girl could not be quite pleasant!
     I could have screamed with laughter, if I had not been so angry; I felt dreadfully tempted to
     tell her of the Marquis's proposal to me, and why he was marrying her—only that would have been
     playing down to her level of meanness. So I said that the English idea of flirting and the
     French were different; that the Marquis seemed to me to be quite an agreeable Frenchman, and no
     doubt she would be very happy; and far from it grieving me, I was delighted to think she would
     be settled at last, as twenty-two was rather on the road to fixing St. Catherine's tresses. She
     dragged her arm away in such a hurry that she scratched her hand on a pin that Agnès had
     stupidly left in my belt. "Voyez! vous avez fait saigner ma main," she said almost crying with
     fury. All I said was, "Qui s'y-frotte s'y pique," and as we had got to the door of my room, I
     went off in fits of laughter—she looked so like a cross monkey I could not help it!

Girlish Amenities

Well, you can think, Mamma, we did not have an agreeable walk. Victorine talked in her most
     prudish goody style to "the Remorqueur," and never addressed me; while poor Mademoiselle Blanc
     was so nervous trying to speak to both. As we got to the turn into Vinant, Monsieur
     Dubois—Victorine's music-master—came up the street. He is a rather vulgar looking person, with
     a black moustache, and lemon yellow gloves, and horrid if you have to be quite close
     to him. Just then we stopped to give some sous to a beggar-woman, so as he passed he said, with
     a great flourish of the hat: Was he to come on Saturday as usual for the lesson? Victorine
     looked down all the time modestly, and "the Tug" answered: Of course; so he said it would be a
     never-to-be-sufficiently-thanked kindness, if Mademoiselle would take back with her this roll
     of music he had been on his way to deliver chez elle, as it was much out of his road,
     and he was pressed for time at his next lesson. Victorine at once seized it, and he bowed again
     and walked on. Mademoiselle Blanc had already a parcel in each hand she was taking to the
     embroidery shop.
After that Victorine was distraite, and seemed in a great hurry to get home; she
     even spoke to me, and while "the Tug" was looking at wools in the shop she fidgeted so with the
     music that it came undone. I offered to carry it, as I had no parcels, but she snatched it up
     as if it was gold, and in doing so a bit of paper fell out of it, and as I picked it up I could
     not help seeing it began "Ma cruelle adorée." She said, in a great rage, that it was
     only the words of a song, as she put it in her pocket; so I don't see why she should have been
     so furious with me seeing it, do you, Mamma?—but she had not got over the pin in my belt, I
     suppose. Anyway she made us trot home with seven-leagued boots.

The Music-master

Godmamma met us in the hall, radiant, and, clasping Victorine to her breast, said she must
     announce to her the joyful news that M. le Baron de Frémond had made the demande, on
     the part of his sister, the Marquise de Beaupré, for the hand of her peerless Victorine, for
     her son and his nephew, the Marquis de Beaupré, and that she—Godmamma—had consented to
     relinquish to them this treasure. Jean came out of the smoking-room just then and they all
     began kissing—it was awful.
I got upstairs as quickly as I could, and Héloise soon joined me there. She was enchanted at
     the idea of really getting rid of Victorine, and she said Godmamma's rheumatism was growing so
     bad she would soon have to spend the summer at German baths, and so they would fortunately at
     last have Croixmare to themselves; and she could not thank me enough for having assisted at
     this dénoûment.
All the evening Victorine played the tunes the music-master gave her, and once or twice broke
     into a song of joy; but when I asked her to try the one beginning "Ma cruelle adorée,"
     she looked green, and said she was tired, and would go to bed.

A Game of Billiards

Then Jean and I had a game of billiards—we often do now after dinner. The salle de
      billard opens out of the salon, and there is a glass like a window over the mantelpiece,
     so that you can see into the two rooms from each other. It always reminds me of Alice, in
     "Through the Looking Glass"—you expect to find a mirror, and you see into another room.
     Godmamma generally accompanies us into the billiard-room, and sits bolt upright in an armchair
     watching us, but to-night she was too excited to pay us so much attention, and stayed talking
     to Héloise about the engagement. Jean seemed nervous and sad, and knocked about the balls
     aimlessly, not trying a bit. It is only French billiards, but still one has to play properly,
     so at last I said that evidently the good news of Victorine's engagement had so distracted him
     that he could not pay attention to the game. He seemed quite startled. "Ma foi! le jeu!" he
     said vacantly. I put down my cue and asked him quite gently what was the matter?
Just then the bangle you gave me last Christmas came undone, so Jean put his cue down too,
     and offered to fasten it. It is difficult to do oneself, so I thanked him and handed him my
     wrist; his hands trembled so he could not do it. I thought he was ill, and bent over him to
     see. Fortunately at that moment we happened to be at the one part of the table which can't be
     seen from the other room; because Jean behaved so queerly—I feel sure Godmamma would have been
     horrified. He did not worry about the bangle, but just began kissing my hand; simply
      dozens of kisses. I pulled and pulled to try and get it away, but he would not let
     go, and kept murmuring that at last, at last, he was alone with me!
Now wasn't it too annoying, Mamma? I could not call out or make a fuss, because there would
     have been such a scene, and you would never think a Frenchman could be so strong. For
     although I wrenched and dragged I could not get my hand away, and it was making me crosser and
     crosser every minute. At last, when he began to kiss my wrist, it tickled so I was afraid I
     should laugh, and then he would think I was not serious; so I seized my cue with the other
     hand, and just told Jean in a firm voice that if he did not let go that instant I would break
     it over his head! That stopped him!
He pulled himself together and said "Oh! pardon, pardon," and that he was awfully sorry, and
     that it was because I was going away soon and he was mad. And that is what I believe it was,
     Mamma—a fit of some kind. Did you ever hear there was anything odd in the Croixmare family?
     Anyway it shows foreigners are not to be trusted, for, even if they haven't pistols ready to
     shoot you, they are doing something queer like this.

Indigestion!

Presently he took up his cue and began playing again, and Héloise came in from the salon. She
     noticed he looked different and said at once, "Qu'avez-vous, mon ami?" "Une mauvaise
     digestion," replied Jean, and he went and drank sirop at the side-table. I think I
     should perhaps tell Héloise what it really was, and warn her to keep an eye on him, but then it
     might worry her, and he may not have another attack for a long time. No one would suspect him
     of being cracked, he looks as quiet and respectable as the pony that mows the lawn. The post is
     starting, and I must go to breakfast, so now good-bye, with love from your affectionate
     daughter, Elizabeth.

P.S.—The day after to-morrow there is to be a dinner-party here for the
      fiancés to meet. All the Tournelle party, and his mother and a couple of cousins will
     be here, besides the Vicomte and "Antoine," and the Marquise, who are staying at Tournelle.
Château de Croixmare,

Tuesday, September 6th.


Victorine's Indisposition

Dearest Mamma,—The dinner for the fiancés came off last night. It was the first time
     we have had real evening dresses on since I have been here. I wore the pink silk, and Héloise
     was delighted with it, she says you could not possibly improve upon the style you dress me
     in—it is ideal for a young girl.
The day after Jean behaved so queerly, he was not at breakfast; he went to Paris and I did
     not see him until the evening, when he was as stolid and quiet as usual, so it must have been a
     fit, and perhaps he went up to Paris to see his doctor.
Victorine had her music lesson, and I don't know what could have upset her; but "the Tug,"
     who always sits in the room with her, came flying out, saying Victorine was faint and she must
     get her a glass of water; so I ran into the salle d'étude to see if I could help her.
     There she was flopping on the music-stool, with Monsieur Dubois kneeling by her, looking cross
     and reproachful, and just like the villain in the pantomimes. I heard her say, "Cela doit être
     complètement oublié entre nous à présent que je vais être Marquise." I don't know what it was
     about, but if she was telling him she would not be friendly with him any more, I do call it
     snobbish, don't you, Mamma? just because she is going to be a Marquise. It isn't as if
     he was an English Marquis even, like Lord Valmond, that would be of some importance—but a
     trumpery French title, without any land or money, it is ridiculous. Of course, here no one has
     his own land really since the Revolution, I mean like "Tournelle," they only call the new house
     that; I believe the real "Tournelle" is down in Touraine somewhere and belongs to some one else
     now. This is Château de Croixmare, but then Jean's great-grandfather bought it back
     again.
Now I have wandered from what I was telling you—oh! yes, about Victorine and M. Dubois. He
     got up from his knees when he saw me, and began fanning her, while she flopped more than ever,
     but I don't think she felt very faint, her face was so red. And when "the Tug" returned with
     the water I came away, as they both looked as if they wanted to murder me. The excitement had
     made Monsieur Dubois' collar quite give way, and he looked a dirtier and more pitiable object
     than usual.

The "Dîner des Fiançailles"

Such an affair the "Dîner des fiançailles!" Victorine wore a pink dress too, with
     horrid bunches of daisies on her shoulders and in her hair; and, as that is dark and greasy,
     and dragged off her face, and done in the tightest twist at the top, it does not look a
     suitable place for daisies to be sprouting from. I hate things in the hair anyway, don't you,
     Mamma? However she was delighted with herself, so it was all right.
We waited in the big salon, standing behind Godmamma to receive the company. First arrived
     the old Baron and the Baronne, and the Marquis and his mother. The Marquis kissed Victorine's
     hand as well as Godmamma's and Héloise's, and you should have seen her bridling! When he got to
     me he made the stiffest bow; and just then the Comte and Comtesse de Tournelle, the Marquise de
     Vermandoise, and the Vicomte were announced, and immediately following, "Antoine" and two
     cousins of Godmamma's. To finish the party there were a batch of the Marquis's relations, who
     had come specially from Paris. We were spared Yolande and Marie, who usually sit up to dinner
     with their German bonne, and eat everything that they shouldn't, and then scream in
     the night.
There was a buzz of conversation, and the Vicomte talked to me, but I could not help hearing
     what the Marquis said to Victorine—
"Vous aimez la bicyclette, mademoiselle?"
"Oui, monsieur."
"Moi j'aime mieux l'automobile."
"Mais il y a toujours de la poussière!"
And they are going to be married in a month!
The Vicomte kept bending over me and looking silly, and the Marquis fidgeted so that he could
     not go on talking to Victorine—one eye was always fixed on us. That seemed to please the
     Vicomte, for he got more and more empressé, and I could not help laughing in return.
     At dinner he took in Mme. de Vermandoise, but sat next me, and on my other hand was one of the
     cousins, a harmless idiot too timid to speak much, and with all kinds of horrid baby fluffs
     growing on his face. If men are to wear beards (which I should forbid if I were the Queen) they
     ought to be shut up till they are really grown.

A Contretemps

Opposite to us were Victorine and the Marquis, and Godmamma and the Baron, and Jean and the
     Marquis's mother. They did look a dull lot, and the Marquis's mother eats worst of all! We had
     the greatest fun at our side, Mme. de Vermandoise was delicious with gaiety, the Comte was on
     her other hand, and we four never stopped joking and laughing the whole of dinner. It was such
     a big party, so the conversation could not be quite as general as usual.
The Marquis got gloomier and gloomier as time went on. I could not look up that I did not
     find his angry eyes fixed on me. Even Victorine's aggressive joy at having caught him was
     damped when she could not get him to pay attention to what she was saying. At last when he was
     straining his ears to try and hear my conversation with the Vicomte, she got absolutely
     exasperated with him, and addressed a question to him in a loud, sharp voice. It made him jump
     so that he bounced round in his seat; and as she had lowered her head to put the piece of
      bécassine—which had been poised on her fork while she spoke—into her mouth, his
     jumping round, and her raising her head suddenly, made her daisies catch on his beard; and you
     never saw such a funny sight, Mamma! It was a nasty little wired dewdrop that got fixed in poor
     Monsieur de Beaupré's fur, and there they were: she still grasping her fork and he looking
     ready to eat her with annoyance. Their two heads were fastened together, and there they would
     have remained, only Hippolyte (who always goes everywhere with the Baronne) came to the rescue,
     and untangled them. But it hurt the Marquis very much, as some of the hairs had to be pulled
     out, and it did not mend matters Hippolyte muttering, "Cela doit être que Monsieur le Marquis
     doit faire plus attention à l'affaire qu'il a en main, s'il désire garder ses cheveux
     intacts."

The Vicomte's Proposal

The affair made quite a commotion at the table, and Victorine so nearly cried with rage that
     the Marquis's mother had to give her smelling salts. Mme. de Vermandoise was overcome with
     laughter, and her tongue was hardly ever out of her gap, while the Marquis sat, white with
     fury.
When we left the table, arm-in-arm, things cleared up, and, while we were alone when the men
     went back to smoke, Victorine was made to "play something," and she really plays very well. It
     was so stiflingly hot that at last some one—the Comtesse, I believe—asked to have the windows
     opened on to the terrace. There was a fair-sized moon, and we all went out there, even Godmamma
     for a few moments. The men came out of the smoking-room windows and joined us, and for the
     first time since I have been in France we talked to the persons we wanted to, without either
     shouting across some one else or making a general conversation.
"Antoine" and Héloise leant over the balustrade; the Comte and the Marquise stayed by the
     window, while the Vicomte whispered to me by the steps; and Victorine and her Marquis stood
     like two wax figures, not saying a word, by the orange trees. I don't know whether it was owing
     to the moon or not, but the Vicomte did say such a lot of charming things to me. He said he
     loved me, and would I marry him; he would arrange it all, as fortunately he has no parents to
     consult.
I seem to be getting quite used to proposals now, because it did not excite me in the least.
     But I don't think I want to marry any one yet, Mamma; so I told him you would never let me
     marry a Frenchman, and he had better forget all about me. He said as much about love as he
     could in the ten minutes we were left talking together, and put it so nicely—not a bit that
     violent want-to-eat-one-up-way the Marquis has. I felt once or twice quite inclined to say yes,
     if only it had been an affair of a week; but unfortunately, even in France, you have to stay on
     with people longer than that, and that is the part I could not have managed.
I made him understand at last that I really meant not to have him, and he was very miserable.
     But you can't tear your hair or cry, with every one looking on, and, as it all had to be done
     in a voice as if one was talking about the weather, he did not show much. Only he looked very
     white when we came into the lights again, but he whispered as he said good-night that he did
     not despair; he would always love me, and when I married some one else his day would come,
     which I did not think kind of him, as I don't want to be a widow.
The Marquis had not a chance to say a word to me; he tried often, but I avoided him, he
     looked so out of temper. I am sure it would have been something disagreeable. He and the
     Vicomte nearly came to blows going out of the door, just over a silly thing like the Vicomte's
     sword knocking against the Marquis's boot. I hope they won't really fight. When they had all
     gone, and we were going up to bed, I thought Jean looked as if his fit was coming on again, so
     I bolted into my room; and on the whole I am rather glad to be coming back to England on
     Thursday.
To-day we go over to Tournelle, a visit of ceremony for me to say good-bye, and they are all
     dear people there, and I shall always hope to see them again.—Now good-bye, dear Mamma, with
     love from your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.

P.S.—I wish his hair wasn't cut en brosse. But of course one couldn't marry a
     Frenchman anyway.
Château de Croixmare,

Wednesday, September 7th.


Hippolyte's Testimonial

Dearest Mamma,—It was really quite sad saying good-bye to all the people at Tournelle. The
     Baronne almost wept over me, and said that they would be dreadfully dull without me. They all
     kissed me on both cheeks, and even Hippolyte as he put us into the carriage after I tipped him,
     remarked, "Mieux vaut épouser un français et rester toujours chez nous, vous êtes trop belle
     demoiselle pour le brouillard d'Angleterre!"
I wonder after all if the Marquis will ever marry Victorine, as it seems, when he got back
     last night, he was in such a temper that he made a scene with the Baronne and his mother. He
     said that Victorine made him look ridiculous, that she was unappetising, without wit, and ugly
     enough to have tranquillised St. Anthony at his worst moment of temptation—whatever that means.
     (I overheard the Baronne tell all this to Héloise while the old Baron was making me compliments
     in his fearful English.) The Marquis stamped his foot, and finally, bursting into tears,
     announced that he would go to Paris, back to Adèle—whoever she is—and find consolation! So off
     he started this morning the first thing. What a man, Mamma! crying like a child!
His mother and the Baronne are very anxious about him, as if he really decides to "jeter
      le manche après la cognée," who is to pay his debts! The Baronne also said, that if
     "Elisabet" (that's me) had only been married, it would have been all a simple matter; because
     then there would be no cause for him to despair, and he would not have occupied himself about
     an ordinary subject, like who they married him to in the meantime. But, as it is, the contrast
     between us—Victorine and me—whom he cannot obtain—is too great, and the sooner I am out of his
     sight the better! It does sound all Greek, doesn't it to you, Mamma? I repeat it just as the
     Baronne said it.

Etiquette for the Fiancés

We went into the garden presently, and the Marquise and the Comte and I walked together; she
     had not got over the affair at dinner, and did nothing but laugh and joke about it. She said
     that Victorine at all events will give the Marquis no anxieties in the future, but she is sure
     he will have to "se griser" to get through the wedding. Fortunately Victorine was not
     with us, as Godmamma was too tired to accompany her; it would not have been proper for her to
     come with only her brother and sister-in-law, as her fiancé, being supposed to be at
     Tournelle, she might have had private conversation with him not under Godmamma's eye!
Oh! mustn't it be awful to be French! Héloise says it isn't so bad as this in the smart set
     in Paris; they speak to one another there quite a lot before getting married, and do almost
     English things, but Godmamma is of the old school.
Before we left, the Marquis turned up, he looked thoroughly worn out and as piano as
     a beaten dog. He was awfully polite to Jean and Héloise, and hardly looked at me, but as I did
     not want to leave with him still feeling cross with me, I got the chance at last to tell him I
     hoped he would be happy, and to congratulate him. He bowed deeply and thanked me, and then
     under his breath, as he stooped to pick up a flower I had dropped, he said, "Vous avez brisé
     mon coeur, et cela m'est égal ce qui arrive,"—but I don't believe it, Mamma, he has not got a
     heart to break, he is only a silly doll and worthy of Victorine.
I saw the Baronne talking to him seriously while we were having "five o'clock;" and just as
     we were starting, she came up and said low to Héloise, who was beside me, "J'espère que tout va
     bien, Adèle l'a remplacé, et ne veut plus de lui! Oh! la bonne fille!" So whoever "Adèle" is, I
     suppose she has done Victorine a good turn. I asked Héloise on our way home if "Adèle" was a
     relation of the Marquis's, and she went into fits of laughter and said, "Oui, une très proche,"
     but I can't see anything to laugh at, can you, Mamma?

A Country Dinner Party

In the evening there was a ghastly dinner party at Croixmare. Three sets of
     provincial families. They are really awful these entertainments, and so different to English
     ones! Nobody bothers about even numbers. You feel obliged to ask the X's, the Y's, and the Z's
     from duty, and so you do. It doesn't in the least matter if they are mostly females; you have
     to ask the family, because if the daughters are grown up they can't be left at home alone—they
     would be getting into mischief. This is the kind of assortment that arrives: Papa X, Mamma X,
     and two girl X'es; Papa Y, Mamma Y, and Master and Miss Y; Papa Z, Mamma Z, Aunt Z, and Mdlle.
     Z—such a party!
Godmamma just revels in these frumps; they make Héloise furious, and the airs of Victorine,
     her coyness and giggling, nearly drove me wild. I sat next to Monsieur Y, and although he is a
     Baron of very old family he ate like a pig. The food was extraordinarily good, but the
     proof of good service here is to get the whole dinner—of I don't know how many courses—over
     under the hour. So one has no sooner swallowed a mouthful, when one's plate is snatched away,
     and one begins to devour something else. But with this awful man gobbling at my side, and those
     foolish girls giggling beyond, even the forty minutes seemed ages.
Afterwards in the salon the "jeunes filles" were sent to talk at the other side of
     the room, supervised by "the Tug," who did not dine, but was in waiting. If you had heard their
     conversation, Mamma! It was worse than the day the two came to breakfast. Just one endless
     string of questions to Victorine about the Marquis, with giggles over possibilities of their
     own fiançailles! It is so extraordinary that they can ever turn into witty,
     fascinating women like Héloise and the Marquise. Of course, these are just provincial nobodies,
     whom Héloise would not dream of knowing in Paris; perhaps the girls there are better.

A Cure for a Fit

Victorine told them the Marquis was "Beau comme l'Archange Michel," and had for her "une
     brûlante dévotion!" What will she say if after all he refuses to come to the scratch! Jean is
     to accompany Agnès and me up to Paris to-morrow to see us safely off to Dieppe. I hope he won't
     have another fit in the train, I shall tell Agnès to take plenty of salts and brandy in her
     bag, and a bottle of soda water, because I have always heard that a sudden shock is best for
     people in fits, and one could pop the soda water over him if the worst came to the worst.—Now,
     good-night, dear Mamma, your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.

P.S.—An awful wind is blowing. I hope I shan't be drowned crossing the Channel.—E.
Château de Croixmare,

Thursday night.

The Emotion of the Marquis

Dearest Mamma,—I hope you got the telegram all right to-day saying I would not leave. The
     storm became really so fearful they would not hear of my starting, and as it has turned out I
     am very glad, for to-night we dined at Tournelle to celebrate the Baronne's birthday, and we
     had such an amusing time. All the usual lot were there, as well as those two officers who came
     to the Foire with us, and about three or four more people from Paris, so we were quite
     a large party. Everybody gave the Baronne a present, and such baskets of flowers as
     she had in the salon! "Assez pour tourner la tête," as Hippolyte said.
The Baronne was dressed in pale mauve and looked lovely, only such a funny thing happened at
     dinner. The Vicomte, who sat next to her, made her laugh dreadfully, just as she was eating her
     soup, and she choked, and suddenly one cheek quite fell in, while the other stuck out as if a
     potato was in it. One could not think what had happened; but it appears that she wears
     "plumpers," of a kind of red guttapercha, to keep her face nice and round, and in choking the
     right cheek's one got jerked across into the left cheek, and that is how she got the toothachy
     look. Mustn't it be a bother, Mamma, to have to do all that? but the Baronne is such a dear
     that one did not even laugh.
The Marquis had to sit by Victorine, and I saw him looking at the pink rosebuds in her hair
     with a cautious eye; and he sat up as straight as anything in case she should get caught in him
     again.
But it is all right, he means to go through with it—the Baronne told Héloise directly we got
     there. So I thought, as it was finally settled, there would be no harm in talking to him a
     little. He looked at me at dinner, I smiled, and it was so quaint, Mamma, his whole face seemed
     to flush until his forehead was even pink, with the veins showing at the side. He lifted his
     champagne glass and kissed the edge of it, and bowed to me, and no one saw but the Comte, and
     he went into a chuckle of laughter, as he whispered to me that if Victorine had seen she would
     certainly tear my eyes out on the way home.

Elizabeth Sandwiched

Afterwards, in the salon, the Vicomte managed to stand behind me while I was talking to the
     old Baron, and he said in a low voice: Why had I come back? He was at peace waiting till his
     day came, and here I had upset everything, and he should have to go through endless more
     restless nights! I said that I was sorry the storm had prevented my starting, especially as I
     was unwelcome. So he threw prudence to the winds, and said out loud before the Baron that I
     knew it was not that, and he looked so devoted and distressed that the dear old Baron patted
     him on the back, and turning away said, "Mon brave Gaston, moi aussi j'étais jeune une fois."
     And he left us alone by the window, while he stood a sort of sentry in front.
The Vicomte did whisper a lot of things; he said just for one evening I might make him happy
     and pretend I loved him, and let him call me "chérie." So I said "all right;" I did
     not think it could matter, as I am coming home to-morrow, Mamma, and shall probably
     never see him again, and you said one ought always to be kind-hearted and do little things for
     people. When I said "all right," his forehead got pink, and the veins showed just like the
     Marquis's had done at dinner, and he said, "Chérie—ma chérie, ma bien-aimée" in such a
     voice! It made me feel quite as if I wanted to listen to some more, only, unfortunately at that
     moment, Godmamma came up; she brushed the Baron aside, and said I should certainly catch cold
     by the window, and must come with her, while she annihilated the Vicomte with a look.
There I was, taken off to a sofa at the other side of the room, and stuffed down between
     Godmamma and the Marquis's mother. You can think I was cross. However, I paid her out, for I
     just looked at the Marquis, who was seated by his Victorine almost silent and like a dummy
     (they are allowed to talk together now, as long as they are not alone in the room). It made him
     fidget so, he could not attend to what she was saying. And when finally he got up and came over
     to us and said, had I seen the new "Nattier" the Comte had just bought, which was in the other
     salon, and would I come and look at it?—I think Godmamma wished she had left me safe with the
     Vicomte. She could not say anything, as half the party had already gone to look at the picture,
     so I got up at once and went with him. His mother is years older than the Baronne, and not a
     bit gay like her. I saw them—her and Godmamma—nodding their heads anxiously as we left; no
     doubt they were deploring the bad bringing-up of the English.

The Fiancés Together

The Marquis said it was awful what he was going through; and when the dancing began presently
     would I give him the first valse? I said Certainly, and by that time we were in the other
     salon, and beside the Marquise. She smiled her dear little smile, which always seems to mock at
     everything, and put her tongue into her gap and whispered: "Quelle comédie! c'est bien petite
     espiègle, amusez-vous!" And so I did! I can't tell you what fun it was, Mamma. I was
     in wild spirits, and the Marquis answered back, and we were as gay as larks, until I overheard
     the Marquis's mother, who had followed us, say to him, in an acid voice, that he seemed to have
     forgotten that it was arranged for him to give Victorine the engagement ring that evening and
     say a few appropriate words to her, and he must take her to see the flowers in the
     conservatory, and get it over there. So off he had to go, looking black and peevish, and
     supervised by the two mothers—who stood at the risk of catching their deaths of cold by the
     door—he and Victorine went arm-in-arm into the conservatory, and disappeared behind some pots
     of palms.
It appears Mme. de Vermandoise and the Comte were in there too, and saw what happened, and
     she told Héloise and me afterwards. The fiancés came and stood quite close to them,
     with only a bank of flowers between; and they said the palms were pretty and were growing very
     tall, and the Marquis coughed, and Victorine began scrabbling with her toes on the marble floor
     in that irritating way she has, and they neither of them spoke. At last the Marquis dashed at
     it, and said, as she already knew, their parents had arranged they should marry, and he hoped
     he would make her happy. At that moment the piano struck up very loud in the salon, and
     prevented Victorine from quite catching what he said; he got very red and repeated it again,
     but he mumbled so she still was not sure, and had to say "Pardon?" for the second
     time. That upset the Marquis to such a point that he said "Damn," which is the only English
     word he knows, and when Victorine looked horribly surprised, he dived into his waistcoat pocket
     and fished out the ring. Then he took her hand, pulled off her glove backwards, and pushed it
     on to the first finger he came to, which happened to be the middle one! He just said he hoped
     she would wear it for his sake; and when she exclaimed, "Mais, monsieur! ce n'est pas sur ce
     doigt que vous devez mettre la bague!" he hardly waited to apologise or put it right before he
     dragged her back to the salon and deposited her with the anxious mothers!

The Baronne's Diplomacy

Mme. de Vermandoise said she and the Comte nearly had a fit to keep themselves from laughing
     out loud. Wasn't it too comic, Mamma? How I should hate to be betrothed like that! However,
     Victorine seems to think half a loaf is better than no bread, for she kept her glove off all
     the rest of the evening, and looked at her ring with conscious pride. It is a very nice one, a
     ruby and a pearl heart connected by a diamond Marquis's coronet. They ought to have added a
     money-bag representing the dot, and then the symbol would have been complete.
We had begun to dance when they got back, and, as the Marquis had not been there to claim me,
     I was valsing with Jean. The Baronne kept the Vicomte close to her side all the rest of the
     evening—she told me, as she kissed me in saying good-bye, that she had done it for peace sake,
     as she knew he and the Marquis would have had a quarrel otherwise, they were both so madly in
     love with me. "Petite embrouillante d'heureuses familles va!" she said—"Mais je t'aime bien
     quand même!"—She is a darling, the Baronne! The Marquis stood there glowering, and never
     offered to dance with Victorine; she must have been cross!
We had another farewell all round when the valse was over—Godmamma would not stay for
     another, and even "Antoine" seemed sorry to say "Adieu." "Dépêchez-vous de vous
     marier," he said, "et ensuite revenez auprès de nous. J'ai envie de vous faire la cour, mais
     vous êtes beaucoup trop dangereuse pour le moment."
"Ça, c'est vrai!" said the Comte and Jean together, and every one laughed.
Now that the betrothal ring is really on Victorine's finger, and Héloise knows she will be
     got off, she does not mind a bit about the Marquis looking at me. She kept laughing to herself
     over it all the way home; she really detests Victorine. Godmamma and the bride-elect hardly
     spoke a word, and I am sure if a perfect hurricane blows to-morrow, they won't suggest my
     waiting another day, so I shall be glad to be off.
Good-night, dear Mamma; you will see me almost as soon as you get this, as I shall only sleep
     the night in London at Aunt Mary's.—With love from your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.
