
Chapter 2
The Enchanted Chairs
More than ten minutes had elapsed since Reeks’ departure, and Mr. Thorneycroft, who had
     hitherto had some difficulty in repressing his anger, now began to give vent to it in muttered
     threats and complaints. His impatience was shared by the Tinker, who, stepping up to Ginger,
     said—
“Wot the devil can Mr. Reeks be about? I hope nuffin’ has happened to him.”
“Don’t mention a certain gent’s name here,” remarked Ginger; “or if you do, treat it vith
     proper respect.”
“Pshaw!” exclaimed the Tinker impatiently; “I don’t like a man stayin’ avay in this manner.
     It looks suspicious. I wotes ve goes and sees arter him. Ve can leave the old gent to take a
     keviet nap by himself. Don’t disturb yourself, sir. Ve’ll only jist giv’ a look about us, and
     then come back.”
“Stay where you are, rascal!” cried Thorneycroft angrily. “I won’t be left. Stay where you
     are, I command you!”
“Vell, ve’ve got a noo captain, I’m a-thinkin’,” said the Tinker, winking at the others.
     “Ve’ve no vish to disobleege you, sir. I’ll only jist peep out into the hall, and see if Mr.
     Reeks is anyvhere thereabouts. Vy, zounds!” he added, as he tried the door, “it’s locked!”
“What’s locked?” cried Thorneycroft in dismay.
“The door, to be sure,” replied the Tinker. “Ve’re prisoners.”
“O Lord, you don’t say so!” cried the iron-merchant in an agony of fright. “What will become
     of us?”
A roar of laughter from the others converted his terror into fury.
“I see how it is,” he cried. “You have entrapped me, ruffians. It’s all a trick. You mean to
     murder me. But I’ll sell my life dearly. The first who approaches shall have his brains blown
     out.” And as he spoke, he levelled a pistol at the Tinker’s head.
“Holloa! wot are you arter, sir?” cried that individual, sheltering his head with his hands.
     “You’re a-labourin’ under a mistake—a complete mistake. If it is a trap, ve’re catched in it as
     vell as yourself.”
“To be sure ve is,” added the Sandman. “Sit down, and vait a bit. I dessay Mr. Reeks’ll come
     back, and it von’t do no good gettin’ into a passion.”
“Well, well, I must resign myself, I suppose,” groaned Thorneycroft, sinking into a chair.
     “It’s a terrible situation to be placed in—shut up in a haunted house.”
“I’ve been in many much vurser sitivations,” observed Ginger, “and I alvays found the best
     vay to get out on ’em wos to take things quietly.”
“Besides, there’s no help for it,” said the Tinker, seating himself.
“That remains to be seen,” observed the Sandman, taking the chair opposite Thorneycroft. “If
     Reeks don’t come back soon, I’ll bust open the door.”
“Plenty o’ time for that,” said Ginger, sauntering towards the table on which the provisions
     were spread; “wot do you say to a mouthful o’ wittles?”
“I wouldn’t touch ’em for the world,” replied the Sandman.
“Nor I,” added the Tinker; “they may be pisoned.”
“Pisoned—nonsense!” cried Ginger; “don’t you see some von has been a-takin’ his supper here?
     I’ll jist finish it for him.”
“Vith all my ‘art,” said the Tinker.
“Don’t touch it on any account,” cried Mr. Thorneycroft. “I agree with your companions, it
     may be poisoned.”
“Oh! I ain’t afeerd,” cried Ginger, helping himself to a dish before him. “As good a
     pigeon-pie as ever I tasted. Your health, Mr. Thorneycroft,” he added, filling a goblet from
     one of the bottles. “My service to you, gents. Famous tipple, by Jove!” drawing a long breath
     after the draught, and smacking his lips with amazing satisfaction. “Never tasted sich a glass
     o’ wine in all my born days,” he continued, replenishing the goblet: “I wonder wot it’s
     called?”
“Prussic acid,” replied Mr. Thorneycroft gruffly.
“Proossic fiddlestick!” cried Ginger; “more likely Tokay. I shall finish the bottle, and
     never be the vorse for it!”
“He’s gettin’ svipy,” said the Tinker. “I vonder vether it’s really Tokay?”
“No such thing,” cried Thorneycroft; “let him alone.”
“I must taste it,” said the Tinker, unable to resist the temptation. “Here, give us a glass,
     Ginger!”
“Vith pleasure,” replied Ginger, filling a goblet to the brim, and handing it to him. “You’d
     better be perwailed upon, Sandy.”
“Vell, I s’pose I must,” replied the Sandman, taking the goblet proffered him.
“Here’s the beaks’ healths!” cried Ginger. “I gives that toast ‘cos they’re alvays so kind to
     us dog-fanciers.”
“Dog-fanciers—say, rather, dog-stealers; for that’s the name such vagabonds deserve to be
     known by,” said Mr. Thorneycroft with some asperity.
“Vell, ve von’t quarrel about names,” replied Ginger, laughing, “but I’ll relate a
     circumstance to you as’ll prove that wotever your opinion of our wocation may be, the beaks
     upholds it.”
“There can be but one opinion as to your nefarious profession,” said Mr. Thorneycroft, “and
     that is, that it’s as bad as horse-stealing and sheep-stealing, and should be punished as those
     offences are punished.”
“So I think, sir,” said Ginger, winking at the others; “but to my story, and don’t interrupt
     me, or I can’t get through vith it properly. There’s a gent livin’ not a hundred miles from
     Pall Mall, as the noospapers says, as had a favourite Scotch terrier, not worth more nor
     half-a-crown to any one but hisself, but highly wallerable to him, ‘cos it wos a favourite.
     Vell, the dog is lost. A pal of mine gets hold on it, and the gent soon offers a reward for its
     recovery. This don’t bring it back quite so soon as he expects, ‘cos he don’t offer enough; so
     he goes to an agent, Mr. Simpkins, in the Edger Road, and Mr. Simpkins says to him—says he,
     ‘How are you, sir? I expected you some days ago. You’ve com’d about that ere Scotch terrier.
     You’ve got a wallable greyhound, I understand. A man told me he’d have that afore long.’ Seein’
     the gent stare, Mr. S. adds, ‘Vel, I’ll tell you wot you must give for your dog. The party
     von’t take less than six guineas. He knows it ain’t vorth six shillin’, but it’s a great
     favourite, and has given him a precious sight o’ trouble in gettin’ it.’ ‘Give him
     trouble!’ cries the gent angrily—‘and what has it given me? I hope to see the rascal hanged! I
     shall pay no such money.’ ‘Werry vell,’ replies Mr. Simpkins coolly, ‘then your dog’ll be bled
     to death, as the nobleman’s wos, and thrown down a breathless carkis afore your door.’”
“You don’t mean to say that such a horrid circumstance as that really took place?” cried
     Thorneycroft, who was much interested in the relation.
“Only t’other day, I assure you,” replied Ginger.
“I’d shoot the ruffian who treated a dog of mine so, if I caught him!” cried Mr. Thorneycroft
     indignantly.
“And sarve him right, too,” said Ginger. “I discourages all cruelty to hanimals. But don’t
     interrupt me again. Arter a bit more chafferin’ vith Mr. Simpkins, the gent offers three pound
     for his dog, and then goes avay. Next day he reads a report i’ the Times noospaper
     that a man has been taken up for dog-stealin’, and that a lot o’ dogs is shut up in the
     green-yard behind the police-office in Bow Street. So he goes there in search o’ his favourite,
     and sure enough he finds it, but the inspector von’t give it up to him, ‘cos the superintendent
     is out o’ the vay.”
“Shameful!” cried Mr. Thorneycroft.
“Shameful, indeed, sir,” echoed Ginger, laughing. “Thinkin’ his dog safe enough in the hands
     o’ the police, the gent sleeps soundly that night, but ven he goes back next mornin’ he finds
     it has disappeared. The green-yard has been broken into overnight, and all the dogs stolen from
     it.”
“Under the noses of the police?” cried Thorneycroft.
“Under their werry noses,” replied Ginger. “But now comes the cream o’ the jest. You shall
     hear wot the beak says to him ven the gent craves his assistance. ‘I can’t interfere in the
     matter,’ says he, a-bendin’ of his brows in a majestic manner. ‘Parties don’t ought to come
     here vith complaints of vhich I can’t take notice. This place ain’t an advertisin’ office, and
     I sha’n’t suffer it to be made von. I von’t listen to statements affectin’ the characters of
     absent parties.’ Statements affectin’ our characters,—do you tvig that, sir?”
“I do, indeed,” said Thorneycroft, sighing; “and I am sorry to think such a remark should
     have dropped from the bench.”
“You’re right to say dropped from it, sir,” laughed Ginger. “I told you the beaks vos our
     best friends; they alvays takes our parts. Ven the gent urges that it was a subject of ser’ous
     importance to all dog-owners, the magistrit angrily interrupts him, sayin’—‘Then let there be a
     meetin’ of dog-owners to discuss their grievances. Don’t come to me. I can’t help you.’ And he
     vouldn’t if he could, ‘cos he’s the dog-fancier’s friend.”
“It looks like it, I must own,” replied Thorneycroft. “Such reprehensible indifference gives
     encouragement to people of your profession. Government itself is to blame. As all persons who
     keep dogs pay a tax for them, their property ought to be protected.”
“I’m quite satisfied vith the present state of the law,” said Ginger; “here’s the vorthy
     beak! I’ll drink his health a second time.”
“Halloa! wot’s that?” cried the Tinker; “I thought I heerd a noise.”
“So did I,” rejoined the Sandman; “a strange sort o’ rumblin’ sound overhead.”
“There it goes again!” cried Ginger; “wot an awful din!”
“Now it’s underneath,” said Mr. Thorneycroft, turning pale, and trembling. “It sounds as if
     some hidden machinery were at work.”
The noise, which up to this moment had borne an indistinct resemblance to the creaking of
     wheels and pulleys, now increased to a violent clatter, while the house was shaken as if by the
     explosion of a mine beneath it.
At the same time, the occupants of the chairs received a sharp electrical shock, that
     agitated every limb, and caused Mr. Thorneycroft to let fall his pistol, which went off as it
     reached the ground. At the same time, the Sandman dropped his goblet, and the Tinker
     relinquished his grasp of the cutlass. Before they could recover from the shock, all three were
     caught by stout wooden hooks, which, detaching themselves from the back of the chairs, pinioned
     their arms, while their legs were restrained by fetters, which sprang from the ground and
     clasped round their ankles. Thus fixed, they struggled vainly to get free. The chairs seemed
     nailed to the ground, so that all efforts to move them proved futile.
But the worst was to come. From the holes in the ceiling already alluded to, descended three
     heavy bell-shaped helmets, fashioned like those worn by divers at the bottom of the sea, and
     having round eyelet-holes of glass. It was evident, from the manner of their descent, that
     these helmets must drop on the heads of the sitters—a conviction that filled them with
     inexpressible terror. They shouted, and swore frightfully; but their vociferations availed them
     nothing. Down came the helmets, and the same moment the monkey, which had been seen by Reeks,
     issued from a cupboard at the top of a cabinet, and grinned and gibbered at them.
Down came the first helmet, and covered the Tinker to the shoulders. His appearance was at
     once ludicrous and terrible, and his roaring within the casque sounded like the bellowing of a
     baited bull.
Down came the second helmet, though rather more slowly, and the Sandman was eclipsed in the
     same manner as the Tinker, and roared as loudly.

In both these instances the helmets had dropped without guidance, but in the case of Mr.
     Thorneycroft, a hand, thrust out of the hole in the ceiling, held the helmet suspended over his
     head, like the sword of Damocles. While the poor iron-merchant momentarily expected the same
     doom as his companions, his attention was attracted towards the monkey, which, clinging with
     one hand to the side of the cabinet, extended the other skinny arm towards him, and
     exclaimed—“Will you swear to go hence if you are spared?”
“No, I will not,” replied the iron-merchant. He had scarcely spoken, when the helmet fell
     with a jerk, and extinguished him like the others.
Ginger alone remained. During the whole of this strange scene, he had stood with the bottle
     in hand, transfixed with terror and astonishment, and wholly unable to move or cry out. A
     climax was put to his fright, by the descent of the three chairs, with their occupants, through
     the floor into a vault beneath; and as the helmets were whisked up again to the ceiling, and
     the trap-doors closed upon the chairs, he dropped the bottle, and fell with his face upon the
     table. He was, however, soon roused by a pull at his hair, while a shrill voice called him by
     his name.
“Who is it?” groaned the dog-fancier.
“Look up!” cried the speaker, again plucking his hair.
Ginger complied, and beheld the monkey seated beside him.
“Vy, it can’t be, surely,” he cried. “And yet I could almost svear it was Old
     Parr.”
“You’re near the mark,” replied the other, with a shrill laugh. “It is your venerable
     friend.”
“Vot the deuce are you doing here, and in this dress, or rayther undress?” inquired Ginger.
     “Ven I see you this mornin’, you wos in the serwice of Mr. Loftus.”
“I’ve got a new master since then,” replied the dwarf.
“I’m sorry to hear it,” said Ginger, shaking his head. “You haven’t sold yourself, like
     Doctor Forster—eh?”
“Faustus, my dear Ginger—not Forster,” corrected Old Parr. “No, no, I’ve made no bargain. And
     to be plain with you, I’ve no desire to remain long in my present master’s service.”
“I don’t like to ask the question too directly, wenerable,” said Ginger, in a deprecatory
     tone—“but is your master—hem!—is he—hem!—the—the——”
“The devil, you would say,” supplied Old Parr. “Between ourselves, I’m afraid there’s no
     denying it.”
“La! wot a horrible idea!” exclaimed Ginger, with a shudder; “it makes the flesh creep on
     one’s bones. Then we’re in your master’s power?”
“Very like it,” replied Old Parr.
“And there ain’t no chance o’ deliverance?”
“None that occurs to me.”
“O Lord! O Lord!” groaned Ginger; “I’ll repent. I’ll become a reformed character. I’ll never
     steal dogs no more.”
“In that case, there may be some chance for you,” said Old Parr. “I think I could help you to
     escape. Come with me, and I’ll try and get you out.”
“But wot is to become of the others?” demanded Ginger.
“Oh, leave them to their fate,” replied Old Parr.
“No, that’ll never do,” cried Ginger. “Ve’re all in the same boat, and must row out together
     the best vay ve can. I tell you wot it is, wenerable,” he added, seizing him by the
     throat—“your master may be the devil, but you’re mortal; and if you don’t help me to deliver my
     companions, I’ll squeege your windpipe for you.”
“That’s not the way to induce me to help you,” said Old Parr, twisting himself like an eel
     out of the other’s gripe. “Now get out, if you can.”
“Don’t be angry,” cried Ginger, seeing the mistake he had committed, and trying to conciliate
     him; “I only meant to frighten you a bit. Can you tell me if Mr. Auriol Darcy is here?”
“Yes, he is, and a close prisoner,” replied Old Parr.
“And the girl—Miss Ebber, wot of her?”
“I can’t say,” rejoined Old Parr. “I can only speak to the living.”
“Then she’s dead!” cried Ginger, with a look of horror.
“That’s a secret,” replied the dwarf mysteriously; “and I’m bound by a terrible oath not to
     disclose it.”
“I’ll have it out of you notvithstandin’,” muttered Ginger. “I vish you would lend me a knock
     on the head, old feller. I can’t help thinkin’ I’ve got a terrible fit o’ the nightmare.”
“Let this waken you, then,” said Old Parr, giving him a sound buffet on the ear.
“Holloa, wenerable! not so hard!” cried Ginger.
“Ha! ha! ha!” screamed the dwarf. “You know what you’re about now.”
“Not exactly,” said Ginger. “I vish I wos fairly out o’ this cursed place!”
“You shouldn’t have ventured into the lion’s den,” said Old Parr, in a taunting tone. “But
     come with me, and perhaps I may be able to do something towards your liberation.”
So saying, he drew aside the tapestry, and opened a panel behind it, through which he passed,
     and beckoned Ginger to follow him. Taking a pistol from his pocket, the latter complied.
