
Chapter 11
Preparations
On that same night, at the appointed hour, Mr. Thorneycroft repaired to Shoreditch, and
     entering a narrow street behind the church, speedily discovered the Turk’s Head, at the door of
     which a hackney-coach was standing. He was shown by the landlord into a small back room, in
     which three men were seated at a small table, smoking, and drinking gin and water, while a
     fourth was standing near the fire, with his back towards the door. The latter was a tall,
     powerfully built man, wrapped in a rough greatcoat, and did not turn round on the
     iron-merchant’s entrance.
“You are punctual, Mr. Thorneycroft,” said Ginger, who was one of the trio at the table; “and
     I’m happy to say, I’ve arranged everythin’ for you, sir. My friends are ready to undertake the
     job. Only they von’t do it on quite sich easy terms as mine.”
The Tinker and the Sandman coughed slightly, to intimate their entire concurrence in Mr.
     Ginger’s remark.
“As I said to you this mornin’, Mr. Thorneycroft,” pursued Ginger, “this is a difficult and a
     dangerous bus’ness, and there’s no knowin’ wot may come on it. But it’s your only chance o’
     recoverin’ your darter.”
“Yes, it’s your only chance,” echoed the Tinker.
“Ve’re about to risk our precious lives for you, sir,” said the Sandman; “so, in coorse, ve
     expects a perportionate revard.”
“If you enable me to regain my daughter, you shall not find me ungrateful,” rejoined the
     iron-merchant.
“I must have a hundred pounds,” said the Tinker—“that’s my lowest.”
“And mine, too,” said the Sandman.
“I shall take nuffin’ but the glory, as I said afore,” remarked Ginger. “I’m sworn champion
     o’ poor distressed young damsils; but my friends must make their own bargins.”
“Well, I assent,” returned Mr. Thorneycroft; “and the sooner we set out the better.”
“Are you armed?” asked Ginger.
“I have a brace of pistols in my pocket,” replied Thorneycroft.
“All right, then—ve’ve all got pops and cutlashes,” said Ginger. “So let’s be off.”
As he spoke, the Tinker and Sandman arose; and the man in the rough greatcoat, who had
     hitherto remained with his back to them, turned round. To the iron-merchant’s surprise, he
     perceived that the face of this individual was covered with a piece of black crape.
“Who is this?” he demanded with some misgiving.
“A friend,” replied Ginger. “Vithout him ve could do nuffin’. His name is Reeks, and he is
     the chief man in our enterprise.”
“He claims a reward too, I suppose?” said Thorneycroft.
“I will tell you what reward I claim, Mr. Thorneycroft,” rejoined Reeks, in a deep stern
     tone, “when all is over. Meantime, give me your solemn pledge, that whatever you may behold
     to-night, you will not divulge it.”
“I give it,” replied the iron-merchant, “provided always——”
“No provision, sir,” interrupted the other quickly. “You must swear to keep silence
     unconditionally, or I will not move a footstep with you; and I alone can guide you where your
     daughter is detained.”
“Svear, sir; it is your only chance,” whispered Ginger.
“Well, if it must be, I do swear to keep silence,” rejoined Mr. Thorneycroft; “but your
     proceedings appear very mysterious.”
“The whole affair is mysterious,” replied Reeks. “You must also consent to have a bandage
     passed over your eyes when you get into the coach.”
“Anything more?” asked the iron-merchant.
“You must engage to obey my orders, without questioning, when we arrive at our destination,”
     rejoined Reeks. “Otherwise, there is no chance of success.”
“Be it as you will,” returned Thorneycroft, “I must perforce agree.”
“All then is clearly understood,” said Reeks, “and we can now set out.”
Upon this, Ginger conducted Mr. Thorneycroft to the coach, and as soon as the latter got into
     it, tied a handkerchief tightly over his eyes. In this state Mr. Thorneycroft heard the Tinker
     and the Sandman take their places near him, but not remarking the voice of Reeks, concluded
     that he must have got outside.
The next moment, the coach was put in motion, and rattled over the stones at a rapid pace. It
     made many turns; but at length proceeded steadily onwards, while from the profound silence
     around, and the greater freshness of the air, Mr. Thorneycroft began to fancy they had gained
     the country. Not a word was spoken by any one during the ride.
After a while, the coach stopped, the door was opened, and Mr. Thorneycroft was helped out.
     The iron-merchant expected his bandage would now be removed, but he was mistaken, for Reeks,
     taking his arm, drew him along at a quick pace. As they advanced, the iron-merchant’s conductor
     whispered him to be cautious, and, at the same time, made him keep close to a wall. A door was
     presently opened, and as soon as the party had passed through, it closed.
The bandage was then removed from Thorneycroft’s eyes, and he found himself in a large and
     apparently neglected garden. Though the sky was cloudy, there was light enough to enable him to
     distinguish that they were near an old dilapidated mansion.
“We are now arrived,” said Reeks to the iron-merchant, “and you will have need of all your
     resolution.”
“I will deliver her, or perish in the attempt,” said Thorneycroft, taking out his
     pistols.
The others drew their cutlasses.
“Now then, follow me,” said Reeks, “and act as I direct.”
With this he struck into an alley formed by thick hedges of privet, which brought them to the
     back part of the house. Passing through a door, he entered the yard, and creeping cautiously
     along the wall, reached a low window, which he contrived to open without noise. He then passed
     through it, and was followed by the others.
