
Chapter 1
The Cell
Mr. Thorneycroft and his companions had scarcely gained a passage in the deserted house,
     which they had entered in the manner described in a previous chapter, when they were alarmed by
     the sudden and furious ringing of a bell overhead. The noise brought them instantly to a halt,
     and each man grasped his arms in expectation of an attack, but the peal ceasing in a few
     moments, and all continuing quiet, they moved on as before, and presently reached a large hall
     with a lofty window over the door, which, being without shutters, afforded light enough to
     reveal the dilapidated condition of the mansion.
From this hall four side doors opened, apparently communicating with different chambers,
     three of which were cautiously tried by Reeks, but they proved to be fastened. The fourth,
     however, yielded to his touch, and admitted them to a chamber, which seemed to have been
     recently occupied, for a lamp was burning within it. The walls were panelled with dusky oak,
     and hung at the lower end with tapestry, representing the Assyrian monarch Ninus, and his
     captive Zoroaster, King of the Bactrians. The chief furniture consisted of three large
     high-backed and grotesquely-carved arm-chairs, near one of which stood a powerful electrical
     machine. Squares and circles were traced upon the floor, and here and there were scattered cups
     and balls, and other matters apparently belonging to a conjuring apparatus.
The room might be the retreat of a man of science, or it might be the repository of a
     juggler. But whoever its occupant was, and whatsoever his pursuits, the good things of the
     world were not altogether neglected by him, as was proved by a table spread with viands, and
     furnished with glasses, together with a couple of taper-necked bottles.
While glancing upwards, Mr. Thorneycroft remarked that just above each chair the ceiling was
     pierced with a round hole, the meaning of which he could not at the time comprehend, though
     after circumstances sufficiently explained it to him.
“A singular room,” he observed to Reeks, on concluding his survey. “Did you expect to find
     any one here?”
“I hardly know,” replied the other. “That bell may have given the alarm. But I will soon
     ascertain the point. Remain here till I return.”
“You are not going to leave us?” rejoined Mr. Thorneycroft uneasily.
“Only for a moment,” said Reeks. “Keep quiet, and no harm will befall you. Whatever you may
     hear without, do not stir.”
“What are we likely to hear?” asked Thorneycroft with increasing trepidation.
“That’s impossible to say,” answered Reeks; “but I warn you not to cry out unnecessarily, as
     such an imprudence would endanger our safety.”
“You are quite sure you don’t mean to abandon us?” persisted Thorneycroft.
“Make yourself easy; I have no such intention,” rejoined Reeks sternly.
“Oh! ve’ll take care on you, don’t be afeerd, old gent,” said Ginger.
“Yes, ve’ll take care on you,” added the Tinker and the Sandman.
“You may depend upon them as upon me, sir,” said Reeks. “Before we explore the subterranean
     apartments, I wish to see whether any one is up-stairs.”
“Wot’s that you say about subterranean apartments, Mr. Reeks?” interposed Ginger. “Ve ain’t
     a-goin’ below, eh?”
But without paying any attention to the inquiry, Reeks quitted the room, and closed the door
     carefully after him. He next crossed the hall, and cautiously ascending a staircase at the
     farther end of it, reached the landing-place. Beyond it was a gallery, from which several
     chambers opened.
Advancing a few paces, he listened intently, and hearing a slight sound in an apartment to
     the right, he stepped softly towards it, and placing his eye to the keyhole, beheld a tall man,
     dressed in black, pacing to and fro with rapid strides, while three other persons, wrapped in
     sable gowns, and disguised with hideous masks, stood silent and motionless at a little distance
     from him. In the tall man he recognised Cyprian Rougemont. Upon a table in the middle of the
     room was laid a large open volume, bound in black vellum. Near it stood a lamp, which served to
     illumine the scene.
Suddenly, Rougemont stopped, and turning over several leaves of the book, which were covered
     with cabalistic characters, appeared in search of some magic formula. Before he could find it,
     however, a startling interruption occurred. An alarum-bell, fixed against the wall, began to
     ring, and at the same moment the doors of a cabinet flew open, and a large ape (for such it
     seemed to Reeks), clothed in a woollen shirt and drawers, sprang forth, and bounding upon the
     table beside Rougemont, placed its mouth to his ear. The communication thus strangely made
     seemed highly displeasing to Rougemont, who knitted his brows, and delivered some instructions
     in an undertone to the monkey. The animal nodded its head in token of obedience, jumped off the
     table, and bounded back to the cabinet, the doors of which closed as before. Rougemont next
     took up the lamp, with the evident intention of quitting the room, seeing which, Reeks hastily
     retreated to an adjoining chamber, the door of which was fortunately open, and had scarcely
     gained its shelter when the four mysterious personages appeared on the gallery. Reeks heard
     their footsteps descending the staircase, and then, creeping cautiously after them, watched
     them across the hall, and pause before the chamber containing Mr. Thorneycroft and his
     companions. After a moment’s deliberation, Rougemont noiselessly locked the door, took out the
     key, and leaving two of his attendants on guard, returned with the third towards the
     staircase.
Without tarrying to confront them, Reeks started back, and hurried along the gallery till he
     came to a back staircase, which conducted him, by various descents, to the basement floor,
     where, after traversing one or two vaults, he entered a subterranean passage, arched overhead,
     and having several openings at the sides, apparently communicating with other passages. It was
     lighted at intervals by lamps, which emitted a feeble radiance.
By the light of one of these, Reeks discovered the door of a cell. It was of iron, and as he
     struck it with his hand, returned a hollow clangour. On repeating the blow, a hoarse voice from
     within cried, “Leave me in peace!”
“Is it Auriol Darcy who speaks?” demanded Reeks.
“It is,” replied the prisoner. “Who are you that put the question?”
“A friend,” replied Reeks.
“I have no friend here,” said Auriol.
“You are mistaken,” rejoined Reeks. “I have come with Mr. Thorneycroft to deliver you.”
“Mr. Thorneycroft has come too late. He has lost his daughter,” replied Auriol.
“What has happened to her?” demanded Reeks.
“She is in the power of the Fiend,” replied Auriol.
“I know she is detained by Cyprian Rougemont,” said Reeks. “But what has befallen her?”
“She has become like his other victims—like my victims!” cried Auriol
     distractedly.
“Do not despair,” rejoined Reeks. “She may yet be saved.”
“Saved! how?” cried Auriol. “All is over.”
“So it may seem to you,” rejoined Reeks; “but you are the victim of delusion.”
“Oh that I could think so!” exclaimed Auriol. “But no—I saw her fall into the pit. I beheld
     her veiled figure rise from it. I witnessed her signature to the fatal scroll. There could be
     no illusion in what I then beheld.”
“Despite all this, you will see her again,” said Reeks.
“Who are you who give me this promise?” asked Auriol.
“As I have already declared, a friend,” replied Reeks.
“Are you human?”
“As yourself.”
“Then you seek in vain to struggle with the powers of darkness,” said Auriol.
“I have no fear of Cyprian Rougemont,” rejoined Reeks, with a laugh.
“Your voice seems familiar to me,” said Auriol. “Tell me who you are?”
“You shall know anon,” replied Reeks. “But, hist!—we are interrupted. Some one
     approaches.”
