
Chapter 9
The Moon in the First Quarter
In spite of his resolution to the contrary, Auriol found it impossible to resist the
     fascination of Ebba’s society, and became a daily visitor at her father’s house. Mr.
     Thorneycroft noticed the growing attachment between them with satisfaction. His great wish was
     to see his daughter united to the husband of her choice, and in the hope of smoothing the way,
     he let Auriol understand that he should give her a considerable marriage portion.
For the last few days a wonderful alteration had taken place in Auriol’s manner, and he
     seemed to have shaken off altogether the cloud that had hitherto sat upon his spirits.
     Enchanted by the change, Ebba indulged in the most blissful anticipations of the future.
One evening they walked forth together, and almost unconsciously directed their steps towards
     the river. Lingering on its banks, they gazed on the full tide, admired the glorious sunset,
     and breathed over and over again those tender nothings so eloquent in lovers’ ears.
“Oh! how different you are from what you were a week ago,” said Ebba playfully. “Promise me
     not to indulge in any more of those gloomy fancies.”
“I will not indulge in them if I can help it, rest assured, sweet Ebba,” he replied. “But my
     spirits are not always under my control. I am surprised at my own cheerfulness this
     evening.”
“I never felt so happy,” she replied; “and the whole scene is in unison with my feelings. How
     soothing is the calm river flowing at our feet!—how tender is the warm sky, still flushed with
     red, though the sun has set!—And see, yonder hangs the crescent moon. She is in her first
     quarter.”
“The moon in her first quarter!” cried Auriol, in a tone of anguish. “All then is over.”
“What means this sudden change?” cried Ebba, frightened by his looks.
“Oh, Ebba,” he replied, “I must leave you. I have allowed myself to dream of happiness too
     long. I am an accursed being, doomed only to bring misery upon those who love me. I warned you
     on the onset, but you would not believe me. Let me go, and perhaps it may not yet be too late
     to save you.”
“Oh no, do not leave me!” cried Ebba. “I have no fear while you are with me.”
“But you do not know the terrible fate I am linked to,” he said. “This is the night when it
     will be accomplished.”
“Your moody fancies do not alarm me as they used to do, dear Auriol,” she rejoined, “because
     I know them to be the fruit of a diseased imagination. Come, let us continue our walk,” she
     added, taking his arm kindly.
“Ebba,” he cried, “I implore you to let me go! I have not the power to tear myself away
     unless you aid me.”
“I’m glad to hear it,” she rejoined, “for then I shall hold you fast.”
“You know not what you do!” cried Auriol. “Release me! oh, release me!”
“In a few moments the fit will be passed,” she rejoined. “Let us walk towards the abbey.”
“It is in vain to struggle against fate,” ejaculated Auriol despairingly.
And he suffered himself to be led in the direction proposed.
Ebba continued to talk, but her discourse fell upon a deaf ear, and at last she became silent
     too. In this way they proceeded along Millbank Street and Abingdon Street, until, turning off
     on the right, they found themselves before an old and partly-demolished building. By this time
     it had become quite dark, for the moon was hidden behind a rack of clouds, but a light was seen
     in the upper storey of the structure, occasioned, no doubt, by a fire within it, which gave a
     very picturesque effect to the broken outline of the walls.
Pausing for a moment to contemplate the ruin, Ebba expressed a wish to enter it. Auriol
     offered no opposition, and passing through an arched doorway, and ascending a short, spiral,
     stone staircase, they presently arrived at a roofless chamber, which it was evident, from the
     implements and rubbish lying about, was about to be razed to the ground. On one side there was
     a large arch, partly bricked up, through which opened a narrow doorway, though at some height
     from the ground. With this a plank communicated, while beneath it lay a great heap of stones,
     amongst which were some grotesque carved heads. In the centre of the chamber was a large square
     opening, like the mouth of a trap-door, from which the top of a ladder projected, and near it
     stood a flaming brazier, which had cast forth the glare seen from below. Over the ruinous walls
     on the right hung the crescent moon, now emerged from the cloud, and shedding a ghostly glimmer
     on the scene.
“What a strange place!” cried Ebba, gazing around with some apprehension. “It looks like a
     spot one reads of in romance. I wonder where that trap leads to?”
“Into the vault beneath, no doubt,” replied Auriol. “But why did we come hither?”
As he spoke, there was a sound like mocking laughter, but whence arising it was difficult to
     say.
“Did you hear that sound?” cried Auriol.
“It was nothing but the echo of laughter from the street,” she replied. “You alarm yourself
     without reason, Auriol.”
“No, not without reason,” he cried. “I am in the power of a terrible being, who seeks to
     destroy you, and I know that he is at hand. Listen to me, Ebba, and however strange my recital
     may appear, do not suppose it the ravings of a madman, but be assured it is the truth.”
“Beware!” cried a deep voice, issuing apparently from the depths of the vault.
“Some one spoke,” cried Ebba. “I begin to share your apprehensions. Let us quit this
     place.”
“Come, then,” said Auriol.
“Not so fast,” cried a deep voice.
And they beheld the mysterious owner of the black cloak barring their passage out.
“Ebba, you are mine,” cried the stranger. “Auriol has brought you to me.”
“It is false!” cried Auriol. “I never will yield her to you.”
“Remember your compact,” rejoined the stranger, with a mocking laugh.
“Oh, Auriol!” cried Ebba, “I fear for your soul. You have not made a compact with this
     fiend?”
“He has,” replied the stranger; “and by that compact you are surrendered to me.”
And, as he spoke, he advanced towards her, and enveloping her in his cloak, her cries were
     instantly stifled.
“You shall not go!” cried Auriol, seizing him. “Release her, or I renounce you wholly.”
“Fool!” cried the stranger, “since you provoke my wrath, take your doom.”
And he stamped on the ground. At this signal an arm was thrust from the trap-door, and
     Auriol’s hand was seized with an iron grasp.
While this took place, the stranger bore his lovely burden swiftly up the plank leading to
     the narrow doorway in the wall, and just as he was passing through it he pointed towards the
     sky, and shouted with a mocking smile to Auriol—“Behold! the moon is in her first quarter. My
     words are fulfilled!”
And he disappeared.
Auriol tried to disengage himself from the grasp imposed upon him in vain. Uttering
     ejaculations of rage and despair, he was dragged forcibly backwards into the vault.

